CERTAIN VERY PROPER, AND MOST PROFITABLE SIMILIES, wherein sundry, and very
many, most foul vices, and dangerous sins, of all sorts, are so plainly laid
open, and displaied in their kinds, and so pointed at with the finger of God,
in his sacred and holy Scriptures, to signify his wrath and indignation
belonging unto them, that the Christian Reader, being seasoned with the spirit
of grace, and having God before his eyes, will be very fearful, even in love
that he bears to God, to pollute and to defile, his heart, his mind, his mouth
or hands, with any such forbidden things. And also many very notable virtues,
with their due commendations, so lively and truly expressed, according to the
holy word, that the godly Reader, being of a Christian inclination, will be
mightily inflamed with a love unto them. Collected by Anthony Fletcher,
minister of the word of God, in unfeigned love in the Lord Jesus, to do the best,
and all that he can, to pleasure, and to profit all those, that desire to know
the Lords ways, and to walk in the same.

This present year of our happiness 1595.

Psalm 128. Blessed is every one that fears the Lord, and walks in his
ways.

Printed at London, by John Iackson, for Isaac Bing.

To the Right honorable Earl, and virtuous Lord, the Lord GILBERT TAVLBVT,
Earl of Shrewsburie, and Knight of the noble order of the gartar, Grace,
mercy, and peace through Christ Jesus, with increase of honor, health, and all
happiness, etc.
BEing very desirous (Right honorable) in the fear of God, to do good, and to
profit (among all) at the least some, especially of the weakest sort, whose
need of help in heavenly things, that they may see both virtue and vice, and
learn to embrace the one, and to avoid the other, is exceeding great, I have
ventured to take a little pain to collect, and to bestow some labor to
gather together, a little book of Similies, to testify my love in Christ
Jesus, to all the servants of God: and have presumed to dedicate the same unto
your Honor: not doubting, but that, as it may do good, and profit very many,
concerning the knowledge of God, and of his judgments due to sin, so your
Honor will accordingly, receive the same in good part, and be as glad to be a
patron, to any true service to God, as any man in the world, is or can be able
to offer, and to perform it. Your Honors continual and faithful care, to do
good to your native country: your unfeigned and most hearty zeal, in favoring
true religion: your very good liking and love, toward all that fear the
Lord: your misliking of vice, and love to virtue: your readiness to do good
to all, both for their bodies and souls, and to hurt none: These things (I
say) have given me this boldness, under your Honors protection, to publish and
to send abroad, this my little labor, as a poor token of my good will, and
love in Christ, toward all the servants and children of God, nothing doubting,
but that for your Honors sake, it will be the better welcome, to all that fear
God, and with the greater diligence read, embraced, and imitated of all: And I
my self the more encouraged to labor hereafter, and to think no pains great,
whatsoever I am able to undergo and to endure, to profit others, to increase
knowledge in the ignorant, and to further the salvation of all men. Again, the
remembrance of that most virtuous and godly Lady, Lady Marie your Honors
good and gracious sister, wife to the very worshipful and good Knight, sir
George Sauill, when I was preacher in Wakefield, to me and to all that fear
God, a most Christian friend, did even seem to warrant me (though I am
unknown to your Honor) that you are readier to further, than I am to perform
any good work. Lastly, the readiness to know God, and their obedience unto
the highest and almighty, that I found in those gracious branches, sweet
virgins, and most toward Ladies, your Honors own daughters, when I being
preacher at Clerkenwell, they were with that virtuous, gracious, and very
religious gentlewoman, sometimes mother to her Majesty's Maids of honor, and my
very worshipful friend mistress Winfield, has given me great comfort, to
thrust out this little book of mine, under your Honors protection, to do good
to them, that you and I both do love (as I assure my self) in Christ Jesus.
Thus without troubling your Honor any longer, I beseech the Almighty to bless
your Honors self, the honorable and godly Lady your wife, your Lady
daughters, and all that appertain to your Honor, if they appertain to God.
This 22. of May, 1595.

Your Honors most humble to command in Anthony Fletcher preacher

A pattern of a cursed tree, and the fruit and end of the same.
WHen the son of God, the redeemer of the world, Christ Jesus, was here
below upon the earth, so truly in his body, as we be now in our bodies,
saving that he was clear and free from all corruption of sin, and as he
walked, being pinched with hunger, did epsy a goodly fig tree, which with the
fair, green, Matthew. ^1. 12.
and flourishing leaves, did offer unto him some hope of relief, and coming
to it, finding it fruitless, and being disappointed of his hope, he Mark. 11.
12. and 13.
cursed it, and commanded that it should be cut down, and cast into the fire.
If he dealt so with trees, that did bear no fruit at all, we may warrant and
assure our selves, that he will curse, cut down, and cast into the fire that
never shall be quenched, every tree, that is, every man, that brings forth
such fruits, as this tree bears. If the Lord his curse belongs to a barren
tree, that bears no fruit, much more does it belong, to those trees, which
bring forth bad fruits. If trees that are unprofitable, because they bear
nothing but leaves, are fitter for the fire, then to trouble the earth, then
much more those trees that are so heavy laden, and so full of poison, that a
man cannot touch one twig of them, but it kills his soul and body, for
ever. Such a tree is every one that bears such fruits in his life and
manners, as this tree does. No good Christian therefore, will delight and
please himself with the shadow of such a tree, neither build his nest in any
part, or branch of it: but rather will do his greatest endeavor to pull it
down. Do thou (good Christian) thy best, and be sure the Lord will take thy
part. And howsoever earthly iusticers, let slip their parts, and forget to do
their duties, the Lord will never forget nor let slip his part. Here thou
see Justice has fastened his coard to the top of the tree, and Verity is
hacking* at the root, between them both to overthrow it. Now if thou love
righteousness, and art a friend to truth, take their parts in this business,
pull down with Justice, and strike with Verity, lend each of them one of thy
hands, and thy heart too, and keep neither heart nor hand to think or to work
any manner of evil, it is better for thee, to have no hand, no eye, no foot,
then wicked ones. Do thy best that this tree may be destroyed here in this
world, whiles it is to day, least to morrow thou be destroyed, for not
laboring about it. I mean not that thou should rend this paper and cast it
in the fire, but that thou should examine, thy own heart and thy conscience,
to see whether any root, branch or twig of such a tree be there, and if thou
shall find any, to pluck them out and to cast them into the fire. Otherwise
thou have nothing else look for, but even that which made the fig tree to
wither, to wit, the malediction and curse of God. And although Covetousness
here does keep the root, and Self-love the top of the tree, yet there is
not any fruit, that this tree bears, that is not sufficient to bring forth,
as great and as tall a tree as this is, and also to furnish it, and thoroughly
to load every twig of it, that they bend and break, with such poysonfull and
cursed fruits as these be. For the sins of men are innumerable, as the sands
upon the shore by the sea side, and the stars of heaven. Who can tell says the
holy prophet, how often he offends? The sharp edge of the axe of Gods
wrath, is ever toward the root of Matthew. 3. 10.
this tree, and he is daily telling us, that it shall have a foul fall at the
length: he in love to our salvation, does premonish us, that we may be
careful, and take heed to our selves, that we be not found in, or near this
tree, in any good liking or love to it, when the final fall of it shall be.
Take heed (says Christ) and beware of covetousness, though a man Luc. 12. 15.
Ephesians. 5. 3. 1. Cor. 5. 10. 1. Tim. 6. 10.
have abundance, yet his life stands not in his riches. And the apostle does
advise the Ephesians, to banish from among them the very name of covetousness.
And he would have the Corinthians neither to eat nor drink with covetous men.
And his reason is, because covetousnes is the root of all evil. As if he
should say, where covetousness is rooted, there is not only a barrennes of all
good things, but also a great grove, and thick wood of all abominations. I
refer thee (good Reader) to the Book it self, where every branch, and all
the fruits of this tree, be opened so plainly, and the poison of them so
expresselie declared, that every good christian, seeing what danger is in them,
will beware, that willingly he never touch nor taste the least of them: And not
only that, but also out of the tree, of a lively faith, will bring forth such
fruit of holiness, truth, and righteousness, as may be well pleasing, and
acceptable in the sight of God. Both which things the Lord grant us.

Amen.
CERTAIN Very notable, profitable and comfortable Similies, briefly collected,
wherein the loathsome foulnes of many vices, and the amiable beauty, of many
and sur^e virtues, that the Reader may loath the one, and love the other, are
plainly expressed.
EVen as a shepherd, seeking a lost sheep, Similie 1.
is wont to go up to some high place, that from thence he may view the valleys
below, and the better whistle and call unto Ezech. 34. verse. 12. 16.
his sheep: So the Savior and redeemer of the world, seeking again mankind
that was lost, went up to the high cross, fixed and fast set upon mount
Caluarie, that with the loud voice, and great outcrie of his sufferings, death
and passion, he might call us unto himself.

And although the wicked and ungodly ones of this world, do despise the cries
and callings of Christ, as he himself affirms, saying: I have called, and ye
have refused, I have stretched forth Proverb. 1. 24.
my hand, and there was none would look toward me: yet the elect and saints
of God, do hear the fearful shrikes, and lamentable noise that he sent from
his cross, even as the sheep hears the voice and whistle, of the shepherd.

Will thou know whose sheep thou art, then consider well whose whistle thou
do follow. For Christ does say: My sheep John. 10. 27.
hear my voice, and I know them, and they do follow me. And immediately
before, to the unbelieving Jews he says: Ye believe John. 10. 26.
not, for ye are not of my sheep.

SKilful and cunning Physicians, are wont sometimes, when 2
a sick man is sore vexed, with a numnes of his whole body, to cut a vein of
his head, that the letting of blood, may heal the body, of that disease and
sickness: Christ is our head (as the Coloss. 1. 18.
Apostle says) and we are his members: a vein of our head is cut, that our
whole body may be healed: Christ suffered, that mankind might be redeemed.
When the fulness of time was come Galat. 4. 4*
(says the Apostle) God sent his son made of a woman, brought under the law,
that he might redeem those that were under the law.

AS they, which by reason of the blearednes of their eyes, 3
turn their backs toward the sun, and not daring to open their eyes toward
the light, are delited with places that be dark, and full of shade, and so not
having the benefit of the sun light, are carried about, by many ways full of
perils and dangers: So they, which through the dimnes of their mind, and want
Mos Papista^um.
of understanding, do contemn the true and living God, do please themselves
with all manner of most perilous and pestilent errors, and not considering that
clear and heavenly light, which comes from God, they fall into the gulf,
and sink to the bottom of that most foul and filthy puddle of all false
opinions, errors, heresies, and worshippings of false gods.

AS the soul in the body, does give to all the members, moving 4
and life: So the providence of a godly king, is present to every part of his
kingdom, stirring up his whole commonwealth, to virtue and godliness: and
ruling and governing the same, with justice and judgment, as though in his
own person he were present, in every place.

AS they which do dissolve and mar the picture of a king, very 5
skilfully made of gold, and precious jewels, by a witty and wise workman,
and do translate, and change the same gold and goodly gems, into the likeness of
a dog, which they do make of the same matter, do say that that their likeness of
a dog, is the picture of the king, because it is the same gold, and the same
precious jewels: Even so all peevish and pestilent heretics, do dissolve,
Papists, Familists, Brownists, and such others.
break and mar (so far as in them lies) the proportion of a true,
substantial, and lively faith, and of the same places and authorities of holy
scripture, falsely understood, and wickedly expounded, they frame and garnish a
resemblance and a pattern, of disloialtie, deceit, treachery, and treason: and
they say, it is a perfect picture of faith and truth, because it is made of the
same places of the holy word of God. And by this their sorcerie, they do
bewitch and deceive many weak and frail souls, persuading Jude 4.
them, that their foul figure of a dog (that is, their pestilent and most
detestable heresy) is the goodly picture and resemblance of the king, that is,
the express proportion of a right faith, and truth it self. From all such
sorcerers good Lord deliver us.

EVen as the rain waters the fields, and makes them 6
fruitful, and causes corn to grow, and gives strength unto the same, and
garnisheth and beautifieth all goodly plants, with abundance of most pleasant
fruits: Even so the word of God, and doctrine of Christ, bedeweth and
moisteneth the children of God, and feeds and nourishes their souls, to
everlasting life, and causes them to bring forth very excellent virtues, and
most rich and plentiful fruits, and effects of a true Christian faith. This
sweet dew of the Gospel of Christ, God has given to us, in our days very
plentifully, and in great measure, according to that the kingly prophet says:
Thou, O God, wilt reserve a seasonable Psalm. 61. 9.
rain for thine inheritance: that is, thy heavenly doctrine, for thine elect
and chosen children. Ezechiel also, There shall be Ezec. 34. 26.
the dewes of his blessing.

AS he that enters into a fair, and goodly goldsmithes shop, 7
richly furnished with precious pearls, and costly jewels of all sorts, ought
not to mislike those excellent things, and great treasures, because he sees
among them, a black furnace, dustie coals, and sundry instruments of base
metal, because those instruments, coals and furnace, must needs be had, to
make those jewels, as chains, earerings and bracelets of gold, withal: So in
the church of God, where are innumerable men, some famous for their wisdom,
some renowned for their piety, some forward and fervent in Christian love and
charity: and many excelling in all kind of virtues: if a man shall see there,
some unlearned, some deceivers, some wicked ones, some tyrants, and many
ungodly ones, he ought not therefore, to pick a quarrel against the church of
Christ, nor yet to think of the ruin and destruction of the same. For there
should be no martyrs, if there were no tyrants. The Lord would not have created
(says Augustine) either August. de ciui^. Dei, lib. 11. cap. 18.
angel or man whom he knew would prove wicked, but that he also knew, to what
uses of good men he would employ them.

AS one candle cannot light another, if it self be put out: So a 8
prelate or preacher, shall not inflame others, with the love of God, himself
being void, and without that same love.

And yet I know, it is possible, if it please God, that by a wicked and ungodly
man, sinners may be converted, and brought to repentance.

FOr even as a godly master, sometime gives a good alms, 9
by the hand of a wicked servant: So God (if it seem good to him) by the
ministry of an evil man, can draw the ungodly, to know him, to fear and to
love him.

Yet nevertheless, I do exhort all the ministers, and preachers Good counsel.
of the Gospel, to do their best endeavor, to keep themselves unspotted of
the world, and so boldly (but charitably) to reprove, taunt, check, and chide
the sins and iniquities of others.

The tongs and the snuffers, which were in Salomons Temple, Exodus 37 23.
wherewith they did snuff the lamps, were of most pure gold (as the
scriptures do report) to signify the purity and cleannes of them, which are
bound to reprehend and to correct, the slips and faults of others.

AS he which hoordeth up, and hides his wheat, that it may 10
not help and succor hungry souls, in the time of dearth, is grievously
cursed of men, women and children: and he that in a famine and great dearth
does bring forth his corn, and sells it, is highly praised and prayed for,
of the people: So that minister and preacher, deserves sharp and rough
reprehensions, which will not impart his knowledge and skill, to the hungry
and thirsty souls, of the children of God: and he is woorthily praised, which
opens unto them, the garner of divine doctrine, which teaches and preaches,
and does faithfully exercise the office of a watchman.

He that keeps close, and hides his corn (says Solomon) shall Proverb. 11.
be cursed among the people, and a blessing shall be upon the head of the
sellers.

EVen as Perillus that skillful workman of Athens, that he 11
might gratify Phalarides that cruel tyrant, presented him with an ugly bull
of brass, wherein men being enclosed, might be tormented and afflicted, with a
strange engine, and new devised torture, lost his life, and suffered a most
fearful death, by that his own invention, as Pliny reports in the tenth
book of examples: for at the commandment of the wicked tyrant, he being
enclosed, and fast shut up, in the bull, which with great skill, and no less
charges, he had most cunningly and curiously wrought, that he might delight the
ears of Phalarides, a most savage tyrant, and void of all humanity, with the
lamentable shrikes and intolerable tortures and torments of men, he himself
first by experience, tried the pain and smart thereof, and imbrewed in his
own blood, that famous and curious piece of work, which he had devised to
torment others withal: Right so, wicked and cruel counsel, many times
redoundeth upon the heads of the authors of the same: according to that of the
Psalmist:

He spread his net, he dug deep, and fell himself, into the Psalm. 8.
pit, which he made for others: Let his craftines be turned upon his own head,
and let his iniquity fall upon his own pate.

Wicked Haman was hanged himself, upon the gallows, Ester. 7.
which he had prepared for good Mardocheus.

AS a field, although it be fertile, without tillage cannot be 12
fruitful: So the mind of man, without the word of God, and heavenly
instruction, must needs be barren, and can bring forth no effects of faith,
nor fruits of godliness.

AS the sea (especially that, which is called Mare mediterraneum) 13
is wont to imitate the air, as, if the air be calm, the sea is very calm
also, if the air be stormy, the sea also is very stormy: Even so the common
sort of people, in all places for the most part, do follow their prince: if
princes be just, subjects love justice: if the prince be ungodly, they embrace
ungodliness.

Therefore, it was woorthily observed and said, of wise men in times past, That
the people is the shadow of the prince.

A king or prince given to iniquity, with his sin kills himself, and with
his example many others, because he has many followers. For we do see, that
whatsoever alteration and change of manners, shall be in princes, the same is
wont to follow in the people: for princes do not only conceive virtues or
vices themselves, but also, they do as it were power them, into the city and
country where they reign and rule.

EVen as a brook does follow the nature of the fountain, 14
from whence it comes: So people do follow the disposition of their prince:
the fountain being troubled, the brook is troubled also, and the prince
disquieted, the people find no peace.

Herod the king was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him. Matthew. 2.


Whiles he reigned, impiety ruled, good laws were nothing set by, justice and
judgment lay dead, ancient and laudable customs were banished, there was no
rest, no peace, which is the end of godly government. For, to that end are
governors ordained, that people may live in peace.

The work of justice, shall be peace. Esaias. 32. Psalm. 85. Psalm. 72.


Justice and peace, have kissed each other.

There shall arise in his days, justice and abundance of peace.

AS the root of a tree, being utterly rotten, the boughs cannot 15
bud and flourish, nor bring forth pleasant fruits in their due time: So
justice being violated, it cannot be, that peace can flourish, and bring forth
so plentiful fruits, as she is wont to do.

THe prosperity of this world, is as the cleerenes of winter 16
weather: as the calmnes of the sea, and stabilitie of the moon. As these do
waver, and be suddenly changed: So the state of wealth and worldly things, has
no firmnes, no perpetuity, no constancy: for as it is said: All these things
pass Sapient. 5.
away like a shadow, and are as a messenger running before.

Man flies away like a shadow, and never continues in one Job. 33.
state. For sometime it falls out, that when thou do think, thy self to
have gotten innumerable riches, and great dignity, and that thou art set, even
in the top of excellency and honor, then all of a sudden, in the twinkling of
an eye, thou art hurled from that high and mounting glory of the world, down
headlong into a bottomless gulf of all disgrace. For out of that place, which
thou had thought, to be full of rest and security, very often great
calamities, and most bitter blustering storms, in the turning of an hand
suddenly do arise. Seeing therefore, that these things stand so, we ought not to
put any confidence in deceivable dignities, nor to be proud of them: neither
must we trust, in the uncertain riches of this world, which are daily
changing, but we must fly to our redeemer and only savior Christ Jesus, and
place our whole hope, and settle all our confidence in his infinite and endless
mercies. God give us grace to do so.

Amen.
EVen as the eagle is carried up on high, and falls not upon 17
the ground, but to seek his necessary food, and having caught his pray, by
and by flies up again, and makes no abode below on the earth: So we ought to
have our minds occupied in heaven, and all superfluous care of worldly things
laid apart, with the eyes of our minds and faith, to behold our God, and in
the quietness and staiednes of our souls, rest our selves upon his grace,
without having more to do with this world, than in our several callings, to
seek lawfully those necessaries only, which may serve for the preservation of
life. Which had, we should in the meditation of our minds, and the thoughts of
our hearts, with all our powers fly unto our God. The apostle Paul his
counsel is exceeding good: Having meat and drink, and 1. Timoth. 6.
wherewith we may be clothed, let us be therewith contented, for they that will
be rich, do fall into tentation, and into the snare of the devil.

And Solomon making his prayers unto God, has these words: Proverb. 30.
Give me (O Lord) only necessaries for my life, least if I be too full, I may
be drawn to deny thee. And again:

Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, than great and Proverb. 15.
insaciable treasures. David also:

Better is a little that the righteous man has, than the great Psalm. 36.
riches of the ungodly.

EVen as thick and black clouds, do obscure and darken 18
the bright and glittering stars: So degenerating posterities, and such as be
polluted and blemished with treachery and iniquity, do dishonor their
ancestors, and do extinguish the clear light of their noble virtues, and do
put upon them the ugly darksomnes of their own vices: that although they be
noble men by birth and descent, yet they fall into oblivion, and by little and
little are quite forgotten. It is better, that a man be renowned and nobled, by
his own noble acts and excellent virtues, than to depend upon the nobility of
his ancestors. They ought not to be called the sons of noble men, which
please themselves with vanities, and do wallow in ignominy and wickedness, but
the sons of those wicked ones, whose kind of life they do imitate, and whose
footsteps they follow.

Christ called the wicked Jews, which said they had Abraham Joan. 8.
to their father, the children of the devil. And speaking of Christians he
says: And how many soever did receive him, he Joan. 1.
gave them power to be made the sons of God. In Christ Jesus (says the
apostle) neither circumcision avails any thing, neither Galat. ^*
uncircumcision, but a new creature. True nobility before God, consists not
in the prowess of ancestors, but in newnes of life by faith in Christ.

AS the pleasant and sweet river of Jordan, when it runs 19
into Asphaltites that bitter poole of Palestina, is also made bitter and
unwholesome, and loses the virtue thereof: So, that man, which ioineth himself
in friendship, and does couple himself in familiarity, with wicked and
ungodly men, becomes wicked and ungodly himself, and is stained and
blemished with their vices, although heertofore he had been inclined to virtue
and godliness. It is therefore pithily said of Ecclesiasticus: Depart from
Eccles 7.
the wicked, and evil things will depart from thee. And the apostle in the
fifth of the first to the Corinthians, and also in that to the 1. Corinthians. 5.
Galath. 5.
Galath. says: A little leaven does sower a whole lump of dowe.

AS of necessity, a shadow does accompany those that walk 20
in the sun shine: So is envy a continual companion, to those, that in good
and honest things, do excel others, and are advanced and renowned with the
best. There is no felicity (says Valerius Maximus) be it in never so good
measure and modesty, which can eschew the gnarling and gnawing teeth of envy.
One demanded of a learned man, how he might avoid envious persons: If (says
he) thou shall have no excellent thing in thee, and shall do nothing
fortunately. Envy is always virtues companion, and is ever at the heels of
them, which in honesty, virtue, and godliness go beyond others. Misery only
admits no envy.

EVen as the inferior planet, shadoweth and ecclipseth the 21
planet that is above it, but the higher, not the lower: So, men without
honesty, endued with no wisdom, not acquainted with virtue, and enemies to
true godliness, do their greatest endeavor, to distaine the commendation, and
deserved honor, of notable and very worthy men. Job calls him a little Job.
5.
one, or a man of no valor, that is tormented with grudging and repining
against the welfare of others. An envious man, is as unprofitable to a city,
as darnell is to wheat.

AS rustinesse consumes iron: so envy consumes the envious 22
man: envious persons are mightily tormented, at the prosperity of a superior,
because they cannot match him: and they greatly disdain an inferior, least he
should overtake them: and they cannot abide their equals, for their equality
sake. Learned Basil and Bernard, do compare an envious person with a viper,
for as she conceiueth her young one, which (as they report) is brought forth,
with the breaking of the belly of hirdam, and utterly killing her breeder: So
the envious man conceiueth that envy, which gnaweth and teareth in pieces
himself, and works his own ruin, and utter destruction.

Envy is a picture, or a resemblance of hell: it is a great loss 23
without any gain or advantage: it is a dangerous damage, without one dram of
commodity. Cursed Cain, set Genes. 3.
forward with the stinging goades, and smarting pricks of envy, did kill Abel
his good and gracious brother. And the sons of Jacob, in their hot burning
envy, sold Joseph their innocent and Genes. 35.
best brother. Saul in like manner, being through envy almost beside 1. Sam.
18.
himself, sought by all means, to take away the life, of holy and faithful
David. We are taught in the book of Wisdom, Sapient. 2.
that through the envy of the devil, death entered into the world. This evil
and dangerous disease is very busy in these our days: to envy superiors, to
speak evil of men in authority, to backbite and slander them, which seek
the unity and the peace of the church, and to condemn those that hunger and
thirst after the advancement of Gods glory, and the free passage of the
Gospel of Christ. The Lord amend it.

AS a staff made of a reed, is hollow and empty: So the 24
confidence and trust, which we put in this world, is vain and will deceive
us. Therefore the Lord commanded the people of Israel, by the prophet Esaias,
that they should not go down into Egypt for refuge, and does denounce the
destruction of those that would fly thither, in these words: We be to them,
Esaias. 31.
which go down into Egypt to seek for help there. And again: Thou do
trust upon a staff of a reed, and the same broken, that Esaias. 36.
is, upon Egypt, etc. it will deceive thee. Even such is the help of man,
whereunto infinite thousands of people, despising and forsaking God, do most
earnestly fly. But let us lean upon, and Exodus 7. Exodus 14.
trust to the rod of our God, which devoured the rods of the Egyptians, and
divided the red sea into two parts, whereof David speaks: Thy rod and thy
staff, O Lord, they have comforted me. Psalm. 23.


EVen as learned and skillful physicians, with the bitter potions, 25
and sharp medicines, which they minister unto their patients, do mix some
sweet and pleasant thing, to win those that be sick, the more willingly to
receive them: So preachers of the word of God, being learned and godly wise,
ought (if need be) to temper their bitter and rough reprehensions, with a
sweet and comfortable doctrine, and so of sharpnes and mildnes, to make a
sovereign and wholesome medicine, to heal the spiritual griefs and diseases
of their hearers. For in all things that are done and spoken, a measure
keeping, and temperance must be used, and consideration must be had, what is
fit for the time, and agreeable to the persons, and what in all our words and
actions does beseem or misbese^me us.

AS some birds, before they fly out, and mount on high, stoop 26
down with their heads, and touch the ground with their bills: So every man,
before he be advanced to any high dignity, ought to show great humblenes of
mind, and a casting down of himself.

EVen as many men, are much delighted with music, and 27
will most gladly hear musitions, make songs of the noble acts, and singular
virtues of many men, but never care to imitate one virtue of a thousand, which
they hear, with praises extolled unto the skies: So very many men in these our
days, are outwardly very forward, to hear sermons, and the word preached, and
as Ananias, will be willingly, to see to, at some cost to maintain preachers,
and all is (in many) but mere hypocrisy, to please their own humors, with
some strange and new matter, with some Logike, Rethorike, and bravery of
words, which they look for, without any purpose, to frame their lives, after
such doctrine as the preacher delivers.

AS bees passing over other things, take pleasure only in flowers, 28
and forsaking the rest, do crop them: So, some hearers of the word preached,
do only desire to have their ears fed, with fine phrases, delicate flowers of
eloquence, dainty similies, pretty comparisons, and pleasant histories, as for
sound doctrine, they contemn it, and hate to have it, a bridle for their
lusts, a reproouer of their vanities, and a glass to see themselves in, they
seek after flatteries and fables, and they loath the truth, which should do
them good. The holy apostle foreseeing this, said: The 2. Timoth. 4.
time will come, when they will not abide wholesome doctrine, but after their
own lusts, will gather to themselves teachers, and having itching ears, will
be turned into fables. And we read in the Acts of the Apostles, that the
Athenians applied themselves to nothing else, but to hear, and to learn
news. And yet Act. 17.
notwithstanding, though the case stand thus in our time, the preachers of the
word, ought not to give over their faithful labors in teaching, but rather to
be the more diligent, careful, and fervent. For although, there be many
curious, vain and idle hearers of their doctrine, yet there be many grave,
learned, and godly ones, which seek only the good of their souls, and the
comfort of their consciences. And if there were among a thousand, only one
that loved and sought the truth, for that one sake the truth of God, ought to
be preached. That same excellent saying of the famous Poet Antimachus, is well
worth the remembering: who, when he read his book to all his scholars called
together, and all (saving Plato) forsook him, before he had ended his reading:
I will (says he) go forward, and read on, for Plato is to me, as much as all
the rest.

AS physicians do oftentimes cut off a rotten member, least 29
it corrupt and putrify the other members: So it behooves men of authority,
if they will preserve the commonwealth in safety, to root out of it, all
those, that do give themselves, even with greedines, to beastly behavior, and
to rotten conditions, as theft, adultery, fornication, murder, blasphemy,
treachery, treason, and such like: least the rotten ones, destroy them that be
sound, and the brutishly minded, stain those that be of chaste conversation,
and the wicked and rebellious crew, draw the better sort to disobedience. Solon
said wisely, that A Solon.
common wealth is maintained, and vpholden with two things, to wit, with due
reward, and due punishment. For as it behooves, to reward well, those that be
profitable members, and such as do live in the fear of God, and due obedience:
so it is no less necessary, and needful, to give unto the wicked their
deserved punishment.

EVen as the moon is not ecclipsed, nor loses any light, but 30
when it is at the full: So men are wont, then chiefly to be ecclipsed, and
darkened, c^ncerning the love of God and their neighbors, when they be full of
riches, and do abound with worldly wealth.

ANd as the moon, when she is at the full, is farthest from 31
the sun, of whom she has her light: So, many of those men, which do flow
on every side, with the goods and riches of this world, do even then in the
midst of their wealth, withdraw themselves farthest from God, from whom
themselves, and all their treasures, and whatsoever, have their being. And
although, some virtues now and then, do seem to make, a show in them, yet
through the cares of this world, and the desire of riches, they be quite
overthrown and utterly buried. Therefore our savior Christ, compares riches
with thorns. For he Matthew. 13. Marc. 4. Luc. 8.
expounding what those thrones might signify, into the which the seed fell,
which being choked of them, brought ^oorth no fruit, he says, that those
thorns ar^ the riches of the world, the which, though with their beauty they
delight men, with their works they do prick them. Of these does God speak by
Esaias the prophet, saying: In his days there shall grow up thorns and
nettles. Esaias. 34.
Also Augustine, that ancient and grave teacher says: Have thou gotten riches?
then have thou lost quietness.

HE that is adorned, and well furnished, with many and 32
great virtues, although he be a very poor man, concerning this world, yet is
he to be honored. For as precious stones, though they be cast into the mire,
yet they lose not their beauty, nature, and property: So men endued with
honesty, replenished with goodly virtues, and well acquainted with the true
worshipping, of the most high and gracious God, although they be silent, as men
in their graves, and are had in contempt of the world, yet have they not lost
their dignity, and the true honor proper to Christians, which consists not
in the wealth and renowine of this world, but in holiness, in righteousness, and
in the faithful imitation of Christ. Godly men are great men, though the world
make no reckoning of them, and wickedmen, are vile and base men, although the
world set and place them, in the height and top of all honor. Nothing is
higher, nothing loftier, than unfeigned virtue. There is nothing lower, nothing
baser, nothing ^iler than vice. Wheresoever is a just man, there is a great and
mighty man, and wheresoever is a wicked man, there is a man of no account,
with God and his saints.

AS a little image, though it be set upon an high mountain, 33
is notwithstanding a little one still: and on the other side, if Colossus that
huge and mighty image, be placed in a very low valley, yet loses not his
bigness: So a wicked and cursed man, that is fraught with sundry vices, though
he flourish in honor and riches, yet is he but a seely mean man: and on the
other side, a man that is virtuous and godly wise, although he be in extreme
poverty and beggarly estate, yet out of doubt he is a great man, and to be
highly accounted of. And certainly it were an excellent change between these
two, if the good poor man, had the honor and the riches of the wicked man, and
he the poverty and beggerlines of the good man.

EVen as a cloud darkeneth the air, and covers the sun: 34
So, calamity and misery, makes cloudie the mind of man, and taking from him
all his joy, it leaves him bare and naked, without comfort, and full of sorrow.

AS a wall all whited on the out side, is not easily perceived, 35
whether it be made of stone, or of clay, unless it be smitten, and tried with
a mallet, or some other instrument: So, a man garnished outwardly with good
things to see to, is not by and by judged, and presently discerned, whether he
be a man of patience, of charity, and other virtues, unless he first be
smitten, and tried with the mallet or beetle, of obloquies, slanders,
afflictions, troubles and temptations. The apostle Paul made answer to one,
that would shadow his wickedness, with a cloak of virtue: God will smite thee
thou painted wall. Act. 23.


AS those things which agree not with our nature, and have 36
no proportion with it, as fire, sulphur, and such other things, if we should
eat them, would not only not profit us, but would also hurt and kill us: So,
the deceitful riches of this world, too much desired and sought for, the pomp
of honor, vain glory, and such like, after the which, very many do run to too
earnestly, do not only not nourish the souls of men to eternal life, nor
mitigate and appease the wicked lusts of the same, but also do bring upon them
everlasting woe, with utter and endless destruction. The food best agreeing
with the soul of man, is virtue, the property whereof is, above all things to
love God, to wish for him, to stick to him, to fear nothing but him, and for
his sake, to despise this world, and all the trash of the same, and in him, and
for his sake, to love them, that hate us, to feed them, that would
hunger-starue us, and to save the lives of them that would kill us. Riches,
dignities and honors, may be possessed and holden without sin, but the greedy
coveting of them, and ambition, which the apostle calls the root of all
evils, without great sin, cannot be holden. 1. Timoth. 6.


EVen as the bough of a tree, the fuller it is of fruit, the waightier 37
it is, and the greater and more plentiful fruit it bears, the lower it
falls: So the wiser a man is, the more humble he is, and the more he is laden
with the fruits of wisdom, the lower he stoupeth, and humbles himself the
more: but the proud man, like a fruitless and barren bough, lifts his head
on high, not seeking the profit and good of his soul, but the idle praises of
men, and the vain glory of the world. Thus is it, that the proud man, coming
to the sacred and most holy scriptures, there he works his own woe, and as
it were suppeth up his remediless destruction. For it is that holy mountain,
whereunto if any shall come, in the likeness of a man, and shall bring with
Exodus 19.
him the life of a beast, he shall be stoned to death: and where he might have
furnished, and stored himself, with true and heavenly wisdom, if he had come
unto the holy word, in humility, reverence, and with an heart and mind well
prepared, from thence he carries his own undoubted, and most certain death,
and helpelesse damnation: because he would with his own arrogancy and
swelling pride, pearce into the deep secrets, and hidden mysteries, of the
oracles of God. Of such speaks Solomon in his Proverbs: He that will be a
searcher out of God his majesty, Proverb. 25.
shall be overwhelmed of his glory.

EVen as, if any man would steedily look upon the bright 38
sphere of the sun, he should become blind, because the weak sight of his
eyes, is not able to abide so great a brightness: So, whosoever, trusting to his
own wit, shall cast the eyes of his mind, upon the wonderful and
unspeakable brightness, of the secrets of God, he shall be overthrown of the
same, and the sight of his mind being blinded and put out, he shall never
attain to that, which he would: because the great and hidden mysteries of the
most high God, cannot be comprehended, by man's wit being puffed up with pride,
or else there should be no difference between God and man, if man of himself,
could attain unto, the secrets of Gods eternal majesty sealed up in his
blessed word, and not to be opened, but by the mighty power of his most holy
spirit. So much did those things Exodus 40. 1. Reg. 6. and 8.
signify which were in sanctis sanctorum hid and covered.

Paul, perhaps, leaning and trusting to his own wit, before he received the
faith of Christ, would pearce into Gods mysteries, but coming far short of his
purpose, he wandered in a great and dangerous error, and would needs (being
inflamed with hatred) even kill those Christians with the sword, whom he ought
not to have wounded or vexed with a word. But a light from heaven Act. 9.
compassed him about, and falling to the ground, he saw nothing, and yet his
eyes open, as before, whereby his former disposition was signified: but
afterward when he did cast down and truly humble himself, and all his pride
laid apart, came to Ananias, he received his sight. And in that his humility
he said: I am the 1. Cor. 15.
least of the apostles, which am not worthy to be called an apostle, because
I persecuted the Church of God. David says: The Psalm. 25.
Lord opens his secrets enclosed in his word to those that fear him. In
which words our God promises, that he will unfold and reveal, to godly and
humble men of heart, the secrets and priuities of his holy oracles. Upon whom
shall I look (says the Esaias. 66.
Lord) but upon the silly poor man, that is contrite in heart, and trembles
at my words? Heerehence comes that saying of the blessed virgin: He has
beholden the lowlines of his handmaide^.

THou shall see sometimes in the air, a cloud having the figure 39
and likeness of a tall and mighty man, which by and by is spread abroad and
represents huge and high towers: but in the turning of an hand, being taken
with a blast of wind, it is dissolved and vanishes away: Even such is the
trust, that we put in this transitory world. This world does set before us, in
the conceit of our imagination, that we shall be great men, and that we shall
be very famous, and attain to great dignity, it does promise unto us
mountains of gold, and huge and lofti^ towers of honor and renown: but all
these things are towers builded in the air, and castles made of wind and
grounded upon vanity, which are dissolved and dispersed most suddenly. John
the servant of God did well consider of this, when he gave this 1. Joan. 2.
counsel: Love not the world, nor those things that be in the world: the world
passes away, and the lust of the same. And Paul says: The shape of this
world passes away: he says not, 1. Cor. 7.
the substance of this world, but the shape passes away. If then this world
must needs pass away, and return to it nothing again, if that we take to be
a substance, be but a shape, think we then, that our life, our hope, our
riches, our pleasures, shall continue? no surely. For James says: Our life is
as a vapor, Jacob. 4. Sapien. 2.
appeering for a very short time, and our life is dissolved as a cloud in the
air.

AS our eyes, which do behold heaven and earth, and other 40
innumerable creatures of God, do not see themselves, but looking in a glass,
by that mean, they perfectly see themselves: So we do not see and consider our
own frailty, and brickle estate, but if we will set before our eyes, the
glass of the remembrance of death, and the true knowledge of our selves,
beholding diligently (I say) that clear glass, we cannot choose but very
plainly see our selves and what we be. James the apostle James. ^.
does point us to the law of our God, and wills us to use that glass, to
behold our selves in. Indeed it is a true glass, it will not flatter nor
deceive us: it will tell us that we be but dust, and that we shall again
return to dust. James seems to say plainly to us thus: Know your selves, and
least ye be deceived, behold your selves in the glass of truth, which is the
perfect law of liberty. See what thou art, and what thou shall be. Remember
that thou art a man, and consequently dust and ashes. O that we would remember
this: O that we would be content to embrace this most certain truth: O that
this glass might never depart, out of our hands and hearts* Augustine that
learned teacher, says well: Before thou wast man, thou wast earth: and before
thou wast earth, thou wast nothing. Here thou may easily see thy progeny,
thy nobility, and the worthiness and excellency of thy stock and lineage.
Be not proud therefore, for thou art but dust and ashes. Eccl^. 10.


EVen as a little bird shut up in a cage, although it be very precious 41
and costly, and be made of Cedar, Iuorie, or gold, yet she desires to go out,
and strives to have her liberty, and in her eager and earnest desire to be
gone, she does oftentimes thrust her bill through the loupes of the cage: So
the soul of a virtuous man, inflamed with an unfeigned love of God, being shut
up and holden in the coupe of his body, although he abound with all
necessaries, fit for the preservation of this temporal life, yet most
earnestly desires, to depart hence, and to go to his country, which is
heaven. And in token that he would feign go thither, he fetches many a deep
sigh, and many a grievous groan, and does full often crave of his creator, with
his cheeks all to bedewed, and smeared with the tears of his eyes, that, this
exilement being finished, he might rest for ever, in that happy and holy house
of blessed souls, where he may have the fruition of his God, and everlasting
life through Jesus Christ his only savior and redeemer. Every Christian man,
although he have wealth at will, and have stately and royal houses, glittering
and flourishing with Iuorie and gold, yet ought he to aspire toward heaven,
and in heart and desire, to fly toward his best country, saying with the
Apostle: I would feign remove hence, and go 2. Cor. 5. Philipp. 1.
to dwell with the Lord. And again: I do seek, or desire to be dissolved, and
to be with the Lord Jesus.

EVen as vipers do eat out, and tear in pieces the bellies of 42
their breeders, that themselves may get out: So, not the Jews only, but the
Papists also, do mangle and tear in pieces the law of God, and do rent, and
corrupt the words and doctrine of the holy prophets of God, even as it were a
belly, and bowels, that they may creep out, and escape from a lively, perfect
and a saving faith, and they may be confirmed in their errors, heresies, and
infidelity. Yea, as the Jews, have from time to time, slain the gracious and
wise prophets of God, even so the Papists now, where they bear any sway, of
rule and authority, do most cruelly torment and murder the saints of God.

EVen as the delicate balance of a goldsmith is moved with 43
every little weight, so that with one grain laid upon it, it falls
downward: So, with every thing, whether it be luckie or unfortunate, we are
wont to be greatly moved, and do suddenly change our purposes: sometime we
exceed in mirth, by and by we are overwhelmed with sorrow: we are even now
praising men to the skies: and presently we hurl them down from heaven, with
our toongs, and thrust them into hell. We love men, and hate them: we save men,
and kill them, all with one breath: now we choose virtue, and by and by vice.
Thus does man's will obey his unbridled lust. The Lord redress, and amend it.

FOr even as the Chameleon, changes his color, according 44
to the thing whereupon he sits: So we at every tentation do change our
minds, and are driven from our purposes, and determinations, and our wicked
lusts, and the ungracious thoughts of our hearts, do force, and drive us, even
whither they will.

ANd as the Chameleon, will be changed into any color, save 45
white: So are we most apt and prone, to all kind of vice, but to no virtue.

AS he that falls into a river, if he neither move hands, 46
arms, nor legs, is quickly drowned, and sinketh down dead to the bottom;
but if he swim, escapes alive: So he that trusts to that faith, which the
apostle James calls a dead Iam. 2.
faith, because it has no good effects, and brings forth no lively fruits,
as an holy love to God and man, piety, patience, pity, mercy, compassion,
and such like virtues, he must needs be drowned in utter destruction, and
sink down into the bottomless gulf and pit of hell: but he that moves his
hands and his feet, to do the deeds of a true and right faith, which (as the
Apostle Paul says) works by love, and shall be a doer of the word Galat. 5.
^a^. 1.
and not an hearer only, he shall escape safe out of all dangers, and shall
arrive at the happy haven of eternal happiness, and everlasting life, through
Christ Jesus: whereto the Lord bring us all, if it be his will.

Amen.
EVen as the river Hypanis, which is very famous, and much 47
spoken of, because of the cleerenes and sweetness of the water of the same,
after that it receives into it, the bitter and troubled waters of the
fountain Exampes, is poisoned and made unprofitable: So many men of great and
excellent wits, which did flow with the pure and pleasant waters of virtues,
when they have fallen into the society and familiarity, of ungracious and
godless men, have been poisoned with the lewdnes of their lives, and the
loosenes of their conditions. And conceiving their inexpiable frauds, have
been foully disgraced, with their most detestable vices.

FOr as rotten apples do corrupt those sound ones that do 48
touch them, and lie close to them: So the evil manners, and had conditions of
the ungodly, do infect those that keep the^ company. Therefore, Blessed is
the man, that has not walked Psalm. ^.
in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stand in the way of sinners, and has not
sit in the seat of scorners, etc. And, I have not sitten in the counsel of
vanity, and will keep no company with the Psalm. 26.
wicked, etc.

Go out of Babylon (says the Lord) and fly from the Chaldeans. Esaias. 48.
Ierem. 50.
Depart out of the midst of Babylon, and go from the land of the Chaldeans.

Peter denied Christ when he came into Cayphas his hall, etc. Matthew. 26. 1.
Cor. 15.
And Paul says: Evil words corrupt good manners.

AS it profits nothing, to graffe a plant, if with a whirlewinde 49
or storm, it be pulled up by the roots, before it bear fruit: So the word
of God, being heard and laid up in our minds, shall do us no good, if before it
bring forth fruit, with some blustering blasts, and sturdie storms of
temptations, it shall be rooted out of our hearts. Therefore says the kingly
prophet David: Blessed is the man, whose delight is in the law of God, and in
Psalm. 1.
that law, does meditate day and night. He says not, that that man is happy
and blessed, which hears and reads the word: but he pronounces him to be
happy, which does practice the same in the course of his life, and does digest
it in the stomach of his understanding, and endeuoreth himself with all
diligence to obey it, and shall spend days and nights in the meditation
thereof. And the Lord by Ezechiel says: Thou son of man eat this Ezech. 3.
book. And again: Thy belly and thy bowels shall be filled with this book.
Very many do eat the word of God, and yet remain empty: many do take it,
whose bowels (that is, their hearts and minds) are not filled with it, because
in very short time, either they do forget it, or else they apply it rather to a
vain curiosity, than to the profit and good of their souls: neither do they
observe those things, which they know, in their consciences, by the instruction
of the word, ought to be observed. Such a thing did the Lord object against the
unthankful Jews, by Aggeus the prophet: Ye have sowe^ much, but ye have inued
little: you have Aggae. 1.
eaten, but you are not satisfied. They eat much, and are not satisfied, which
hear and read much, and lead evil and wicked lives, so far staining and
polluting themselves, with foul sin and filthy vices, that their life and
profession do woonderfully ^ar and utterly disagree.

EVen as that man, which goes about, to cut down a tall 50
and mighty Cypres, being barren, unprofitable, and an idle tree, that other
fruitful plants, which are let and hindered through the noisome shadow of
it, may increase and prosper, does not despair, though at the first or second
blow, he fell it not, but by little and little he strikes with the axe,
until at the length he lay it along: Even so a preacher of the word of God,
although he see no profit follow his preaching, no faults amended, no sins
abated, yet for all that, he ought not to despair, to faint, and to hide his
talent in the ground: let him preach again and again, and never give over,
that at the length, with the two edged sword, of the pure word of God, he may
hew and fell down the huge and monstrous tree of sin, and all abomination:
and that the new plants, of virtue, holiness and righteousness, may grow,
prosper, and increase.

AS he that would have a little flame of fire, to mount and rise 51
up on high, first keeps it low, and holds it down, with the force of a
van, and the gathering together of much wind: Even so our God, presses us
down and keeps us low, that he may lift us up, and exalt us on high, he
throws us down here in earth, that he may exalt us in heaven, and lays
many times disgrace upon us in this world among men, that we may be gracious in
the world to come, with himself, his angels and his saints. On the other side.

AS a wrastler embracing him, with whom he strives in the wrestling place, for
victory, lifts him up the higher, that 52
with the greater force he may hurl him against the ground: So this world does
extol us, that with throwing us down headlong it may hurt us, and that we may
fall from the top of deceitful and transitory glory, down to the bottom,
of most certain and perpetual ignominy. Cyprian says: The world smileth
upon a man, with a cruel purpose: it flattereth to deceive: it calls a man
to it, to kill him: it extolleth him, to undo him.

AS men mad and frantike, are wont to tear, and rent 53
themselves: So wicked and ungodly men, inflict upon themselves, most deadly
and incurable wounds, yea they be most wilful murderers of their own souls
and bodies. For that is true, in the book of Wisdom: Man through his own
Sapien. 1^.
naughtines* kills his own soul. And what greater madness can there be, than
a man to run headlong upon everlasting destruction? Job having a desire to
describe the ignorance of such Job. 5
men, and to declare that even in matters most evident and plain, they be
utterly void and destitute of wisdom, he says: In the day* light they run
into darkness, and as in the night, so stumble they at noone days. And whereas
the fear of God, is the beginning of wisdom, as David, and Solomon his son,
do Psalm. 101. Proverb. 1.
both affirm; and ungodly men, laden with all manner of naughtines, to the
fear of God are mere strangers: it is plainly and truly concluded, that they
be not only without wisdom, but also, that they have not, so much as the
beginning of the same.

AS the filthy swine, regard not, but thrust from them, roses 54
that are most beautiful and sweet, and seem to contemn most fragrant, and
pleasant flowers: and do rather seek after foul puddles, and stinking mire,
and forsaking dainty dishes and costly iuncates, do frank themselves most
greedily, with wild mast and unclean things: So ungodly men have no taste of
the word of God, but hunting after uncertain riches, which are in continual
hazard, and at the length will deceive them, they are (as it were) fettered in
the enchanting pleasures, and pestilent flickerings of the world. From the
which, the Lord preserve and deliver us.

Amen.
AS in a fruitful and fertile ground, among many wholesome 55*
and very medicinable herbs, some that be dangerous and full of poison do
grow: So the wits and wisdom of men, together, with some profitable and
wholesome counsels and admonitions, do bring forth perilous and pestilent
errors, and are therefore with wisdom and great discretion to be regarded,
even as herbs are to be gathered and used. But this wisdom and discretion,
is to be sought for and had, only in the word of God, which is a lantern to
our feet, and a most perfect light unto our Psalm. 119.
paths. It is only acceptable, to the souls of Gods saints, and nothing but
it, does feed them to eternal life. It is sweeter unto them, than honey and
the honey comb. In men's judgments, Psalm. 119.
words and works, we may be deceived, in the Lords we cannot. Thy judgments O
Lord (says David) are just, and more to be Psalm. 18.
desired than fine gold, or precious stones, and they are sweeter than honey
and the honey comb. It is the power of salvation to Romans 1. Iam. 3.
all that believe it: it is able to save our souls, if it be thoroughly rooted
in us. The word of the Lord laid up in our hearts, does preserve us from sin:
it cleanses our hearts, and by the working of Psalm. 119.
the holy Ghost with it, it creates right spirits within us. By the means of
it, the saints and servants of God, attain to that purity and cleannes of
heart and mind, that they wish for and desire nothing, but that which is good,
godly, and holy. The author of the word is God himself, who can neither
deceive, nor be deceived: and therefore whatsoever is written in it, is truth:
whatsoever is taught in it, is virtue and holiness: whatsoever it promises
after death, is eternity, and endless joy to the children of God, when this
life is ended. Whereto the Lord bring us all, if it be his good pleasure.

AS that man* that will give an onset, and encounter with 56
an enemy, or will defend, and keep himself unwounded at his hands, has
need of a sword in his hand, to smite the enemy withal, and to repel his
violence: So, whosoever will triumph, and carry away the victory, over this
world, flesh and devil, must hold fast in his hand, that is, in his manners,
conversation, and the whole course of his life, the word of God, which is
called the sword of the spirit, and is sharper than any two Ephesians. 6.
edged sword. This the Lord commands to be closed, and safely laid up, in the
cofer of our hearts, and to be worn as a sign upon Deuteronomy. 6. Exodus 13.
our hands, and to be had for a remembrance always before our eyes. Solomon does
counsel us, to bind it fast to our hearts, and Proverb. 6.
to use it as a chain about our necks, and to take it with us, when we walk
abroad. And Christ himself says: If any man love John. 14.
me, he will keep my saying. Again, Blessed are they that hear Luc. 11.
Roman 2.
the word of God and keep it. The apostle also: Not the hearers of the law are
righteous before God, but the doers of the law shall be justified. And James
says: Be ye doers of the word, and Iam. 1.
not hearers only, deceiving your own selves. The Lord give grace, and his
holy spirit unto us, that we may love to hear his word, and to do his will.

EVen as doves do love, and delight in houses, that be fair 57
whited, and do willingly frequent sweet and pleasant places, but contemn and
fly from black, foul, and unsavory cottages: So, faithles and untrusty
friends, do hunt and seek after, the friendship of those men, by whose wealth
and riches, they may be helped, relieved, and enriched. But men in poverty,
and distressed persons, unable to fill their bellies, to clothe their backs, or
otherwise to pleasure them, with some worldly things, they utterly despise,
they care not for their company, their love, nor friendship, fear they God
never so much. Yea, if some blustering storm, and terrible tempest of
adversity shall blow away thy wealth, and shall separate thy riches and thy
self: thy greatest friends (as thou thoughtest) will hide them from thee,
Proverb. 17.
and no where be found: but a faithful friend loves at al times, he never
shrinketh, adversity and prosperity is all one to him. Happy is he that
finds a true and trusty friend. Eccles. 25.


AS great and mighty fishes, are not bred and fed in small 58
rivers, and sweet waters, but in the salt and bitter waters of the seas: So,
men that are excellent, and very famous, by reason of the notable and manifold
virtues, wherewith they be endued, are not delighted in the false and
deceitful pleasures of this world, but are nourished, and as it were sweetly
cherished, and brought up in Christ, with very sower sorrows, and bitter
calamities, which they endure, and most patiently bear for Gods sake. And as
to a valiant soldier, nothing is more noble, and worthy praise, than to carry
the armor and arms of his prince: So a true Christian man, esteems nothing
of greater valor and more honorable, than to bear the arms and badges of
Christ his captain, that is, to be thoroughly touched with great crosses, and
many afflictions, and to be well armed with a godly patience. Hear the
Apostle, that stout and valiant soldier of Christ: I do bear in my body the
marks of the Lord Galat. 6. 2. Tim. 3.
Jesus. Yea he says further: All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall
suffer persecutions. Seeing Christ our head, and only savior, suffered
persecutions, what marvel, if we his members suffer them? The holy scripture
calls calamities and persecutions, yea and death it self, endured in the
quarrel of God, and his truth, a cup. David prepared himself to receive this
cup: I will receive the cup of salvation, and will call upon the name of Psalm.
116.
the Lord: and expressing what this cup is, he says: Right dear in the sight
of the Lord, is the death of his saints.

Christ has his cup, and the world his: the cup of Christ has very bitter
drink in it, but very wholesome. The cup of the world, is gold to see to, and is
full of pleasures within, but most pestilent and deadly, it pleases the senses,
and kills the soul.

AS a physician does minister to his sick patients, sower 60
and bitter potions to drink, that some hurtful humor of their bodies may be
expelled: So, God our heavenly physician, willing to cure the maladies, and to
salve the sores of our souls, does reach unto us many times, the cup of
afflictions, troubles and miseries, that (our sins and iniquities being taken
away) we may be restored to the former salvation of our souls. The world does
offer unto us a very beautiful cup, but it is full of deadly poison, it
delights our eyes and taste, but it works most surely our overthrow and
utter destruction. This is that cup, that John in the Revelation, bids us to
beware of: the Lord give us grace to shun it, for he says, it is full of all
abomination Apoc. 17.
and uncleanness. Let us cheerfully receive the cup of Christ, that is,
poverty, penury, obloquies, evil reports, backbitings, slanders,
persecutions, sickness and death it self: this is very sharp and unpleasant to
our taste at the first, but at the length most wholesome to our infected and
sick souls.

A Good bailife of husbandry, when he sees plentiful fruits 61
grow after his faithful labors, desires that his lord or master may come,
that seeing his diligence, and fidelity in his calling, he may reward him for
his travel and pains taken: And a valiant soldier, after dangerous fight, and
noble victory gotten, wishes the presence of his prince, that he upon the
view and sight of the sweat of his brows, his grievous wounds, and courage,
may recompense the noble acts that he has done: So, that man which has
faithfully handled, the husbandry, and bailywike, committed to him of the
Lord, and has manfully fought, against the world, flesh, and satan, and
through the grace, and mighty spirit of God, has gotten the upper hand, and
victory of them all, he now most earnestly desires, that Christ his captain,
under whose banner he has fought, would come, that he might receive his
reward, which is everlasting joy in heaven, and eternal salvation through
Christ, with God, his angels and saints for ever and ever. Which though it be
called a reward, yet is it the free gift of God, utterly undeserved of man, but
only deserved and purchased for us by Christ Jesus, in his death and passion
upon the cross, and to all that do believe in him, it is free. But on the
other side: the wicked and ungodly, whose delight is only in the pleasures,
and pestilent flickerings of the world, which do swallow up vanities even with
greedines, and set at naught all virtue and godliness: which are shut up under
iniquity, and become slaves unto sin: which are pricked in their
consciences, and do fear the infernal woes, and terrible torments of hell,
which are prepared for them against the day of their death, they would not have
Christ to come, to hear of his coming is troublesome and fearful to them. A
guilty man, whose conscience does disquiet him, would never see the Judge: a
traitor would never willingly be seen of his prince, nor a disloyal person of
one that knows him.

AS brass or copper does make a greater sound, and is heard 62
farther off than gold, whereas notwithstanding, gold is far more excellent
than it: So eloquence joined with knowledge, sounds louder and farther, than
humility coupled with charity: and yet such humility is far better, and more
excellent than it. Knowledge (without humility) puffs up (says the Apostle)
1. Cor. 8. 1. Cor. 13.
but charity does edify. Again: If I speak with the toongs of men and of
angels, and have not charity, I am but as a sounding brass, or a tinkling
cimball. A great bragger and boaster of religion, makes much noise, but an
humble spirited Christian, is far better than he.

AS travelers, not thinking of the sun setting, are overtaken 63
with darkness, before they be aware: So does death suddenly come upon many,
that never thought of it, neither have learned to die, nor what shall become of
them when they be dead. But it behooves all Christians, that will be saved, to
watch, to 1. Cor. 16.
stand steadfast in the faith of Christ, to quit themselves like men, and to be
strong, and to do, all that they do in love.

AS earthen vessels are alike subject to danger and breaking, 64
whether they be new or old made: So, all men are open and subject to death
alike, whether they be young men, and in their lusty and flourishing age, or
they be old men, and well strooken in years. If thou shall come into a
Po^ters* warehouse, where thou shall see a large table, set full of pots, some
old and some new, some little and some great, and shall demand of the Potter,
which of them all, shall first be broken: he may well say, for answer, That
which shall fall first to the ground: Even so among men, he dies not first,
that is elder* but he that first falls to the ground, that is, that comes
first to his grave. What is this world else, but a Potters warehouse? and what
are all we Psalm. 2. Esaias. 30. 2. Cor. 4. Apoc. 2.
that be in it, but earthen vessels? The Apostle says: We have this treasure
in earthen vessels. And saint John says: As an earthen vessel shall they be
broken. Seeing then that all flesh is grass, and all must see death, but how,
when, and where, we cannot tell: it stands us upon, to have our minds fixed
in heaven, and to be seeking those things which are above, where Christ sits
at the right hand of God in majesty and power, that living in his fear, and
dying in his faith, we may have a glorious resurrection, and meeting him
joyfully in the clouds, we may hear him most cheerfully say to us: Come ye
blessed children, receive a kingdom prepared for you, before the foundations
of the earth were laid. The which kingdom, God, for his son, and our savior
his sake grant us,

Amen.
THe moon when she decreaseth, does turn the opening of 65
her bow, down toward the earth, and her back up toward heaven, and so
proceeds to her defect, and the end of her course, by little and little
losing her light, until at the length she be dark, and utterly void of all
her light: And on the other side, when she increases, she turns her open
side up toward heaven, and her back toward the earth, and so goes on,
growing and increasing by degrees, until she come to her ^ul and perfect
light: Even so man, when he faints, and fails, in tru^ christianity, anst
spiritual graces, and so falls away more and more, he turns the door of
his heart, and the opening of his desires, altogether to this world, and being
carried away with the love of transitory things, he seeks nothing but the
earth, and the things of the same, turning him from immutable goodness, to
things very uncertain, and changing every day. And whiles he thus falls
away, and starteth aside like a broken bow, he loses the light and excellent
brightness of Christian dignity, until he remain not only deprived of the
light of grace, but also blind in his understanding, utterly obscured, and
clean covered with a most palpable darkness. The Psalmist speaks of such men,
saying: They are without knowledge, they have no Psalm. 82.
understanding, they walk in darkness. And the holy Apostle says: Their
foolish heart is full of darkness. And again: Walk Romans 1. Ephesians. 4.
not ye, as the gentiles walk, in the vanity of their minds, having their
understanding darkened.

But when man grows in divine exercises, and increases in a heavenly life,
and goes on still in spiritual graces, then he turns his back to the
world, and utterly renounceth the vanities, the flickerings, the allurements,
and all the deceits of the same; and turns the opening of his heart, and all
his desires, to God only, and so goes on, continually profiting, and every
day receiving some brightness, until he be filled, not only with the light of
grace, but of glory also. Therefore by how much the more thou shall see a man
occupied in the insatiable desires of this world, and busied with the
troublesome affairs of vain and transitory things, and such as be
unprofitable for his soul, by so much the more, understand thou, that he goes
backward, and decaieth in Christian perfection. And on the other side, the more
fervently, and earnestly thou shall see him, to aspire to heavenly things,
know thou, that so much the more he profits, in the true knowledge, love,
fear, and worshipping of God. That we therefore may profit in heavenly
things, and be illuminated with the bright beams of grace, let us lift upward
our hearts to God, let us send to him our desires, our sighs and groans, let us
never cease begging, but continually crave at his hands, that everlasting life,
which is only excellent, only best, and kept in store for all that do truly
fear God and walk in his Psalm. 128.
ways.

EVen as a body without a soul, is dead, because it uses not 66
the sinews, ioints, nor members: So that commonwealth, or that city, may
well and truly be said to be dead, where good laws, godly statutes, and holy
ordinances, are not used, and put in practice, which are the sure binding
bands, of man's society, and the principal parts of a common wealth. These
missing, justice is contemned, virtue banished, honesty expulsed, and all
evil, vice, vileness, and all sin, iniquity, and abomination cherished,
vpholden and maintained.

IF birds of all sorts do desire the air, fishes seek for water, 67
and the fire of the earth, mounteth and flameth up, toward the elementall
fire, and all things seek their place and center, and do tend toward the
same: why then, will we not seek our God, as we ought, our only rest, our
center, and only good? If floods and rivers, with great force run into the
sea, because (as Eccles. 1.
Solomon says) they came out of the sea: why will not we love our God, why
will we not aspire toward him? why will we not, in all feruencie of love draw
near unto him, which is that immeasurable sea of all goodness, from whence we
came? for he has made us after his own similitude and likeness. As we are
Genes. 1.
bound to keep the precepts and commandments of God, so are we most straightly
bound, to love, honor, and obey himself. Even as the horse is ordained to run,
the ox to plough, and the dog to hunt: so is man borne, above all things, to
love God.

AS a stone preaseth to his center: So an hard hearted man is 68
preasing toward hell. It is said of the obstinate Egyptians: They went down
into the depth like a stone. Their bodies Exodus 15.
went down into the bottom of the sea, and their souls into the bottom of
hell. And Ecclesiasticus says: An hard heart shall Eccles. 3.
fare evil at the last. God grant therefore that every one of us may justly
say, as Job says of himself: The Lord has mollified Job. 23.
my heart. It is written in the books of Exodus and Numbers: that Exodus 17.
Numb. 20.
Moses did smite the rock with his rod, and that abundance of water flowed
out. Unto which words the prophet David alludeth, saying: He smote the rock,
and the waters gushed out, so that rivers did run thereat. The Lord so smite
our stony hearts, with the rod of the cross of Christ, and of the remembrance
of his bitter passion, and so break in pieces the hard rocks of the same, that
floods of most bitter tears may run from our eyes, and many deep sighs, and
grievous groans, may fall from our hearts to move the Lord, to wash away all our
sins, and rebellions against the Almighty, in and with the blood of Jesus
Christ, our only savior and redeemer.

Amen.
AS wild and fierce horses, are wont to be broken with the 69
hardness of the bridle, and sharpnes of the bit: So, our untamed lusts, and
unbridled appetites, are hampered, and brought within the compass of reason,
with the bridle of adversity, troubles, sorrows and afflictions.

EVen as the grape, that it may yield wine, is brought to the 70
press, that it may be thoroughly pressed: So man, is brought to calamity, that
being pressed with sorrows, and exercised with afflictions, he may bring
forth the sweet and pleasant liquor of obedience and virtue, and so be
advanced to true Christianity, which is the greatest and highest dignity in
the world. Miseries, penuries, and tribulations, do, for the most part, keep
under and stay, our unruly lusts, and dangerous desires, and are means, that
we lift up our hearts and minds unto God, and that we be strengthened and
confirmed, in true piety and unfeigned godliness. And on the other side,
prosperity, worldly wealth, dignity and honors, are oftentimes, means to
hinder us, in holy exercises, and to puff us up, with pride and vain glory,
and to draw us to disloyalty, and rebellion against our God. The Israelites
being stoong and torn of fiery serpents, they learned to know Numb. 21.
God, and cried for his mercy. And wicked Manasses, being cast into the bands
of the Babylonians, and compassed round about with great calamities, he fled
unto the Lord, he acknowledged 2. Paral. 33.
his sins, sending unto the Lord most fervent prayers, and the Lord heard
him. And the prophet Nehemias says: They called Nehem. 9.
upon thee in the time of trouble, and thou heardest them from heaven.

AS a master, when his servants obey him, and do his will, commands his
steward, or governor of his house, 71
to minister unto them all things necessary, and that nothing be wanting: but
if they offend him, and deal unfaithfully with him, he gives a contrary
charge: Even so God, the true and right owner of all things, of whom the kingly
prophet David says: The earth is the Lords, and all the fulness Psalm. 24.
thereof, the round world, and they that dwell therein: if we do obey him, and
serve him faithfully, and give unto him his due honor, he commands the earth,
his ancient steward, to minister unto us, great store of necessaries, and to
give unto us, all good, rich, and pleasant things in due time: but on the other
side, if we disobey him, rebel against him, and be not afraid to do those
things, which he forbids us, and will commit, we care not what sin, even
with greedines, joy, and delight; then he commands his steward the earth, to
deny food unto us, and to afflict us with penury, and extreme want, of all
those things, whereof it was wont to yield us great abundance, and not to be
so bold, as to relieve or comfort us, until we be converted, and fly unto
him, confessing and acknowledging our sins, from the bottom of our hearts,
and most bitterly bewailing them, shall prostrate our selves before the throne
of grace, craving and crying, for remission of our sins, in the death and
bloodshedding of our savior Christ crucified.

EVen as a colume or pillar, is sometime on thy right hand, and 72
sometime on thy left hand, because thou do change thy standing, sitting or
walking, for it is immovable, and keeps one place: So, God is sometime
favorable and bountiful unto thee, and sometime seems to be wrath and angry
with thee, because thou do fall from virtue to vice, from obedience and
humility, to pride and presumption, for in the Lord there is no change, no
Malach. 3. James 1.
not so much as any shadow of change. He is immutable, always one, and
everlasting. If thou will bend thy self to obedience, and to a virtuous and
godly life, thou shall ever have him, a strong rock, whereupon thou may
boldly build: a castle and tower of defense: he will be unto thee a mighty
pillor, bearing up heaven and earth, whereto thou may lean, and not be
deceived, wherein thou may trust, and not be disappointed: he will ever be
at thy right hand, that thou shall not fall: he will take thy part, and Psalm.
16.
will mightily defend thee, against all thine enemies, of thy body and of thy
soul: But if thou will shake hands with virtue, and bid it adieu and farewell,
and forsaking the ways of God, wilt live as thou list, and follow thine own
corruption, and make no conscience of ought thou do, defiling and blemishing
thy self, with all manner sin and iniquity; then be sure, the Lord will
appear unto thee, in his fury and indignation, from whose justice and
judgments none shall ever be able to deliver thee: the Lord therefore give us
hearts, to fear him, to love him, and to obey him.

EVen as the adamant stone, placed near unto the load stone, 73
does not suffer the load stone to draw iron from it, or if it seem a little
to move and to draw it away, it presently pulls it back, and draws it,
to it self: Even so, a man endued with godly wisdom, and righteousness from
God, is firm and constant, and does so overcome all the blustering blasts, and
burning brunts of calamities and miseries, that he is not so scorched with the
force of their flames, that he proves unconstant, and loses his dignity.
And such is the iar and discord, between this world and him, that being placed
in the world, he suffers it not (so much as in him lies) to bewitch men, and
to draw them after it. But if the world (like a load stone) shall at any time
A virtuous man, is a precious jewel.
allure them to follow it, he by and by bends himself, with all his force,
by counsel, by admonitions, by his life and example, to draw them back
again from it, and to restore them to their former dignity, that is, to the
estimation and honor of true christianity, whereto the world and worldlings are
mere strangers.

AS organ plaiers, unless some body blow unto them the 74
windy bellows, do make no sound at all: Even so, vain men, unless they be
pricked forward, with commendations and praises of others, have never any
mind, or purpose to bend themselves to any good action.

EVen as mariners, which are carried with the course and 75
force of winds, being in an haven, will not disanchor, nor depart out of the
haven, without a prosperous wind, blowing to their very good liking: So,
hypocrites do look, that the people should shout, and clap their hands, in
token of their great praises and commendations, they seek for, and hunt after
vain brutes and reports, without which they are disposed to do nothing well.
These men care not to do well, and yet they seek for, and desire the rewards
of well doing. They have no eye, nor regard to God in any of their actions.
They are not to be imitated at any hand. Christ himself does give us warning
of such: Be ye not like Matthew* 6.
unto hypocrites, etc. But let us do as the holy prophet of God does teach us:
I (says he) have set the Lord always before mine eyes, Psalm. 16.
he is at my right hand, that I shall not be moved. Whatsoever he thought,
spoke or did, he still behaved himself, as one in the presence and sight of
God, and sought the glory and praise of his name, in all his actions. So ought
we to do, the Lord grant we may. This also is the Apostles counsel: Whether ye
eat or 1. Cor. 10.
drink, or whatsoever ye do else, do all to the glory of God.

AS a thick wood, and goodly grove, giving great shadow, 76
very pleasant to behold, does delight the eyes of the beholders so greatly,
with the variety and thicknes, of flourishing trees, and pleasant plants, that
it seems to be ordained only for pleasures sake, and yet within is full of
poisonful serpents, ravening wolves, and other wild, hurtful, and cruel
beasts: Even so, an hypocrite when outwardly he seems holy, and to be well
furnished with the ornaments of all sorts of virtues, does please well, and
delight much the eyes of his beholders, but within him, there lurketh pride,
covetousness, envy, and all manner wickednesses, like wild and cruel beasts,
walking and wandering in the wood of his heart. So that, whiles he seems to be,
that he is not, neither will be that he seems, his exercise is, to seek
whose house he may devour, whose goods he may gripe, whose credit he may
crack, whose name he may blemish, and whose honest disposition, and godly
simplicity he may most abuse. In the hypocrite this is verified: Fained
sanctity, is double iniquity. So that (I speak with reverence) if any be a
knave, the hypocrite is more: if some may serve for one, he may well stand for
two. Hypocrisy is a subtle evil, a secret poison, a lurking venom, a
painting and counterfetting of virtue, and a moath of holiness. In mine opinion
there be no worse men living, than hypocrites be: for when they purpose most
to deceive, they handle the matter so, and do so paint themselves with
counterfeit color, that you would think them to be very virtuous, and godly
disposed.

AS a flint smitten against iron or steel, does drive out 77
sparks of fire: So godly meditations of heavenly things, draw out of hard
hearts, some warmnes, and as it were fire of the love of God. The prophet David
had experience thereof, when he said: My heart wareth warm within me, and in my
Psalm* 39.
meditation a fire was kindled. That soul which shall be replenished with
virtues, and shall take pleasure in the contemplation of heavenly things, shall
(no doubt) have most swift and speedy wings, and shall be called most
woorthily, Auis petens alta, se a terrae laqueis eripiens: A bird that mounteth
on high, and pearseth the clouds, freeing her self from the traps and snares
of the earth. Such was the soul of the prophet, when he said: My soul is even
as a bird, escaped out of the snare of the hunter. Let us, whiles it is to day,
and we may fly, be lifted up toward our God: and forgetting the vain things
of the earth, which are behind us, and preasing with all our powers to the
things above, and never satisfied with the love of God, and the desire of
heaven, let us boldly go forward, and stretch out our selves to the reward of
the high calling of God, in Christ Jesus our Lord. For the things of this world,
have ever been false, and at the length have deceived their lovers and dearest
friends.

EVen as he that has a son, which is in good and perfect 78
health, and a servant that is exceeding sick, deals more roughly and
severely with his son, than with his servant, not because he loves his
servant more, than his son, but because he would (if it might be) restore his
sick servant to his former health, but his son, whom he loves most dearly,
he reprooueth, checketh, taunteth and corrects: Even so our God, sometimes
afflicts his dear children whom he most tenderly loves, and does suffer
them to be exercised with wants, with weepings and wailings, with sighs and
sorrowful sobs, with hunger and cold, with nakedness and want of harbor, with
heaviness of heart, and vexation of soul, with sickness of body and want of
liberty, and with a thousand other calamities and cares, and in the mean time
suffers the wicked and ungodly ones of the world, to want nothing, he gives
them health, wealth, and liberty, worldly honor and dignity, and what not?
meaning and purposing by these means (if the fault be not in themselves) to
bring them to know, to fear, to honor and to serve him, by whose providence
and appointment they have and enjoy all those good blessings, and so be cured
and healed of the sores and sickness of their souls. The holy men and servants
of God, have ever been well experienced in the Lords chastenings: Jeremy the
prophet says to God: Thou have chastened me, O Ierem. 13. Hebr. 12.
Lord, and I am corrected. And the Apostle says: Whom the Lord loves, he
chasteneth, and he corrects every son, that he receives. Again: Let us
rejoice in tribulations. And to the Romans 5. Galat. 6.
Galathians: God forbid, that I should rejoice but in the cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified unto me, and I to the world: by
the cross, understand the afflictions of Christ, wherewith the Apostle was
exercised for Christ's sake. For this must ever be true: All that will live
godly in Christ 2. Tim. 3.
Jesus, shall suffer persecution. So that, the troubles and afflictions of this
life, are not reiections, maledictions, and the curses of God, but rather, and
most truly, infallible signs of his grace, and true tokens of his love and
mercies toward us. Blessed are they Matthew. 5.
(says truth it self) that suffer persecution for righteousness sake.

AS the skillful pearl seller, and cunning lapidarie does 79
willingly suffer the Indian diamond, or adamant, to be smitten and st^ooken
with great and weighty blows, because he knows well, that the hammer and
anuill will sooner be bruised, than the diamond or adamant will be broken: So
our most wise God, yea only wisdom it self, suffers men of excellent
virtues, of unquenchable love and charity, and invincible constancy, to fall
into diverse temptations, and to be plunged deep into manifold miseries,
because he will have their inward graces to break out, and so shine before
men, that they seeing the constancy of his saints, may glorify God which is
in heaven. For he is sure that they be constant, and that nothing can separate
them from the love of God. Joseph was imprisoned in Egypt: Genesis 39. Ierem. 20.
Ezech. I. Matthew. 11.
Jeremy in Judea: Ezechiel in Chaldea: and John Baptist by wicked Herod: and
yet all these and infinite others, did never shrink from God, but as they
lived in him, so they died in him, and are exalted up on high, and shall dwell
in his tabernacle, Psalm. 15.
and rest in the hill of his holiness for ever and ever. And so shall we do, if
we will be as they were.

AS when thou see a great and goodly city, consisting of many 80
and sundry sorts of men, some of great reputation, and very many of small
estimation: some exceeding rich, and infinite others extremely poor: some in
their fresh and flourishing youth, and some crooked with old age, where all
these, though among themselves selves they be diverse and sundry, do live in
great concord, and agree well together, and are kept all within the bounds and
limits of good and godly discipline, thou will by and by judge, that the prince
or governor of the same is just, and very mighty and wise, though thou see
him not: Even so, in the huge greatness of this world, and the agreement and
well hanging together, of the things contained in the same, though differing in
their natures, and the apt and fit placing of the whole, it cannot be, but that
thou will presently conceive in thy mind, that there is a great, a wise, and
mighty creator, and preserver of these things. For not only the mighty works
of God in this great world, but also his incomparable workmanship in the little
world, that is in man himself (for so he is called of some) do teach us
wonderful knowledge of God. The prophet David speaking to God, says: Thy
knowledge, O Lord, is made wonderful by me. As if he should say: By the
knowledge of my self (O Lord) I am come to a wonderful knowledge of thee.

AS the cause of trees and plants, of their roots, stocks, stems, 81
and boughs, is in the seed: So, the cause of our transgressions, foul
sins, and most dangerous iniquities, is our own corruption, wherewith we are
moved, and inclined to all evil: and the ignorance, and not knowing of our
selves, wherewith we are greatly hindered, in the knowledge of our God, and do
also most sharply censure those things in others, which we do love, and cherish
in our selves. We must know also, that self love, is unto us a perilous
thief, for it does rob us, of the knowledge of our selves, it blinds our
eyes, and darkeneth our understanding: It is a very common thief, so ranging
and robbing in every place, so reigning and ruling without controlment, yea it
is so welcome to high and low: that that saying of the apostle, may seem to
have been spoken of these our days: Dangerous 2. Tim. 3.
times will come (says he) and men shall be lovers of themselves. O how true is
it? yea it is to too true, that we never set our selves before our own eyes,
that is, we never stay* we never examine, our own thoughts, words and works,
but let them pass and go on, like roages and vagrant persons, till by some
others they be apprehended, they go untouched of our selves: we be lynces, that
is, earnest priers into the lives of others, but about our own lives, we are
very moles or wants, that is, stark blind.

EVen as wheels do run most lightly: So godly men, and 82
virtuous women, are most easily moved, to every good action, upon any
occasion offered. If they do but hear of the wants, miseries, calamities,
poverty, imprisonment and sickness of their poor brethren, they presently
begin to care for them, and to cast with themselves, how they may relieve them,
succor, help, and comfort them. The troubles and afflictions of their
Christian brethren, are to them, as if they were their own.

AS a wheel does touch the ground, only with one side, or a 83
little part, and with the other, is lifted from the earth: So, a man that
fears God, and loves righteousness, and is careful for the salvation of his
soul, dwells here upon the earth only in body, but in affect and desire,
he is lifted up on high, and so dwells in heaven, in his meditations, and the
thoughts of his heart.

AS men in a clear and bright shining night, passing or traveling 84
near unto a deep river, do plainly see and behold in a calm, the shadows
and beautiful likenesses, of the round moon and glistering stars, but those
stars and moon, though they seem to be in the waters, are notwithstanding
placed in the skies: Even so, men that have gathered, and learned wisdom out
of the word of God, and do direct the whole course of their lives, by the line
of the same, although they seem to be in the flood of this life, which daily
is tending toward the sea of death, yet in spirit and in mind, they are fixed
and placed in heaven, and leading an heavenly and godly life, they contemn and
despise all those things, which unto the wicked and ungodly, do seem great,
high and precious matters, and do draw after them with great force the most
part of the world.

AS it behooves him that walks upon coardes strained 85
and fastened on high, diligently to look to his footing, that he may not
totter, or decline this way, or that way, because he must needs perish, if
never so little he miss his way: Even so, it stands us upon, to be wary,
and carefully to look about us, and to take good heed where we set our feet,
that is, our affections and the delights of our hearts, least we fall down
headlong into the bottomless gulphe of Gods displeasure. For if we will fire
our affections and bend our wills, with a deliberate consent, to do the thing
that is evil, unjust, and ungodly, making no conscience of any thing that we
do, be it never so opposite and contrary to the will of God, it cannot be but
falling from the state of grace, we shall fall most suddenly and shamefully,
into the infernal pit of hell, death and damnation. From whence there never
was, there is not, neither ever shall be, any Luc. 16*
return nor delivery. Our blindness in heavenly things here, shall be most
justly rewarded, with intolerable tortures, in most horrible, fearful and
stinking darkness there, where no ease, end nor remedy shall ever be found. Let
us therefore be very careful, and take good heed, that we lose not our eyes:
and indeed our eyes are then put out, and we do utterly lose our sight, when
we give our selves over to carnal delights, to fleshly lusts, to worldly
pleasures, and to love more the things that are below in the earth, then those
things that are above in heaven with God, and everlasting life it self. This
was shadowed in Samson: for the Palestines pulled not out the eyes of that
famous man, Iudic. 16.
until he had slept in Dalilaes bosom: neither shall thy enemies blind thee,
unless thou will resign thy self to foul delights and filthy pleasures.
Whersoeuer soul lusts and forbidden pleasures do bear the sway, there is no
place for temperance; and in the kingdom of dishonest love, virtue is not
known. And where virtue is wanting, there is no wisdom: and where wisdom is
banished, there is no sight, but a miserable blindness of mind: and where
Satan the God of this world has blinded men's minds, there is most certain
death and lamentable destruction. The devil that old serpent, our deadly
enemy, does so extremely hate us, that he lays and keeps a continual
siege against all virtue, and does what he can to poison and to kill it, even
in the hatching. We have great need therefore of many eyes, and many and
continual watchings, that we may avoid and escape his deceits, that he trap
us not. Pharao would kill the male children of the Israelites in their birth,
because the people of God should not increase, this was the commandment of the
devil of Egypt: and now Satan does what he can, to kill and slaie all good
works, and all godly purposes, yea, he labors by all his means and
instruments, to strangle and to smother the very first motions of them, in the
hearts and minds of men, least they should increase and multiply: he is that
dragon with seven Apoc. 1^*
heads, which (as John says in the Revelation) stood before the woman when
she was to be delivered of her son, that even in the birth he might devour
her child. We may very fitly understand by the woman the soul of man, which,
when it thinks and purposes to do good works, is said to conceive, and when
it brings forth and perfourmeth the same in deed, is said to be delivered,
as a woman of a child: but then satan is forthwith Esaias. 26.
most eager and busy to stop the kindly birth of virtue and godliness, and to
smother it so, that it never come to light. The Lord strengthen us against his
force, and make us wise against subtlety, that in all his sleights and crafty
conueyances, he may be disappointed, and we delivered from him, and that we
may do the will, and walk in the ways of our God, mauger satan and all his
means.

EVen as the Ostrige, being a great and mighty foul, has The Ostrige. 86
wings, but does not fly, neither is lifted up from the ground with them: so
very many men in the world do seem to be carried up to heaven upon the wings
of their ceremonies, but are in deed, in heart, mind, and desire, fast nailed
to the earth. As the Ostrige has wings and flies not, so they have calling,
but they answer it not: they have knowledge, but they practice it not: they
have words, but they work not.

THe Kite being a most greedy and ravening foul, mounteth 87
exceeding high, so that you would think she touches the gliding clouds, and
as she flies does spread her wings: and yet when she is at the highest, she
has her eyes fast set and fixed below in the earth, pryeng and spieng to catch
(if she can) some poor chicken, or other pray within her talons: indeed she
flies high, but never looks up toward heaven, but altogether down toward
the earth: even so, thou shall see a number of men, faining a certain
sanctymonie, and counterfeiting much holiness, who, although they are thought
with the contemplation of heavenly things, to be ravished and taken up into the
clouds, yet they mind nothing less then true godliness, neither any thing more
then earth and earthly things. Their study is for worldly honor, their
greatest carking and care is, for rich and large revenues, for dignities,
princes favors and worldly wealth. Such men turn their backs to heaven and
fly from God, and so being disappointed of that light which they seemed to
seek for, they are wrapped in palpable and most dangerous darkness: but they
that truly seek after God, do (by the help and assistance of his holy
spirit) translate and convey their minds from earth to heaven, and so are
illuminated with the brightness of God his grace and love: for so says Christ
himself, He that follows me, walks not in darkness, but shall have the John.
8.
light of life. But we shall never follow Christ as we ought, unless we shall
first utterly deny our selves, for he says: If any man will follow me, let
him deny himself, and take up his cross Matthew. 16.
and follow me: and then, and so often do we deny our selves, as treading under
feet our old and former sins, we leave to be that we have been, and begin to
be that we have not been: and follow the counsel of the apostle saying:
Layeng aside our old conversation, and putting off the old man, which is
corrupted after the lusts of the flesh, let us be renewed in the spirit of our
minds. Ephesians. 4.
But alas, (I speak it with grief of heart) the most part of the world
despising and forsaking God, do take for their guide, and do follow as their
captain, the violent lusts and foul appetites of their own corrupted and
cankered hearts. But if we would consider what that is that drives us, and
whither we are going in such great haste, what we do, whom we follow, what woe
we work our selves, and what will be the end, we would surely forsake those
ways of our own, and turn our feet into the ways, that is, into the
statutes and laws of our God. David took this course, and so the Lord grant
we may.

Amen. Psalm. 119.

EVen as a Bird does not fly with one wing alone, but with 88
twain: So it is not enough, that we know much of the Lords word and will,
but we must do it also. It will not suffice us at the latter day, that we have
been great professors of the Gospel, and are deeply learned, if also we have
not been inflamed, with a love to God above all things, and have not loved our
brethren as our selves: if our knowledge, our faith, and profession do not
move us to pray to God, for to visit and to comfort our poor brethren being
sick, in prison or otherwise distressed, if (I say) our faith and knowledge
yield not fruits, that we feed the hungry, cloth the naked, call into our
houses, the harborlesse, and shall not do to all men, as we would be done unto,
we shall be beaten with many stripes, because we know the will of God and do
it not. Blessed only are they, that fear Psalm. 128.
the Lord and walk in his ways. And blessed are they that hear the word of
God and keep it. The greatest, the highest, the best, and only service that
man can do, and bring unto the Lord, is his obedience to Gods word, and the
doing of his will.

AS he that makes tools, and instruments of iron, or 89
other mettle, makes not rustines and canker, neither is to be blamed, if
those things which he has made, by reason of too much moisture, dust or other
corruption, shall afterward gather canker or rustines: even so, that heavenly
workman, our God, did not bring in sin and iniquity, neither can he justly
be blamed, if his creatures do stain and blemish themselves, with the foulenes
of sin and wickedness: for he made Genes. 1.
them good. God saw all things, that he had made (says the holy Scripture)
and they were exceeding good. Augustine in his 14. Book of the City of God,
says: Good things may he without evil things, but evil things cannot be
without good things: because the natures, in which evil things are, in as much
as they be natures, they are good. For they be of God, and in some measure they
lead us to the knowledge of him. David understanding Psalm* 92.
so much, says: How excellent are thy works O Lord? thy thoughts are
exceeding deep: An unwise man does not know these things, and the fool does
not understand them. That man perishes, is damned, and goes to hell, is not
the Lords fault, but man's own.

EVen as plants and trees, do spread abroad their roots in the 90
earth, from whence they have their nourishment: So christian men, because they
be fed with delicates and dainties from heaven, and are nourished with the
grace and favor of God, they hold up their hands, they turn up their eyes,
they lift up their hearts and minds, to God that is in heaven, from whence
their souls receive comfort, joy, salvation and everlasting life. Such men are
not in love with this world, nor with the transitory things of the same. They
know and consider, that the earth and all that is in it, was once nothing, and
that it shall return to nothing again. All is vanity, and vanity of
vanities. But Ecclesiastes. 1
all their felicity, joy and comfort, is in the word and will of God, to
know it, that whiles they live here below in the earth, they may do it. That
the course of this life being ended, they may have and enjoy everlasting life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

LEarned and famous writers do report, that in the universal 91
world, there is nothing harder then the adamant stone, especially that which
is had in the Indians, which in firmenes, hardness, and valor exceeds the
rest: but I am of opinion, that the heart of man is harder than it: for the
adamant, though it will give place to no other thing, nor be softened by any
other means, yet is it said to be subdued and mollified, with the warm blood
of a goat: But the heart of a man, being hardened through the continuance and
custom of sin, will not be mollified, brideled nor tamed, neither with the
blood of a goat, nor yet with the blood of that immaculate lamb Christ Jesus,
which gave himself a sacrifice for us, upon the altar of the cross, and there
bestowed his blood, that he might mittigate and appease our wild minds, and
prick to the quick our hard and senseless hearts, and to open unto us the
way to the attaining of eternal life, and everlasting salvation. O hard,
(says Bernard) and hardened sons of Adam, that will not be mollified with so
great a force and power of love! With whom the bitter pangs, of Christ his
death and passion, cannot prevail. We are surely that people, to whom the Lord
speaks by Esaias the prophet, saying: I Esa. 48.
know that thou art hard hearted, and that thy neck is a synewe of iron, and
that thy face is of brass. And Jeremy out of doubt, speaks no less of us,
than of the Jews: they have made (says Ierem. 5.
he) their faces harder then flint, and they will not be converted. I would to
God, these sayings did only touch the Jews, and did not also hit a number of
us, that profess the name of Christ, and look to be saved by him, pat upon
the thumbes. We are proud, hawtie and high minded, and we hate to be humbled:
we are covetous, envious and leacherous, and we will not be brideled. We are
very rich and religious in words, but we are very beggarly, and have no
religion in our works. Our lips and tongues only are gilded, and tipped with
good speeches, but our hearts are far from the Lord. The almighty vouchsafe to
open the eyes of our minds, and to mollify our hearts, that we may see and
receive his grace offered unto us, and that forsakeing our selves and our
sins, we may be converted unto him.

Amen.
AS the sun does not leave shining, and sending forth his 92
bright beams, although a cloud will sometimes darken his light: Even so, we
must not give over to exercise godliness and to do well, even toward them that
be our enemies, and will hate, and persecute us, and the better we do, the
worse will deal with us. Christ commands us, to love our enemies, and to do
them good: and to pray for them that hate us, and persecute Matthew. ^.
us.

AS the nut and olive trees, although they be beaten with 93
rods, yet bring forth most plentiful fruits: So we must not be weary of well
doing, nor cast the exercise and practice of godliness behind us, but rather
more willingly and fervently proceed and go on in the same, although the
friends of this world, shall braule and rate at us, shall curse, revile, and
most unkindly entreat us. The lot of virtue is, to be envied, and to find
few friends, and (if at all) to be but coldly entertained with the most part,
and greatest number of the world. The prophet of God Psalm. 119.
complains, that for his virtues sake, the princes of the earth, laid their
heads together against him, and yet he shronke not.

EVen as a quiet, calm and pleasant water, will show unto 94
us, if we look into it, the very image and likeness of our selves, as it were
a glass, but moved, stirred and troubled, it does not so: even so our own
hearts, if they be quiet, and not troubled with horrors, nor distempered with
fears, will plainly show us what we be, so that we may easily know our
selves, and not be deceived: but being filled with fears, tossed with terrors,
and overwhelmed with troubles, they cannot do so. It behooves us therefore,
that our hearts be not troubled, nor ouerladen with fears. Christ wills his
disciples, that they fears Ioh. 14.
not, nor that their hearts be troubled: and in another place, he says: Fear
not my little flock. The prophet was in heavy plight, when he cried: O Lord
my heart is sore troubled: And in Psalm. 55. and Psalm. 57.
an other place: I was troubled in my sleep. Therefore, that we may have our
hearts quiet, our souls in peace, and our consciences untroubled: Let us beware
of sin, fly from all iniquity, and walk uprightly before our God, all the
days of our lives. God grant we may. Then may we say: The Lord is the
protector Psalm. 27. and 23.
of my life, of whom shall I be afraid. And again: I will fear no ill, for
thou Lord art with me. And: if God be with us, Romans 8.
who can hurt us?

A Scorpion is a venomous creature, which has a pleasant 95
pace, but wounds deadly with her tail: she stingeth not with her face, but
with her hinder part. Such a one, is every smooth toonged and flattering
body. Which speaks fair to his neighbors face, and kills him in his
heart. Honest Cato to see too: but cruel Nero in experience.

AS a Be does carry a flower in her mouth, but behind does 96
prick very sharply with her stinge: So very many in these days, do use
most sweet and pleasant speeches, and will even stroke, as it were thy humor and
disposition, with soft and sugared communication, to the end, that (by reason
of some malice couched in their hearts) they may work thy woe, and Psalm. 118.
utter overthrow. Of these David speaks: They came about me like bees, etc.
Wicked men therefore must be taken heed of. Math. 10. Ioh. 10. Luc. 13. Math.
3. Luke 3.
For the Scriptures do painte them out in their colors, that we may shun them.
Matthew and John do call them woolues: Luke foxes: Matthew and Luke, the
generation of vipers. The Lord deliver us from them.

Amen.
EVen as a candle, that it may give light unto others, it self 97
is burned and consumed: And as salt it self is bruised, and molten, that it
may give good season, and a sweet savor unto meats: So, a true Christian,
especially one advanced to dignity, and placed in authority, should spare no
labor, but even break himself with study and care, and undergo any pains,
to do good, to profit many, and to win some souls to God. Such Math. 5.
men indeed has Christ appointed to be the light of the world, and the salt
of the earth. They ought to be full of love to God and man. They should live as
strangers upon the earth. They should have no acquaintance with pride,
covetousness, ambition, emulation, and such other sins of the world.

EVen as the sailers gnomon, or rule, which is commonly called 98
the mariners needle, does always look toward the north pole, and will ever
turn toward the same, howsoever thou shall place it: which is marvelous in
that instrument, and needle, whereby the mariners do know the course of the
winds: Euenso, every Christian man, ought to direct the eyes of his mind, and
the ways of his heart to Christ. He is our north pole, and that fixed and
constant north star, whereby we ought all to be governed: he is our hope, and
our trust, he is all our strength, whereupon we must still rely. And as the
gnomon, does ever behold the north star, whether it be closed and shut up, in a
cofer of gold, silver or wood, never losing his nature: so a right Christian
man, whether he abound in wealth, or be pinched with poverty, whether he be of
high, or low degree in this world, ought continually to have his faith and
hope, surely built and grounded upon Christ, and to have his heart and mind
fast fixed and settled in him, and to follow him through thick and thin, through
fire and water, through wars and peace, through hunger and cold, through
friends and foes, through a thousand perils and dangers, through the surges and
waves of envy, malice, hatred, evil speeches, railing sentences, contempt of
the world, flesh and devil, and even in death it self, be it never so bitter,
cruel and tyrannical, never to lose the sight and view of Christ, never to
give over our faith, hope and trust in him. Let us follow the counsel of the
holy Ghost, which says: Put me as a sign upon thy heart: as if he Cant. 8.
should say: Set me in thy heart, in steed of a mark, whereat all thy
thoughts, words and works, may be leuelled. Put out of thy heart, the mark of
the world, and place me there as the end, unto the which all thy purposes may
tend: upon whom all thy cares may be cast, and in whom thou may rest thy
soul in all peace. A wonderful gnomon, and most excellent sailing needle,
was that noble king, and famous prophet of God, David, when he said: I set the
Lord always before mine eyes, for he is at my Psalm. 16.
right hand, that I shall not be moved: Therefore (says he) my heart reioiced,
my tongue was glad, and my flesh shall rest in hope. And the Apostle says: Let
us run toward the fight that is set Heb. 12.
before us, looking still upon Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith: who
having joy set before him, endured the cross. God give us grace, continually
to lift up, our hearts and minds, our hand and eyes to Christ Jesus, and as
Augustine says, To behold steadfastly our head.

AS all rivers of waters go into the sea, because they came 99
out of it, and as Solomon says, All rivers and floods return Ecclesiastes. 1
to the place whence they came: So, let us go and toward our God, with all our
hearts, strength and powers, because we came out from him, and were created of
him. Let us therefore look upon him with the eyes of a steadfast and constant
faith, grounded upon his word: let us behold his glory, and the blessedness of
his saints, and let us conceive in our hearts and souls, an unfeigned love to
him: and let us not have two loves, one for our selves, and another for our
neighbors, but let us love them and our selves both with one and the same love,
which may kindle and inflame our hearts and minds throughout, with an earnest
desire of immortality, and that heavenly Jerusalem. That we may say with the
prophet: O my soul return unto Psalm. 116.
thy rest, for the Lord has done well to thee: or as it may be translated,
because the Lord has restored thee to thy self: As if he should say: O my
soul, when thou did serve thy body, and wast in bondage to it, it was no
marvel, that thou did seek the pleasures thereof: but now seeing thou art
thine own, because the Lord has restored thee to thy self, seek not
another pleasure but thine own: seek thine own rest, and not the rest of
thy body, of the flesh and of the world: seek God, delight in him, fly unto
him, and rest thy self in him: put all thy cares, griefs, and sorrows, in his
love and sweet comfort: think of eternal blessedness, press it and print it
surely in thy self. This is thy spiritual rest, this is thine own and only
delight, restored unto thee, by the benefit and bountifulnes of God.

THere is nothing liker unto the world than the sea. For as 100
it flows and ebbeth, and all the waves thereof, at the length fall into the
earth: So this world is never quiet: it extolleth some, and casts down
others: but all the vanities of it, are ended in the grave. If the sea lie open
to many dangers: how perilous then is the world? if the sea be troubled with
strange storms: with what tempests then is the world tossed? If they that
serve by sea, are never without great perils, how much more then, the servants
of the world? They, whose heads are under the girdle of the world, are
continually shot at, with the darts of envy, hatred and malice, and are ever
covered as it were with clouds and storms of a thousand cares. How many are
slaves to pride? how many are dirtie drudges to covetousness? how many are
consumed in substance, souls, and bodies, by foul and filthy lechery? How
many are devoured and swallowed up quick, of sorrows and greefes, of heart and
mind? And does not too much joy, and reioicing in worldly trifles, kill some?
Many die laughing, but mo sorrowing, some with eating and drinking too much,
and many through want of sufficient, give the world adieu. Some grudge and
whine, because they have many children, and some are malcontent because they
have none: some grudge, not because they have many, but because they have bad
ones: some boast of their beauties, and some mourn for their blacknes. Many
desire to live long, but few to live well. All would be rulers, and few will be
ruled. What then shall we think of this world? Truly I think of it, as of a
thing most dangerous, and most vain: and the going out of it, is to me, as the
shore is to a man, that has traveled far and long by sea, and has been
dangerously tossed with the surges and waves of the same, sometimes thrown up
as it were into the clouds, and sometimes hurled down, as it were into hell.
And howsoever it bears thee in hand, it will serve thee a sluttish trick in
the end. It will promise thee health, but ere long thou must be sick: it will
promise thee friends, but if adversity overtake thee, thy friends will be to
seek: it will promise thee wealth, and shortly after, thou shall be in
hucksters handling, and be feign to crouch to a beastly usurer* that will eat
up thee, and all thou have: it will smile on thee, and deceive thee, whatsoever
it shall promise thee, Look thou, for quid pro quo. Therefore if thou be
well advised, say to it, and dissemble not, farewell world. I desire to be
dissolved and to be with the Lord Jesus.

AS the image of Nabuchadnezzar, although it had an head 101
of fine gold, yet it fell, and was broken all to pieces, because it had feet
of clay, which being touched with a stone, overthrew the whole invention: So,
justice many times falls to the ground, because, although the princes which
are rightly called the heads of their countries, be very excellent iusticers,
and made as it were of the purest and finest gold of virtue, yet the ministers
of justice are earthen, and do bend their hearts and minds, to nothing but
earth and clay, and with gifts and rewards they are carried every way: for
gain they will sell judgment, and break the neck of justice. If you shall
touch their hands, with some precious stone, some jewel of gold, some costly
plate, some gold or silver curiously engraven, or with some good round sum of
gold or money, though it be in an old purse, they will for thy sake, turn
vpside down, all the laws of God, and man. And yet notwithstanding, there be
many such ones in the world, it is not to be doubted, that there be some, yea
many very good, upright, and godly iusticers with us, which hate bribes, love
justice with single hearts, and framing their whole lives after the rule of
reason and equity, do never willingly violate the law. God amend the worse,
and increase the better.

EVen as a brook in winter, is carried with great violence, and 102
runs with a mighty force, flowing over with abundance of waters on every
side, when there is no want nor need of water, but in the heat of summer is
dried up and empty, when water is scant and hard to be had, whereto thirsty
passengers as they travel, running in hope of water to drink, are utterly
deceived: So, a fained and hollow hearted friend, in the time of thy
prosperity, and rich estate, will promise thee many things, when thou have
need of nothing: but if the wind shall turn, and blow the contrary way, and
thou shall be turned and tossed with many sharp brunts, and blustering blasts,
of troubles, adversity, penury and poverty, thy friends (as thou thought)
will be like a tree withered through want of sap, and like a ditch without
water, dried and parched with the heat of the sun. If thou be troubled in
the city, he will be gone into the country: if in the country, then his
business is in the city. He will hide himself, he will stand a far off, he
will be afeard to meet thee, yea he will live in a continual fear and dread,
least God should use him, and make him his instrument to do thee good. Job had
great experience of this, when he complained, saying: My friends passed Job. 6.
by me, or have deceived me, even as a brook that runs swiftly in the
valleys. Such men are friends of thy table, of thy wealth, of thy favor, and of
thy friendship: they will wait of thy honor, thy lordship, thy worship and
authority: but in poverty, imprisonment, or in any other distress or
disgrace, they will utterly forsake thee. If thou will follow my counsel
therefore, try them thoroughly, and know them perfectly, and forsake thou
them, before they forsake thee.

AS a shadow does follow that man, which is lighted with the 103
bright beams of the sun, but if the sun be hid, or covered with a cloud,
the shadow vanishes* and is clean gone: So, a painted and counterfetted
friend, does follow and ply that man, whom he perceives to be rich, to be
famous, honorable, and in the princes favor, at whose hands he hops that
something will be gotten: but if he shall fall into calamity, be dispoiled of
his riches, and shall tumble down from the top of his honor, into the low
vallie of disgrace, he presently forsakes him, and makes no reckoning nor
account of him. But a true friend is no changling. Solomon says: He that is a
friend, does love Proverb. 17.
thee at all times, and a brother is tried in perplexity and anguish. And
Ecclesiasticus says: A friend shall not be known in Eccles. 12.
prosperity, neither will an enemy be hid in adversity. Augustine says in
one of his books of questions: There is nothing so August. lib. 83.
quaestionum. Isidor. lib. 3. de summo bono.
much tries a friend, as the bearing of his friends burden. And Isidorus
says: Friendship in prosperity is most doubtful, neither is it easily
discerned, whether a man's person, or his prosperous estate be loved. And an
experienced man affirms, that, Boethius lib. 3. de consolatione.
whom prosperity makes a friend, him adversity makes a foe. Time does show
and try, who it is that loves thee truly: in these our days, friends for the
most part, are rightly compared unto the bird called a swallow, whose company
thou shall have in summer, but not in winter: so friends (as they go now
adays) will swarm about thee, so long as thou art able and willing, to feed
their humors, and serve their turns, but that ended, they will leave thee, in
the midst of a thousand surges and waves, of what troubles soever shall light
upon thee.

AS an huge and mighty fire, will be assuaged, and at the 104
length, quite put out, if thou will withdraw the sticks and other matter, that
does cherish and increase it: So, thy afflictions and troubles will come to an
end, if thou will cease to do evil, and give over sin, before it give over
thee. Our sins are those dry sticks, and stubble, wherewith the fire, not
only of the wrath and malice of infidels, and heretics, but also of the wrath
and indignation of God, is kindled, increased, and most mightily stirred up
against us. They are our greatest enemies, the Lord grant, that ever beholding
them, we may unfeignedly forsake and hate them.

AS a godly and a wise surgeon, purposing to cut the corrupted 105
wounds of a sick body, and to take away, or to sear with an hot iron, the
rotten flesh, in cutting or searing has no pity of the weak man, to the end,
that in curing his sore, and healing his wound, by cutting and searing, he may
show him great pity: Even so, our most wise God, that celestial physician,
and heavenly surgeon, smites us, that he may heal us, cutteth Heb. 12.
and seareth us, that he may cure us. He smites whom he loves, and does
chasten him, that he may help and heal, the wounds Deuteronomy. 32.
and sores of his soul. The Lord himself does say: I kill, and I make alive,
I wound, and I make whole. And in the mouth of Amos the prophet, God has these
words to the Israelites: You Amos 3.
only have I known of all the families of the earth, therefore will I visit
all your iniquities: that is, I will be revenged, and will punish all your
sins. For in the scripture, sometime, to visit, is to punish. As in the Psalm
89. If they break my statutes, Psalm. 89. 31.
and keep not my commandments, then will I visit their transgressions with
the rod, and their iniquity with strokes: yet my loving kindness will I not
take from him, neither will I falsify my truth, etc. As if the Lord should
say: If he offend, I will punish him, and have mercy upon him. The Lords
justice will have punishment, and his promise will have mercy. This is to our
everlasting comfort, that the Lords chastenings, are to his children, his
mercy.

EVen as, in a sea moved and tossed with great waves, and 106
mighty surges, the pilots skill and wisdom is thoroughly tried, and his
manlines and courage perfectly seen: Even so, a man that is godly without
dissembling, and religious without hypocrisy, in the midst of terrible
tempests, of great troubles, when he is thrown up, and hurled down, tossed
here, and crusshed there, in a thousand storms of dangers, then declares his
patience, his spiritual courage, and his immovable constancy, in virtue and
true holiness. The princely prophet David, being woonderfully afflicted, did
bear most patiently, and took very quietly, the shameless reproaches of
Shemei, leaving unto us an 2. Sam. 16.
everlasting monument, of an unfeigned, and voluntary patience. Yet when David
had gotten the victory of his enemies, through the Lords mighty and stretched
out hand, he took a great and dangerous fall, in causing the people to be
numbered: wherein he offended God most highly, and brought a fearful plague
upon 2. Sam. 24.
them, and yet repenting he found mercy and forgiveness of his grievous and
intolerable sins. Here may we see the benefit and commodity, that comes
by the means of troubles and calamities, and that the Lord has mercy upon us,
even then, when he seems to show no mercy, but only to deal in judgment.

AS, when one part of a man that is sick, is not capable of the 107
remedy, wherewith he may be helped, we are wont to apply the same remedy
to another part: as if one be grieved, with extreme ache of the head, we are
wont to strike a vein of the arm, because the head will not abide
phlebotomie, or blood letting: So, that we may help and heal many diseases of
the soul, we must keep the body in subjection to the spirit, and tame the
lusts of the flesh, and labor to bridle our affections, and to keep them
within the compass of reason, sobriety and temperance.

AS a water pot, or a violl, full of liquor, if suddenly it be 108
overthrown, does shed and scatter the liquor: So a devout and godly heart,
abounding with tears, being moved and troubled with sorrow, because of the
injuries, dishonor, wrongs, and blasphemies committed against the Lord, does
presently power out great abundance, and as it were mighty streams of salt
and bitter tears. The sins of the Jews committed against God, did draw out
of the heart of Christ, great store of tears, and sent them trickling down his
cheeks: and the Matthew 21. Luc. 19.
prophet David his eyes gushed out, and did run over with water, to see the
wickedness of the ungodly. And Peter's denying of Christ, when he came to
himself, made him weep bitterly. We are to too eager and forward, to revenge
every little wrong done to our selves, but injuries done against the Lord, do
never once move us: but we ought to be grieved with his wrongs, and bear
patiently our own.

EVen as wild beasts, being about to invade and to set upon 109
their pray, will stoop low, and bend themselves, that they may fall, and
rush upon it, with the greater force, and more violence: even so proud and
mischievous men, being sly and subtle, sometimes will crouch, and bear
themselves very lowly, that under the color of dissembled virtue, they may
supplant, and deceive the simple, and godly honest man, advance themselves,
and work mischief to others. The holy Ghost, by the prophet does signify so
much, when he (speaking of the proud man) says: He will crouch and bow, that
he may get the upper Psalm. 10.
hand of the poor. These are dangerous men, their steps are not to be
followed. True and single hearted christians, must and will, embrace true and
unfeigned humility, and lowlines of heart. They imitate him that says, Learn of
me, for I am humble and lowly Math. 11.
in heart. They are ever ready, most easily to pardon and forgive, detractions
and slanders, given out against their lives, injuries and wrongs offered, and
don to their innocence, obloquies and false reports, divised and cast abroad,
to blemish their good names, and to stain their credits. And on the other
side, they be ever bold and earnest, in reproouing of sin, as speeches that
be vain and idle, rather offending then profiting the hearers, blasphemy,
and whatsoever may provoke the almighty to displeasure and anger. These
injuries committed against the Lord, do grieve their hearts a thousand times
more, then any violent or tyrannical torture, that can be offered unto their
bodies and lives. They make them wail, weep, sigh and sob. I speak of good
Christians, the number of them is small, the Lord increase it, and make it
greater.

Amen.
AS the wings of eagles, with their stripe or blow, do marthe 110
wings, and break the feathers of other birds: So, the mighty and great men
of the Jews, with their tyrannical cruelty, and most hellish impiety, were
wont to draw to destruction, and to drag to death, the weaker sort, and such as
were innocent, and tendered the glory and praise of God. As the scripture in
many places does declare. Manasses, as it is written, shed 2. Reg. 21.
innocent blood exceeding much, till he replenished Jerusalem from corner to
corner. And Christ himself beholding Jerusalem, with a pitiful voice, said: O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest to death,
those that are sent unto thee, etc. And Stephen the martyr of Christ, as Luke
makes Math. 23.
mention in the Acts, says to the Jews: Which of the prophets Act. 17.
have not your forefathers persecuted? and have killed them, that foretold of
the coming of that just. And in the Epistle to the Heb. 11.
Hebrews, the apostle says: they were stoned, they were hewn a sunder, they
were tempted, they were slain with the sword, they wandered up and down, in
sheep skins* and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted and tormented. Thus
was it then: I would to God, there were not the like now, even among some,
that profess the name of Christ, and his Gospel now, as though they would die
in his quarrel, and spend all in the defense of his truth. The Lord root out
all hypocrisy, and convert or subvert all hypocrites.

AS great floods and swelling rivers, when they ouerflowe 111
their channels, and do break through their banks, by reason of their raging
and violent streams, and so spread and run abroad, can not fill and cover the
fields with water, but they hurt corn or grass, or what so else, is in their
way: So, great riches, mighty powers, and high dignities, when they grow and
increase in wicked, and ungodly men, do not spread abroad, and run over the
fields, and limits of common wealths, but they do much harm: to wit, they
polle and pill away, the riches and substance, of the seely weak and poor
men, they fill their diches, I mean their purses, with the blood of innocents:
they build their honors, and establish their dignities, upon the disgrace, and
the oppression of the saints and servants of God: And whatsoever is in their
way, and to their liking, they carry it with them, by hook or crook, by
right or wrong: they care not who weep, so they laugh: who be empty, so they
be full: who be undone, so they be advanced. Here hence come slaughters, and
murders: Thus are many brought into great calamities, and miseries. But they
that do these things to others, do hurt themselves most. For whiles they hurt
others, in their bodies, goods, or names, they kill their own souls.

AS a man much moved with anger, and far out of frame 112
through indignation and wrath, intending to kill his brother, should throw at
him, precious stones, goodly pearls, and rich jewels, should not damnifie, nor
hurt his brother, because he would gather them up, keep them, and enrich
himself with them: Even so, tyrants disposed to kill, and with fire and sword
to put to death, the saints and true servants of God, which do excel in true
piety, and unfeigned love to God and man, do torment them, with diverse sorts,
and sundry kinds of most cruel martyrdom, of which things the children of
God are glad, and do rejoice, and grow stronger, and richer in Christ, and
being thoroughly armed with a godly patience, they do take, and bear them, most
quietly for God his sake, without murmuring or grudging, even as their cross,
wherewith most willingly, they follow their Lord and savior Christ, and do
account such tortures inestimable riches, and themselves happy, that they be
thought worthy to suffer such things, for the truth sake, and in the Lords
quarrel. Such ever have been all the martyrs of Christ, that when they have
been haled and dragged, to most cruel torments, and tyrannical executions,
they have taken and embraced them, most cheerfully, as though they were rich
and delicate banquets.

AS precious jewels, made of most pure gold, wrought cunningly 113
and curiously, with great workmanship, the nearer thou shall come unto them,
and the more steadfastly and clearly thou shall behold them, the finer, the
brauer, and more excellent thou will judge them: Even so, as thou shall come
nearer in understanding and knowledge, unto the secrets and mysteries of God,
contained in his written word, and with the greater purity of mind, the more
strength of faith, and the brighter light of the grace of God, thou shall look
into them, the profounder, the deeper, the more divine and heavenly, yea and
the more comfortable to thy soul, will they seem and appear unto thee, every
day. Insomuch, that thou will judge thy self, to have been little better then
blind, and to have seen nothing as thou ought in the mysteries of the divine
word. And thou will make haste to cry unto the Lord with the prophet: Open
mine eyes O Lord, Psalm. 119.
and I shall see and consider the wonderful things of thy law. But that man,
that trusting to his own gifts, wit and learning, and has his heart and mind
bewitched with this world, and poisoned with sin, taking pleasure in those
things which the Lord has forbidden, will go about to pearce into the most
holy word, and to search out the secrets, of the great and most high God, he
shall lose his labor, open his vanity, miss the mark he shot at, and die in
the blindness wherein he lived, and so pass hence to his own destruction, the
just reward of his presumption, be he never so witty, skillful and learned.
Through thy commandments Psalm. 119.
(says the Lords prophet) I am wiser then all my enemies, learneder then my
teachers, and better experienced then the ancient men of the world. Therefore
true wisdom, the best learning, and heavenly experience, is gotten and had
out of the law of God, by the inward working, of the holy Ghost, in our hearts
and minds. The Almighty vouchsafe to write his laws and statutes in all our
hearts, that thereby we may be wise, against flesh, this inchaunting world, sin
and satan.

AS the hawk is then lost, when trusting to her wings, she 114
rises and mounteth too high: So then, do vain men fall far from God, when
with their own wit, reason, and wisdom only, and alone, they will
understand the deep mysteries of God, as though the counsels and wisdom, of
Gods eternal majesty, might and could be comprehended, with the reason and wit
of man. The Apostle his counsel is holy and good: be not too Romans 11.
high minded, but fear.

AS they that have clear and sound eyes, do easily endure the 115
bright light of the sun, wherewith eyes that be sore and diseased, are
greatly offended: So, virtuous and godly men, are illuminated, and woonderfully
cleared in their understanding, and the eyes of their minds, with the divine
and heavenly light of the word of him, that says: I am the light of the world:
wherewith Ioh. 8.
the wicked and ungodly, are highly offended, in so much that they hate the
light, and love darkness more then it. And so growing blinder and blinder every
day, at the length they fall, and tumble down headlong into the insaciable
pit, of eternal destruction.

AS a pot full of sweet liquor, if it be made hot, and boiled 116
upon the fire, will drive away flies, that they will not come near it, but if
it be cold, the flies will by and by go into it, and it will receive them, and
they will corrupt and consume it: Even so the heart of man, if it be inflamed,
with a true and sincere love of God, will not receive into it, those dangerous
temptations, which are continually flying about it, but will remove, and drive
them far off, and give no place unto them: but if by reason of slothful
idleness in heavenly things, and for want of a godly courage, it grow cold in
the love of the Lord, then is it obuious, and wide open, to all temptations, it
barreth out none, it receives all, none are rejected, be they never so wicked:
all are embraced, entertained and welcome. Then is it a receptacle of all
abominations: as idolatry, blasphemy, murder, adultery, and whatsoever is
wicked, mischeeuous and damnable. The Lord therefore vouchsafe, to take from
us, all idle slothfulnes in the matters of God, and our salvation, and to fill
our hearts full of unfeigned love, to himself above all things, and to our
neighbors as to our selves, and for his own sake, even to our enemies, that
satan our sworn enemy, that soul fly of hell, may never find so much as
one chinke or chap, where through he may creep into our hearts.

Amen. Amen.
AS in a true, perfect, and certain clock, the wheels being 117
tempered, and in equal and due proportion divided, do perform their courses,
and do keep their several compasses, without iarring, or differing one from
another, euenly and alike: so that, one moving, the others are moved, and one
standing, the rest are still, and stir not, so that, though they be many in
number, in frame, fashion, and agreement, they are but one: Even so in a
Christian commonwealth, there ought to be one, and the selfsame will, and so
great a concord, and likeness of minds, reconciled and drawn together, by
virtue it self, and so inseparably linked one to another, with the infringible
band of sincere love in Christ, that though in bodies, they be infinite and
innumerable, yet in unanimity, consent, and good agreement, in the Lord Jesus,
they should be all as one man. This is that unity, and brotherly love, which
God himself, so highly commends in the mouth of his prophet saying: Behold
how good and how joyful Psalm. 133.
a thing it is, brethren to dwell even together, etc. To this end came our
savior Christ (that I may use the words of Zachary) even to guide and direct
our feet into the way of peace. And the holy Apostle does admonish us, to
keep the unity of the spirit, in Luc. ^. Ephesians. 4.
the band of peace. And to the Romans he says* The kingdom of God, is not
meat and drink, but righteousness and peace. Again, is not that example of
our sweet savior, worthy of all men to be embraced and imitated? Simon
(says Christ to Peter) of whom do the kings of the earth, take tribute or poll
money? of their children or of strangers? Peter answered, Of strangers. then
said Jesus, Then are the children free. Nevertheless (says Christ) least we
should offend them, go thy way to the sea, etc. and pay for thee and me. Lo^,
to avoid offense, and to preserve peace, what our savior Christ himself was
contented to do, even that he needed not, and was free from. Much to blame
therefore, are all they, and far from following the steps of Christ, which
seek not by all means lawful and possible, to maintain the unity and peace
of the church of Christ. The enemies of this peace are very intolerable men.
The Lord by his prophet calls them Esaias 48.
wicked and ungodly men: There is no peace to the ungodly. And Solomon does
number them, among the enemies of God, which Proverb. 6.
do sow discord and dissension, among brethren.

EVen as the spirit of man, does not strengthen the members 118
of the body, unless they be fast and surely joined together: So, the holy
Ghost, does not revive and comfort, the members of the Church, when they fall
away, and will not continue in league and fellowship with the servants of God.
Longer than they are fast bound, and knit to the congregation, of Gods people,
in love and peace in Christ, the holy Ghost does minister no strength, no
consolation, no comfort unto them. There remains, nothing else in such men,
but a numnesse, and an extreme blindness, in heavenly things. And whiles in
their arrogancy and pride, they forsake and condemn the church of God,
because they cannot draw it into subjection, to their fond and fantastical
humors, they become of men, devils incarnate.

AS the pilote of a ship, without the shine of sun or moon, 119
cannot take the haven of any land: So a man, without the light of grace, can
never attain to the haven of glory, but howsoever he persuadeth himself,
that he casts his anchor in a place of safety, it falls out in the end,
that he casts it upon a rock, where there is no hope of salvation.

AN eagle, so long as her young ones, be not very flidge and 120
thoroughly feathered, she does not suffer them to go out of the nest, and to
fly abroad: but after they be perfectly winged, and in the beauty and
strength of their feathers, she throws them out of the nest, that they may
fly, and exercise their wings and feathers, and use them to the end wherefore
they have them: Even so our savior Christ, that heavenly eagle, after his
resurrection, commanded his disciples to stay at Jerusalem, as it were Act. 1.
and 2.
in a nest, and not to depart thence, until in the day of Pentecost, he had
filled them with the grace of the holy Ghost: and then he commanded them, that
passing through the world, and traueling through diverse coasts of the earth,
they should publish abroad, and spread far and near, the Gospel of his
kingdom. This example of Christ, is followed at this day, to the great comfort
and benefit of Christ his church, when godly Archministers, lay not their hands
upon any, to admit them, to be laborers in the Lords vineyard, nor to do the
office of a minister, until they find them sufficiently learned, and well
furnished with gifts and graces from God, so far as they be able to discern
and judge.

EVen as the eagle, having her young ones shut up in the nest, 121
although she flies exceeding high, and pearseth the lofty air, yet she
withdraws not her eyes from her young ones, but still beholds them: and
they also, crying after their manner, with their stretched out necks, do look
after her: Even so the Lord Jesus ascending into heaven, did behold his
disciples, and they also hungring and thirsting after him, did fasten their
eyes upon him, and did not lose the sight of him, until he pearsed and broke
open the heavens, and entered into the presence of his father. And although they
were divided from him in body, yet in heart and mind they followed him still.
And Jesus that heavenly eagle, seeing from heaven, a fierce and cruel hawk,
preparing to destroy his nest, and to kill his young ones, he on the other side
prepared himself, and came against the hawke, overthrew him, and laid him
prostrate upon the ground. The hawke was Saul, Acts. 9.
who (that I may speak, as the scripture speaks) breathing out threatenings
and slaughter, against the disciples and servants of the Lord, he went unto the
high priest, and desired letters of him to Damascus, against all the Christians
that he should find there, etc. but the Lord Jesus did hurl him against the
ground, and gave him for meat unto his church, and to the young ones of his
nest, whom he sought to destroy, who now being called Paul, does recreate and
refresh the whole church of God, with holy and most heavenly doctrine. Behold
how the lord has ever provided well, for his nest, that is, his church, his
saints and servants. And this is our comfort in all extremities, even to the
end of the world: For as of old, and from age to age, he has provided for his
own, and has defended, preserved, and delivered them, in all their
distresses, were they never so desperate, in the opinions of men, so will he do
still, and for ever, if we be not the cause of the contrary, through our
wilful, obstinate, and manifold sins, and most impudent impenitencie. The
Lord show mercy unto us, and guide our hearts, minds, and all our ways, to the
right honoring of his majesty, and true praise of his name.

AS we are wont to eat, pears and the kirnels of nuts, 122
but throw from us upon the ground, the parings and shells: So we ought
unfeignedly to be in love, and delighted with virtue and godliness, and to
contemn and despise the shape, show or shadow of the same, being separated and
divided from virtue it self: for, to retain and hold the fashion and likeness
of virtue, without the substance of the same, is mere hypocrisy.

THat man that does cover and hide, his foul faults, and 123
loathsome sins, with a fair and beautiful show of virtues, fayning an holiness
where none is, is not to be counted religious, but an hypocrite: Like unto a
swan, whose feathers are all white, but her flesh black, white without and
black within.

THe margarits, those little white shining precious stones, 124
which do grow within shell fishes in the sea, in this point are very
marvelous and wonderful, that though they be bred and increased in the sea,
yet have they no similitude nor likeness with the sea: For the sea is blue or
sky colored, but the margarits are white: The sea is horrible, and full of
discomfiture, but they are cheerful, pleasant, and so beautiful to behold,
that they move much, greatly delight, and allure mightily men's eyes to look
upon them: the sea is bitter, but they are amiable, and without all bitterness:
But rather in some sort and measure, by reason of their cleerenes and
brightness, they represent the sky, the reason is, because they receive
influence from thence. Such are virtuous and godly men, which are surely
grounded, and certainly settled, in the love of God, and true Christian
religion, who being borne and brought up in this world, have no semblance,
likeness nor fashion of the same. In desire they be drawn, in will they be
severed, in words they differ, and in works they utterly disagree from it. And
they do rather resemble in some measure heaven, from whence they receive the
influence of the grace and favor of God.

EVen as the precious stone called a iacincte, is turned and 125
changed with the air: (for in a clear air, it is bright, and in a cloudie
season, it is darkesome, and not so pleasant:) So, the preachers, and teachers
of the word of God, in their teaching and preaching, ought to frame
themselves, to meet with the manners, ages and qualities of all their hearers.
So did the apostle among the Corinthians: We speak wisdom says 1. Cor. 2.
he, among them that are perfect: And again he says: I could 1. Cor. 3.
not speak unto you, as unto spiritual men, but as unto babes in Christ Jesus.
I gave you milk to drink, and not meat, for ye were not yet able to bear
it, neither yet now are, etc. Again: 1. Cor. 9.
I am made all things to all men, that at the least I may win some to Christ.

AS one and the same medicine, is not used and ministered to 126
all that be diseased and sick, but diverse medicines, according to their
diverse diseases: So one and the self same doctrine, is not agreeable to all
hearers: The teaching therefore, and preaching of the ministers of Christ, must
be so ordered and divided, that, having diverse and sundry hearers, whose cases
differ much, and are not all alike, every one may have his several portion,
that not one, through want of discretion in him, go empty away.

AS a diligent and learned physician, before he minister any 127
physic to his sick patiente, ought not only to seek out, and to know the
disease of him, whom he purposes to cure, but also his manners, his usual
behavior, the nature of his body, and his qualities: So, a godly wise
preacher of the word, must do his best endeavor, to know the infirmities,
manners, and dispositions of his auditorie, that spiritual physic, sit and
meet for every one, may be ministered in due time.

EVen as that precious stone called a carbuncle, does not in 128
darkness lose his shine and excellent beauty: So, a virtuous and godly man,
in the extreme darkness of infinite calamities, obloquies, cursings, railings,
backbitings, slanders, and whatsoever, does show his Christian patience, and
quiet suffering: For he knows well, that such things do profit much to
advance the praise of true and noble virtues.

THe heart of man, is like unto a censer, filled full of hot coals, 129
and made ready to receive, whatsoever thou will cast into it: For even as, if
thou shall cast into a censer, odoriferous and sweet pomander bals, the whole
house will be filled, with a most sweet savor, and pleasant perfume: but if
thou shall cast into it, brimstone or some such matter, all the house will be
full of most horrible stinche: So, in like manner, if thou shall put into the
heart of some man, good and wholesome counsels, and shall instruct him with
godly aduertisements, and shall open unto him the fountain of the truth, thou
shall bring to pass, that there shall proceed out of his heart, a great savor
of a most sweet smell: But if thou shall fill him with evil and wicked
counsels, and shall persuade and draw him, to impiety, hatred, treachery and
all abominations, thou shall be the cause of an intolerable stinche, there
shall come out of his heart a most poysonfull savor, wherewith not only his
own heart, but the whole house wherein he is, and all the common wealth where he
abides, shall be hurt, infected, and poisoned.

EVen as, out of an apothecaries shop, where very wholesome 130
medicines, precious ointments, and most pleasant perfumes are sold, sometimes
comes most rank and deadly poison: So very often, from men greatly
experienced, and deeply learned, do come very pestilent, pernisious and
treacherous counsels. Therefore says Ecclesiasticus: Have but one counselor of
a Eccles. 6. 8. and 37.
thousand. And again: Do no secret thing before a stranger, for thou can not
tell what he goes about. Also keep thy soul from an evil counselor. Choose
such a counselor, as does love thy soul, and desires thy salvation. Gregory
says: No man can be more faithful to give thee counsel, then that man, that
loves and desires not thy goods, but thy self. Every man has need of
counsel, but let every man, make good and godly choice of his counselor.
The law of God, (says Cyprian) is the stern of counsels. Happy and blessed
is that man, that house, and that commonwealth, that is ruled with such
counsels, as are grounded, and derived, from the holy laws of God.

AS a man holding in his hand an angling rod, and with a 131
baited hook fishing in an obscure and troubled river, although he does not
see the fish rush upon the bait, yet he perceives very well, that the fish is
taken, and hanged upon the hook, because the cork or bark of his fishing
line is pulled down, and hid under the water: So satan, that most subtle, and
will fisher, although he sees not our thoughts, being in the secrets and
bottomes of our hearts, yet notwithstanding, by outward signs, he many times
does know them, as by our words: (For out of the abundance of the heart, the
mouth speaks,) by our actions, and by the gestures of our bodies. For Christ
himself affirms: That out of our hearts do come evil and wicked Math. 15.
thoughts. And Solomon in his Proverbs, does number among Proverb. 6.
those things which God hates, An heart that is fraught with evil thoughts.
Here hence may most easily be gathered, that all our evil thoughts, do not
come unto us, from without, neither are wrought in us, nor stirred up
altogether by satan, but that they come and creep out of our own corruption.
And so by outward signs and tokens, coming to the knowledge of our enemy the
devil, he never cease, with infinite temptations, of all sorts, to do his
greatest endeavor, to draw the same cogitations of our hearts into most
dangerous and damnable practice, if the Lord of his mercy and goodness, shall
not give us true repentance, and the assistance of his spirit, whereby we may
avoid his snares, and escape his traps. Which thing the Lord grant us.

Amen.
AS the smith does not make himself, the hot coals, that be 132
in his forge, but does blow the fire with bellows, and so the coals are
kindled, and made hot and fiery: So, the devil does blow and inflame, those
dangerous and wicked cogitations, which are conceived in our hearts and minds,
with the bellows of great and manifold temptations, and so laboring to kindle
the fire of all iniquity, he ministers nourishment to all our wicked and
damnable purposes. For the heart of man, is like unto a smithes forge, his evil
and bad cogitations are hot burning coals, he that does blow the bellows, to
make them to burn up, and to consume both our souls and bodies, is the
devil, that ancient enemy of our happiness and salvation.

It is to be lamented verily, and with bitter tear^s, and blubbering eyes, to
be bewailed, that such pestilent cogitations, and deadly thoughts, should be
nouzeled and nourished in our hearts and souls, which do kill both body and
soul for ever, even as the fry of vipers, in coming to light, do kill their
dams, most miserably.

EVen as a beggar, does cover and hide those parts of his body, 133
which be whole, sound, and perfect, and does open, and show abroad, those
parts or members, which be ^ore, wounded, maimed, lame, putrified and rotten,
to move the hearts and minds, of passers by, and of all that shall behold him,
the rather to pity him, and to minister unto him some relief and comfort:
Even so, we that be poor and miserable sinners in this world* must not bring
before the Lord our God, our own merits, good deeds, or virtues, as able and
sufficient, to win the favor and love of God, and to clear us of our sins
and transgressions: but we must most willingly, with hearts, that be rent and
torn, with grief and sorrow, for our misdeedes, and heinous offenses, done
and committed against the majesty of God, open, bring forth, and lay before
him, the botches of our souls, the corruption of our natures, and the
putrefaction and rottennes of our sins and iniquities, that we may obtain at
Gods hand, ease and comfort to our souls and consciences, his great mercy,
and free remission for all our rebellions, sins and wickednesses, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

AS they which do dig metals out of the earth, do not contemn, 134
nor despise the least gobbets and pieces, that they epsy, but take all: but
especially, if they find by digging a vein of gold, they leave no way
unsought, but with all care and diligence they look about them, and do dig the
gold and earth together, and most diligently do save and keep the same: Even
so ought we to deal, in the holy word of God, we must pass over nothing
therein lightly, nor despise one word, of all the sacred and divine scriptures,
but eagerly and earnestly, to do our best and greatest endeavors, yea and to
call, and to cry most mightily to the Lord, to aid, assist, and enable us, to
dig out of the same word, whatsoever is requisite and necessary for the
salvation of our souls, and eternal life. It is not earth and gold mixed
together, it is all most pure, and thoroughly tried, yea it is purer by a
thousand degrees, than any gold, that has been tried seven times in the
fire. The prophet affirms, that it is better than Psalm. 119.
thousands of gold and silver.

AS the sea does cast to shore, shell fishes of al sorts, weeds and many other
things, and not long after does sup up, receive, devour, and cast into the
depth the same again: Even so, this world does now thrust us out of favor,
and by and by receives us again: and when we think our selves to be upon a
very safe shore, and that we have leisure, and time to rest us, and to meditate
upon some worthy and excellent things, even then we find our selves
deceived, and are tossed among the waves of infinite troubles, and are
swallowed up of innumerable calamities, because many things that we never
thought of, have prevented us, and the flickerings and false promises of this
cosoning world have deceived our hope, and disappointed our expectation.

AS a weak and brittle wall, is easily cast down, and overthrown 135
with every engine: but an huge fense, a mighty strong wall, and a tower that
is firm, and fensed on every side, does stand surely, and endures the force
that comes against it, without yielding, staggering, or falling: insomuch,
that the enemies that seek to overthrow it, are driven and constrained, to use
warlike engines and policies, yea and to batter and shake it, with engines,
torments, and ordinances of wars, which will send and throw out, stones,
weapons, bullets and pellets of iron and lead: Even so satan, does most easily
overthrow, with every light temptation, frail and weak men, which are not
well settled in virtue, nor grounded in godliness, nor armed with the holy word,
and spirit of God: but to win and overcome (if he could) men that are furnished
with a strong and lively faith* and such as are stayed, and do rely upon the
Lords protection and love, he uses sundry subtilties, and most Matthew. 4.
dangerous and forcible temptations. He that tempted our savior Christ, will
neither spare any man, nor means to destroy us, if he can bring to pass, and
effect his purposes. The Lord keep and defend us, from his craft, subtlety
and force, and so strengthen us with the holy Ghost, that we may pass through,
and break in pieces all his snares.

WE must not think, that those men are forsaken of God, 136
which are much, and continually exercised, with diverse temptations: for even
as a man that has two sons, the one, an earnest lover of virtue, strong in
body, and of a mighty courage: the other, depraved, and of crooked
disposition, inclined to effeminate pleasures, and wanton delights, weak in
body, and of little or no courage. The first he sends out to wars, and does
adventure him, in perils and dangers of all sorts, that he may exercise, and
acquaint him, with the labors, troubles, and toiles of the world: the other he
cockereth, and makes too much of him, he suffers him to have all things at
his will, he is kept at home, and (as it were) dandled upon his mothers lap. But
at the last, he that in all his affairs, and dangerous adventures, did in
every point, quit himself, like a man of great valor, and noble courage,
received together, with great praise, and deserved honor, a most high and noble
reward: but he that was pampered, and cockered at home, had neither praise,
reward nor honor: Even so our heavenly father, does lead men, that are strong
and constant in faith, through diverse and sundry perils and dangers, and does
draw them as it were with his own hand, through bitter anguishes, great
perplexities, and very narow streightes of calamities, miseries, and
temptations, and does continually exercise them, with fearful cumbats,
against the enemies of their souls, and through many and great labors,
infinite sturdie storms, and bitter blasts, does strengthen, and confirm them,
in virtue and godliness: But the frail and wicked men of the world, and such
as be mere natural, without any delight or comfort in his word, and are no
whit seasoned, nor cheered, with the dewes of his grace, and his most blessed
spirit, he permits them to be in great prosperity, and to have all things
at their will and pleasure, without smarting, sighing, sobbing, and groaning,
for want or lack of any thing, that their hearts can devise or desire: but at
the length, in the end of the day, they that have striuen hard, and fought
manfully, and have in battle ouercomed the flesh, the world and the devil,
shall be received into endless salvation, everlasting life, and eternal
glory: And they which have laid down their heads, and slept in the bosoms of
worldy pleasures, and have slumbred in foul and filthy idleness, never caring,
nor thinking, what will follow, nor remembering the dreadful day of judgment,
when the wicked shall hear their damnation denounced by Christ, they (I say)
shall be utterly condemned, reprobated, and cast into everlasting and endless
miseries. Then shall most plainly be seen and felt, the loss that fleshly
pleasures bring, and the profit of crosses, carried and borne for Christ's sake.

AS wheat or other grain, laid up and kept in a garner, 137
cellar or chamber, if it be not stirred, and dressed often, with a shouell or
van, will be full of corruption, lose the sweet savor, ware unwholesome for
man's body, and will be consumed of weeuels: And apparel or garments being laid
up in a press, or other place, if they be not much shaken and tossed, will be
eaten and spoiled with mothes: Even so men, if they be not tried with
temptations, and thoroughly exercised with calamities and miseries, will be very
quickly monstrously corrupted, and will grow to be so rotten in all manner of
sin, and iniquity, that they will shrink and fall quite from the Lord. But
being well proved, canuased, and thoroughly tried, with many crosses,
afflictions, and troubles, one following in the neck of an other, they become
the firmer, stronger, and more constant, in the faith, fear, and love of God,
and so manfully fighting, and courageouslie ouercomming, the adversaries and
enemies of their souls, they shall at the length be crowned, with an
everlasting crown of eternal glory. The 2. Tim. 2.
which crown, they only shall have, (says the apostle) which do strive
lawfully. And in another place he says: God is faithful, 1. Cor. 10.
and will not suffer you to be tempted, above that which you are able to bear,
etc. But in this case it is requisite, that we be well furnished with the
armor of God, because our enemies do diverse and sundry ways assail us, and
most mightily impugn and fight against us: tryeng us sometimes with one thing,
and sometimes with another. So that, if we be not clothed with the armor of
righteousness, on the right hand, and on the left, we 1. Cor. 6.
shall never be able to quit our selves against them, I mean the world, flesh
and devil, our professed, mortal and sworn enemies.

AS bees when they strive together, and are stirred up, 138
through some vehement motion, with throwing of dust, are brought into order,
and appeased: even so men, when they are tossed and tormented, with troublesome
broiles perturbations and passions, if they would remember dust, whereinto of
necessity they must be turned, and never forget death, which they shall never
be able to escape, they would easily be stayed, pacified and quieted, and
would repress and keep within compass, their straggling lusts, and unruly
appetites, which cannot endure to be tamed, nor ruled by reason.

AS a tree, the more deeply it is rooted in the earth, the taller 139
it grows, and mounteth the higher: So a man, the more humble and lowly that
he is, the more and higher does the Lord exalt him.

And as a tree set upon the top of a mountain, is mightily shaken, 140
and easily rent up by the roots, with every blustering blast, and storm of
wind: Even so man in this world, the more and higher he is exalted, the more
and greater dangers is he subject unto. The holy virgin did perceive and see,
these things to be most true: He has (says she) put down the mighty from
their Luc. 1.
seat, and has exalted the humble and meek. And the apostle says: God
resists the proud, and gives grace unto the humble Iac. 4. Math. 7. Mark. 8.
Luke 3. and 6.
and lowly. Seeing therefore that we be compared to trees, by Christ himself
in his holy Gospel, it behooves us, to have deep and strong roots, of true
and unfeigned humility, and in consideration of our frailty and weakness, to
set and place our selves, in the bottom of the low valley of the knowledge of
our own misery: That no tempests, nor storms, may remove and root us out:
That no vanity may destroy us: No ambition trouble us: No greedy covetousness
torment us: Nor any occasion whatsoever, may possibly draw us, from the
lowlines and humility of our hearts and minds: from the comtempt of the world,
and from a true and sincere love of honesty and godliness. A building is so much
the firmer and stronger, as the foundation and groundworke of the same, is laid
lower and deeper. The groundworke of Christian philosophy, is unfeigned
humility, and the deeper that the same is laid and settled in our hearts, the
surer and more permanent, will the building of our religion be. That saying of
our savior Christ, of necessity must ever be true and infallible: He that
exalts himself, shall be brought low, and he that humbles Luke 14. and 18.
himself, shall be exalted.

IT behooves that sin and iniquity, may greatly displease 141
thee, that the love of thy self, may be turned into a sincere love of God.
For if thou shall east into an hot burning furnace wood and sticks, that be
scare and dry, and ready to burn, there will arise and burn out, a most pure
and clear flame of fire: But if thou will cast into the same furnace, green
sticks, wet, and stinking rushes, or some other such matter, they will burn in
deed, but the furnace and whole house will be filled with smoke, and will be
even black by reason of the thick darkness, which proceeds of the foul and
stinking smoke: So, the heart of man, is a furnace continually burning, if thou will nourish it, with cogitations, and heavenly meditations of the love of God,
there will appear and shine out of it, a pure flame and bright light of true
and unfeigned love to God and man: But if thou will cherish and maintain it,
with thoughts and devises of self love, then it will be full of vile smoke,
stinch and darkness. They Romans 1.
perished (says the apostle) in their own imaginations, and their foolish heart
was darkened. The fountain and original of all evils, and the center, from
whence the lines of all abominations do flow, is man's inordinate self love.
Augustine says, that Aug. lib. 14. Ciuit. Dei.
Adam did fall, into that overmuch love of himself, before he did eat the
forbidden fruit. And the same author says, that two loves did build two
cities: the love of God Jerusalem, and man's self love Babylon. It is self
love, that Christ speaks of, saying: Ioh. 12. 2. Tim. 3.
He that loves his life, shall lose it. And Paul says: In the latter days
men shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, hautie, Romans 5.
high minded, proud, etc. And again: we must not please our selves. And Peter
calls the wicked and ungodly, bold, and pleasers 2. Pet. 2.
of themselves. There is no misery comparable to this, that a man knows not
his own misery. And of follies, there is none greater, then not to know a
man's own folly, but to have an over well weening of himself. It is exceeding
great, and very laudable wisdom, that a man cast down and condemn himself,
that he may avoid the heavy judgments of God, and condemnation with the wicked
world. For the more imperfect that we esteem, and judge our selves to be, the
nearer to true perfection do we come. For this in some measure is perfection,
even to know and to acknowledge our own imperfection.

Even as after great showers and storms of rain, the air 142
is cleansed and cleared: So, after great troubles, sorrows, afflictions, and
temptations, cleannes of heart, quietness of mind, and peace of soul and
conscience do follow.

AS with a pile or stacke, of sear and dry wood, the fire is 143
quickly kindled, and caused mightily to flame out: Even so, the outragiousnes
of carnal, and fleshly lust, is greatly provoked, moved and stirred up,
through rioting, banqueting, quaffing, gussing, swilling, and continual
feeding and pampering of the belly, and by taking the body from good, lawful
and honest exercises, and giving it to idleness, slothfulnes, and overmuch ease,
and rest from labors.

EVen as, of overmuch fulness of the stomach, and superfluity 144
of meats, grows that obstruction, which the physicians do call oppilation,
or stopping, whereupon breeds a continual headache, and that frenzy, which
brings men to a madness: Even so, of a depraved, and dishonest love of this
life, of the corruption of manners, of gluttony and excess eating, does
spring an unbridled and untamed lust, whereof arises that phrenetical Papists.
madness of heretics, and a corruption of their understanding in matters of
faith. They which care not, to keep a good conscience, do at length fall to an
incurable contempt of faith. The apostle therefore joins faith and a good
conscience together. The which conscience (says he) whiles some cast from
them, they have made 1. Tim. 1.
shipwreck of their faith. If therefore thou will, that the almighty shall
like, and allow of thy faith, be sure that thou keep a good conscience,
without the which thy faith is dead, and will do thee no good.

The Emperor Traianus compares the treasure of rich men with the spleen.
EVen as, when the spleen increases, the other members, 145
joints, and parts of the body, do consume and pine away: So, the great
treasures and riches of covetous tyrants increasing, the wealth of subjects and
inferior persons, is weakened and diminished, whiles they pill, and poll away,
their substance and goods, to enrich themselves withal.

And even as the spleen increasing, the other members do decrease: 146
So covetousness growing greater and greater, all virtues do utterly decay, and
vanish away. Bountifulnes, liberality, charity, truth, righteousness, and all
such excellent qualities, are no more found, in those men, which are strangled
and poisoned, with a great and greedy desire of worldly riches. For being
drowned in covetousness, they can never lift up their hearts to God, nor stretch
forth their hands, to do good to their brethren. God gives unto men, riches,
wit, industry, knowledge, and many other things, signified and understood, by
the name of Talents, to the end that they should honor and worship God, and
because they should do him faithful and true service, which is the giver of
all good things. The Evangelist says, that the Lord Matthew. 25.
called his servants together, and gave unto them his goods. Riches then, and
all goods, whatsoever men have in their possessions, are not their own, but
the Lords, unto whom they must make an account for the same. The Apostle says:
What have 1. Cor. 4.
thou, that thou have not received? And the holy prophet his words are plain:
The earth is the Lords, and all the fulness of Psalm. 24.
the same, the round world and they that dwell therein: thou art then, a
servant, a steward, a bailife, the things which thou have, are Gods, not thine,
they be his goods, which he has delivered unto thee, that thou should use
and bestow them, not upon thy foul lusts, nor filthy pleasures, vain
delights, nor to hurt thy brother, neither that thou should hide them: but
to his good liking, honor and glory, that his Gospel may be preached, his
poor servants, and distressed children relieved, that the honest causes of
poor widows, and orphans may be defended, and that other such charitable
deeds should be done and practiced: that the Lord finding thee faithful in
th^se small things, may at the length give thee greater matters, that is, the
kingdom of heaven and the ioies thereof: but if thou be faithless in these,
he will never trust thee with those. Take heed and beware therefore, that thou
do not lavish, waste and consume, the Lords goods, in the service of the flesh,
world and devil. It is a lamentable thing to see, how many, yea innumerable
men, in these days, with the riches, goods, natural gifts, and talents,
which they have received of the Lord, do purchase, and even make sure unto
themselves, ever lasting confusion, death and damnation, against the will and
commandment of the Lord, the owner and giver of the same. Ecclesiasticus says
truly, that gold and silver has Eccles. 8.
destroyed many men. If we would follow the counsel of the Apostle, we should
mortify covetousness, which he calls worshipping Colos 3. Ephesians. 5.
of idols. The covetous man, says Augustine, before he gain money, he loses
himself, and before he catch any thing, himself is catched. Covetousness is a
cruel tyrant: and the riches of covetous men, are those idols, unto the which,
that saying of the Lord by Jeremy the prophet, may very well be applied: Ye
shall serve strange gods, day and night, which will give you no rest. The old
philosophers, purposing to describe aua^ice, or covetousness, did feign, that
one Tantalus in hell, was grievously tormented with thirstines and drought, in
the midst of rivers of waters: signifying thereby, that covetousness is a very
swallowing gulf, and an insaciable hell, where covetous men even burning with a
love of riches, do most earnestly covet, and greedily run after those things,
whereof they have great and unspeakable abundance. And the more they have, the
more are they tormented, with an unquenchable thirst, and an hot burning
desire, still to have more and more. In my opinion, if a covetous man, were so
mightily, and so heavily laden with gold, and (if it were possible) fuller of
riches, than that ship that came to Solomon from Ophir, yet he 1. Reg 9.
would never be satisfied.

Rivers and floods, although they be most sweet and pleasant, 147
yet when they run, and enter into the sea, they are most bitter: keeping their
right and due course, they yield pure and wholesome water, but once mingled with
the sea, they are, as it were, poisoned with bitterness: Even so the wealth and
riches of this world, although in the course of this life, they do highly
delight some men, which have them in possession, not the less, when they come
to the sea of death, whither all floods at the length shall come, they seem to
be doleful, sower, bitter, intolerable, and as it were, poison it self. For
rich and covetous men, do then find, and feel, that their riches, wealth, and
prosperity, which the Lord gave them to an excellent end, have been unto them
many times, occasions of evil. That good man Augustine Augustine.
says, that pride is a sickness, or disease, that comes of riches. Also, gold
is the matter, or cause, of cares, labors, toils, fears, and of all
unquietness: it is perilous to the possessors of it, and a great weakening of
virtues, in all them that set their hearts upon it. And Chrysostom says, that
riches are a school of malice, envy and hatred. Christ Jesus therefore our
heavenly schoolmaster says: Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is
the kingdom of heaven. And again: Lay not up for your selves treasures Matthew.
5. Matthew. 6.
in the earth. Also, You cannot serve God and mammon. And yet this is ever to
be understood, that riches of themselves are not evil: but as they be to the
wicked and ungodly, hindrances of virtues, so they are to the faithful
servants of God, helps and furtherances, of many good things, godly actions,
and very charitable works. For godly men, do possess their riches, be they
never so ample and infinite: and are not possessed of their wealth and goods:
their riches are drudges to them, and not they to their riches.

EVen as gold is tried with a touch stone: So is man tried 148
with gold. And as Chilo the Lacedemonian says: Gold does most manifestly
prove and declare, what they be, that owe it. And look what the touch stone
is to gold, the same is gold to man. The touch stone with rubbing the gold or
silver upon it, shows plainly what kind of gold or silver it is: and gold it
self does in like manner most easily bewray, what manner of man one is. There is
no touch stone in all the world, that does more truly touch and try, al
degrees of virtues and vices, than gold, wealth, and abundance of riches. The
Israelites being very inclinable to the superstitions of the Egyptians, were no
sooner out of Egypt, but they made a calfe of gold and jewels, the which they
Exodus 32.
worshipped, in stead of God. And in the land of promise, they oftentimes
consumed and wasted their gold and treasure, in making of idols. Whereupon did
arise that great complaint, which the Lord makes by the prophet Oseas, saying:
I have multiplied Osc. 2.
their silver and their gold, which they have made Baal: as if he should say, I
have given the Israelites great store of silver and gold, which they most
wickedly have wasted, in making of the idol Baal. And by the same prophet the
Lord says: Their silver and their gold, have they made idols, for themselves
to serve. But men that are godly, and of sound and Christian religion, do
bestow their goods, their wealth and riches, upon building, and repairing
temples and churches, dedicated to the holy service, and true worshipping of
God: in feeding the poor saints of God: in redeeming captives: in providing
for poor widows, and orphans, and in doing such other virtuous and godly
deeds of charity. The nobles of the Israelites, returning from the captivity
of Babylon, did bring their substance and riches, to build 1. Esd. 2* Tob. 1.
and 2. Matthew. 2.
the temple of the Lord. And Tobias did feed the hungry, and gave clothes to
the naked. The wise men of the east contrie, opening their treasures, offered
unto the Lord, gold, frankincense, and mirrhe. And now in our time, that is
truly offered unto the Lord, and is unto him a sweet smelling sacrifice, which
is given to the poor distressed servants of God. I remember a report given out
of one ^medeus, when certain orators talking with him demanded whether he kept
any hounds, or not: he presently showed unto them, a great multitude of poor
beggars, sitting all together, these says he, are my hounds, with these do I
hunt, after the kingdom of God, these do I keep and feed every day: the Lord
send many such huntesmen.

HIeronymus says, that it is a part of sacrilege, not to give 149
unto the poor, that which is their own. That is, whatsoever thou art able to
spare: Money, meat, clothing, harbor, counsel, comfort, and whatsoever else
thou art able to do. That is not lost, which thou do distribute among thy
poor brethren and sisters, in the world. For as Solomon says: He lays in
bancke unto the Lord, which has pity, and shows Proverb. 19.
mercy unto the poor. It can not be lamented and bewailed enough, to see how
infinite thousands in the world, do most vainly, yea most vilely and wickedly,
spend and lavish out, the goods and riches, wherewith the Lord has put them in
trust, to the end that they should use them to his own glory, and the good of
his church. Some under the color of religion and holiness, with their goods and
gold, do maintain superstition and false worshipping, in stead of the true
service of God: some do spend them, upon pride and voluytuousnes: some purchase
houses, lands, many garments, much apparel; and very many with their wealth
and riches, do pinch, nip, and oppress their neighbors: but all this while,
the poor are hungry, naked, cold, in prison, contemned, despised, and few,
yea very few, do regard or comfort them. It behooves us, which do believe in
one almighty, everliving, invisible, and incomprehensible God, and living in a
most christian commonwealth, do profess true and sincere religion, so surely
grounded, and built upon the holy, infallible, and invincible word of God,
that neither wicked man, hell, nor devil can prevail against it, continually
to be doing good, and still caring most, how we may please God best, and to
answer our faith and profession, with holiness and righteousness of life and
conversation: And so to contemn this deceitful and momentanie world, that
most willingly we may follow the steps of our sweet Jesus, who says: The
foxes have holes, and the fowls of Math. 8.
the air have nests, but the son of man, has not where to lay his head.
True godliness is great riches, if thou will be contented, with that thou have.
Theefes cannot steal it, mothes, cannot eat it, neither can it be consumed
with canker or rustines.

THe carbuncle, is a very precious stone, to see to, like an 150
hot burning cole of fire, shining exceeding brightly, the which as Pliny
affirms, feels no fire, neither is it molten, changed, or mollified
therewith. If thou shall take it, and close it fast in a ring of lead, and
cast it into the fire, thou shall see the lead molten and consumed before thy
face, but the carbuncle remaining sound and perfect, without blemish, as
before: for the fire works upon the lead, but upon the carbuncle it cannot
work: Even so, Christ our savior, being in the hot scorching fire of his
torments, suffered and died as he was man, but as he was God he neither
suffered nor died. The fire of his afflictions, wrought then upon his manhood,
but his divinity and godhead continued perfect, and utterly untouched. That he
might put away our sins, he imbased himself, taking upon him (as the apostle
says) the shape of a man, and was made like Philip. ^.
unto man, and was found in his apparel as a man. He humbled himself, and
became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. But the most
excellent brightness of his divinity suffered no eclipse, neither could by any
ways or means be darkened. He ever was, is, and ever shall be Christ, and
equal to his father, touching his godhead. So, in like manner, all they that be
surely grounded, and thoroughly graffed in Christ Jesus, although in the Lords
quarrel, for the trial of their faith and religion, they shall bear many
weighty crosses, suffer infinite and most sharp afflictions, undergo
innumerable and bitter persecutions, and shall be acquainted with all manner
troubles, calamities, and sorrows, so that they shall seem even to be molten,
with the fiery and hot burning heat thereof: yet notwithstanding, their
carbuncle, that is, their faith in Christ, their hope, their love of God, and
comfort in the Lord Jesus, will never shrink, never quail, never be shaken,
never give over: but will ever remain steadfast, perfect, immutable, strong,
and so bold as a lion: The 1 Cor. ^.
children of God will say still with the Apostle: We are cursed, and we bless.
We suffer persecutions, and we bear them: We are blasphemed and we pray.
Again, who shall separate us from the Roma. ^.
love of Christ, shall tribulation, anguish, or famine? etc. As if the true
christian man should say: No, none of all these, nor whatsoever else can
happen, or shall be inflicted upon us.

AS the sea, although it receives, an unspeakable multitude 151
of floods and rivers, which do run into it, yet never runs over, neither is
so full, that it will receive no more: So, evil and wicked men, are never
satisfied, with malice, envy, and hatred, neither make they any end, of their
trecheries, sins and iniquities: but with the goades of some, they are stirred
up and pricked forward, to commit others, worse and more detestable then the
first: So that one deep calls on another, because being deluded, with the
lyeng shadows of false good things, they make no account of, but contemn and
despise, those things that be true, sound, and good indeed: And do even feed
and as it were frank themselves with evil, and all abominable things, and yet
(such is their greedines) they are never satisfied, they have never enough.

AS fire brands and wood, being kindled and set on fire, do give 152
light and warmth unto others, which are cold and in darkness, but are wasted
and consumed themselves; so that others receive the benefit, and they the
loss and spoil of themselves: So an unlearned and ungodly minister, whiles
without repentance or remorse of conscience, he delivers the word, and
ministers the sacraments unto others, which are prepared, know what they do,
and do reverently hear the word, and woorthilie receive the sacraments, does
only hurt himself, the rest receive comfort by the word, and are edified by
the sacraments. They are saved, though he perish.

Our souls in our bodies, may well be compared, to that 153
green precious jewel, called Smaragdus, in the hand of a rude child, or of
a slouenly and unmannerly carter: Our souls are most excellent, and precious
jewels, in the regio^ and country of mortal men, no whit, or very little
esteemed, but in themselves very precious and immortal: Which our God, that
highest and most heavenly ieweller, by his excellent and incomparable wisdom,
has woonderfully polished, and has coupled and joined them unto the leaden
rings of our bodies. And even as it greeueth and makes sorrowful, a skillful
and expert ieweller, when he beholds and sees, those jewels and precious
stones, which he with all his wit, industry, and art, has trimmed and
polished, to be tumbled and tossed, in the foul and filthy fingers, of
children and fools, who neither knowing them, nor esteeming them, do soil,
blemish and despise them: Even so, our heavenly father, when he sees our
souls, the which he has created, after his own similitude and likeness, to be
in the midst and depth, of the corrupted cogitations, wicked and beastly
thoughts, and hellish imaginations of our hearts, he takes it heavily, and in
evil part: insomuch that he cries out, saying: Why think ye evil in your
hearts? And by his holy Math. 9. Ezech. 11.
prophet Ezechiel: I know the thoughts of your hearts. That history of old Hely
in the holy book of God, is ever to be remembered: When he heard told unto
him, they heinous deeds, and most intolerable evils, which his sons had
committed, he did but slightly and slenderly reprove them, when he ought
sharply to have chastised, and corrected them. Therefore the Lord spoke unto
him, and said: Thou have honored thy children more 1. Samuel. 2.
then me, therefore will I cut off thy arm, and the arm of thy fathers house.
And shortly after the Scripture says: That his sons were slain in fight,
and that Hely himself fell backward out of his chair, and broke his neck.
God grant that this example of Hely and his sons, may be a warning to all
parents, to 1. Sam. 4.
train up their children in the fear and nurture of the Lord, and to punish
their sins and vices, so often as they perceive and know them. But again,
the ungodly motions, and mischievous thoughts of our hearts, what are they else,
but children and brats of our own breeding? The which we ought very severely
to restrain, and without pity to punish them sharply, when they are unruly,
and will cast from them, the empire and government of reason, offending God, and
dangering our souls: If we do not, howsoever we break not our necks in this
world, we shall perish for ever in the world to come.

IF thou dwell with profane, ungodly, faithless, and wicked 154
men, and do still hold fast, and keep surely, the faith, religion,
profession, and integrity, and honesty of life and manners: and do so bear
and endure, all their spites, malice, obloquies, contumelies, railings,
ratings, and what else soever shall be offered and done unto thee, that thou
never swerve nor fall, from the state of nature, grace, fear, faith and love
of God: It is an evident argument, and a manifest proof, of a great and
Christian magnanimity and courage, that is in thee, of excellent virtues, and
of the holy Ghost himself that dwells in thee, and does arm and strengthen
thee, against satan, and all his cunning sleights and violence. For even as a
looking glass, though it be most clear and clean, with the foul breath, of
those that blow upon it, is obscured and dimmed: even so, a man that is
honest, virtuous and godly, with continual custom, acquaintance, and
familiarity, of dishonest, ungodly, and graceless men, is oftentimes
corrupted, infected, and blemished. And therefore Ecclesiasticus says, Whosoever
touches pitch, shall be defiled with Eccles. 31.
pitch, etc.

IF it shall happen, that a planet otherwise very beneuolent 155
and wholesome, shall be joined to other stars or planets, which are maleuolent,
and of bad influence, it also will send forth influence that is evil and
unwholesome: Even so, a man that is virtuously given, and well bent to godliness,
if he shall take and join unto him, profane, wicked and ungodly men, in too
much acquaintance, custom and familiarity, he also at the length, will become
profane, and ungodly, as they be. For, all for the most part, are wont to
imitate the manners of them, with whom they are conversant and familiar, unless
they have some special gifts, and strength from God, to preserve and to keep
them, from such baits and snares, as satan is wont to spread and lay abroad,
in the persons, and manners of men, badly and lewdly disposed.

THat we may perfectly behold and see a thing, it behooves 156
that there be some space, between our eyes, and the object, or thing that is
to be seen: So, that we may see the world plainly, and thoroughly look into
it, it is requisite, that there be some distance, between us and it. But
evil, lewd, and ungracious men, which please themselves, in all things, that
displease God, seeing they are the world it self, how can it be, that they
should see it, when there is no space nor distance between them, and it? So
then, if thou will see the world, and all the vanities, flickerings and deceits
of the same, be not one with it, fashion not thy self after the manners of it,
be still at ods with it, let there be a distance and space between you, so shall
it never deceive thee.

EVen as the eye, does not see, the lids of the same, because 157
there is no space between the eye and them: So the vain and pestilent sort
of people, cannot see the world, because they are not separated from it, by any
distance, or space at all. In the midst of Babylon, they see it not: in the
midst of Sodom, they cannot perceive the filthiness, nor feel the stinch
thereof: they have eyes and see not, they have ears and hear not, they have
hands and handle not, feet and go not etc. They are in the world, of the
world, and the world it self: therefore they love the world, they inhalse, and
embrace the world. They cannot, they will not, spy any faults in the world. To
them, the stinch of the world, is a sweet smelling savor, the foulnes of it,
is excellent beauty, the corruption of it, is perfect goodness. That saying of
the Psalmist agrees well with worldlings: Fire came down upon them, Psalm. 58.
and they did not see the sun shine. This fire that the prophet speaks of, is
an extraordinary and rotten love of themselves, which brings such a darkness
unto them, that covers and ouerwhelmeth their understanding: it blinds
their eyes, and stops their ears: it does manacle their hands, and fetter
their feet, so that in all goodness they are senseless. The sun that the
prophet means, is that whereof mention is made in the book of Wisdom: The
sun shine of understanding, is not Wisd. 5.
risen, or has not appeered unto them.

EVen as oil does cause the fire to flame: So flattery does 158
minister nourishment to errors. Believe not a flatterer, for under the person
of a most sweet friend, he is a most bitter enemy. It is not for nothing,
that Solomon says: He that flattereth Proverb. 29.
his neighbor, lays abroad a net before his steps, to trap and to take him
withal. It is the office, and as it were the profession of a cunning
flatterer, with his smoothe words, and soft and sugared speeches, to undermine,
supplant and deceive men, and to draw them into some dangers and snares,
whereout they shall not easily escape, but with some harm. Even as the end of
an Orator is, with eloquence to persuade: and the end of the physician, with
medicine to cure and to heal: so the end of the flatterer is, with his humble
communication, and sweet alluring talk, to deceive. Be sure of this one
thing: whenever an evil and wicked man, or one that is vain and profane,
does seem to stoop and to crouch unto thee, in his words and speeches, then
is he spreading his net, and casting in his mind, how to deceive thee, and to
bring one evil or other upon thee. Plato calls a flatterer, a wild beast,
that is very pestilent, and hurtful to mankind, and says he is like an
unclean devil, that feeds men's minds, that are not wise and wary, with
deadly dainties, and with foul things that are dangerous and poysonfull. He
also compares a flatterer, with a sorcerer and a witch. And in my judgment,
there is no thief worse, nor vnwoorthier to live in the world, than a
flatterer: because he does not only rob men, of their money and goods, but also
of reason and judgment. Augustine says, there be two kinds of persecutors:
one is of them that dispraise thee, the other of them that flatter thee: but
the flatterers tongue, does hurt thee more, than the persecutors hand.
Hieronymus says, that nothing does so easily corrupt men's minds, as flattery.
Indeed there is no music more sweet and pleasant to men's ears, than
flattery, and yet none more pernicious and pestilent, than it.

AS a looking glass does imitate, whatsoever is set before it, 159
and does represent the likenesses of them that look in it, but by a contrary
way, for it shows the right side, to be the left, and the left side to be the
right, and if thou look into the east, it does represent thee, looking toward
the west: Even so a flatterer, in voice and in gesture will imitate thee. If
thou laugh and be merry, he also will be pleasant and merry: if thou weep, he
will weep for company: if thou will backbite and slander a man, he will take
thy part, and will, with railings, obloquies, and slanders, even grievously
wound the same man. And if thou will praise thy self, he will help thee: or
if thou love, to hear thy self praised of others, he will carry thee, as
it were upon the wings of praises and co^mendations, up into the clouds, and
lofty skies. Through his subtle sleights, and crafty devises, he turns and
bends himself every way: When he will work upon men, that be sad and
heavy, he is presently translated into their humor: with men that are remiss,
he deals merrily: he handles old men gravely, and young men courteously: with
wicked men he is bold and impudent, and with libidinous and lecherous people,
he is filthy and shameless. The flatterer has always, at his fingers ends,
and ready under his girdle, the gestures, voices, inclinations and dispositions
of all persons, high and low, he leaves out none, that he may deceive all. He
will praise thee in thy presence, and scorn thee in thy absence: that old
proverb, Out of one mouth comes both heat and cold, serves well for
flatterers. Pliny reports that there is a fountain in Dodona, which does
kindle fire brands, that are extinct, and does extinguish them when they are
kindled: So a flatterer is double toonged, he now extolleth thee, and does set
thee aloft with great praises, and by and by, he will cast thee down, with
injuries and Esai* ^.
wrongs. Against such the Lord himself speaks: My people, they that say thou
art happy or blessed, do deceive thee. And Esai. 5.
again: Woe be to you, that call good evil, and evil good.

A Vyper, although she be pestilente and poysonfull, yet notwithstanding, 160
whiles she is nummed with cold, she may safely be handled, not because she
has no poison in her, but because in her cold and numnes, she can not use it:
Even so pernicious I mean the subtle and obstinate papists.
and dissembling hypocrites, do sometime want opportunity and power, to
practice and to put in execution their wicked and detestable trecheries, but
good will they never want, for that does daily grow, and increase in them.
Therefore inde^or must be used, that they may be espied, taken, and rooted out
of the Lords vineyarde, least they spoil and make havoc of it. They are
Cant. ^.
those foxes that are spoken of in the Canticles: Which do dig and turn up the
vineyards.

AS the skin of a fox is of some valor, and in request, but 161
the flesh is nothing worth: So outward shows of holiness, are highly esteemed
with hypocrites, but cleannes of the heart, and inward purity, is of them no
whit regarded. A certain man being disposed to term his great enemy, cruel
and deceitful, he called him a lion and a fox: A lion for his tyranny, and a
fox for his fraud. And one Lysander in the like case, said: That if the skin
of a lion be not enough, it must be peeced and enlarged with the skin of a
fox: Whereby he meant, that if force and violence would not serve, but come
short of that cruelty, that a tyrant would feign practice, he must add
deceit, to do that he desires. So that old men in times past, did by a fox
understand, wily, crafty, and deceitful men, that would cover Hypocrites*
their vileness, with a veil of virtue, as all hypocrites do. No doubt, there
be in these days of ours, not a few most cruel and bloody tyrants, that
carry within them, as cruel, bloody, and traitorous hearts* to the true saints
and servants of God, as ever Pharao did to the Israelites; Cursed Cain to good
Abel, and as Judas to Christ. But yet they perceive, that their open using of
their cruelty cannot prevail, and therefore they practice their cunning,
Papists, foxes, and hypocrites.
fraud, deceit, and hypocrisy secretly, and (as they think) so closely, that
it cannot be spied. But the Lord has hitherto ever discovered them, to his
own glory, the comfort of his people, and to their own shame and confusion.
And notwithstanding that old proverb, that is: An old fox is hardly snared, I
doubt not, but to see or hear tell, that the old foxes and young cubs, shall
all at the length, either be snared and taken by the word of the Lord, and so
converted, or else, so snared and knared otherwise, that they shall sooner have
that they do deserve, then that they do desire. A certain writer expounding
that place of the Gospel, where Christ says to one, that said, He would follow
him: Foxes have Matthew. 8. Luc. 9. Cyrillus.
holes, and the birds of the air have nestes, but the son of man has not
where to lay his head: The same expositor understands by foxes hypocrisy, by
the birds or fowls of the air, arrogancy. As if Christ should have said:
thou say, Thou will follow me: But foxes, and fowls, have their holes and
nests in thee, that is: Hypocrisy and arrogancy do dwell in thy heart, and how
then can Christ rest or dwell in thee? Hypocrites and arrogant persons, do
never follow Christ, whatsoever they pretend, and how fair a show soever they
make of holiness and perfection.

AN hypocrite is like unto an apple, that is very fair, and 162
beautiful without, but within is corrupted and rotten. An arrogant person, is
like unto a goodly tall tree, that grows and mounteth very high, but brings
forth no fruit.

When Herod was determined to kill Christ, if he could, and yet would cloak
his wicked treachery, with a pretense of virtue and holiness: Christ said to them
that told him of the matter: Go Luc. 13.
ye and tell that fox, etc. And also Christ says to his disciples: Beware of
false prophets, which come to you in sheeps clothing, Matthew. 7.
but inwardly they are ravening woolues, you shall know them by their fruits.
And the apostle says, That they have a show of ^. Timoth. 3.
godliness, but they do deny the power thereof. Also the same apostle in
another place says: That satan does transfigure himself into an angel of
light. No marvel therefore that his ministers are also transfigured, into
ministers of righteousness, whose end shall be according to their works. Job
says, the hope of hypocrites Job. 13.
shall perish. Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, wherein Luc. 12.
is hypocrisy. God give us grace to take heed and to beware of hypocrites,
which would seem to be, that they are not, and hate to be that they seem.

AS sticks and wood do nourish and maintain the fire, but 163
the fire does waste and consume them: So, a man that is flattered by smooth
dissemblers and hypocrites, does maintain his flatterers, for the most part,
but in the end they will devour, and utterly undo him. When men in old time,
did feine, that one Acteon was torn in pieces and devoured of his own dogs,
which he kept and daily fed: They meant verily, that whosoever will please and
delight themselves, with parasites, flatterers, hypocrites, and dissemblers,
and be at cost to feed and maintain them, at the length shall be devoured and
swallowed up of them. And yet it is a world to see, that neither the
flatterers, nor the flattered, the deceivers, nor the deceived, will see and
consider their wretched and miserable ends, which are as clear as the sun
light at noone day. The flattered shall be devoured of his own dog the
flatterer: And the flatterer himself shall be a pray to satan, that cruel cur
and hound of hell. Thus that ungodly crew, and rabble of scribes, pharisees and
hypocrites, do for temporal and momentanie trifles, lose great and most
excellent things. They exchange and forsake heaven, for earth: their souls for
their bodies, (or rather that their bodies may be pampered here for a short
time, for at the length, souls and bodies must fare alike:) They grieve the
spirit, to please the flesh: they abandon virtue, and embrace vice: and to be
short, they give their backs unto God, and their faces unto the world, they
utterly forsake him, to be in league and love with it. The holy Ghost by
Solomon does Proverb. ^4.
foretell their end: The end of their joy is sorrow, says he. And that of
Ecclesiastes must ever be true: Vanity of vanities, and Eccles. 1.
all things are vanity.

EVen as the birds, and fowls of the air, that they may 164
escape the nets and snares of the foulers, are wont to fly up on high: so we
to avoid the infinite snares of innumerable temptations, must fly to God, and
lift up our selves, from the corruptions, lyeng vanities, and deceitful
sleights of the world.

And even as those bi^ds, and fowls, which fall to the ground, to take the
foulers baits, are taken themselves: Even so those men, which do rely upon the
suggestions, and enchantments of the devil, world, and flesh, and are taken in
their traps, do die a A threefold death.
most miserable, and as it may well be called, an immortal death. For though
they do escape such an end, and death in this world, as their deserts do
crave, yet besides the death of nature, they shall taste of the death of hell,
which is endless, easelesse, and remediless. Let us therefore whiles it is to
day, lift, and stir up our selves, and fly unto God, with our hearts and
minds, that we fall not into the nets and traps of our enemies. I know it is,
an exceeding hard thing, to give over thine acquaintance with this world,
wherein thou art bred and brought up; even as it is hard, to bring an infant to
forsake the breasts that have given him suck. The child will love his nurse,
for her dugs sake, though her self be whoorish: So we are ready to love the
world, for the vain pleasures and delights thereof, though the world indeed be
a very strumpet. I wish that all would, and I pray God that all may, (if it be
his will) even steal, and as it were privily convey themselves, from their
vanities, evil cogitations, naughty devises, and whatsoever sin they use
and take pleasure in, if it be but one hour of a day, and I doubt not, but by
little and little, they would learn to hate sin, renounce the devil, and
despise the world. And where as now men and women, old and young, do bestow all
the hours of days and nights, about the vanities and deceivable pleasures of
the world and flesh, yea, yea, and to serve satan to: they would not bestow
one twinkling of an eye in so bad and dangerous a service.

EVen as fire, when it breaks out of compass, and order, is 165
more perilous in old buildings, than in new houses: So misdeamenor,
covetousness, lechery, pride, dronkennes, and blasphemy, is more offensive,
and does more harm in old age, then in green youth: For an old man, as in
years and experience, he is beyond them that are young and green headed, so
he ought in life and example, as well as in counsel to instruct others. For when
an old man falls into folly, he hurts himself greatly with his sin, and
other more with his example. That he is corrupted breeds his own woe, and
great trouble of mind and conscience, to the church of God.

AS a merchant that is expert and skillful, in his profession 166
and faculty, will not open, nor show his rich wares, and costly merchandise,
unto those whom he well knows, will not buie them, which do come unto his
shop or warehouse, either as curious persons, or as crafty spies, and subtle
searchers, not with any purpose to buie, but to do some evil: and calls unto
him only those, whom he knows to be very willing and desirous to buie: Even
so the Lord his manner is, not to open his heavenly mysteries, and the deep
secrets of his sacred, and most holy word, unto them, whom he perceives and
sees plainly, to seek after them vainly, and curiously, or with a wicked
mind, and corrupted purpose, to search them out, to the end they may tread,
and trample them under their feet: and does call them only to the true
knowledge of his laws and ordinances, and does instruct and teach them, whom
he is sure, will both profit themselves, and others thereby. Give not that
which is holy (says Christ) unto dogs, neither cast ye pearls before swine.
When Herod Matthew. 7.
was very desirous, that Christ standing before him, would show some miracle,
Christ would not only, not do any miracle or Luke 23.
wonder, but also not vouchsafe him one word for answer. And when the Jews
said: we would see a sign of thee, he answered: A wicked and adulterous
generation seeks a sign, but no sign shall Matthew. 1^.
be given unto it, but the sign of Jonas the prophet. But before his
disciples, and others that were with them, he did show many and great woonders,
when they did not ask for any. But the Jews did ask, and went without,
because they had no mind to be converted, either by his words or works, but
only to see his miracles, and to hear his words, to the end (if they could)
to trap him, and to quarrel with him. If thou would profit therefore by the
word of God, when thou do read or hear it, bring with thee faith and
humility: for God resists the proud, and gives grace unto the humble and
lowly.

AS that dry skin which a snake does cast, to renew her age, 167
has in it the shape, likeness, and prints of eyes, and that thin rynde also,
wherewith the eyes of the snake are covered, and yet indeed has no seeing
eyes: So, the wicked and unbelieving Jews, did seem to have eyes, but indeed
they were blind, and idle and empty skins, and ryndes without sight: they
were men, but not of God: they had eyes of the flesh, but none of the spirit:
they could see creatures, but they had not one eye, to behold the creator. And
as for Christ, they had no more sight no^ knowledge of him, that then ^ad of
the sun and moon, when they were yet in the wombes of their mothers. The
divine miracles of Christ, were most pure, and clear looking glasses, without
blemish, spot, or deceit, wherein they might have seen, both the omnipotency
of him that wrought them, and also their own most miserable and wretched
estate, howbeit they were so stone blind, that they could not see the glass,
much less themselves in the glass. So that when they sought after Christ, and
to see his miracles, this might well have been said to them: Quid caeco cum
speculo? What should a blind man do with a looking glass? The Evangelist
says, that they came unto the Lord, that they might despise his mysteries and
woonders. And they said: We know not whence Matthew. 2. John. 9.
this fellow is. But because they came unto him only upon their feet, and
departed far from him, in their hearts and minds, for they came vainly,
curiously, and deceitfully, therefore the Lord did most sharply reprove them,
and that which they demanded, they never obtained. The papists no doubt,
notwithstanding their brave shows, and vauntings of religion, holiness, and
devotion, are in the same predicament with the incredulous Jews. Let us
therefore take the counsel of the holy Ghost, which says: Think of the Lord
in goodness, and seek him in the Wisd. 1.
singlenes of heart: for he is ^ound of them that tempt him not, and appears
unto them, that put their trust in him. Let us Heb. 10.
come unto Christ, with a true heart, and in the fulness of faith. Many do come
to church to hear the word of God, at the mouth of the preacher, but all
profit not, because all do not come with humble minds and lowly hearts, to that
end.

AS of many men, coming into a goldsmithes shop, one buieth 16^
a chain of gold, another a costly ring, some a rich jewel, and some buie
plate cunningly and curiously wrought, and some one among the rest, stoupeth
down, and takes up a black cole, which he turns and tumbleth in his hands,
till it foul and make black his fingers: Even so, very many do come to the
church, to hear the word preached, and do learn and bear away, exceeding
good, and heavenly lessons, and do gather great strength to their faith, and
much comfort to their scules, and peace to their consciences: and some again
do come, without any such good purpose, intending to take some occasion, to
quarrel with the preacher, and to mark, if any thing fall from him, unwisely,
indiscreetly, or barbarously, wherewith they may sport themselves, and scorn
him: such, as they came with wicked purposes, and cauilling minds, so they
depart with hearts as hard as adamants, s^ared consciences, and brazen faces, so
bloodles that they cannot blush, far worse than when they came. The preaching
of the Gospel is in deed, a very rich shop, fully and thoroughly furnished and
stored, with jewels of great valor: to wit, with most wise, holy, and heavenly
sentences, proceeding from the almighty himself, through the mouth of his
servants, though seely worms, and mortal men. And whosoever will come
woorthily, to the preaching of the Lords laws, and ordinances of God, and of
the Gospel of Christ Jesus, he must come, with an holy and godly mind,
desirous to understand, and to know the will of God, that he may do it. They
that come thus unto the Lord, do most certainly learn, those things which
appertain to the salvation of their souls. Such only, does the holy Ghost
instruct, teach and comfort, and does inflame them with a wonderful love, of
the holy word, and heavenly things. But the Lord sends empty away, all such
hearers, as approach and come near unto him, with their ears and lips, and are
divided far from him, in their hearts and minds, being full of hypocrisy,
deceit, and all abomination. To them speaks the Lord Ezech. 14.
himself by Ezechiel the prophet: Shall I make answer unto them when they
ask me any thing? as if the Lord should say, I will not.

Pliny reports in his 14. book, that myrrh does keep ^69
men's bodies from corrupting, and preserves them from putrefaction, and
rottennes: but howsoever that is true, or otherwise, this is most true in the
children of God, that calamities and afflictions, taken and borne patiently, do
profit and prevail much, to keep out fowls from the corruption, and ^anker,
of grievous evils, and heinous sins, and from being spotted of this wicked
world. For when we are afflicted, then do we fly unto God* in o^r dangers and
extremities, as to our only refuge, besides whom there is none can help, or
comfort us. We crave and beg most earnestly his mercy, and do make great
haste, and even run as it were, to meditate of his omnipotency, and readiness
to do us good, and to deliver us. And although we see our selves, to be as it
were banished souls, and crossed with a thousand troubles, and to be even
abiects among men, and to be thrust out of the societies and companies of
worldlings, yet we never forget, the goodness and mercies of God, nor cast out
of our minds, the remembrance of his loving kindness toward his servants. The
love and favor of God, is ever before the eyes of his saints, and their
calamity does even stay, and rest it self, in the sweet remembrance, of
heaven and heavenly things: though they be sore wroong in this life, and
grievously pinched, yet they are never so oppressed, that they be discomforted.
In the midst of mourning and sorrow, they do woonderfully rejoice: in extreme
poverty, they feel no want: they seem daily to be cut off, and yet still
they increase and flourish: they are still afflicted, and yet continually
refreshed.

Thus does it come to pass, that an admirable greatness, of love and obedience,
toward the Lord, does grow very fervent, and hot in them. For they
understand, that they be therefore afflicted, that they should fly unto God,
the heavenly and only comfort, as a most strongly fenced tower, and invincible
castle, that they may be turned from their sins and be saved. Tobias knowing
so much, said: O Lord, when thou art angry, thou Tobias. 3.
show mercy, and in the time of trouble, thou forgiuest them their sins,
that call upon thee. And the Lord (says Job) wounds, Job. 5.
and he heals, he smites, and his hands shall heal again. And the kingly
prophet David says: Thou art my refuge in my Psalm. 32.
trouble, which compasses me round about. And again: The Lord is hard at
hand, to them that are of a troubled heart, and Psalm. 24.
will save the humble and lowly in spirit. And the Lords words, by Ose the
prophet are these: In their tribulation, they will rise Ose. 2.
up early, and call upon me. For the Lord his manner and custom is, to help
and succor the afflicted, which call and cry, for his heavenly comfort.
Heerehence is that of the Evangelist John: Your sorrow shall be turned into
joy: And that of the apostle: John. 16. 2. Cor. 1.
As you are companions of the passions and sufferings, so shall ye be, of the
consolation and comfort: And that also in the Acts: We must enter into the
kingdom of God, through many tribulations. Acts* 14.
And holy John in the revelation, speaking of the saints which have, and shall
have the fruition of God, in heaven, says: Those are they that came from great
tribulation. Hereupon, Apoc. 7.
Augustine says exceeding well. That the Lord has appointed thee to suffer*
it is a scourge of him, that chastises thee, and not a punishment of him that
condemns thee, Who would not then, be well contented with troubles and
afflictions? Who would not willingly undergo, the indignation, malediction, and
persecution of wicked men? Who would be afeard, of the spite, malice, and
whatsoever this wicked world can say or do? Seeing the sequel unto the sons
and daughters of God, is to be exalted, and extolled into heaven, and to be
placed there, at the right hand of the almighty, through and with the Lord
Jesus, world without end. The forenamed saints of God, and other holy men, from
age to age, in the midst of their calamities, did still remember themselves to
be men, borne under that condition, that their lives should ever be open, and
subject, to all the inevitable darts of infinite troubles, and that there was
no refusing, to live and lead their lives, in that condition, whereunder they
were borne: And whiles they called to mind the events of other men, they knew
right well, that no new thing, had happened unto them. And indeed, the
remembrance of man's condition and estate, and of a common law, and lot as it
were, incident to al, does mitigate the pain of troubles, and does make their
burden the easier to bear. And this is a thing, ever observed, and noted, in
the children of God, that they are so far from impatience, and from repining at
their afflictions, that even in the depth of their miseries, they think
themselves happy, that they are counted worthy, to suffer any thing for
Christ's sake. It were a great book matter, to remember all those, that are
mentioned in the holy scriptures, which even shrinking, and falling away from
God, have been recovered, reclaimed, and healed, by afflictions and
tribulations, as it were with physic and medicine from heaven. O how great is
thy goodness, how incomparable is thy clemency, how infinite and endless is thy
mercy, O heavenly and most holy father? Which do therefore afflict us, that
tho^ may cheer us up again: Thou do therefore hold us down, that thou
may comfort us, and do suffer us, to fall into diverse and sundry
calamities, that we may learn to know thy righteousness and mercies. All these
things thou do, not of hatred to us ward, but of love, not to destroy us,
but to bring us to thy glory.

AS the air is cleared, with the brightness and shine of the sun, 170
and when the sun is down and set, the air is covered with darkness: Even so
the mind of man, when it is purged and cleared, with heavenly wisdom, sought
and drawn out of the word of God, does shine most excellently, and sends
forth, a pure and perfect light of christianity, which may most easily be
decerned, to proceed, and to come from God himself: But being without that
true light, it is overwhelmed with an horrible and fearful darkness, and gives
out nothing, but filthy mists, and stinking vapors, which do spring and rise,
out of the corruption, and rotten nature of man, and even from hell, and satan
himself. How can it be, that darkness, and blindness, should remain and rest,
in that heart of man, which the holy Ghost, the author of all light, and the
only light it self, has chosen to be his own seat, and holy habitation? Can
error flow, out of the most pure fountain of wisdom: It is not possible,
that from the only center of all goodness, a line of wickedness should be
drawn: And can the fruits of death, grow out of the tree of life? These are
impossible things. And on the otherside, where the holy spirit of grace and
might, has not place, and possession, there is nothing to be found, but
blindness, error, sin, iniquity, and all abomination, yea, and all the fruits
of eternal death it self.

EVen as a bitter potion, is not said to be unprofitable, nor 171
without hope, when health and soundnes does follow, although it be exceeding
bitter to him that takes it: So sharp and pinching calamities, wherewith the
Lord does exercise, now and then his children, are not to be counted idle and
in vain, when some peace of conscience, and comfort unto our souls do follow,
that when the justice of God is seen, many may be amended, and the faith and
patience, of many may be tried. For nothing is more available, for the
aduauncing of the praise and commendation of true virtue, then calamity it
self, taken and borne patiently, for Christ's sake.

AS young chickins are in safety, from the hawk and puttocke, 172
so long as they straie not, from about the wings of their dams, and when they
do straie, far from them, they are easily taken, of every vermin: Even so,
they that depart not from God, but keeping themselves near unto him, do walk,
and lead their lives, within the compass, and limits of his laws and
ordinances, are most safely kept by him, from the force, enchantments, engines,
and all the subtle devises of satan and his instruments: but if they forsake
God, and not regarding his word, divide themselves from him, by their sins and
iniquities, they must needs fall into the tallons and jaws of that
tyrannical hawke and hound of hell, from whence there is no delivery. Whose
whole endeavor and labor is, like a roaring lion, to seek 1. Pet. 5.
whom he may devour.

EVen as, it is a thing very commendable, and worthy praise, 173
that a soldier, do ever bear about him, the signs and badges of his
captain, that it may appear, to whom he belongs: So is it no little honor,
to a true christian man, to pass through many dangers, and to be experienced
in many troubles, and to endure many affliction^ for his captain, Christ's
sake. For sorrows, vexations, and tribulations, are the armor and badges of
Christ. And therefore the apostle, which for Christ's sake suffered many things,
says: I do bear about in my body, the marks Galat. 6.
of the Lord Jesus.

EVen as the sun, which unto eyes being sound, and without 174
disease, was very pleasant and wholesome: unto the same eyes, when they are
feeble, sore and weak, is very troublesome and hurtful, and yet the sun,
ever all one, and the self same, that it was before: So, God that has ever
shown himself, benign and bountiful, to those that were kind, and tender
hearted, toward his saints, and merciful, to those that show mercy: unto the
same men, when they fall into wickedness, and grow to be full of beastly
cruelty, the Lord shows himself to be very wrath and angry, and yet still
one, and the selfsame immutable God, from everlasting, to everlasting. So
that, we see the Lord, to bear and show himself unto men, according to that,
which he knows them to be. The prophet David had great knowledge, and no
small experience of this, when he said: The Lord will reward me, according to
my righteousness, and Psalm. 18.
according to the cleannes of my hands, in his own eye sight: with the holy
thou will be holy, and with the froward, thou will deal frowardly. When the
wicked and ungodly, do provoke the Lord, to anger, and even pull upon
themselves, through their rebellion and hardness of heart, some judgments,
plagues, or scourges, then they think, that the Lord deals hardly, and
frowardly, when as notwithstanding, he is most holy, and most just.

AS a looking glass, does show, whatsoever thou shall set 175
against it, if thou show thy self pleasant and mild unto it, it also will
show it self, mild and pleasant unto thee, and if thou be angry, and full
of wrath and indignation, thou shall perceive in like manner, the countenance of
the glass, to be, as it were furious, and cruel to behold, whereas
notwithstanding the glass is one, and the same: So God, whereas he is one, and
the selfsame immutable and everlasting God, and as it is said in the book of
Wisdom, A glass without spot or blemish, Sap. 7.
is sometimes compared to a gentle lamb, and sometimes, to a fierce and
terrible lion. Esaias says of him: Even as a sheep unto Esa. 53.
the slaughter was he led, and as a lamb before the shearer, so he opened not
his mouth. And John Baptist says of him also: Behold John. 1.
the lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world. And Christ
speaks of himself: Learn of me, for I am meek Matthew. 11.
and lowly in heart. These and such other places do show the mildnes and kindness
of our God. But the prophet Esaias speaking of him again, says: The fury of
the Lord, is wax^n hot against Esa. 5.
his people. And a little after: His voice is, as the roaring of a lion. And
Amos the prophet says: A lion of the tribe of Judah, has Amos. 3.
the victory. Christ himself affirms, that he is merciful toward them
that be merciful, saying: Blessed are the merciful, Matthew. 5.
for they shall obtain mercy. And touching the Lords manner of dealing with
cruel and unmerciful men, James the apostle says: He shall have judgment
without mercy, that shows no Iac. 2.
mercy himself. Thus do we plainly see* how diversely the Lord shows
himself: to wit, merciful, to those that be merciful, and to those that be
merciless and cruel, he shows himself sharp and severe. Christ declares
in his Gospel, that he will say unto the good, in the last judgment day: Come
ye blessed children of my father, possess a kingdom prepared for you, from
the beginning of the world: for I was hungry, and ye gave me to eat, etc. O
sweet and comfortable saying to the children of God. And to the wicked he will
say: Depart from me ye cursed ones, into everlasting fire, prepared for the
devil, and his angels: for I was hungry, and ye gave me not to eat, etc. O
doleful, and fearful curse, well had it been for them, if they had never
been borne.

Our savior Christ in his holy Gospel, that he may teach us, Joan. 10. Matthew.
13. Luc. 8 Matthew. 25. Luc. 14.
his care and love toward us, compares himself to many things: calling
himself sometimes a shepherd: sometimes an husbandman: sometimes a man: sometimes
an householder: and sometimes also a king calling his servants to their accounts,
rewarding well the good, and condemning the bad: and sometimes also a king,
bidding all to a marriage, and to a wedding dinner. For thus it is written: The
kingdom of heaven, is like unto a man a king, Matthew. 20. 21. Luc. 19.
which made a great marriage for his son. He is called a man a king, that we
may understand him to be bountiful and merciful toward us. But not long after
it is said: When the king heard it, he was angry. When he is noted to be
angry, he is not called a man a king, but king only. And as we read the
scriptures, we find that Christ is called by diverse and sundry names, and all
to express his nature and disposition unto us. He is said to be wonderful, a
branch, just, comely, beautiful, Jesus, Messiah, a savior, salvation, a
rock, a corner stone, a counselor, strong, beloved, the sun, a captain, a
giant, a bridegroom, the east, the prince of peace, the father of the world to
come, a lord, an high priest, a physician, Emanuel, an eagle, a mediator, a
fountain of water of life, the bread of life, the way, truth and life, a
light, the root of Iesse, a swift destroier, and by many other names is he
called, as we shall find in the scriptures, as we read, and mark them well:
and yet he the same God, and as James the apostle says, Without any shadow of
change. He brought, and advanced the people of the Hebrews, to great dignity:
and again did throw them, into extreme ignominy, but the change was in them,
and none in him. He placed them in the land of promise, and brought them into
the captivity of Babylon, and all these things did he, without any alteration
in himself, to show both his mercy and his justice.

EVen as a twig or branch, taken from a very good and fruitful 176
tree, and graffed in the trunk or stock of some wild tree, as a crab,
thorn, or such like, does draw the trunk or stock, to the nature of the twig
or branch, that now it bears other leaves, and other fruit, than it was wont
to do: So, the doctrine of Christ, well planted, and surely graffed, in our
barren hearts, does draw us, and convert us, unto, and into it self, and
causes us to bear other goodly leaves, of holy and godly words, and other
most pleasant and wholesome fruits, of unfeigned virtues and graces. But by the
way, we must needs crop, and cut off, the boughs of our old sins, that
Christ may be graffed in us, and then no doubt, our fruit shall be such, as
God, for his sons sake, will accept and take in good part, at our hands. A
good tree, cannot bear bad fruit, nor an evil tree, good fruit. No man can be
delighted with the foul pleasures, and filthy delights, of the world and the
flesh, and with the joys of heaven, at the same time. No man can be given,
both to the contemplation of heavenly things, and to the wisdom of the flesh.
Truth and lying, things everlasting, and things most vile and transitory,
spiritual things, and fleshly matters, the things that are above with God, and
the deceiuable trifles, that are below in the earth, may not be mingled
together. Thou can not both savor of the Lord, and of the world: thou can
not bear both good and bad fruit: it is not possible, that thou should both
be barren and fruitful. If thou love God, and his doctrine be graffed in
thee, then art thou fruitful: if not, thou art unfruitful. For the truth it
self says: He that abides in me, and I in him, he brings forth Joan. 15.
much fruit.

SAlt is made of sea water, but so long as it is in the sea, it is 177
not salt, it must be taken out of the sea, and placed upon the dry land, that
being in salt pits, where the sun may shine, and the air blow upon it, the
water may be thickened, and so converted into salt. This world is a sea: so long
as we live in the world, being tormoilde in the swelling surges, of the pride
thereof, and tossed with the ebbings and flowings, of the worlds inconstancy,
and overwhelmed in the bitter waters of the sins, and wicked practices of the
same, we are as yet no salt. We must go out of the world, and enter into the
land, to wit, into our selves, and take a just view of our own imbecilitie,
and have a due consideration of our own miserable, and wretched estate, that
the sun of righteousness, may thrust out his beams, and the wind of heavenly
grace, may blow upon us, and so we may be turned, into an admirable, and
wonderful salt, that being seasoned our selves, we may be means, and the
Lords instruments, to season others. We may be bold to inueigh against all
iniquity, when we have amended our own amisses. Yet must that be done in
measure, and according to knowledge: for so it behooves al men, to do all
things, that they do. It is well said of one, that salt is an excellent sauce,
and seasoner of all things, so that measure be not wanting: Otherwise, measure
and mean missing, the salt it self is lost, and that which should have been
seasoned, is utterly spoiled. For too much does make very bitter that, which
measure would have made full sweet. And yet notwithstanding, all men must, but
especially the ministers of the word, lift up their voices, and cry out
against all manner of sin, and wickedness. For the Lord says by Joel the
prophet: Sound out the Joel. 2.
trumpet in Sion, cry out upon my holy mountain, and let all the inhabitants
of the earth be troubled and quake. And Esaias says: Cry out, cease not, lift
up thy voice like a trumpet. The Esa. 58.
Scripture does signify so much, when it says, That God commanded Moses, to
make two trumpets of silver, wherewith he Number. 10.
should call the people together, when their tents were to be removed. For
with the sound of those trumpets, the people were roused, and stirred up to
wars, and to celebrate certain days, wherein sacrifices were offered up unto
God. Even so, every preacher of the word of God, ought to call upon sinners,
to remove their tents, from this wicked world, and the manners and fashions of
the same, and so much as in him lies, to bring the people, that are blinded in
their sins, and falling from God, out of their errors, perils, and dangers, and
with all their force, and skill, to move and stir them up, to be that in
deed, which true christianity does require. That every one may say with the
prophet Esaie: Let the ungodly man forsake his own way, and the Esai. 55.
wicked man the cogitations of his own heart, and be turned unto the Lord: And
with John in the Revelation: My people, Apoc. 18.
avoid out of the midst of Babylon, be ye not partakers of their sins. As
if he should say: Remove and separate your selves from the transitory and
lieng things of the world, forsake the wickedness of it, and pitch your tents,
by godly meditations, and holy affections of your hearts and minds, not in the
earth, but in heaven. For every preacher of the Gospel, ought to prepare his
hearers, so much as in him lies, and by his own example, to stir them up,
against the enemies of their souls.

And to counsel them, with the apostle, To put on the armor of God, that they
may be able to stand against the deceits of the devil, for we wrestle not
against the world, flesh, and blood, Ephesians. ^.
but against princes, powers, and the governors of the darkness of this world.
It behooves us therefore, to be well furnished with Romans 13. 2. Cor. 10.
the armor of light, and that the weapons of our warfare, be not carnal, but
spiritual.

AS an expert and skillful husbandman, does first draw out 178
of his fields, or lands, and pulls up by the roots, thistles, briers,
brambles, and all other venomous, and wild weeds, and afterward commits
unto them his good seeds: Even so a wise teacher of the word of God, ought
first to root out sin and vices, and to till as it were, the minds of his
hearers, and as much as in him lies, to draw and pull out of them, both root
and rind of all manner of evil, and wickedness, and to prepare and make them
meet, to receive the good seeds of the holy word, and to sow in them those
things, which being rooted and grown up, may bring forth both pleasant,
profitable, and plentiful fruits. And although virtue and godliness, unto the
wicked and ungodly, seem even horrible and bitter, and all vice, and
naughtines, sweet and well sauouring, so that they are not willing, that the
gardens of their hearts, should be weeded and trimmed, because they would have
no vprightnes, no integrity of life, no truth nor honesty to grow there: yet
not the less, the Lords ministers must ever think, that the same is spoken to
Ezech. 16.
them, which was delivered to the prophets, long since: Make Esai. 58.
Jerusalem to know her abominations: And show my people their wickedness, and
the house of Jacob their sins. Offer unto them salt, wherewith their corruption
may be drawn out, and Matthew, 5.
they made to savor sweetly in the nostrilles of God, if they be not
altogether rotten, and consumed in their sins. Thrust at Eccles. 12.
them, with the goade, of the holy word, and strike at them, with the two
edged sword of the law of God, that (if they be not stark Hebr. 4.
dead, in their abominations, and be not already swallowed up of hell, if
there be any recovery in them at all) they may be awaked, out of their deadly
slumbers, and may be so pricked at their Act. 2.
hearts, that they may find and feel, how forlorn they are, in the sight of
God, and fly to him for succor, grace* and mercy, if they belong to his
kingdom.

WHat does it profit a river, to flow from a pure and 179
clear fountain, if it self be foul, filthy, and unwholesome? Even so, the
noblenes of fathers, and the honors of elders, and ancestors, what does it
pleasure their sons, when they themselves degenerate from their noble and
honorable parents? bragging only of their nobility, and chalenging their
honor, but despising their virtues, show themselves wicked, loose, and leude
of life? He that is not nobled, for some worthy acts of his own, nor renowned
by reason of some famous virtues, known and found to be in himself, what
honor may he look for? seeing there is nothing in himself that is good, but
only a vain and proud challenging of the excellency, and woorthines of other
men. Christ calls the proud and bragging Pharisees, the generation of
vipers: And when they boasted that Matthew. 3.
they had Abraham to their father, he said: Ye are of your father Joan. 8.
Ezech. 16.
the devil. And when the Jews resembled the Amorrheans and Cetheans, and
imitated their sins and iniquities, the Lord says: That Amorrhaeus is their
father, and Cethaea their mother.

So that these places last cited, do plainly show, that sometimes the holy Ghost
does call sons, not of nature, but of imitation, and likeness: because the
Jews did the deeds of the devil, Christ says the devil is their father. And
when they so followed the steps of the Amorrheans and Cetheans, that for the
likeness of their iniquities and abominations, they did seem even to be bred
and borne of them, and had like condemnation with them, because they had the
same sins, the Lord says that Amorrhaeus and Cethaea, be their parents.

EVen as Aesops Iay, being clad with the fair feathers of 18^
other birds, did vainly take unto himself a beauty, but being discovered and
stripped of all, for a reward was thoroughly scorned, and was turned into his old
black gown, when every bird had taken from him, her own feather: So they,
that make their boast of the noble acts of others, and do vaunt themselves, of
the dignity of their predecessors, and do usurp unto themselves the nobility
of ancestors, themselves being naked of all virtue, and utterly void even of
common honesty, temperance, and sobriety, are constrained many times, with
great ignominy and shame, to put off other men's vestures, and with no small
disgrace to forgo their usurped honors. It is a thing far more honorable, and
woorthier commendation, that a man flourish, and be famous, with his own
virtues, and just deserts, than to borrow his praise, and honor of others. Men
are very fitly, though not naturally, called the sons of them, whose deeds
they do, and whose vices or virtues they imitate. If ye be the sons of
Abraham (said Christ to the Jews, boasting and glorying of their original)
then do the deeds of Abraham. They were indeed by nature, Joan. ^.
the children of Abraham, but by imitation, they were the brats of Amorrhaeus
and Cethaea. If thou will be counted the son or daughter of a noble, honest,
and good man, then do noble acts thy self, lead an honest life, and do good
works. And following the steps of Christ, thou shall be a christian: otherwise,
look whose manners, and ways thou walk in, his son or daughter art thou
rightly called.

ECclesiasticus says, that pride is the beginning of all sin. 181
And indeed, it is that center, in the sphere of man's life, whereout do go
lines, to the circumference of iniquity. For a proud man, has no
righteousness, no equity, he has no liking of any virtue: he scorneth and
despises all, all are his inferiors, and he superior to all, in his own
conceit. Even as in a thrashing place, chafe is seen above the wheat, not
because it is the better, but because it is the lighter, and whereas it is the
viler, and of the less valor, yet notwithstanding it gets the higher and
woorthier place: Even so in this life, a proud and vain man, is exalted above
the humble and lowly, not for any woorthines, just desert, or true virtue that
is in him, but for his vanity, and a false opinion, that he has conceived of
himself: And whereas he is of very little, or no valor, yet he puts out
himself before others, which are far beyond him, in virtue, wisdom, and
nobility. But the lowly, though the woorthier, and more excellent man, does
ever humble himself, not because he is of less valor, but because he has in
him, greater weight of wisdom, understanding, and true nobility. Wheat, the
weightier, sounder, and better it is, the lower place it desires, and seeks:
the humble man, the wiser, and more gracious that he is, the more pleasure and
delight he has, in christian humility and lowlines. But the proud man being
lighter then the wind, lifts up, and extolleth himself, above all things:
Whereupon it comes to pass, that he peruerteth, all the laws of God, and
man, for that souerainty sake, which he falsely imagines, to belong unto
himself. Tobias, that virtuous, charitable and wise man, did earnestly Tobias.
4.
dissuade his son from all pride, and did persuade him to humility and
lowlines: Suffer not pride (says he) in any wise, to domineere, o^ to bear a
swaie, in thy understanding, nor in the words of thy mouth. And Ecclesiasticus
counsels every Eccles. 7. and 10.
man greatly to humble his spirit: And says, That pride is 1. Cor. 4.
odious before God, and men. and the holy apostle says: What have thou, that
thou have not received? And if thou have received it, why boastest thou, as
though thou had not received it? There is an old and true saying, almost in
all men's mouths, that is, Pride will have a fall: and the same is very
strongly confirmed by Christ himself, who says: He that exalts himself,
shall be Luc. 14. Luc. 18.
brought low: and he that humbles himself, shall be exalted. Augustine
says, that pride deceived angels, and that much more it will deceive men, and
therefore to be shunned. And Ambrose says, it made of angels, devils. And no
doubt it is the original of all evils, and the ruin of all virtues, where it
is maintained.

WE see sometimes two men, about to go into some sumptuous 182
and stately hall or house, through a very low and narrow door, the one
stouping, and bending himself, does pass through and go in, without harm:
the other stout, not stouping, nor bending at all, but preasing in with great
force, hurts his head, and falls backward: Such a stately and princely
place, is the kingdom of heaven, the habitation of the saints of God, whose
way is very straight, as Christ himself does affirm, and Mar. 10.
the door thereof is so low and narrow, that he compares it with the eye of
a needle. That man, that humbles himself, and Luc. 18.
stoupeth low, does enter into that most stately and princely house, of the
king of heaven: but he that is puffed up with pride, and swelled with
insolency, cannot get in at that gate, he falls to the ground, his pride
does throw him backward. Augustine speaking of heaven, says, it is a very high
country, but the way to it, lies very low. And so much would the Lord and
king of the house signify, when he bids all learn of him, because Matthew.
11.
he is meek and lowly in heart. And when he called a little child unto him,
and set him in the midst of his disciples, he said unto them: Unless ye
become as little children, ye shall not enter into Matthew. 18.
the kingdom of heaven. Pride is a very pestilent sickness, and has this
operation in man, if it reign in him, it divides him from God, from himself,
and from his neighbor, and does disperse, and distract him, into infinite
evils, and innumerable vices. The holy virgin could tell that, when in her most
wonderful canticle she said: He has dispersed the proud, in the imagination
of their own hearts. Let us therefore beware of pride, eschew all insolency of
the mind, and avoid clean the vain hautines of the heart, least whiles we
hunt, and hawk after, the idle praise of men, and the vain glory of the
world, we utterly lose the everlasting glory, of the saints of God, and
eternal life for ever. Then will repentance come too late, when we have lost
all things for nothing, and no recovery does remain.

EVen as a fouler, does lay abroad and spread his net, to take 183
the birds, where bait is, and they may feed: So the devil Genes. 2.
when he would take Eve, spread his net in gluttony, and tempted her with a
beautiful apple, till at the length, to the harm and woe of all their
posterity, both she and her husband were taken, and trapt to our woes. And
with the same bait he went about to entangle Christ, when he said, If thou be
the son Matthew, 4.
of God, command that these stones be made bread. And indeed excess of meat
and drink, is the mother of many most dangerous evils. The Scripture speaking
of them, that worshipped the Exodus 32.
golden calfe, says: The people sat down, to eat and drink, and rose up to
play. And in Deuteronomie it is said: That when the Deuteronomy. 31.
people had eaten and were full, they turned to strange gods. And Ose the
prophet says: They were full, and they did forget Ose. 13. Luc. 6.
God. And Christ says: Woe be to you, that are full, for ye shall be hungry.
Rioting, excess, and fulness of meat and drink, does make men's bodies unapt to
all good and holy exercises, and very prone and apt to all sin, and wickedness.

CHrist wills us not to lay up treasure for our selves, here 184
upon the earth, but in heaven etc. and affirms that it is Matthew. 6.
harder for a rich man, to enter into the kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 19.
then for a cable rope, to go through the eye of a needle. In deed such a
rope, though it cannot be drawn through a needles eye, yet if it be divided,
and singled into the several threedes whereof it was made, it may be so drawn
through, one thread after another: Even so a rich man, whose heart is set upon
his riches, more then upon God, so that covetousness is as it were, a most
infringeable shell, wherein his heart is closed, and the same is manicles to his
hands, and fetters to his feet, cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven: But
if he will divide his riches, into certain threeds or portions, and bestow one
part to further the preaching of the Gospel, another upon the poor man: and
one upon the poor widdowe, another upon seely poor orphans: one upon the
stranger that is in want: another upon the poor prisoner: one upon him that is
sick, and another upon the impotent: if he will succor them, that be in
sorrow, and misery, and will help the needy, and will godly, mercifully, and
discreetly, distribute his riches, to the comforting and releeuing of the
distressed children, and saints of God, and all this out of a lively and true
faith, for Christ's sake, he may, notwithstanding his riches, be they never so
great, enter into the kingdom of heaven, and be saved, his riches shall not
hinder him. But if he be carried away from doing of any good, with a greedy
and damnable covetousness, making his riches, his God, there is no entrance for
him, but he shall be taken, and bound hand and foot, and shall be sent into
hell, and shall be cast into utter darkness, where shall be houling, wailing,
and gnashing of teeth. He that is such a one, is even in this life, already
dead, and is as it were his own grave. Chrysostme says, that the mind of a
covetous man, is a foul, rotten and stinking sepulcher. Joshua commanded,
Joshua. 6. and 7.
that no man should take any thing from Jericho, but covetous Achan, tempted
with the glittering gold, did break that commandment, and was therefore most
justly put to death. Yea for his covetousness and greedy desire of riches,
Joshua lost Iosu. 10.
the victory. Joshua with his humble calling upon the Lord, could cause the sun
to stand still, that it went not forward, but he could not stay the
covetousness of man, but it would be creeping, say he what he would. The sun
was staide at his voice, but Achan his covetousness, would not be staid. All the
while that the sun stood still, Joshua had the upper hand of gods enemies: but
when Achan his covetousness, was in esse, then Joshua lost the victory.

It is lawful for Christian men to possess riches, but it is not 185
lawful for them, to be possessed themselves, of insatiable covetousness of the
same. Thou may have goods and riches to serve thee for necessaries, but thou
must not be a servant and drudge unto them. For even as a fly, coming to a
platter full of sweet and pleasant honey, if she thrust not her self
altogether into it, but only touch and taste it, with her mouth, and take no
more, than is necessary and needful, she may safely go away, and fly to an
other place, but if she wallow and tumble in the honey, then is she limed and
taken in it, and whiles she is not able to fly away, she does there lose her
life: Even so, if a man, of all his riches, take only so much, as may sustain
him, and honestly maintain his estate, bestowing the rest, as I have said
before, his riches then cannot hold him back, nor bar him out of the kingdom
of heaven* But if covetousness shall bewitch him, and still prick him
forewarde, to scrape together more and more, and shall make him, even
insatiable, then they take him, and hold him, and so belime the wings of his
mind, that he cannot once in all his life, have one flight toward the
kingdom of heaven. And thus being in thraldom and bondage to wicked Mammon,
the end of his pleasures in this world, is the beginning of his sorrows in the
world to come. Plutarch says, that the contempt of riches, is an instrument
of Philosophy. And Seneca affirms, that the nearest way to be truly rich,
is to despise worldly riches. If heathen Philosophers did easily epsy, the
perils, dangers, and discommodities of the love, of worldly and uncertain
riches, and the benefit of a mean and poor estate, how much more then, ought
we that be Christians, to know these things? whose captain, master, and
Savior, loved poverty, and taught the same, having his birth in a stable,
with beasts among chafe, and his death naked upon the cross. Before Christ
did appear in the flesh, poverty might have seemed very bitter, and full of
ignominy, unto men: but after that, the Emperor of heaven and earth, had
taken poverty upon himself, and also touching himself said: The foxes have
holes, and the fowls of the air have nestes, but the son of man has not
Matthew. 8. Luc. 9.
where to lay his head. Who does not now see, that Christian poverty, in the
servants of God, does well become them, and is honorable, and that it is a true
badge of Christian nobility?

IF a king should have a certain house, fast lockte, and close 186
shut up, full of gold, precious stones, and costly jewels, and would promise
all those treasures to one that should open the same: and would offer unto thee
two keys, one of pure gold, hanging at a costly string, made of silk and
golden threads, but that would not open the same lock, that thou might go
into the house: and the other of iron, rustie and ill favored to see to,
hanging at a thong of leather, or whipcorde, the which notwithstanding, would
open the door, and let thee in, that thou might choose which of these keys
thou would: were it not better, and more profitable for thee, to choose the
old rustie iron keie, then the keie of gold? Yes no doubt. The golden one
indeed is more precious, but what avails that, when it will not open the
door, and bring thee to the treasures: The iron one, is the viler, but yet it
is the better. Such a king is our God, and such an house, is that heavenly
habitation of his saints, wherein are inestimable treasures, endless ioies,
and unspeakable good things, which are woorthier, and more excellent, then man
is able to express. For so says the holy Ghost: No eye has seen, nor ear
1. Cor. 2.
heard, nor heart of man conceived, those thing which the Lord has prepared
for them that love him. All which heavenly treasures, God has promised, to
all them that shall enter into his holy hill, or house of saints. The golden
keie, which the most part of this world do choose, and trust to, that they may
enter into heaven, is worldly wealth, and abundance of riches, joined with
covetousness, which will never open the Lords house, where are kept his
celestial, and inestimable treasures. But that key does rather open a foul
and vile house of this world, which is full of all filthiness and abominations.
The iron keie, is spiritual poverty, against the which, the kingdom of
heaven is never shut, but stands ever wide open, to all them, that bring with
them that key, so says Christ himself: Blessed are the poor in spirit,
Matthew. 5.
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Let us therefore make no account of the
golden key, but let us, for Christ and his kingdom, forsake and despise the
deceitful riches of this world, which are desired, and sought for, far and
near, by sea and land, with dangers and loss, of the bodies and souls of
many thousands, as though men could bribe God for their sins, and purchase
heaven, with their worldly trifles: and let us without murmuring and grudging,
with all patience of heart and mind, bear and embrace poverty, and all those
crosses and afflictions, which unto the world seem bitter and intolerable, of
which kind very many do happen in the life of man. Let us earnestly seek after
the riches of the Lords kingdom, and everlasting life, for they be stable and
permanent: and let us not set our hearts, and affections, on this world: for it
waxes old, and rotten, it staggereth, is ruinous and ready to fall. Job
speaking of rich men, which do deli^iously pamper themselves every day, says:
They lead their days in Job. 21.
pleasures, and in the twinkling of an eye, they go down into hell. And David
says: They shall leave their riches for others, etc. Psalm. 17. P^o^er^. 11.
And Solomon says: Thy riches shall do thee no good, in the day of vengeance.
And in the book of Wisdom: What has pride Sapien. 5.
profited thee? and what good has thy bragging of riches brought unto thee?
all these things are gone away like a shadow, and as a messenger running before.

EVen as a firebrand, drawn from the fire, and lying still, 187
waxes cold, and by little and little dies, and is extinct, but being moved
and put to the fire, burns and flameth: Even so, an idle life, does by little
and little, extinguish virtue, but being well exercised, it does kindle and
increase the same. Therefore is it said in the book of Job, Man is borne to
labor. And Job. 5. Eccles 33.
Ecclesiasticus says, that idleness has taught much mischief. This moved the
Apostle to will Timothy, to watch and to labor 2. Tim. 4.
in all things. And the same Apostle says, that every one 1. Cor. 3.
shall receive his own hire or reward, according to his labor. Lawyers do
say, that inheritance is had with the burden thereof. Seeing then, that we be
Gods heirs, and the fellow heirs of Romans 8.
Christ, as the Apostle affirms: it must needs be, that we come not ^^ our
inheritance, not with idleness, but laden, with great and ^^auie burdens, of
adversities and tribulations, and with sore ^^^our, and grievous groans under
the weight of the same. Matthew. 11.
If w^ shall give our selves to ease, and shall seek after rest in this l^^^,
and so slumber in security and idleness, our enemy the devil, ^ill surely
deceive us. For whiles men slept, says the E^ist, the enemy came, and did
sow darnell upon the Matthew. 13.
wheat* Christ himself does highly condemn idleness, when he says: Why stand
ye here, all the day long, idle? And a little after, Call the workmen (says
he) to take their hire. Idle persons Matthew. 20.
are not called to take hire, but they which have labored. And they are called
from their labors, to rest, from poverty, to heavenly riches, and from their
calamities, to everlasting pleasures. Yea even when they be dead, then are they
blessed, and rest from Apoc. 14.
their labors, the spirit says so, and therefore it is most certain Tobias.
2.
and true. When Tobias slept, there fell out of a swallows nest, doong upon
his eyes, which made him blind: and w^iles we do sleep, and slumber in
slothfulnes, and idle security, without being virtuously and godly exercised,
there creep out of the nests of our hearts, most wicked and pestilent
cogitations, which do blind and numbe our understanding, and carry us into
most dangerous disobedience, and rebellion against the Lord.

MEn in these our dangerous days, are very close hearted, and 188
merciles, toward the poor afflicted members of Christ. And though they hear
their cries, and see their poor bodies, ready to die at their doors, in
streets and in prison, yet until they perceive, that there is no way, but
present death with themselves, they will impart no part of their goods and
wealth unto them. Such men are like unto beasts, which are not eaten, until
they be dead, and boiled or roasted. For until death has them in his pot, and
there boil them after his manner, the poor can have no relief at their hands:
whiles they live, they will do no charitable deeds, nor works of mercy: only
at the point of death, in their last testament, they will perhaps leave some
legacies, to be given when they be dead: but death must be sure of them, before
the poor be sure of a penny. It were better done by much, to relieve the poor
with their own hands, in their life time: it is not amiss that they do good
then, but it were better done before. It is to be wished, that man would
consider whence he has his name, ( homo) and finding that he has it of (
humus) the earth, which yields to every man, more than it receives at his
hands, and brings forth and ministers all manner of fruits, to all men with
great advantage, he would surely be afeard, and ashamed, that the earth should
condemn him, in bountifulnes and liberality. The Lord does very earnestly
condemn the covetousness, and cruelty of the Jews, toward the poor, in
Ezechiel the prophet, saying: They did not stretch out their hands Ezech. 16.
Proverb. 14.
to the poor and needy. And Solomon says: He shall be blessed, that has
pity upon the poor. And indeed, what a great blessing is it, for things of
no valor, to receive great and heavenly riches, for dead things, matters of
life, for things transitory, things eternal? and to have the Lord himself,
to be pay master, of all these things? And the same Solomon says, that he
Proverb. 19.
lays in bank unto the Lord, that has pity upon the poor: and also, He
that stops his ears, at the cry of the poor, shall cry Ibidem 2^.
himself and not be heard. And the Apostle calls covetousness, Ephesians. 5.
Colos. 3. 1. John. 4.
worshipping of idols, and affirms that the covetous man, has no inheritance
in the kingdom of God. He that loves not his brother whom he sees, how can
he love God, whom he sees not? Blessed are the merciful, says Christ, for
they shall receive Matthew. 5.
mercy. That man, that unmercifully keeps his gold, money, meat, cloth,
harbor, or other comfort whatsoever, and sees his brother or sister want, as
he has no love of God in him, so can he not by Christ be saved. What then
shall become of them, which being rich, do not only, not succor and comfort
the poor, but also dismay, discomfort, and dispoile them, of that they have?
surely such m^st needs perish. For the^ are fettered and holden in the snares
of satan, and woe woe is their reward. It is a world to see, how the houses,
walls, chambers, bedsteeds, and garments, of rich men, glitter and flourish with
gold, and infinite poor souls, that Christ suffered his death for, are ready
to perish in every place, for want of food, and necessaries. They enrich
stocks and stones, and suffer the servants of God to be deeply distressed.
Whiles they hunt after worldly wealth, they let slip the kingdom of heaven. O
miserable men, what get they, what have they, what possess they? surely
nothing of any valor, and yet they lose themselves. They have a veil before
their eyes, bird lime in their wings, and fetters about their feet, that they
cannot see the kingdom of God, they cannot moo^e one feather of a wing toward
heaven, nor set one foot before another, to go toward everlasting salvation:
yet such men are merry now, but their sorrow is not far off, nor long to come.

AS feathers do lift up, and carry on high, the fowls and 189
birds of the air: So the riches and dignities of this world, are wont to
extol and carry men, into the air and clouds of vanity.

And as hawks trusting to their wings, will fly exceeding high, as though
they would pearce the clouds themselves, for their too high flieng, are
oftentimes lost: So men depending upon the wings of prosperity, being puffed
up and swelled with pride, the higher they clime, the more mischeeuous is their
fall, and with the greater disgrace, are they hurled down headlong. These be
those feathers of vanity, which God commanded to pull out, and to cast them
into the dust. The remembrance of Leuit. 1.
death, is a place of dust, where we ought continually to reuolue in our
minds, those things which the men of this world do deem and judge, to be most
excellent, considering how they all, in the twinkling of an eye, do vanish
away, and are consumed, and we with them are turned into dust.

TRees growing in the wood, are known, some by the difference 190
of their truncks or bodies, some by the property of their boughs, branches,
leaves, flowers and fruits, but this knowledge is had of them, whiles they
stand, grow, and are not consumed: but if they be committed to the fire, and
turned into ashes* they cannot be known: for how is it possible, that, when
the ashes of diverse kinds of trees, are mingled together, the tall pine tree,
should be discerned, from the great and huge oak, or the mighty popler from a
little low shrub, or any one tree from another? Even so men, whiles they live
in the wood of this world, are known, some by the stock of auncetors, some by
the flourishing leaves of their words and eloquence, some in the flowers of
beauty, and some in the fruits of honesty, many by their savage
barbarousnes, and some by their mild lenity and kindness. But when death does
bring them into dust, and has mixed and mingled them all together; who can by
their ashes, earth and dust, discern and know them? when the ashes and dust of
all, are mingled together, what difference is there then, between the mighty
princes of the world, and the seely poor souls, that are no account made
of? into the remembrance of such dust and ashes, we ought to cast, the
beautiful and fair feathers of this world, least being puffed up with our
own conceits, and with an over well weening of our selves, we utterly lose
all temperance, and measure keeping, and plunge our selves into intolerable
errors. For it is a plain case, that where vain glory does domineere and
bear the rule, there is no place for temperance, neither can virtue be
suffered to be resident, in the kingdom of vanity.

Hawks of the best kind, whiles they live are highly esteemed, 191
and much made of, and are daintily fed, and tenderly looked unto, and are
carried upon the fists of great and mighty men: but when they be dead, they are
thrown out upon the dunghill. And on the other side, the partridge when she
lives, is troubled, afflicted, and pursued of al, every cartar and ploughman,
is ready to fall upon her, to do her violence, and to kill her: But when she
is dead, she is brought to the tables of princes, and is very honorably set
before them: So very many, that in this life, are counted very famous and
notable men, and do lead their lives, in great prosperity and worldly wealth,
and have all things at their wills and pleasures, when they remove hence, and
go out of this life, they shall be hurled upon that most foul and filthy dung
hill of hell, to be tormented in the stinch and abomination thereof for ever.
But others which in this life are encumbered, tormented, and afflicted with
diverse and sundry calamities, and even for their virtues sake, are hated of
the wicked, and contemned of the world, when they shall depart out of this
life, they shall be brought and presented before the Lord, with great honor,
and placed with the king of heaven, in everlasting glory, that is full of
honor, and full of unspeakable joys. These men the world is weary of, and
therefore does scorn, Psalm. 15.
despise and hate them, as men not worthy to live: whereas indeed, they
ought, to cherish and to honor them, because they fear the Lord. And on the
contrary side: The world is in love with men of sin, and does only honor
those, that abound with all manner of iniquity, and as it has them in great
admiration in their life time, so it makes no end of praising and extolling
them, when they be dead. These the world adorneth with all the feathers it
has, and yet in a very moment of time, they lose all: and then one hour
takes from them, all those things, honors, dignities, pleasures, and
delights, which were long a getting, with great care, and no little cost, and
then themselves are sent into endless woes, and everlasting pains. Heerehence
is that saying of Ecclesiasticus: The riches of the unjust, shall be dried
Eccles. 40.
up like water, and they shall make a noise like a great thunderclap in time of
rain. And man (says the prophet) is like a thing Psalm. 144.
of nothing, his days pass away like a shadow. Indeed man dies, and all his
pomp, vainglory and prosperity with him. And good were it for the wicked if
they might never rise up again. For as our old saying is, It were better to
lie still, then to rise up to take a fall: especially such a fall as theirs
shall be, to wit, from heaven to hell, from God to the devil, and from al
bliss and happiness, into the most bitter curse of God, and tortures of
damnation.

EVen as smoke preaseth and flies up on high, as though it 192
would cover and darken the sky: So envy and calamity do aim at those
especially, which are advanced, and placed, in high degree, so that many times,
they are cast down headlong from their dignity, very suddenly with much
ignominy and disgrace: especially when their honors, have changed and
corrupted their manners. Nabucadnezzar that mighty king, which is compared to
an eagle, as though he were peerless among men, as the eagle among birds, yet
notwithstanding, immediately after, his wealth, power, pride, and prosperity,
are compared by the prophet, to light feathers, that are blown and Ezec. 17.
carried away with every blast of wind. Seeing then, that whatsoever this
world does or can afford us, is indre subject to a change, then the Moon,
and more unconstant then the wind, let us learn to contemn the world, with
all the trifles and trash of the same, and seek for the kingddme of God, and
the righteousness thereof, for that indureth for ever.

EVen as from the sap of a tree, does proceed that strength, 193
wherewith the boughs do flourish and bring forth fruit: So from a godly
prince, such justice, virtue, and godliness, do proceed, that thereby all the
people are mightily moved, to true religion, a right worshipping of God, due
obedience, and honesty of life and conversation.

SVbmission and lowlines of mind, is as it were a vessel, 194
wherein virtues are laid up, and kept as jewels of great valor. And as Bernard
says, Humility of the heart is a receptacle of grace. And Chrysostom his
opinion is, that Humility is a great sacrifice. Gregory says, that Humble
men, when they stoop lowest, and prostrate themselves before the Lords
throne, then they rise up (says he) to the similitude and likeness of God. On
the other side, proud men whiles they vaunt and exalt themselves, they imitate
the devil, but such the Lord is wont to bring low, and to exalt the humble
and meek.

EVen as in winter, when it is exceeding cold, and in summer, 195
when too much heat inflameth all things, great thunder and lightenings are
seldom heard, and seen, as Pliny reports in his second book, but in the
spring time and harvest, when the air is clear and calm, then chiefly they
burn and strike where they light: So great calamities, and bitter troubles, do
lie in wait for prosperity: they seek not after them, which in a low and
mean estate, do labor and take pains, in heat and cold, and all storms
else, but those do they most suddenly wound, overthrow, and consume as it were
with fire, which in a calm spring time, and harvest of prosperity, are
drunken with pride, and to too insolent with vain glory of the world, and are
set upon the top of vanity it self. I suppose that in this life there is
nothing safer, nothing more profitable, nothing better, nothing fitter to
advance virtue to a due honor, and to be short, nothing that sooner brings
tranquillity, and other good things, than true humility, and a Christian
lowlines of man's mind. James the apostle does say, that God resists the
proud, James. 4.
and gives grace unto the humble. And again: Be ye humbled in the sight of
the Lord, and he will exalt you. And Peter in his first epistle canonical, Be
ye humbled, says he, under the mighty 1. Pet. 5.
hand of God, that he may exalt you in the time of visitation. And the Lord in
the mouth of Abdias the prophet, says to the proud ones of the world: If thou
shall be exalted as an eagle, and shall build thy nest among the stars, I will
pull thee down from Abdias. 1 Psalm. 37.
thence. And the Psalmist says: I saw the wicked exalted, and lifted up like
the Cedars of Libanus, and I passed by, and behold he was not: I sought him,
and he was not to be found, his place could not be seen. Indeed the proud and
vainglorious sort of the world, although they seem to be very happy men, yet
they have most miserable ends, many times, and foul falls, from the height of
their honors, dignities, and prosperities, and that which is woorst of all,
they are tumbled down into hell, with the mighty hand of Gods indignation.

EVen as in the midst of the sphere, is that center, from which 196
all lines being drawn, do tend toward their circumference: So a good
Christian man, has God for his circumference. For whatsoever he thinks,
speaks or does, it tends to Christ, of whom he is compassed round about:
for as the Psalmist says, The Lord is round about his people. And again: His
truth Psalm. 125.
shall compass thee round about, thou shall not be afraid for any Psalm. 91.
Psalm. 32.
terror by night: also, Mercy shall compass him about, that puts his trust
in the Lord. Indeed our good savior Christ, is that divine circumference,
which compasses round about his servants, and is at every hand, near unto his
dear children. He is that same celestial tree, that covers and compasses
about, with the shadow thereof, all those that fly to him for succor: yea all
the poor birds of God, shall safely build their nests under the shadow of his
boughs. He that dwells (says the prophet) in the help of the almighty,
shall rest in the protection of the God of heaven. Indeed to be under the
Lords protection, and in his favor, is to be in all safety, against all power
of men and devils, and to be from under the wings of his grace, is to lie open
to all dangers, and to death and destruction it self, of our souls and
bodies. The Lord therefore keep us so near unto himself, in due obedience to
his will and word, that he may vouchsafe, to be our shield and buckler, against
all the assaults of satan.

EVen as lightenings do smite, whatsoever they find in the 197
earth, except the laurel tree, as Pliny affirms, in his second book,
chapter 55: So, great calamity, is able to take away, and to overthrow,
whatsoever is in man, or that he has, save only firm and constant virtue:
for constant virtue is a goodly laurel tree, ever flourishing and green, and
will not be consumed, burnt up, nor destroyed, with any fire, that breaks out
of the clouds, be it never so fierce, nor with any violence of torments and
troubles whatsoever. To this virtue does the apostle exhort us, saying: My
dear brethren, ^e ye constant and 1. Cor. 15.
immovable, always rich in the work of the Lord: and indeed, they that are
grounded in the love of Christ, and leave nothing undone, to avoid the
dishonoring of God, and the offending of their brethren, and do their best
endeavor, to honor and obey the almighty, and to edify his seruant^, do not
only not fear the firebrands of any sorrow whatsoever, but also do even
despise, all the fiery flashings and thunderclaps of the world, and do remain
constant, and unchangeable in the service of God, even to the loss of their
lives if need be. Infidels that knew not Christ, but were mere strangers unto
him, thought it better to lose their lives, than to violate their promises and
oaths made to their enemies: Much more then ought Christians, in such cases to
be constant. The Lord himself in the mouth of Ezechiel the prophet, affirms,
that he shall never thrive nor prosper, that makes Ezech. 17.
no conscience of violating and breaking his oath, wherewith he has bound
himself, though it be to his deadly enemy. And Joshua having promised upon his
oath, that the Gabaonites should Joshua. 9.
live in the country untouched, afterward when their great deceit was
discovered, and they found most unworthy to live, yet for his oath sake he
spared their lives. We have sworn unto them (says he) in the name of the God
of Israel, and therefore we cannot touch them. We learn by this to beware how
we bind our selves by oaths, but if we have once done it, we must not regard,
to whom, but by whom, we have sworn and bound our selves.

EVen as the lambs, with the which the sheep were conceived, 198
as they beheld Jacobs rod, were of the same color, that Genes. 30.
the rod was of: So, such as the religion, and actions, of princes, peers of
realms, and countries, ministers, parents and gouerners be, such for the most
part, is the religion, and such be the actions of subjects, and inferior
persons. For as examples are very dangerous in evil things, so be they of
great force and virtue, in good and holy things. When princes will have,
godly, virtuous, loyal, and obedient subjects, they must deal with them, as
Jacob did with his sheep, they must lay before them, the rod of true religion,
justice, holiness, righteousness, and integrity of life and manners, and then no
doubt, they will conceive in their hearts, thoughts that be pure, righteous,
chaste, sound and holy, and bring forth great plenty of fruits, of the same
color that the rod is of: to wit, not words only, but works also of ^aith and
obedience to God and man. Parents with their natural children, ministers of the
word, with their spiritual children, and masters with their servants, must do
the like.

AS most pleasant perfumes, do even then, when they be in 199
the fire, give out a most excellent odor, and their sweetest savor: Even so,
a virtuous and godly man, when he is thrust into the midst of the hot
scorching fire of calamity and misery, does then show most his virtue, faith,
religion, patience and constancy.

THere be some men, which now and then, do bestow great 200
cost, and much of their riches, upon those that need them not, not drawn
thereunto with either love or mercy, but carried with vain glory and with
vanity it self, so to do. Such men are like fluds which send their waters into
the sea, and leave the dry land, which is very thirsty, vnwatred. But such men
(by the commandment and will of God) should help the poor, feed the
hungry, cloth the naked, harbor the harborlesse, visit and redeem captives,
etc. For that is the mercy, whereto the Lords blessing and mercy belongs,
according to that he says: Blessed Matthew. 5.
are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. It is a world to see and
consider, that man dare be so bold, and so shameless, to make but a tush, or a
thing of nothing, of the Lords commandment, when in the mouth of his prophets,
he says: Break thy Esaias. 58.
bread unto the hungry: And, Give thy bread to the hungry Ezech. 10.
soul, and cover the naked with thy garment, if thou will live and be saved.
How think thou (O man) that God will hear thee, seeing thou think him,
not worthy the hearing? With what heart, can thou beg a kingdom of him, to
whom thou deniest a piece of bread, when he sends thine, and his own brother
for it? do thou think, that he will bestow upon thee, an immortal garment
of eternal glory, seeing thou refusest to give to his poor naked servant,
that is ready to perish, and to die with cold, one of thy superfluous, and old
moth eaten garments? The vain men of the world, which do lavish out their
riches and substance, upon needless things, and mere vanities, without
regarding the needy saints of God, will never be able to answer their doings,
before the judgment seat of Christ. Will the Lord of heaven and earth take
this in good part, that hawks and dogs, are kept and fed, fat and fair, and
his seely souls that he died for, have neither coats nor flesh upon their
backs? or does this please him, that walls, and stones, be most curiously and
costly adorned and covered, and men want to eat, and wherewith to cover their
nakedness? How sweet a sacrifice were it to God, and how highly would it please
him, if many rich and costly suits of apparel, that men and women have more
then they need, and many golden chains, care rings and other costly jewels,
which serve more for pride, then for profit, were willingly and even in love to
God, translated by the owners of them, into alms for the poor, and into
relief for poor distressed men, women and children, some in prison, some
wandering here and there, destitute of all necessaries, friends and comfort?
The last day of all days, I mean the general judgment day, will be a very
gloumie and black sessions day, for those men, which do now keep close and
fast locked up in their chests and cofers, their thousands and hundreds of gold
and silver, and are so covetous, that if they could do it, all things that they
look upon, should be turned into gold, they are so insatiable, and yet suffer
their poor brethren to live in great want and misery. Oh insatiable
covetousness, oh ungodly greedines, oh lamentable madness. If such men should
see but one quarter of an hour, the torments that Dives indureth, and shall
for ever in hell, they would surely be afeard, though they would not repent,
and give over their covetous and unmerciful dealings, with the servants of
God. But alas, they are like to feel them for ever, though here they cannot
see them, unless the Lord give them true and speedy repentance, which I
beseech him, (if it may stand with his glory) vouchsafe to do.

EVen as corn laid up and kept, in a barn, garner or other 201
place, does not increase, yea many times is eaten, and consumed of weuels, and
other vermin, but being cast into the ground, does bring forth plentiful
fruit, and great increase, and is very profitable for the owner: So riches, as
gold, money, and other jewels, laid up in chestes and kept in coffers, are
oftentimes in danger of losing by thieves, that may break through, and steal
them, or by fire that may consume them: but being dispersed and scattered among
the poor and needy saints of God, they bring forth fruit an hundredth fold,
and are very profitable both to the giver and to the receiver, discharging a
good conscience in the one, and comforting the distressed body and mind of
the other.

AS pits and lakes of spring water, being stopped and polluted 202
with mire, mud, or other foul and filthy matter, if they be scoured and
drawn out, will flow with water, that is pleasant, sweet, and wholesome, but
suffered and let alone, are corrupted, and do stincke: So, riches and worldly
substance if they be distributed unto the poor, and translated from them that
have too much, to those that are needy, and have nothing, they do greatly
increase, and multiply: for a very little is great riches to him, that has
nothing, and to him that did bestow them, they are instruments, and means of
Gods blessing, but being coffered and lying still, so that the poor needy
creatures are not relieved with them, they are very unprofitable, and will
breed the stinch of hell, and endless woe, to those that so do keep them. The
kingly prophet speaking from God, says: Blessed is Psalm. 41.
the man, that considers the poor and needy, the Lord will deliver him in
the evil day, or in the day of trouble. He calls mercy, the direct way to
bliss, when it is an effect, of a lively faith, that man has in the Lord
Jesus: And he calls that time, that brings with it, bitterness, calamity,
and tribulation, the evil day, or day of trouble, wherein the Lord does never
forsake nor fail his servants, that put their trust in him, and are merciful
to others. And the same prophet says: He has dispersed Psalm. 112.
his goods, and given to the poor, his righteousness indureth Psalm. 112.
for ever.

EVen as men's hands were made, that the one might help 203
the other, and the feet also, because they be members of one and the same
body: So is it the duty of all christians, one to succor and to relieve
another, in afflictions and troubles, seeing the church of God, is a certain
body, whereof we are members, 1. Cor. 12. Ephesians. 5.
as the apostle says. And as it should be against nature, that one foot
should hinder, or smite another: So is it against reason, that one man does
hurt another, yea, it is very unreasonable, and ungodly, that one christian
does not comfort and relieve another, in their tribulations and wants. Bear
ye one another Gala^. 6.
burden says the apostle, and so fulfill the law of Christ.

TAking of usury in sundry places of the scripture, is forbidden, 204
upon pain of Gods eternal displeasure. And that Ezech. 18. Psalm. 15. Deuteronomy.
23. and 24.
does help usurers no whit, which is written in Deuteronomie, where Moses
grants liberty to the people, to take usury of strangers. For that is to be
understood permissiuely, because of the imperfection of the people, and to
avoid a greater inconvenience at that time, better known to Moses, then
understood of us. As that was of putting away men's wives: For Matthew. 19. Deuteronomy.
24.
when the Jews demanded of Christ, wherefore Moses commanded to give a bill
of diuorcement and to put away their wives: Christ answered, Moses for the
hardness of your hearts, did suffer you so to do. The same may be said of his
permitting usury in that place. And howsoever they, that do borrow, to pay
usury, think themselves pleasured for a time, at the length they find and
feel that it breeds their smart and woe. For, even as a man that is stoong
with a snake, seems (as some writers do report) to be stricken with a feeling
of some pleasure, and so falls to sleep, and rests very sweetly therein,
until he must now give his last gasp, and so depart. Because the poison which
laid lurcking in him, whiles he slept, did run through all the parts and
members of him, and so poisoned him to death: So he that takes money to pay
usury, is delighted with the money some short time, but in the end, the usury
turns him, and all that he has, into most wretched and miserable debt. So,
that whereas he was a free man before, he is now in bondage, and drowned in
other men's debts. And so both the man and goods are poisoned and consumed. It
is therefore the commandment of Christ, that christian men Luc. 6.
should lend one to another, without looking or hoping for any thing more then
the principal which they lend. Ambrose says Ambros.
in his book, De bono mortis, in the 14. question of the 4. Chapter, that if
any man take usury, he commits theft, alluding to the words of Ezechiell in
the 18. chapter, and says, That the usurer shall die and not live. And
Chrysostom says, that there is nothing Chrysostom.
filthier, nothing crueller, then usurers, and that they do make merchandise of
other men's miseries, and their own gain, of other men's losses. The usurer is
like to that man, which under the color of love and friendship, will take his
neighbor by the hand, and lift him up, to the end he may give him a greater
fall.

IT is the will and pleasure of God, that the life of every christian 205
teacher, be correspondent unto his doctrine, and that the life and manners of
all men, be answerable to their profession. Therefore the Lord himself does
say, that whosoever will be Ezech. 18. Psalm. 15.
saved, must do the thing that is right. For he that instructs others with
wholesome doctrine, and does so stain, and blemish himself, with vile and
naughty v^^es, that his life and doctrine be opposite and clean contrary the
one to the other, so that it is seen and perceived of all, that there is no
agreement between them: he is like unto a sieue or a boulter, wherewith meal
is sifted or boulted, which sends forth the finest flower, and best of the
wheat, and keeps the bran and woorst to it self. The Lord coupleth
together, in the priests of the old law, Doctrine and Exodus 28.
Truth: regarding both their teaching and living. He is a true and trusty
teacher, which does himself, that same that he teaches. The disciples of the
Pharysies could epsy so much, though they loved it not, when they said to
Christ: We know that thou Matthew. 22.
art true, and that thou teach the way of God truly. They confess though
with a wicked purpose, that he did not only teach, but also live after the
truth. Wherein all christians ought to imitate Christ.

WHen in man's body, the heart does not impart unto the 206
members, the vital spirits, but the arteries are stopped and shut up, and the
blood forsakes the veins, it is a sign of death: That man is either already
dead, or else he will die shortly: Even so, when kings and princes of the
earth, are tyrannical toward their loyal subjects, withdrawing from them
pity, mercy, love and liberality, it threatens and does prognosticate the
ruin of their kingdoms. But through the mercy, clemency and love of princes,
their kingdoms do mightily flourish, and the princes themselves, do enjoy great
tranquillity, security, and peace. God put thankfulness into the hearts of all
the true and faithful subjects of England, and else where within her Majesty's
dominions, for our most gracious and dread sovereign, Queen Elizabeth, for
certainly that saying of Solomon in his Proverbs, was never more truly
verified, in any king or Queen, since the foundation of England, then it has
been in her highness: Mercy and truth do keep the king, and with clemency the
kings throne is strengthened and established. So, all the world must be feign
to say: Mercy and truth, do Prou. 20.
keep good Queen Elizabeth, and clemency does strengthen her throne. Her
highness does that same, that Artaxerxes speaks of himself, in the book of
Ester: When (says he) I did rule and govern many nations, and had brought the
whole world under Ester. 13.
my dominion, I would not abuse the greatness of my power, but would govern my
subjects with clemency and lenity. All the world must needs confess the
same of her Majesty, toward all her subjects: Her seat has always been
environed and compassed about with mercy, which (as Hieronimus says) does lift
man up to Godward: All the world is not able to lay to her highness charge, so
much as one dram of cruelty, which (as the same author affirms) does cast
man down to hell ward. Even as among the pretty sweet Bees, that Be only,
which leads and rules all the rest, either has no sting, or at the least
does not use it: So clemency and mercy agrees with none more in all the world,
then with a prince. God give grace to all her Majesty's subjects, so loyally,
lovingly, obediently, and faithfully, to bear and behave themselves, that the
mighty God of Israel, may affoorde us, her Majesty's life, happy reign, and
cheerful countenance, many years, Amen. For in the cheerefulnes of Prou. 16.
her countenuance is life.

INgratitude is a thing, that the Lord could never abide. It is 207
a scorching wind, that dries up the fountains of piety, and the streams of
grace. Whereas every thing, that is weighty and heavy, tends and preaseth
downward, yet notwithstanding, the clouds that are full of water, and swelled
with moisture, do ascend upward, because the sun takes them from the earth,
and with his force draws them up on high. Which being lifted up in the air,
are gathered together and thickened, and so do cover and hide the brightness of
the sun, by whose help and attraction, they were taken and carried up: but
notwithstanding their malice, they being dispersed and scattered abroad, the
sun, that conqueror, and ouercommer of darkness, thrusts through his beams,
breaks the clouds, and gives light with his shine: Even so the Israelites,
when they lay in Egypt a long time, in obscurity, thraldom, bondage, and
slavery, to Pharao and his people, and were even nailed as it were, to the
earth of all contempt and cruelty, were then taken up, and set in great and
high dignity, by the sun of righteousness, but afterward they went about, to
obscure and extinguish the brightness and light of God himself, by whose
benefit, they had gotten that honor and dignity, which they had, and without
whom they were nothing but bond slaves of misery and wretchedness: but seeing
they were like foul black clouds, they were dispersed, scattered, and
vanished away: And the glory of Christ, against their wills, and in spite of
them, together with the brightness of his name, did break out, and shine abroad,
and give light throughout all the world. I would to God, that this ingratitude
and unthankfulness, had never a corner in England, nor in any English heart: it
has pleased the almighty, by his faithful servant, Elizabeth, by his own
grace, Queen of England, to deliver our country from no less bondage,
thraldom and servitude, than he did the Israelites by Moses and Aaron: and yet
we find to too many, that have been bred in England, and owe their lives to
her highness, to murmr no less against her happiness, than the Israelites did
against the lords servants Moses and Aaron. The servitude and slavery of the
Israelites, was not greater, nor worse under Pharao that tyrant in Egypt, than
the bondage of England was under the Pope, neither ought we to be less
thankful, for our delivery from the slavery of Rome, than they should have
been, if they had well remembered themselves, from the slavery of Egypt. We
read in the book of Wisdom, that the hope of the Sapien. 16.
unthankful man, shall waste and consume like winters ice, etc. And the David
the prophet says: O my soul praise the Psalm. 121.
Lord, and forget not all his benefits. The Lord grant, that we never forget
any of the Lords benefits, and that we may ever be thankful to his divine
majesty, for the great benefit that he has bestowed upon England, in his most
faithful servant, Elizabeth by his own providence and appointment, our most
gracious Queen and sovereign, whose life, health, and happiness, O Lord
continue long.

Amen, Amen, Amen.
EVen as a moth or worm, does not breed in the Cedar, being 208
a goodly and odoriferous tree, always fresh and flourishing, the wood whereof
does not rot: So, envy is not bred in the heart of a wise and virtuous man, but
in the mind of a man, that is wicked and ungodly, and is grieved and
tormented, at the happiness and welfare of other men, and repining, is sadder
than they that went down into Trophonius his den, and in envy passes Zoilus,
envying those especially, that in any gift or quality, are before him. Just
men, and they that be well guarded with virtues on every side, and are of a noble
and excellent courage, can overcome and subdue their enemies, but their envy
they can never overcome, for it will not be tamed nor subdued. It is a fire,
that consumes the hearts of them, whom it possesses, with a continual
burning. Solomon his counsel is, that thou eat not with an envious man, nor
desire his meat. And the Apostle wills Proverb. 23. Galat. 5.
the Galathians, that they be not desirous of vain glory, provoking one
another, and envying one another. Hieronymus in an epistle to Demetriades
says: What pleasure (I pray thee) does envy to that man, whom fretting and
wrath does tear, and rend in pieces, in the secret corners of his conscience,
and makes the felicity of other men, his own torment? A wicked man takes
pleasure in his own wickedness, but the envious man, is tortured with the good
of others. Quintus Curtius in his eight book, De gestis Alexandri, reports,
that Alexander was wont to say, that envious men are nothing else, but
torments and tormentors of their own selves. Chrysostom calls envy an
unquenchable fire. And Isidore says, that it does devour all good things in
man, with a most pestilent burning heat. And in my opinion, it is a very image
of hell, that tormenteth without profit or pleasure.

A Father which gives unto his son, whom he loves deerly, 2^0
a breast plate or stomacher, very costly and curiouslye wrought, of silk,
silver, or gold, to wear under some other garment, does suffer his uppermost
garment, as doublet or cote, to be pinkt and cut in diverse places, that the
under costly work, may outwardly appear, and be seen of all: Even so our
heavenly father, a God of compassion and mercy, yea the God of all comfort,
does sometimes suffer, that man whom he most dearly loves, to be wounded of
the wicked, and to be smitten with calamities and miseries, to the end, that
the precious and golden breast plate of patience, wherewith the Lord has
inwardly endued him, should outwardly appear, and be seen of all. Heerehence
is that which the Apostle says to the Hebrews: Whom the Heb. 12.
Lord loves, him he does chasten, and he scourges every son, whom he
receives. And in the Revelation, the Lord in the person of John, says: Whom I
love, those do I reprove and chasten. Apoc. 3.
And in the mouth of Matthew he says: Blessed are they Matthew. 5.
which suffer persecution, for righteousness sake. True it is, that patience is
an heavenly gift, and a very blessed thing, for as the Apostle says, it
works a trial in man, and that trial works Romans 5.
an hope, and that hope does never confound, nor shame him that has it. And
the same Apostle wills the Colossians, as the elect Colos. 3.
of God, to put on patience: as if he should say, there is no vesture nor
virtue whatsoever, does better beseem the servants of God, than patience under
crosses, and in the midst of a thousand afflictions. And therefore the holy
Ghost does advertise us, to run with patience unto the battle or fight, that
is set before us, and Heb. 12.
ever to look upon the author and finisher of our faith, even Jesus, who
having unspeakable joy set before him, did undergo and endure the cross, not
regarding, but even despising the confusion and shame thereof. It behooves us,
when we are beset on every side, with afflictions and troubles, to fly unto
God, and to beseech him, that with his aid and help, as with the clear
shine, of his most bright sun, he will scatter abroad, the clouds and
darkness, of our calamities and great miseries, least that, if they increase and
multiply, we fall into despair, and so slumber in sin, and sleep in death,
that the enemy of our souls and salvation may say, I have prevailed against
them. For if we will embrace Psalm. 13.
the Lord, with all our hearts, we shall no doubt be, in most sure and certain
safegarde. And although the wicked and ungodly sort, which are more barbarous
and savage, than brute beasts, shall afflict the saints and servants of God,
and bear and behave themselves insolently, and shall abuse their power and
authority, to the hurt and harm, of such as fear the Lord in singlenes of
heart, and are ready with all patience, to bear whatsoever cross shall be
laid upon them: yet at the length, the Lords elect shall prevail, one way or
other, to their great comfort, and shall be advanced to eternal life, and
glory that never shall have end. For as the prophet says: The patient abiding
of the poor, Psalm. 10.
shall not always be forgotten: for although for a time, God suffers his
servants, to be strangely afflicted, that virtue in them, may grow to some
perfection, yet not the less, in his due time, he does deliver them, out of
all the tempests, and storms of the world, and does make them partakers of his
kingdom in glory everlasting. We are wont to call those men martyrs, which
suffer death by fire or sword, for Christ's sake, and indeed so they be: but
that man also, in my opinion, may rightly be called a martyr, which keeps
truly in his heart and mind, an unfeigned patience, without grudging or repining
at any troubles whatsoever, thinking himself happy, that he is thought
worthy, to bear some cross or other, after his Lord and savior Christ:
such a man, no doubt, is a martyr even living, though he lose not his life, by
fire nor sword.

EVen as those sheep, which in the presence of their shepherds, 210
do vomit, and cast out again, the grass which they have eaten, do not
profitably show, how much and how well they have fed: but those rather, which
do inwardly digest and concoct their meat, and do give abundance of milk, and
do bear the softiest, weightiest, and finest wool, and do show themselves to
be fat, fair, and well liking: For by those things they show and plainly
prove, that their pasture is exceeding good: Even so, not those pastors,
ministers, and preachers of the word, which do deliver words, and stuff their
sermons with eloquence and brave phrases, do fruitfully and thoroughly declare
unto the people, that virtues pasture is excellent, good, and wholesome, and to
be desired of all, but they rather, which do inwardly concoct virtue, and do
observe it, and bending themselves to the actions and performance thereof, do
flow, with the sweet milk of mercy, and do cloth themselves and others with
the fine fleeces of christian love and charity, such I say, do evidently
declare, how much they have profited in the doctrine of Christ, and how much
also others ought to profit in the same, and do stir up the hearts and minds of
their hearers, to virtue and godliness, both with their doctrine and living.
Words of doctrine are very profitable, but when they are seen to work,
holiness and righteousness in the teacher, they then prevail the better with
them that are taught. Paul therefore exhorts Timothy, to join with his
preaching, the work of an Evangelist: And also wills Titus, to show himself
2. Timoth. 4. Titus 2.
an example of good works. Our savior himself says: He that shall do these
things, and teach men so, he shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.

AS the lighter balance, or end of the beam, will prease 211
upward, and ever be highest: So, the vayner, more unprofitable and vniuster,
that a man is, the more will he vaunt, and extol himself: And being a very
impious, ungodly, and most wicked man, will arrogantly assume unto himself
righteousness, and most impudently challenge the name of a good and honest man,
when indeed he sets more by one penie of money, then by ten pounds worth of
honesty, and does love more ten pounds of money, then he does the health,
wealth, credit, liberty, life, yea and more then the soul of his neighbor,
and christian brother. But on the other side, even as the fuller and heavier
scale, is ever lowest: So the more virtuous, honest, and godly, that any man
is, the more will he submit and humble himself, and howsoever other men, will
seem to praise him, he nevertheless does still acknowledge his own
imperfection. And indeed it is in a christian man, some perfection, to know,
and to acknowledge his want and imperfection. For when he humbles himself
most, then does God especially exalt him. And when he throws down himself,
as unworthy to be numbered among the servants and saints of God, then does the
Lord set down and register his name in the book of life, so that it shall
never be rased, nor blotted out, but shall stand and remain there for ever,
according to that which the holy prophet says: The just man Psalm. 112.
shall be in an everlasting remembrance, for the Lord is ever exalting the
humble and meek, and bringing down the proud and insolent.

Brass is a mettle of red color, and has a certain likeness of 212
gold, but is indeed brass, and not gold: Whereunto I rightly compare
hypocrites, which under the shape and color of religion and holiness, do cover
a Chaos, and confused heap of all wickedness and abomination. Such men when
they seem best, are then woorst: For of all improbitie, there is none more
pernicious, then that of theirs, which when they are most bent to deceive, they
handle the matter so, that they may seem to be honest, virtuous and godly men.
As for example: If thou meetest with a thief, and talkest with him of honesty,
he will say as thou say, but shortly after, he will rob thee, bind thee
hand and foot, and perhaps kill thee. And if necessity constrain thee, to
borrow money of the covetous cormorant, and miserable usurer, thou shall hear
come out of his mouth, words as smooth as oil, wherewith he will so insinuate
himself, and creep into thy secrets, that thou would think him to be a
very saint, and a man of God: But when he has sounded thee to the depth, and
perceives that thou have an house, a lease, good furniture, some land, plate,
or other commodity, then he will tell thee, that he would feign do thee good,
and help thee, but the world is dangerous, and that a bird in his hand is
better then two in the wood, and his money is his plough, and that he must live
upon it, as the husbandman lives upon his plough. And by these means will he
draw from thee an offer, of thy house, lease, land, plate, horse, cow, or the
bed thou lie upon: And on any of these things, he will lend thee, about the
fourth or fifth part of their valor. But there was never thief, nor traitor,
more surely bound, to be executed, and to lose his life, then he will make
sure work, and bind thee to thy own consumption and utter undoing, in body,
goods, and name. Indeed his money is his plough, and the usurer himself, is
the horse that does draw it, and tyrannical covetousness does hold it, and
the devil himself does drive it, and thou poor borrower art the land they
plow upon, and amongst them, they make long and deep furrows, of extreme
poverty, and misery to thee, and of their own everlasting destruction. For
the driuer will never give over, till he drive the plough, horse, and holder,
all into hell. And yet some body will say, that the usurer is an honest man,
and does help many. His honesty is like a very bitter and pinching black
frost, to tender, sweet, pleasant and beautiful blossoms: The frost does
kill and destroy the blossoms, and the usurer does kill men, women, and
children. And the help, that the poor borrower, has at his hand: is like
that succor, that a poor sheep has under a thorn bush, in some storm or
tempest: the seely sheep is sheltred there, and kept from the smart of the
tempest a little while, but when she departs from the bush, it keeps back
a piece of her fleece, and the oftener she goes, the barer and nakeder she is:
So that at the length, she is able neither to abide bush nor storm. Such a
bu^h of thorns is the usurer, to the poor borrower, he will leave him at the
length, no fleece on his back: he will leave him no house over his head,
unless it be some prison house to die in, no bed to rest upon, no flesh on his
bones, no credit in the world. I cannot find in my heart to eat and drink
with an usurer at his own table, if I know him, because his meat and drink
seems to me, to be the very flesh and blood, of poor honest men, their
wives, and children. Yet this thing I note in that bush, that pincheth, and
pilleth the poor sheep, that it never thriueth nor proves good timber, but
serves only for the fire: So the usurer serves for nothing but hell, and
howsoever he thriueth here, he shall be surely pinched there. It were well
(in my opinion) if usurers were censured now in our days, as they were in
times past: in those days they were never called to any office, in the church,
nor common wealth: For what right, justice, or equity, could be looked for at
their hands, which were most unnatural, and cruel oppressors of their
brethren? The poor would take no relief at their hands, because they knew
the curse of God, did follow them, and that they had: neither durst they eat
the flesh, and drink the blood of their poor brethren, whose marrow the
usurer had picked out of their bones. Again, they were never admitted to
receive the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ Jesus, for what society
or fellowship could be between light and darkness, Christ and Beliall, God, and
the devil? And when they were dead, they were not buried like christian men,
but thrown out like dead dogs, and rotten carrions, and if they did cover
them, it was in diches and filthy places, least the stinch of them, should
infect and poison the air, and they should kill men even being dead, as they
used to do when they lived, if they were censured now a days, as they were
then, we should have fewer usurers, and m^ rich men. And yet these men are
called of some, the golden ones of the world. Indeed they have golden purses,
but brazen faces, they have soft words, but bloody minds, and hearts harder
then the adamant. These are the caterpillars, not of Egypt, but of England,
that discomfort not Pharao, that tyrant and enemy of God, but the Lords
servants and dear children. These fly not abroad, at the commandment of God,
to plague his enemies, but at the pleasure of the devil, to annoy Gods
friends. These are not contented to eat up and to destroy corn, grass,
blossoms, leaves, and all fruit besides, neither will the flesh of beasts, and
fowls, and birds of all sorts, serve them to eat, but they must and will eat,
man's flesh whiles he is alive. For, to consume a man in goods and credit, with
usury, what is it else, but to eat his flesh, and to drink his blood? and
with sorrow to prick and wound his heart, what is it but to kill him? Of all
the murderers in this world (except those, which with false, heretical, and
devilish doctrine, do murder souls) there is none more cruel, merciless,
nor more bloody, than the usurer. For he is not satisfied, with the blood of
men and women, but he will have the blood of young children, and infants also.
For he that cutteth down a tree by the roots, does he not withal cut down,
the boughs, twigs, and branches? and he that consumes, utterly vndooeth, and
with sorrow dries up the marow in the bones of parents, to the shortening of
their days, does he not even destroy their poor sweet infants also? Praise
and commend them, who will, they are barred, and shut out of Psalm. ^5. Ezech.
18. Job. 20.
heaven. They are those ungodly ones, spoken of by Job, whose praise is short,
and quickly ended. The caterpillars of Egypt, were surely tethered, and harmed
no place where themselves were not: but these caterpillars, will sit at home in
their chaires, like a boar that is a franking in his stie, and will consume a
man, one, two, or three hundred miles from them. These caterpillars by their
brokers, do fly over, and view, all the lands, lordships, manors, parks,
woods, groves, fields, meadows, pastures, and whatsoever, farms, leases, or
other commodities, of the noble men, lords, knights, esquiers, gentlemen,
yeomen, and husbandmen of England, and here they gobble up a whole town, and
there a goodly park: here a lordship or manor, and there a most pleasant
wood. The Lord keep all men out of their hands, for where they light and pitch
their tents, they waste, consume, and make havoc of all: and do call the
places after their own names, as though they had never belonged to the ancient
and right owners of them. The God of mercy take from them, covetousness of the
vain and transitory things of this world, and work in them (if it be his
will) a coveting and most earnest desire, of the salvation of their own
souls, and an unfeigned love to their brethren in Christ Jesus.

Amen, Amen, Amen.
EVen as that man, which with a painted ox, does foul for 213
partridges, is not an ox, but under the shape and likeness, of that simple
creature, lies in wait for the pretty fine birds, that he may take them, and
kill them: So, he that with a counterfeited, and fained holiness, will color
and cover impiety, wicked purposes, or whatsoever is against the word, and
will of God, is not a just man, but under the color and shape of godliness and
honesty, seeking the praise and glory of the world, he casts in his head,
and works by degrees, the ruin, decay, and undoing of his neighbors, that he
may compass their goods, lands and possessions, and gain some honor, and
dignity among men. Such men have a show of godliness (as the apostle says) but
they deny 2. Tim. 3.
the power thereof. And although some hypocrites will now and then, seem to
forsake their riches, and lend some to their neighbors, and bestow some upon
the poor, yet still the mark they level and shoot at, is to augment and to
increase them more and more. For even as the swiftest of all hawks, going
about to sease upon and to take, the bird that flies as it were in the top of
the air, does not by and by, when she first sees her, fly directly toward
her, but rather at the first, with fetching of a compass, does seem to forsake
and to despise her, and to draw and to fly from her: but at the second or
third flight, she goes toward her, with a woonderful ^orce and incredible
swiftnes,, to take her in the air, and to rend her in pieces: Right so do
hypocrites he have themselves: for at the first, to see to, they will seem to
thee, not to regard, but to contemn the riches, and promotions of the world,
but then they coin and counterfeit a simplicity, fouling for a greater matter
than yet they see present, and reaching at some higher advancement, and
greater dignity, than that present time and occasion does offer: but at the
second or third flight, when every thing does answer their expectation, thou
shall perceive that with all speed and greedines, they will lay hold upon
those things, which thou thoughtest they had contemned. They do not wish or
desire any thing more, neither can any thing more highly please them, than the
very selfsame things, which they once made the world believe, they detested,
and could not abide them. These are double hearted men, they have wicked lips,
and hands that work iniquity, they be those sinners that go two Eccles. 2.
manner of ways, and everlasting woe is their reward.

The hypocrite goes two manner of ways, when he lays one thing up close in
his heart, and shows another in his actions, speaks one thing, and does
another. Touching such men and matter, it is commanded in Deuteronomie, that a
man should not wear a garment, made of wool and flax, commonly Deuter. 22.
called linsie wolsie, as if it should be said, that kind of vesture, does
cover the subtletie of malice and mischief, signified by the flax, and does
outwardly show, the simplicity of honesty and innocence, signified by the
wool. Such an hypocrite was Herod, when he pretended a great devotion toward
Christ, and that Matthew. 2.
he would worship him, and all the while was whetting his sword, intending his
death, if he could catch him. Such were the inhabitants of Jerusalem in the
time of Sedechias, they boasted greatly of the law, but they would in no wise
observe it. True virtue among Christians, is that a man lead a life, equal
and like unto his words, and as the apostle James says, so to say, and so to
do. All hypocrites, whatsoever they would seem, do so far differ from true
christianity, as the froth or foam of gold does differ from gold it self.

EVen as an archer does shoot nearer, and sooner hit a fair 214
great mark, than a little one: So the devil does easily hit with his
arrows* and strike with his darts, the vain glorious, and proud men of the
world, but the humble and lowly he misseth, with all the sleights and cunning
he has. Every proud man, that seeks after vain glory, is but unwise and
foolish, for the devil has puffed him up, and made him a great mark, whereat
himself may shoot, and the which he may the more easily hit, and strike with
his poisoned darts of death. Such a man does Solomon mean, when he says: The
fool does not Proverb. 7.
know, that he hailed to bands, until he be wounded unto death. True praise
does consist in virtue, which has deep roots, and spreads far abroad: all
vain things do quickly fall away, neither can any vain thing be perpetual.
The Ammonites and Ezech. 25.
Moabites were highly praised and extolled, in the mouths of all men, but they
fell so far from that praise, that the remembrance of them was clean put out.
I saw the ungodly man (says the prophet) exalted and lifted up like the
Cedars of Libanus, and I Psalm. 3^.
passed by, and lo he was gone, I sought him, and his place was no where to be
found. And Solomon says: The name of the ungodly Proverb. 10.
shall consume and waste away. Wicked men, which do feed and frank
themselves, with mischief and malice, although for a time, they seem to
prosper greatly, and to be highly esteemed among men, yet notwithstanding their
flourishing estate does not continue long. The day we see does often come, that
they which this day do praise, to morrow will either dispraise, or say nothing,
but especially this we know, by daily experience, that they which through
hypocrisy, without any virtue or just desert, have stolen their praise and
commendations, by deceiving of men's hearts, they either lose the same in this
life, before they die, or even presently after, when they are cast headlong
into all manner of miseries. Christians therefore must not trust, to the false
and deceitful glory of the world, because as Esaias says: All flesh is
grass, and all the glory of it, is as the flower of the field. Esaias. 40.
Eccles. 14.
And Ecclesiasticus says, All flesh does wither away like grass. The prophet
David being disposed, to speak of a wicked and ungodly man, that is mighty
and famous in the world, he says: When he dies, he takes not all, neither
does his glory or Psalm. 49.
pomp go with him. When he says, he takes not all, it is an Hebrew phrase,
and is all one, as if he should say, he takes nothing with him. And therefore
says the Lord by Esaias, the glory of Moab: and the glory of the Cedar shall
be taken away. And Esaias. 16. Esaias. 21.
Oseas the prophet says, that the glory of the wicked Jews shall be turned
into ignominy. It does therefore behooue all Christians, to seek the glory
of God, and as the Apostle does admonish us, to do all things to the glory and
praise of him, that when we 1. Cor. 10.
shall go hence, we may have eternal glory with God, through Christ Jesus our
Lord and savior. For the glory of this world is very transitory and
uncertain, it is buried with men's bodies when they be dead, and posterities do
forget it, and blot it out of all remembrance. The counsel of Chrysostom is
exceeding good: despising the glory of the world, says he, thou shall he more
glorious, than they that seek it.

CHristian men do profit more, for the good of their souls, 215
and toward eternal life, in the narrow and hot burning furnace, of
adversity and troubles, than in the large and broad fields, of wealth and
prosperity. For as gold, by fire is severed, and parted from dross: So
singlenes of heart, and true Christian simplicity, is best seen, and made most
evident, in troubles and afflictions: in prosperity every man will seem
godly, but afflictions do draw out of the heart, whatsoever is there, whether
it be good or bad. This made David say, Prove Psalm 26.
me, O Lord, and try me, search my reins and my heart. It is not amiss to
understand by the reins, the inward delights and pleasures, because the seat
of lusts and desires is said to be in the reins: and by the heart, the secret
cogitations, because it is the shop and receptacle of the thoughts.

EVen as filthy matter or rottennes of a boil, blaine, or push, 216
being hid within the flesh, does greatly grieve, and vex sore, Weeping,
sobbing, and sighing, do ease the mind.
the body that is sick: But if it break and run out, the pain is mitigated:
So sorrow being closed and shut up, in the heart of man, does mightily torment
him, but being thrust out, with tears and groans, the heart is somewhat eased,
and the mind a little pacified. They therefore must needs be out of measure
grieved, from whom all tears, sighings, and sobs are taken. Ezechiel Ezech. 24.
the prophet, his wife, whom he loved most dearly, died, whose death no doubt
was grievous and bitter unto him, but that he might not weep, nor bewail her
death, with tears and mourning, did exceedingly augment and increase his
sorrow. The The fountain of sorrow is in the heart.
fountain of sorrow is in the heart of man, whose waters, if they flow not over
through the eyes, they will ouerwhelme and drown the heart it self, and will
not once suffer the thought to turn from languish and intolerable grief.

For as a great and thick smoke, vaporing out of a foul 217
black fire, unless it have free passage, and some vente or way where
through it may go out, will all to darken, bestinch, and make black the house:
Even so, sorrow and grief proceeding out of the hot fire of calamities, being
shut up in the house of man's heart, does make it exceeding black, and does
corrupt it, with black and bitter choler, unless through the mouth or eyes,
there be a breathing out of sighs, set from the bottom of the heart, and
streams of tears trickling down the cheeks. Yet an effeminate and desperate
wailing, either for the dead, or for any other cause, as of men without hope,
is utterly to be misliked: and that Stoicall opinion also, that a wise man
should never be moved, neither with mercy, sorrow, nor anger, is to be
avoided. For the motions and stirs of man's mind, must be tempered with reason,
good counsel, wisdom, and discretion, and are not to be utterly pulled up by
the roots. Ecclesiasticus thinks it good, that a man moderately bewail the
death of Eccles. 22. and 38.
others. And when our Savior Christ himself, beheld Marie Magdalene, and
others also weeping with her, when her brother John 11. 35.
Lazarus was dead, he wept, insomuch that the Jews meruayled, and said, behold
how he loved him.

AS a smoke, which at the first is great and thick, ascending 218
upward, is quickly scattered and out of sight: Even so, the glory of the proud
men of this world, by little and little is obscured, and vanishes clean away.
The damned ones, which are tormented in hell with endless and everlasting
pains, do know and acknowledge so much: For in the book of Wisdom, they are
produced speaking these words: What good has our Wisd. 5. 8.
pride done us? And what profit has the pomp of our riches brought us? All
these things are gone away like a shadow, and as a post that hastes by. Let
us therefore, set our hearts and minds, and bend we our whole desires, to
heavenly things: And let us make no account, of earthly, transitory, frail,
and the deceitful things, of this old, withered, and ruinous world. For if we
will deeply consider, and carefully think of that happiness, which is laid up
in store in heaven, with God the father, through Jesus Christ, for all them
that do believe, live, and die in Christ, we will not give our selves, to the
speeches of rude, ignorant, and ungodly people, neither will we hunt or hawk
after the vain reports, and idle praises and commendations of men, nor yet put
any trust, in any thing that man can do: But we will aspire and draw near unto
that God of ours, which is for ever, whom no process, nor continuance of time,
wastes nor consumes: Of whom the prophet speaks plainly: Thou O Lord shall
endure Psalm. 102. verse. 26. 27.
for ever, all other things shall wax old as does a garment, and as a vesture
shall thou change them, and they shall be changed: But thou art the same, and
thy years shall not fail. And the Lord himself says to Moses: I am, that I
am. And he said, Thus shall thou say to the children of Israel, I am, has
sent me Exodus, 3. 14.
unto you. As if he should say: He that ever has been, is, and ever shall be,
whose eternity is not comprehended, within any limits or bounds, has sent me
unto you. If then worldy things do much move us, which are of no such
strength, but that in process of time, they are weakened, and clean consumed,
if (I say) that which is of no stabilitie in this life, but is suddenly
broken, and perishes, or at the least, by little and little decaieth, and
grows out of remembrance, and is quite forgotten, is wont to stir us up, to
take great pains, and to undergo almost intolerable toils, through manifold
perils and dangers: Why then, not much rather, yea and a great deal more, are
we not stirred up, and moved by him, that is for ever, to undergo, and to
endure, the like, or (if need be) greater pains by many degrees, whose
promise and manner it is, to give to all those, that in truth, and singlenes of
heart, do love him, immortal rewards, and to bestow and place them in
everlasting bliss, in his own kingdom, with his own and only most dear
son, even Christ Matthew. 25. 34
Jesus, our only sufficient, and alone Savior and redeemer? God give us grace,
and the assistance of his holy spirit, that we may withdraw our hearts,
minds, and affections from all those vain and transitory things, which are
subject to ruin, rottennes, and consumption, and that we may set them surely
upon our God, follow him, and obey him, according to his own will, in his
written word.

Amen.
AS the excellent and noble hawk, called a faulken, upon 219
the fist of the fouler, seeing a pray flieng on high, does by and by spread
her wings, and offer to break the strings, wherewith she is holden, and to be
gone after the pray; but if she be hooded, she neither sees the pray, nor is
any whit moved: Even so man, whose nature far excels, all other living
creatures, thinking upon the things that are above, in heaven with God, and
with the eyes of his mind, beholding eternal bliss, and endless felicity,
he is inflamed and pricked with a great and wonderful desire, to attain,
unto the same: but if he be hooded with ignorance, spiritual blindness, and a
love of this world, he will never be touched with any heavenly motion, nor any
whit moved with any right love to God, nor once turn, so much as one eye of
his mind, toward heaven nor God. That most noble faulken, I mean the most
famous and kingly prophet David, being rapt, and as it were ravished, with an
unspeakable love, Psam. 42. v. 1. 2.
and desire to heaven and God, did sing this song: Even as the Heart, desires
the water brooks, so does my soul long after thee O God: My soul is a thirst
for God, yea even for the living God: When shall I come to appear before the
presence of God? And the holy apostle, being very desirous to fly out of the
bands of the body, and to shake them off, said thus: Christ is to me life,
Philip. 1. 21.
and death is to me advantage. And immediately after he says, that he has a
great desire to depart, and to be with Christ. And such ought the desire, of
all good Christians to be. God grant it may be such.

Amen.
AS they which have great need of water, do make haste, to 220
come to the fountain or well, where water is to be had, but having drawn the
water, and filled their vessels, do depart, and turn their backs to the
fountain, which has supplied their want, and satisfied their desires: So very
many, when they be compassed round, with perils and dangers, and are beset on
every side with afflictions, and troubles, then they fly apace, to the
fountain of grace and mercy, but when they have obtained the water of comfort,
then they do despise, that flowing spring of living water, which complains of
their unkindness, by the prophet Jeremy, saying: They have forsaken me, the
fountain of Ierem. 2. 13.
the water of life. There be to too many, of all sorts and degrees in the
world, which, when they are in the straightes, of calamities and misery, will
with all possible speed, fly and run unto God, and will power out before him,
many devout and fervent prayers, upon their bare knees, with tears trickling,
and streaming down their cheeks, and will use the name of Christ, in hope for
his sake, to be the sooner relieved, because (as the holy Ghost says) He is
the propitiatio^ and atonement for our sins, by faith Romans 3. 25. 1. Ioh. 2. 2.
in his blood, and they will implore and beg the mercy and help of God, with
most lamentable shrikes, and grievous groans: but so soon as they perceive,
that God is a God, of pity, compassion, and mercy, and do find and feel
themselves to be lightened, and eased of their greefes, they by and by forsake
God, turn their backs upon him, shake off all obedience, and return to their
old vomits, and practice their former foul sins, with greater greedines them
before. And when they should be most mindful of gods benefits bestowed upon
them, then do they utterly forget him. But it is the part, and duty of every
good christian, if he once dedicate and betake himself to the service of God,
to proceed, and to go forward, from virtue to virtue, and from grace to grace,
and not to turn, the Lords precepts and commandments, behind him, when indeed
he ought, to be most thankful, for his loving kindness, and favor, which he
has found and received. So much does the Lord signify by the prophet
Ezechiell, where it Ezech. 46. 9.
is commanded, that they should not go out of the temple, by the same gate,
that they went in, because they should not uncomely, turn the holy things
that were there behind them, and so the sooner forget them, or deal
irreverently with them. And that also in Genesis does teach us no less, where
they that went out of Genesis 19. 22.
Sodom, were charged that they should make haste and go foreward, without
looking back, and there is an heavy judgment of gods vengeance, showed upon
her that looked back. And Christ Luc* 9* 61.
affirms, That he is not meet for his kingdom, that putting his hand to the
plough, looks back. It behooves all true and unfeigned christians, to keep
a perpetual constancy, in a right course, of living virtuously, holilie, and
godly, and as the holy prophet says, to go from strength to strength, until
every one Psalm. 84. 7*
of them, appear unto the God of Gods, in Sion.

IT has been usual of old, that men would inquire, and ask 221
of God, by his prophets, concerning those things whereof they doubted. Saul
seeking his asses, did go to a seear, to wit, to a 1. Sam. 9.
prophet, for so called they the prophet then. The son of Jeroboam 1. Reg.
14. Ibid. cap. 7.
being sick, his wife is sent to Ahiam the prophet. David being a prophet
himself, did ask Nathan another prophet of God, whether he should build a
temple unto the Lord, or not. When the Gabaonites did speak fraudulently to
the children Iosu^. ^.
of Israel, the scripture says that they were deceived, and that they did not
ask at the mouth of the Lord, meaning the Lords prophet, by whom he used to
speak unto the people. This (I say) was very usual and common in that time,
wherein the prophets lived. Howbeit, all did not come with one mind: for it is
to be seen, in the prophet Ezechiel, that certain of the elders of Israel,
Ezech. 20.
came unto him, to inquire of many things, whereof they doubted, but because
they came not, with a good, but a bad mind, the Lord would vouchsafe them no
answer. For they came not, as men drawn with the glory of God, but stirred
with malice, and their own iniquity. They were contented to have some
knowledge of the Lords will, but they had no purpose, to frame their lives
after the same. The number of such at this day is infinite, for who sees not,
how many are very deeply seen, in the understanding of Gods word, and the
knowledge of his will, which never stretch out one hand, nor set one foot
before another, to practice or to do the same? They know, and will also
acknowledge and confess, that they ought to keep their hearts, their minds,
their thoughts, their hands, their hearing, their seeing, and all their inward
and outward parts, without the foul and filthy spots of the world, and to be
careful to walk in innocence, Psalm. 24.
holiness and righteousness before the Lord, upon pain to be barred, and shut
out of his kingdom for ever: and yet they Psalm. 15.
will, even against that they know, feed fat, and as brawne frank
themselves, with all manner of sin and iniquity. So that, even as the sun,
at some time of the year, in some place, does afford his shine and light unto
the people, and yet does little or nothing warm them: So, the knowledge and
understanding, of the word, and will of God, does not by and by, work an
hungring and thirsting, to lead a virtuous and godly life, in all those whom
it has instructed, and most perfectly taught, what they should do, and how
they ought to live. They receive knowledge and understanding from it, but they
refuse the grace, and deny the power of it. But, even as he is not rightly
called a rich man, which understands and knows great riches, and can tell
how, and by what means, a man may be exceeding rich, but he that has riches
of his own, and does possess them: So, he is not a good, and right Christian
man, that can according to knowledge, dispute and reason of virtue, and
godliness, and can describe and define the same: but he that is endued with
vert^^^ and possessed with true godliness, and does most willingly practice the
same, in the whole course of his life, both with his friends, and with his
foes, that man, and such a woman, is rightly called, and Matthew. 5*
is indeed, a true Christian, in whom the Lord has great delight. The lord
vouchsafe to make many such. Otherwise knowledge (when it is bare and naked,
without the love of God, and man) does puff men up with insolency and pride,
so that the 1. Cor. 8.
more they know, the worse they are, and must be beaten with the more stripes,
because they know the will of God, and do it not. We all are hailed, and drawn
after, an earnest desire of knowledge and understanding, but we must do our
greatest and best endeavor, that our knowledge may be coupled with virtue and
true godliness: for he that knows what he himself ought to do, and will point
and teach others, what best becomes them to do, and will show them their
faults, that they may shun them, and yet will not bend and plie himself, to do
those good things, whereunto his knowledge does direct and point him, he is
like unto a clear and bright looking glass, which shows plainly to others,
their blemishes and foul spots, but sees not it self. For as the looking
glass, does show very plainly, to them that behold it, the likeness of such men
or women, as are before it, that they may dress and trim themselves, and yet
does not see it self: So that master or teacher, which very copiously, and
eloquently, does teach others, virtue and all good things, and yet himself
given to sin and wickedness, he does in deed teach others, but he teaches
not himself. Against such masters and teachers, the holy Apostle inueigheth
very sharply, saying: Thou which teach Romans 2.
another, teach not thy self: thou say a man should not steal, and yet
thou stealest: thou say that a man should not commit adultery, and yet thou
committest adultery, etc. An heathen man, by the light of nature, and reason,
could say, that not Marcus Tullius in Verrem.
only an accuser, but such a reproouer also, is not tolerable, in whom is well
known, and found, the same fault, which he sharply checketh and reprooueth in
another. And the same man in an Idem in Salust.
other place does say: that he which is prepared, to speak against another
man, must be without all fault himself. And another man also, no less a
heathen than he, compares those men, which will speak good things, and will
not do them, to a sweet instrument; which will sound very sweetly, and make a
pleasant noise, wherewith it will greatly delight others, and yet it neither
hears, nor understands it self. True it is, that good speeches in men, are
in danger to be lost, and to do little or no good, when they be not helped, and
in some measure furthered, with the good life, and honest manners, of those that
speak them: when knowledge has virtue joined with it, then has it woonderful
effects, and indeed, that is the knowledge that all Christians ought to seek
for, and to desire. For, to desire to have knowledge, only that thou may
know, is nothing else, but curiosity: and to desire to know, that thou
may be known, to know much, is mere vanity: and to desire to know, that
thereby thou may attain to worldly wealth, promotion, and dignifie, what is
it else, but filthy lucre? but to desire knowledge, that thereby thou may be
touched, and mightily inflamed, with an unfeigned love of God, and thy neighbor,
and that thou may move, and stir up others to the same, is an excellent
virtue.

THe body of man, that it may not rebel against the spirit, 222
must be restrained, and kept short of many things, that it will crave,
otherwise it will be very unruly, if with measure keeping and abstinence, it be
not tamed and kept under: therefore as the Apostle says, it must be crucified,
with the lusts Galat. 5.
and concupiscences of the same. For even as, from a fierce and fiery horse,
which will in no wise be ruled, nor obey his rider, men are wont to withdraw,
such strong feed, and fine prouender, as will make him over hot, and to too
fierce, and in steed thereof, to give him chafe and bare straw: Even so from
the body of man, when it is an enemy to the spirit, and by reason of too much
dainty fare, and variety of delicate cheer, grows to be wanton, and
rebellious against reason, must plenty of fine feed and nourishing meats be
taken, and harder and leaner cheer, must be very sparingly ministered unto it,
that when by such means, it is subdued and chastened, it may willingly yield
obedience unto the soul and spirit. The holy Apostle of Christ, himself did
so: I do chasten my body (says he) and keep it under, least whiles 1. Cor. 9.
I preach to others, I my self should be a castaway. And indeed when the body
of man is tamed, and kept in subjection, then does the spirit, stir up it self
more freely, to the obedience of God, and seeks after the divine and holy
mysteries of his word, with greater zeal and feruencie. For, as the same
Apostle says: Although 2. Cor. 4.
our outward man be corrupted, yet that which is within, is renewed day by day.
For as enemies in a siege, will yield themselves to their adversaries, when
for want of food, they are like to be famished: so the flesh and sensuality
of man, being bitter enemies unto the soul, if pampering, and dainty, and
full feeding be taken away, will submit themselves, and will stoop unto the
soul and spirit. When the disciples of Christ demanded of him, why they could
not cast out a certain evil and wicked spirit, he answered them, that that
kind of spirit, was not to be cast out, but only by prayer and fasting:
Meaning that the Lord, Marc. 9.
had reserved unto himself, the casting out of that spirit, who must besought
unto, by faithful, fervent, and most earnest prayer, and because he would have
the whole man, in that holy exercise of prayer, to serve him, and because the
body should be no impediment or hinderance, unto the power and force of
prayer, but in all humility, should most willingly join with the soul and
spirit, in that service of God, and so jointly together, should cry mightily
unto the Lord, to obtain their suite, Christ would have the body tamed and
humbled with fasting. And in the mouth of his holy prophet Joel, he wills the
people, to turn unto him, in fasting, weeping, and mourning, and that with
their Joel. 1.
whole hearts, without all hypocrisy. And therefore Christ says: When ye fast,
be not sad as hypocrites are, etc. But the king of Matthew. 6.
Niniue did easily see and perceive, that neither fasting, praying, Jonas. 2.
nor any other exercise, would prevail with God, unless men would forsake
their sins, and give over their iniquities: And therefore he straightly
charged, that every man should turn, from the evil they had used. And so the
Lord grant we may do, and then our other exercises, of praying and fasting, and
such like, will be acceptable to God, otherwise they be frivolous, vain and
hypocritical.

Pliny in his eighteth book, does report, that Bucephalus, 223
the horse of Alexander the great, when he had not on the brave and princely
furniture, which was provided for Alexander himself, he would suffer any other
man, as well as Alexander, to ride him: but being furnished and made ready
with the kings furniture, he would suffer no man, but Alexander himself, to
take his back: So very many men, all the while they are poor, obscure, and in
base estate, they will endure every man, and will feign a good will, and great
diligence toward all men, and to every one, they will show a singular mildnes,
and kind courtesy, being to see to, most mild and courteous Catoes, but
inwardly very tyrannical and cruel Neroes. They cover and keep close, within
the secret folds, and privy corners of their manifold dissimulations, wrath,
hatred, malice, envy, and all impiety: but once being enriched, full of
worldly wealth, and advanced to honor and dignity in the world, and lifted up
into the place, and set in the seat of authority, then they despise and
scorn all men, save only those, to whom by the law of sovereignty, they are
bound to be subject, and to obey. Then they vnhood themselves, and do bewray
their secret will, and do discover their cankered and manifold nature, which
lay hid so close, in the wrinkles of their hypocrisy, and deceit, that it
could not be seen: then do they most openly show, their pride, and cruelty,
which they had long covered with a goodly mantle and fair cloak of humility
and lowlines. It is the Lords manner and use, to cast down and to bring low,
all such proud, vain, forgetful, and unthankful persons: and to advance,
and to exalt all those, which in true humility, and lowlines of heart and
mind, in piety, patience, and in the practicing of all virtues, do serve,
honor, love, and obey him. The Lord neither regards the riches of the
ungodly, nor the poor and beggarly estate, of his faithful children, and
chosen servants. Of the wicked, David says: Thon have cast Psalm. 73.
them down, Lord, etc. and of his own he says: The just man shall flourish
like a palm tree, and as a Cedar of Libanus shall he be multiplied. And
again: The righteous shall be in an everlasting Psalm. 112.
remembrance. Men that were godly learned, in old time, when they perceived,
that man forgetting his original, and the foul matter of his beginning, would
wax insolent, and grow proud: they would express and signify him, by a
crocodile and an egg. For the crocodile is a creature of an incredible bigness,
and yet has his beginning of a very small and little egg, and is known only
to Egypt, and to those countries, which are watered with the river Nilus, and
in this thing is very admirable, that no living creature, that has so small a
beginning, does grow to such an exceeding bigness. And yet in this one thing,
man is more admirable, that being molded out of the earth and dust, he will
make his heart a nest for pride and all abomination, to build and to dwell in.

THe comminations of the Lord, by the prophet Ezechiel, 224
are not only against Pharao the king of Egypt, but do Ezech. 29.
reach also, to all them, which do imitate him, and stick to him, in his
tyranny, and cruel practices, whom the prophet terms by the name of
fishes. For even as, when some great and huge fish, is drawn out of a river in
a net, many small ones, which are about him, are taken and drawn out with him:
Right so, it is the Lords manner, not only to tangle and to trap, within the
infringible net, of his indignation and heavy judgments, the first authors,
and chief bruers, and brochers of idolatry, treason, treachery, or any other
kind of evil whatsoever: But all those also will he censure, with the same
weight and measure of punishment, which have any pleasure in those forbidden
evils, and are so far, from being offended, and grieved at the same, that they
wish in their hearts, good success, and continuance unto them. I will (says
the Lord) even glue and fasten unto thy skales, the fishes of thy floods or
rivers, and I will draw thee out of the midst of thy rivers, and all thy fishes
shall stick unto thee, etc. Meaning, that Ibidem.
he would destroy not only himself, but all his followers also, together with
all those, that by any means did favor or further, and did give or lend unto
him, their company, counsel, goods, strength, voices, or so much as one hearty
wish or desire, to set forward his malice and cruelty, against the Lord and
his servants. And so indeed it came to pass. Therefore it behooves all men,
to have a good and sure ground, for every thing that they do, and that neither
company draw them, nor authority constrain them, nor fear to lose goods,
liberty, nor life, drive and compel them, to do that thing, which is directly
against the word, and will of God, and is by him absolutely forbidden. And
this is well worth the marking, that the prophet does call men fishes, which
are tossed and tumbled, in the troublesome waters, and waves of the world. For
what else is this world, but a sea, continually disquieted with fearce floods,
of infinite temptations, and tossed with storms of innumerable troubles, and
shaken with winds of al manner of vanities? Is there any Euripus, Syrtes, or
Charybdis, that has so many, and so monstrous floods, and dangerous waves, and
that has so sundry, and stormy motions, as this world has? What vast gulf,
what strait and narrow sea, is shaken with such whirlewindes, and troubled with
such blustering blasts, such raging storms, and cruel tempests, and with such
thick, black, and uncomfortable clouds, as this world is? There be in the sea
of this world, two chief and principal fishers, the one is Christ, our most
sweet and only savior: the other is the devil, our most cruel, and deadly
enemy. Christ does fish for men, that he may give them life, and save them for
ever: but the devil does fish for men, that he may bind them in the chains of
death, and destroy them for ever. The waters of the sea of this world, are
worldly riches, dignities, promotions, fleshly lusts, and filthy pleasures, and
they are like bitter and salt water, which will never quench a man's thirst, but
the more he drinks, the thirstier he is. But the water of Christ, does indeed
quench the thirst, of him that drinks it, and does lay the heat, of the
lusts, and lawless desires of the flesh. For he himself does say: That if a
man drink of the water of this world, he shall thirst again: But if he drink of
the water (says he) that I will give him, he shall not Ioh. 4. Luc. 16.
thirst for ever. The rich man mentioned in the Gospel, had his belly full of
the water of this world, but now he is tortured in the heat, and tormented in
the flames of hell, and shall be a thirst there for ever: But poor Lazarus that
sought for the water of Christ, and did drink of it, is now in heaven, in the
bosom of everlasting blessedness, and shall never be a thirst any more. Christ
does fish for men, that he may draw them out of the bitter waters of this
dangerous sea, and that he may give unto them, the water of grace. But Christ
does fish with an angling rod, and an hook, and he takes few. But the devil,
that wicked and crafty fisher, with his great, large, long, and broad nets,
takes and draws up great multitudes, and infinite numbers of fishes, which
voluntarily give themselves unto him, and do suffer him most easily to take
them. Christ does fish, that he may bring grace, and give unto them, whom he
takes, eternal life, and the fishes fly from him, they will not come near
him: And the devil does fish, that he may kill and destroy, and bring men into
endless, easelesse, and remediless, condemnations and torments, and the
fishes run and fly to him. Christ as he walked by the sea of Galilee, Matthew 4.
with his angle took sour, Simon and Andrew, James and John: but the devil
walking by the sea of this world, may in as little space and short time, take
four thousand. The devil fisheth with a hook, and does catch many mo, then
Christ does take, the reason is, because his bait is sweeter, and more
pleasant to man's appetite, and does better agree with the depraved will and
graceless disposition of man, then that bait which Christ uses, does. The
devils bait, is voluptuousnes, the foul pleasures, The devils bait.
and rotten delights of the flesh, worldly wealth at will, the vain glory of
the world, innumerable riches of all sorts, power, authority, vanity, an
insatiable desire to bear rule, and a thousand such others. The seely poor
fishes being deceived with these baits, do never feel the hook, until it
stick so fast in their jaws, that there is no scaping, but the devil makes
a full account of them, as of his own. The Lord give us grace, and so open the
eyes of our understanding, that we may see, and eschew all his baits, and
never be taken with any hook of his. But our sweet Savior Christ, that
heavenly fisher, which seeks to save our souls, and to bring them to
everlasting happiness, and celestial immortality, he fisheth with a sharp and
bitter bait, very Christ's bait
unpleasant to the corrupted nature, and appetite of a natural man, to wit:
with much fasting, praieng often, with watchings, honest labors in a man's
calling, contempt of the world, spiritual poverty, bitter tears, deep
sighs, and grievous groans, for sins committed against the Lord, with
humility and lowlines of heart, with kindness, peace, patience, righteousness,
and such other things, all which, although to those, which are inflamed with a
right and true love of God, they are pleasant and welcome, yet not the less,
to the will and desire of a mere natural man, that is a friend of flesh and
blood, they are hard, and do seem very bitter to his corrupted taste. God
grant that we may so swallow up all these, and other such like baits, that we
may be surely taken with the Lords hook, and drawn to everlasting life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Satan is a subtle fisher, and uses great cunning in the casting 225
of his net, and searches out, that vein of water, wherein every one is
delighted, and do take their pleasures: for he does not set upon all men, after
one and the same manner. He tempts one with riches, and another with the
flickerings, and pleasures of the world: he draws one on with pride, another
with malice and envy: he wins some through too much spending, and many
thousands through too much sparing, even as he perceives, the inclination of
every man to be. The mouth of his net, is very broad, and the going in is very
wide, and open, but the coming out is very hard, straight, and narrow, and
found of none* or very few. For even as a fisher, when he takes some great
fish, does not by and by violently strike, and twich her, but lets his
fishing line go at all the length, until the fish do swallow down the hook,
and so work her own destruction, least if at the first, he should twich her
too hard, the fishing line or thread should break, and his bait and hook
lost, the fish should escape: Even so the devil, when he has gotten a poor
sinner, fast upon his hook, and has entangled and fettered him, in the
chains of some dangerous and deadly sin, and has bewitched him, with the
sorceries of the flesh, and the world, he does not suddenly oppress and
exasperate him, least if at the first dash, he play the devil openly, and
roughly, like a devil as he is, the sinner should break his bands, and escape
his snares: But he does cherish him, and makes much of him, and does suffer
him now and then, both to speak and to do some things that savor of virtue,
that by little and little, he being made fast and dead sure, upon the hook of
sin and wickedness, he may by degrees work his own woe and utter destruction.
So that the devil does stretch out his angling rod, thread and all, not that
he may let the sinner escape, but that he may make him the surer, and hold him
the faster. Thus suffered he Herod, to pretend in words the worshipping of
Christ, when he intended in his heart to kill him: And Pilate to confess
Christ's innocence, and yet against his own conscience, to give sentence of
death against him: And Judas to kiss Christ, as though he loved him, and even
then to betraie him: These and many mo like them, notwithstanding their painted
and golden shows, were fast enough, upon the devils hook, and so are al
hypocrites and dissemblers.

THere is a sea, called the dead sea, which is a lake in Judea, 226
called Asphaltites, whereof Aristotle, Pliny, Iustine, and diverse others do
make mention. There is neither fish, nor any living creature found in it,
whereupon it has the name dead. Further, in it nothing is covered, neither
does any thing that is in it, sink to the bottom thereof, but all things do
swim, and are in sight, and do continue in the top of the water. For which
cause, they are compared unto it, that will keep no counsel, nor secrets
whatsoever, but will reveal, and bewraie all things that they know whether
they be good or bad. It is a mighty great lake, and is never troubled, with
any waves, storms, or tempests, but is ever quiet: And therefore, they are
compared with it, that lead their lives in tranquillity, peace and quietness,
and are never pressed, nor broken with any calamities, nor tossed and troubled,
with any sorrows or miseries in the world, but are ever at hearts ease, and
live as they list. The water of this dead sea, is reported to be exceeding
bitter, for the sweet river Jordan running into it, (as some do write) it does
utterly lose the sweetness thereof, and is made very bitter also. Even as
Hypanis a river of Scythia, which has a marvelous sweetenes, until a little
bitter spring, which Herodotus calls Exampeus, be mingled with it, and then
it is corrupted with a wonderful They are very dangerous men, which can keep
no counsel, no^ secrets.
bitterness: Even so, those men, which are like torn vessels, that will hold no
water, and so full of chinkes, that they neither can, nor will keep any
secrets, or counsel, are very bitter and intolerable men, and do much harm
in every place where they com, neither can any counsel or secret be committed
unto such, without great danger to the common wealth wherein they dwell, and
especially to all those that repose any trust in them. Such men seem they
never so wise, learned, and full of counsel, are not to come near godly
princes, neither to be made acquainted, with matters of state, and the affairs
of common wealths, least they do great hurt, both with giving counsel
themselves, and also by discovering such weighty secrets, as shall in trust be
committed unto them. These are those ungodly ones, whose counsel, Job. 22.
good Job says, shall not come near him. These be they, in whose counsel,
(the kingly prophet says,) the man is blessed, Psalm. 1.
that never walks. The beginning of our actions is counsel, and therefore
great endeavor is to be used, that evil counselors be eschewed, and in any
wise not leaned unto. Adam following the wicked counsel of He^a his wife, and
He^a the counsel of the deceitful serpent, besides that woe they wrought unto
themselves, they brought great misery, upon all their posterity. The devil
is the first author of wicked counsel, and never cease to devise, which way
he may best and soonest work our woe: And that he cannot do by himself, he
labors to do it by wicked counselors, his trusty servants, and dead sure
ministers. Whose acquaintance and familiarity is to be avoided, and the
company and counsel, of godly wise men, is to be embraced, and used. Who so
Proverb. 13.
keeps company with wise men (says Solomon) shall become wise: But he that
is a friend of fools, shall be made like unto Eccles. 13.
them. And Ecclesiasticus says, that he that touches pitch shall be defiled
with pitch. And the apostle says, That a little leaven, 1. Cor. 5.
sowreth the whole lump of dowe. Even as the Chameleon, is sometimes black,
and sometimes green, sometimes pale, and sometimes blue, (for he ever takes
his color, of the thing, which he sees to be next unto him, and does show and
represent, the color of what thing soever is set before him: So men of all
degrees, are wont very much to imitate, the nature, disposition, and manners
of those, whose counsel they follow, and whose familiarity they use. David
that famous prophet of God, understanding so much, does say in a Psalm, where
he describes the Psalm. 10^.
parts, and office, of an excellent and very good king* and sets down a very
plain pattern, and a most lively picture of his virtue, that such a man, as
walks in an undefiled way, to wit, (whose life is unreprovable) shall serve
him, and be to him a courtier, and a counselor, and voweth that no man of
pride, no vain person, nor speaker of evil things, shall dwell in his house,
nor keep within his court. As if he should say, I will diligently inquire and
search, who they be, which in any land, country, and kingdom, are faithful
and do love righteousness, and by their counsel with I be instructed, and the
familiarity of them, will I use: but all ungodly, proud, blasphemous, lying,
deceitful, and wicked persons, of all sorts, will I utterly expulse out of my
house, and drive and thrust them out of my court, and will suffer them, to
find no rest within my kingdom. God grant that all good, godly Christian
princes, may follow the steps, and example of king David, in this, and all
other his princely virtues, and holy exercises.

Amen.
IT is the part and duty, of every good Christian, that whatsoever 227
he does in word or deed, he do all in the name of the Coloss. 3. 17.
Lord Jesus: that is, to the glory of God: and in an affiance, and confidence
that he has, in the name of God, that he will protect, defend, bless, prosper
and preserve him, in doing of the same, and so to give up, his heart, mind,
will, work and all, unto God, before he do attempt the doing, and performance
of the same. There be very many, that do some deeds, which to see to, are very
Hypocrites.
good works, but not the less, they keep their hearts, minds and wills,
divided and separated far from God. Those things, to wit, their hearts, minds,
wills and purposes, they steal from the Lord, and do bestow them upon the
world, they regard not God, they seek only to please men: in the action of
virtue, they have no respect unto virtue it self, but only, and barely, to
the show and shape, or likeness of virtue. Such men are like unto painters,
which have a greater regard, to the colors and shadows, of images and
pictures, than unto the substance of the same, and contemning the inward parts,
they bestow all the wit, skill, and cunning they have, in expressing and
painting out, a bare shadow, and outside of the thing, and the more they
deceive the eyes, of them that behold it, the more excellent men are they
judged. But the Lord requires at our hands, first fruits, that is, our hearts,
minds, wills, desires, and all that is in us, and that we should even offer up,
and consecrate unto him our selves, even Romans 12.
our bodies, a quick, a^^ ^iuing sacrifice, holy, and pleasing God, which is
our reasonable service of God. And when the Apostle wills us, or rather
beseeches us, that we give our bodies, a lively sacrifice, holy, and
acceptable to God, and calls the same our reasonable service of God: he
means, that the offering of dead calves, and unreasonable beasts, as in times
past, the Jews offered unto him, will not please God now, neither that the Lord
will accept, and take in good part, any service or sacrifice, that we shall
bring, and lay before him, either in words or works, so long as we love sin,
and harbor iniquity, in our hearts, minds, and members. The Lord will receive
no sacrifice, nor service, of those that be strangers unto him, but only of
those which are graffed in Christ Jesus, and are now become in him new
creatures, 1. Cor. 5.
in whom there is a newnes, a righteousness, and holiness of life, and in whom
all old, foul, filthy, and ungodly conversation is past. And therefore the
Apostle says, to the Ephesians: Be ye renewed in the spirit of your mind, and
put ye on the new man: Ephesi. 4. Coloss. 3.
and to the Colossians, he gives counsel, that they destroy the old man,
with all his trash, and put on the new man: and most lovingly he beseeches the
Romans, saying: Let us walk in Roman. 6.
newnes of life. But because this newnes, cannot be wrought in us, without the
grace, and holy spirit of God, David the prophet, Psalm. 51.
does mightily cry unto the Lord, and says: O God, create a new heart within
me, and renew a right spirit within my bowels, or inward parts. The Lord
requires of us, a lamb, that is, innocence, humility and meekenes: and he
would have us to offer unto him, a young pigeon, or a turtle dove, that is,
true contrition, and purity of heart, and mind: for those sweet birds, do use
mourning in steed of singing, and are pretty, and fine paterns of purity, and
innocence. The Lord will not take, receive, nor accept, barking curre dogs,
that is, railing, raging, cursing, lying, slandering, blaspheming, or any such
ungodly persons, neither their offerings, sacrifices, nor prayers, when they
come, and bring, and lay them before him, no more than he did the sacrifice of
Caine. The roaring and cruel lion, the ravening wolf, the foul and dirtie
swine, the blind mole, or want: that is, the tyrannical, and merciless man,
the oppressor, pillar, and poller of his brethren, the man that is mere
natural, and carnal, the man that is blind, and ignorant, in spiritual and
heavenly things, they are neither sacrifices, nor sacrificers, that God will,
or is wont, to take any pleasure in: as he does abhor the vices, so for the
vices sake, he does detest the vessels, until such time, as they be purged and
cleansed, of such foul and filthy matter. If there were no other, but only
Solomon, to tell us, that the Lord requires, and calls for our hearts, it is
great reason, that we should believe the Lord at one word, and at one message,
when so lovingly, and fatherly he says: My son give me thy heart. Proverb. 23.
The Lord help us, and grant, that we may give him our hearts, and whatsoever
else, of the inward and outward man.

Amen.
HEliotropium, the herb of the sun, so called, because it 228
windeth it self about with the sun, in the morning very Herba solaris.
early, it beholds the rising thereof, and all the day, it even follows the
course of the sun, ever turning the leaves toward the same, but the root it
never changes, stirs, nor moves, it has that still, fast fixed within
the earth: So very many, will seem to follow the sun of righteousness, Christ
Jesus, but it is only in leaves, and outward shows, for their roots, that
is, their hearts, are far, and fast within the earth, where indeed their
treasure is, according to that which Christ himself does say: Where thy
treasure is, there is thy heart also. Matthew. 6.
Such men will lift up their hands, eyes, and voices, toward heaven and God,
and with such goodly green leaves, will make a fair flourish, and a beautfull
show, but their hearts and affections, are surely set, upon earthly, vain,
vile, and transitory Esa. 29. Matthew. 15.
things, and are as far from God, as heaven and earth, are distant one from the
other. They show unto the Lord, only bare and fruitless leaves: flesh and
blood, the world and devil, have their hearts, those go downward, and take
root below. Such men are like unto trees, which in the sweet and pleasant
spring time, will be well stored, and full of goodly blossoms, and will make a
frank offer, and a large promise, of much fruit, but when the fruit is looked
for, and should be gathered, there is none to be had, they were but bare
leaves, and idle blossoms. Such trees did Christ himself meet with, when he
was here below, upon the earth Matthew. 21. Marc. 11.
in his body, and at this day, the whole world, even every city and town,
is very full of such trees, yea it is hard to find one house, wherein there
grows not such a tree. Well, the Lord did curse them then, and be we sure, he
will not bless them now, he that then did cause them to be cut down, and cast
into the Matthew. 25.
fire, will in like manner, cast into the fire and torments of hell, all those,
that seek him with their lips, and are far from him with their hearts.

Ungodly men which are delighted in forbidden things, they come not near, the
ways of the Lord, whatsoever show of holiness they make with men, they sit
down, and rest themselves, Psalm. ^.
in the seat of wickedness: for, they have only their lips, gilded with
holiness, there is not one dram of godliness in their hearts. The prophet does
testify so much, when he says, that they which work wickedness, walk not in
the Lords ways: their hearts are Psalm. 119.
so far from seeking after God, or any good thing, that indeed, they seek
after evil things, as Solomon in his Proverbs affirms. Proverbs. 27.
Yet nevertheless, there be some, though the number of them be not great, that
even as great and mighty vapors, with the force and power of the sun, are
taken and lifted up from the earth, and do seek after the sun, by whose
strength and virtue they are carried up on high, and growing into clouds, do
even follow the sun: So (I say) there is a remnant, and a little flock of
Christ's, that in a true, unfeigned, and sincere love of God, are lifted up, from
the love of this world, and from all earthly, and fleshly affections, so far as
is possible, for man in this life to be, and do seek the Lord, and his
kingdom, in the singlenes of their hearts, and thinking the time, of their
abode here, in this vale of all miseries, to too long, they daily sigh and
groan, for a dissolution, and the coming of Christ, to judge the quick and the
dead: But this number is very small, and we may admire them, even as the
prophet Esaias did, and say: Who are these, that fly like Esai. 60.
scattered clouds? The Lord, if it be his holy and blessed will, turn the
hearts of all hypocrites, and carnal worshippers of God, to serve him in
verity, and in truth, and vouch he safe, to increase the number, of his single
hearted servants.

Amen.
EVen as the blood, in the body of a man, being corrupted 229
with a poisoned arrow, does by and by fly to the heart, even seeking, and
hoping as it were, to find some remedy, and help there, and yet does even so
soon as it touches the heart, find death, where it sought for life: So men,
when they are sore pressed with calamities, do make the world their first
refuge, and whiles they seek for succor, and comfort of the world, they find
no better thing, than death, where they thought, to have found life. Experience
does teach them, that they sought for life, in the house of death, and for a
medicine there, where no good thing is to be had. But it behooves us, that do
profess christianity, and do fight under that banner, when we labor, and are
laden heavily, with tribulations and afflictions, forthwith to repair unto
God, and with all speed, and possible haste, to run unto Christ, who even from
the altar of the cross, where he offered himself, for us, that by his death,
he might deliver us, from everlasting Matthew. 1^.
death, calls us unto him. Our savior Christ is said, to make a feast, and
to eat, at the conversion of a sinner, when he forsakes his wickedness, and
turns unto the Lord, with a contrite and sorrowful heart, for his sins and
offenses, committed against the word, and will of God: for so the Evangelist
says: Bring Luc. 15.
hither the fat calfe, kill it, and let us eat. So that, we can no way, make
the Lord a banquet, that will please, and delight him, but by forsaking the
world, our sins, and our selves, and in appealing to the throne of his grace,
and mercies seat. We hear his voice every day, what mean we, that we obey it
not? Why continue we in sin, which consumes, and rotteth our souls and
bodies, as rustines does iron? Why go we not home, to our heavenly father? We
know his goodness, we have great experience of his clemency, love and mercy,
and yet still we linger. Our patrimony is gone, we have most lewdly spent,
wasted, and consumed all, so that we are no more worthy to enter into the
kingdom of God, than are the very foul, and dirtie swine, and yet nothing will
drive us to him. It is even as himself says: No man can come unto me, unless
my father draw him: the Lord then draw us unto himself. What a madness is it,
to seek for help, relief, and comfort of the world, which seeks us, only
that it may deceive, and destroy us? The Lord calls us, to give us comfort,
and unspeakable joy, and we turn our backs to him, the world does but hold up
a finger, and becken us to it, with a purpose to have our company to hell and
damnation, and we run, and whine after it, like a thirsty infant, after the
dug of his mother, or nurse. And thus we pass on, seeking for life in the
house of death, and for joy in the vale of misery, where none is to be found.
The Lord open the eyes of our understanding, and make us to know, and to see,
that our help, health, comfort, and life, in this world, and in the world to
come, stands only in him, that made both heaven and earth.

Amen.
Idleness, as it breeds poverty and beggerie, in very many, 230
which might live well, and in good sort, with diligent, and faithful labor:
So is it very dangerous, in those that be rich, and feel no smart, nor want in
this life, for whiles they give themselves to foul idleness, voluptuousnes does
overcome reason, and they are snared, and taken in the deadly traps, of the
deceitful flickerings of the world, and are poisoned with carnal pleasures,
and fleshly delights, which do bear them fair in hand, for a little while,
but at the length do deceive them, and leave them in shame and confusion. For
even as the earth, when it is not tilled, nor trimmed, does breed and bring
forth briers, brambles, and all noisome, and unprofitable things: so idleness
in man, does breed and brood in him, ungodly thoughts, and wicked cogitations
of all sorts, and does allure, hale, draw, and even drag him, to do those
things, which are so odious in the sight of God, that he must either most
earnestly repent that he has done them, or else, he must die eternally for
doing of them. Idleness therefore does not become Christians, for so does our
God, and maker teach us, when he says to Adam, in the labor of thy Genes. 3.
Job. 15. 2. Thessal. 3. 2. Samuel. 11.
hands, shall thou eat, all the days of thy life. And just Job says, that
man is borne to labor. And the Apostle says: If any man will not labor, let
him not eat. When David continued at home in idleness, then did adultery and
murder creep into his heart, and ceased not, until it broke out into effects,
and most dangerous actions. Christ did show a great hatred to idleness, when he
said? Why stand ye here all the day idle? Matthew. 20.


Sometimes it falls out, that a hen sits upon ducks eggs, 231
and with her diligent sitting, and the heat of her body, she does hatch, and
bring them forth: and when they be able to follow her, she clucks them, and
after her manner, as though they were her natural chickens, she does call them
about her: but they being not of her, but the ducks kind, though by her they
have been hatched, and of her have received life, and though she has a
continual care to bring them up, and to defend them from such enemies as seek
to devour them, yet nevertheless, they will follow and seek after that,
whereunto by nature, they are inclined and given: When she is scraping and
scratching the earth, to find them food, they will be in the water, mire, or
foul puddle, after their kind: she may clucke, and walk alone, they will not
keep her company, unless perhaps in some danger, when the kite is ready to
catch them, for some succor they will ^lie to her: howbeit at the length, when
she perceives them, to be unnatural and unkind to her, she does forsake
them, and give them over. Even so, our sweet Savior Christ Jesus, having
taken great pains for us, and having humbled himself, even in the lowest
degree, of all humility that can be named, as in coming down, out of his
fathers bosom, being most perfect, most holy, and omnipotent God, being every
way equal, and in nothing inferior to his father, to take our weak, frail,
and feeble nature upon him, and (sin excepted) to have a perfect feeling of
all our infirmities, as wearisomnes of body, hunger and thirst, and such
others, and besides the enduring of these, many years together, having
suffered a most cruel death, and even at his death upon the cross, having
tasted and taken a full cup, of his fathers fury and indignation, which was in
deed filled and prepared for us, as a just reward for our sins, and should
have been our own cup, and our own portion, for ever and ever, had he not
even then taken and supt it up, to clear and to free us from it. Again, after
all these things, having still continued his humility, in suffering death, to
keep his body three days in the grave, and even as it were to tread and
trample upon him, and then mauger death, hell, devil, and Jews, having risen
again, and being ascended and gone up to his father, where now (until his
coming again, to judge the quick and the dead) he sits at the right hand,
of majesty and power: He now speaks and calls unto us, by his prophets,
apostles, and ministers, and wills us to remember, what case and estate we
were in, before he died, and suffered all these things for us, and he would
have us to know, to be sure and never to forget, that if he had not suffered
death, here upon the earth, as he did, we should never have found, any way or
entrance into heaven: the celestial joys, and pleasures of the Lords saints,
salvation and eternal life, should never have belonged unto us, we should have
had no more to do with them, then they that live without faith, and die
infidels: The horrors of hell, and the stinking lakes of unspeakable shame,
confusion, torments, endless death, and damnation, should have been our
inheritance, lot and perpetual portion. Christ therefore does daily put us in
mind, that we be not our own but his, and that we be the greatest and dearest
purchase, that ever was made, in heaven or in earth, and that the like price
and cost, was never bestowed upon any creatures, as upon us. When the angels,
which were in heaven, in the presence of their creator, did once offend, they
were hurled out, and cast into hell, Christ would not bestow upon them one
penny of all that great price, and rich ransom, which he paid for us, he would
not then become man, to shed one drop of blood for them; but for our sakes, he
spared not one drop, but shed all. The Hen that himself speaks of, was never
so diligent and careful, to gather her chickins under Matthew. 23. 37.
her wings, as he has ever been, most ready to shroude and to protect us,
against all the enemies of our souls and bodies. Many mothers shall sooner
forget, the children of their own wombs, and utterly forsake them, before
Christ will forsake us, yea he will never forget, nor forsake us, unless we
first forget, and forsake him. Now therefore we being his, so dearly bought,
and so truly paid for, he calls upon us every day, he clucketh us, and
looks for us, that we should follow him, and tread in such steps, as he has
appointed, and that we should not range at randon, but keep our selves within
the hearing of his voice, and our lives within the limits, of obedience unto
the same, these things (I say) he looks for at our hands. But how deal we,
with this most kind, most loving, and most merciful redeemer, and (if the
fault be not in our selves) the fauiour of our seules and bodies? Verily even
so, as the unnatural and unkind ducks deal with the hen, of whom they have
received life, they regard not her clucking, neither we Christ's calling: when
she is seeking and providing for them, on the fair, dry, and wholesome earth,
they will be in some foul water, filthy mire, or stinking puddle: And when
the Lord Jesus calls us, to integrity of life, to do the Psalm. 15*
thing that is just and right in his own eye, and to speak the truth,
according to the knowledge of our hearts: then will we with greedines, pollute
our souls and bodies, with all wickedness, and things that be abominable, then
will we oppress our brethren, not caring who sincke, if our selves swim, then
will we not stick to speak lies, even to Gods own face: And when the Lord
calls, and sends us to seek heavenly things, we presently return to the
foul puddles of the world, carnal delights, and vain, yea vile pleasures:
so that, we ever take the contrary w^y, to that which Christ commands. Christ
calls for our hearts, to have them in truth and sincerity, with all diligence
Proverb. 2^.
to attend upon his pleasure, and to wait on his will, he would have us, not
in part, but wholly to give them unto him, and without the heart, he will
receive, and take in good part, at our hands and lips nothing. But we on the
otherside, give nothing less to God, then our hearts. What is it, that cannot,
and may not command our hearts, and have them at pleasure, sooner then Christ
Jesus, that with the death of his own heart, gave life to our bodies and
souls? If the world do but a little smile upon us, and give us but an
alluring look, and a fair (though a false) word, we will by and by follow it,
and bestow upon it all our attendance. If the devil himself can make us
believe, that we shall either have profit or pleasure, by doing his will, our
hearts, minds, wills, and all are readier for him, then for Jesus Christ. O
matchles, yea monstrous madness, they that seek our destruction, can sooner
with a pleasant look, then Christ with the giving of his life for us, have us
at commandment. Christ would Coloss. 3.
have us to mortify our earthly members, as fornication, uncleanness,
inordinate affections, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which is
idolatry: But who does not nourish, pamper, and cherish all these? The Lord
would have our conversation Philip. 3.
in heaven, but we are altogether earthly and carnally minded. The Lord would
have our feet to stand within the gates of Jerusalem, Psalm. 122.
but we love rather to be trampling the streets of Egypt, Babylon and Sodom.
The holy ghost would have us to ^. Timoth. 4.
fight a good fight, to finish our course after the will of God, and to keep
the faith, not only in words, but also in life and deeds: Indeed we are apt
and ready to fight for worldly promotion, honor, dignity, revenues, and
riches, but for heaven and heavenly things, we will never strive, take no
pains, nor once trouble our selves, we will have i^ with ease, and all manner
of pleasure, or else not at all, farewell it. The courses we take here in this
life, are very bad, and the end (unless we repent) is like to be woorst of
all: And whiles we have no care, to keep good consciences, it is impossible
for us to keep faith. Let stand before us, Christ and satan, the one
pointing us to heaven, and eternal felicity, but the way to it, full of
troubles, greefes, and sorrows: the other pointing to hell, but the way to it,
full of delicates, pleasures, and dainty delights, and let God call, and the
devil call, and (I speak it with grief of heart) the devil is like to have
the greater number to follow him, for those short pleasures, and Christ but a
few to follow him, because they must go laden with crosses. Daily experience
does teach us no less, when all our actions are carnal, and have only but a
little outward show, and no taste at all of true godliness, nor so much as any
relish of the spirit, and love of Christ. Some will abstain from the
committing of many gross sins, now and then, and yet not that, (I fear
greatly) in any true and sincere love to God, but either for fear of shame,
and punishment in this world, or else fear of vengeance, in the world to
come, which both are unprofitable, for the Lord has no pleasure in forced
service, he will have it voluntary, with the heart, and proceeding of love, not
of a servile fear, otherwise it shall be numbered with the rest of our sins.
This does greatly condemn us, that though we do not such things our selves,
yet we can, without trouble of conscience, grief of heart, or vexation of
mind, see and hear the Lords name blasphemed, his saboth unhallowed, idolatry
committed, parents dishonored, whooredome, theft, murder, and covetousness
commonly used, and all the laws of God utterly contemned, and it shall never
offend the greatest number, so much as a thorn in a foot, or a blaine upon a
finger. What other thing is this but to forsake God in the plain field, and to
be afeard to serve him in truth and sincerity, least we should thereby
purchase man's displeasure? Unless therefore, we learn to serve him better, in
more truth, with greater zeal and singlenes of heart, we have nothing else to
look for, but that he will forsake us, both in this world, leaving us
destitute of his assistance, that our enemies may pray upon us, and also in the
world to come, in giving out Matthew. 25. 4^.
against us, his malediction, curse, woe, and sentence of death. The Lord make
us new creatures, and give an unfeigned love of himself, deep root in our
hearts, drawing after it a cheerful obedience to his sacred word, and the
self same to our brethren wherewith we love our selves, (so that all be in God)
that we may escape dangers in both the worlds, that when death, that inexorable
executioner shall do his office, we may arrive, at the safe and happy haven, of
Gods everlasting kingdom, purchased and paid for by Christ, and kept in store
for all those that believe aright, and shall live and die in him. But alas, the
most part of us as yet, until it shall please the almighty to enrich us, be
like proud beggars, which not being worth one farthing, will boast of great
wealth: So many brag of great holiness, but have none, and of great faith, as
though they could remove mountains out of their places, and yet know not what
true faith is. How fearful a saying is that of Christ? When the son of man
shall come Luc. 18. 8.
to judge the quick and the dead, do you think, that he shall find any faith
upon the earth? As if he should say, he shall find very little, howsoever now
all persuade themselves, that they be faithful enough. The Lord amend us,
for we have received great and infinite good things, from the Lords hand, both
for our bodies and souls, but in giving thanks, we are like to the nine Luc.
17. 17.
leapers, mentioned in the Gospel, which never turned back, to thank God for
their healing. The Lord has poured upon us, infinite dewes of his sweet and
blessed word, and yet still we continue to be those dry trees, to whom his
curse, cutting down, and Luc. 23. 31.
casting into the fire belongs. The Lord grant that with all speed, we may
turn from our sins, to righteousness and holiness of life, that God may turn
his anger from us, and his favor toward us,

Amen.
MArcus Antoninus with an oration that he made, upon 232
the death of Caesar, is said to have greatly delighted the people of Rome, and
that he moved very many of them, to shed great store of bitter tears, when he
put them in remembrance, of the great benefits, which they had from time to
time, received of Caesar, and withal did show them Caesar's garment, wherein his
enemies, Cassius and Brutus, had slain him, all full of blood: whereat they
were so mightily moved, that they expulsed the homicides out of the city, so
that they durst not, if they would live any longer, come near it: And yet in
these days of ours, let come never so good, and heavenly an orator, with the
oracles of God himself, in his mouth, and show most plainly, what Christ the
redeemer of the world, has done for man, and prove that man has received
unspeakable, and innumerable benefits, by and through Christ, and declare what
bitter tears of water and blood, did trickle down his cheeks, and what deep
and deadly sighs, with many fearful and grievous groans, did rise from his
heart, before he came to the cross, and let him rip up his passion stitch by
stitch, as the holy book, and divine word, shall direct and lead him, and let
him particularly show, how, and where he was wounded, that he was beaten, spit
upon, crowned with thorns, nailed hand and foot to the cross, scorned and
mocked of the Jews, and let him show most lively, the wicked and cruel Jews
imbrewing their hands in his blood, and giving him vinegar and gall to drink:
and who for all this will shed one tear, give one groan, or sigh once from the
bottom of his heart? yea let the preacher declare and prove, that, besides the
death and passion of his body, he suffered in his soul, the heavy wrath and
indignation of his father, and the extreme tortures and torments of hell, for a
time, no less than the reprobates, that be there already, and no less then,
all we, by just desert, should have suffered for ever, if Christ had not done
it for us: And who for all this, will drive out of the city, not Cassius and
Brutus, that killed Caesar, but those horrible, abominable, and most damnable
sins, for the which Christ was slain? For so says the scripture: He (says
the prophet, meaning Christ) was wounded for our iniquities. Esa. 53.
And a little after, the prophet brings in God himself speaking thus of
Christ: For the sins of my people have I smitten him. And the Apostle tells
the Romans the same Romans 4.
thing: Christ was given (says he) for our offenses. And to the Corinthians:
Christ died for our sins, according to the scriptures. 1. Cor. 15.
The matter then being so plain, that no man, high nor low, whosoever, can
clear himself of the death of Christ, but must needs, will he, nill he,
confess that there is in him, the matter of Christ's arraignment, bitter
passion, and cursed death, and that he is no less guilty of the same his death
and bloodshedding, than those that cried, Away with him, away with him, it is
no reason, that he should live any longer: nor than those, that did spit in his
face, and nailed his hands and feet to the cross. It must needs follow,
that Caesar was more beholding to his friends, than the son of God is, to
many thousands of those that do profess his name: and Marcus Antoninus was
more beholding to the Romans, which were so ready at one oration, to purge
and clear the city, of homicides and murders, than a great number of
faithful preachers of Christ be now, to infinite thousands of their auditors,
which are so far from abandoning and thrusting out of cities and towns, even
gross, vile, and most loathsome sins, that in their own private houses, yea
even in their own bosoms and bodies, they harbor, nourish, and maintain
them: although they hear every day, the heavy judgments, and destroying
wrath of God, denounced against them, not with a general houering over their
heads, at al adventures, as though no body were spoken to, but even with a
particular* toutching, and as it were an unlacing of every sin in it kind, to
lay open the stinch and abomination of the same, that men might (if they had
grace) be ashamed, and afeard, to stain and to blemish themselves with such
things, as the Lord upon pain of condemnation, has inhibited and forbidden:
and yet all will not serve. No man, that will believe the holy scripture, can
be ignorant of this, that the almighty, did, with the heavy hand of his Job.
4. 18.
wrath, cast angels out of heaven, when they were poisoned with pride, and
would not be contented with their own estate, and 2. Pet. 2. 4. Iud. 6.
that therefore they became devils, this (I say) cannot, but be known of all,
and yet who is afeard of pride? yea who will not be as proud, as ever the
angels were, and though he prove a devil, and purchase hell, for his
pleasure? Pride, gluttony, abundance Ezech. 16. 49.
of worldly wealth, vainly and wickedly used, idleness from all good works, and
no stretching forth of hands, unto the poor, and n^edie, were the very
capital, and head sins, which did even wrest, and wring from the Lord, his
heavy and most fearful judgments, and did as it were with violence enforce
him, to destroy the Sodomites, and Gomorrheans, with fire and brimstone from
heaven: for that other most foul sin, the which I Romans 1. 24.
am afeard even to name, did spring and grow out of the sins that I have
named before. And yet all these sins, with infinite others, do in as bad
manner, and no less measure, swarm, reign and revel in England, than when
they were at the woorst, they did in Sodom. What sequel then is to be feared,
and daily to be looked for, with silence I pass over. There is never a man,
that bears the name of a Christian, but he will confess, that his great
grandfather Adam, was expulsed, and thrust out of paradise, Genes. 3.
for eating one apple, forbidden him by the Lord, upon pain of death: and yet
that man, that with open mouth, will make that confession, will every day eat
seven apples, as bitter and as straightly forbidden as that: and will he then,
for eating seven, think to escape better cheap, than his grandfather that did
eat but one? No, no: the eater of seven, shall find the way, into everlasting
life, as hard to enter, as the way into paradise, was to his grandfather, being
once thrust out, unless he speedily, earnestly, and truly repent him, and give
over the eating, of such fruits, as the Lord has forbidden him. It is very
strange, that the judgments of God, showed upon Caine, for killing his
brother: Genesis 4. 8.
upon Saul for his disobedience: upon Judas for his treason: 2. Sam. 15. Matthew
27. 5. Act. 1. 18.
will not make all men to detest and to hate murder, to love obedience, and to
beware of treachery and treason: but that men will still live as they list, as
though they were persuaded, that either God does not see them, or else not
regard them, and that he will never call them to any account, do what they
will, all is one, God is not angry, nothing displeases him: or at the least,
as though they had couenanted, and agreed with hell and condemnation, without
controlment, or fear of pain, to take their pleasures in all vanities, and
abominations whatsoever. Is it not a wonder, that we seeing before our eyes
(if we will believe God) a whole world drowned, with an universal deluge, or
general flood of water, and yet the same sins, that were the cause of that
general destruction, to be so pleasant and sweet unto us, as is the honey,
and the honey comb? well, well, sweet meats, will have sower sauce. If thou
had been an eye witness, of the overthrow and Exodus 14 23. and 27.
drowning of Pharao, his chariots, and horsemen, in the red sea: and duly
examining, what sin that might be, wherewith God was provoked, to i^flict that
heavy judgment upon him, and should have found the self same sin, to be
in thy self, and even highly to please and delight thee, would thou not
have trembled and feared, least the same God, with whom there is no respect of
persons, which punished that sin in Pharao, would not spare, or favor it,
but even most sharply punish it in thee also? Or if thou had seen with thy
bodily eyes, some of the grudging, and murmuring Israelites, stoong to death
with ve^emous Numb. 16. 1. Cor. 1^.
and poysonfull worms, in the wilderness, and some of them consumed with fire,
that came from heaven, and the earth also opening, and swallowing up some of
them, and sending them down quick into hell, would it not have terrified thee,
and have made thee de^^st and abhor those sins, which brought such
destructions upon the committers of them, all the days of thy life? And why
dest thou not so now? If thou have any faith, and if the word of God bear any
credit with thee, thou art no less persuaded of the truth of those things,
than as if thou had seen them. All these, and such other things, are written
for our learning, Romans 14. 4.
that we beholding the Lords wrath, executed upon so many, in all ages, and
from one generation to another, for displeasing and offending the Almighty, we
might beware, and take heed, that we do not the like deeds, least we be beaten
with the same, or sharper rods. The sudden and fearful death of Ananias, and
Saphyra his wife, for their hypocrisy, dissimulation, and Act. 5.
seeming to be, that they were not, will it no whit move us? Can we live
without fear, and a continual looking, for the like present, and sudden
death our selves, when our own consciences, early or late, at home or obroad,
shall check, and charge us, as truly and as justly as their consciences did
check and charge them? With how many and how great, fearful and devouring
plagues, that have swallowed up, infinite thousands of men, women, and
children, has the Lord tried us, and most lovingly admonished us, in England
within these few years? Has not the whole mass, and weight of the earth,
trembled, tottered, and shaken under us, as though it even groned, and were
exceeding weary, of our sins, rebellion, and disobedience toward our
creator, and redeemer, and that of late within our own knowledge, and
remembrance? And yet for all that, we proceed in our wickedness, and are worse
and worse every day. So that we seem to be that wicked crew, and pack of
fools, mentioned by the prophet, which have said in their hearts, there is no
God. Those mariners, and mere idolaters, which were Psalm. 14. Jonah. 1. 5.
in the ship with Jonas, that had no true knowledge of God, nor any
understanding, how to honor and to worship him aright, yea they knew nothing
but Paganism, and idolatry, may make us greatly ashamed: for they having, but
a very little familiarity, and conference with the prophet, did become very
good and true Jonah. 1. 14. 15. and 16.
worshippers of the living God, and did offer sacrifice, and vow vows unto
him: But we have the law, and the prophets of God, and also Christ himself,
and his apostles, we have not conference with one, but with them all, we have
his ministers and messengers, daily unfolding, and interpreting the scriptures
of God unto us, and yet never the better, we will forsake no sin, but rather
choose eternal damnation to do our own wills, then everlasting life, to do the
will of God. Are we not worse then those Jews, which crucified the son of
God, even Jesus Christ? Surely we be: for they hearing Peter preach, but one
sermon, a Act. 2. 37. 38. and 39.
great number of them were converted: But we hearing many hundreds, are never
touched with any remorse of conscience, nor moved to any serious, or true
repentance. We are like unto lepers, upon whom no water will stick, nor abide,
by reason of the foulnes and greasy matter of their leprosy: Such lepers, and
far worse are we, upon whom no ^ewes, nor any drops, of the grace, and word of
God, will cleave, abide, and continue. We do nothing for gods sake, nothing of
conscience, nothing of love, all our actions (the Lord amend it) do savor and
smell of hypocrisy. It is to be feared, that were it not, for vain glory
sake, and to have commendations and praises of men, very few would do any
good: and were it not, for fear of shame, or punishment, few would abstain
from any sin. Idolators, blasphemers, and The transgressing, and breaking of
the laws, and commandments of god, is offensive to very few.
violators of the sabbath, will never blush, say what you will. Children in
these days, think it great wisdom, to control, yea to scorn, and to
disobey their parents, elders, and superiors: To murder is manlines: to commit
adultery, and fornication, is but a trick of youth: to steal, a pretty
slight: to bear false witness, is counted a gainful trade, and serves finely
to pleasure a friend: and as for coveting another man's house, his wife, his
servant, his maid, his ox, ass, or any thing that he has, it is so common,
as houses be in England, yea in London, where they stand nearest one to
another. What then, shall the Lords ministers, messengers, and preachers, keep
silence, give over their labor, and cease utterly to cry out against sin?
God forbid: the Lord has a little flock, and a small remnant, like a little
wheat, in a great heap of chafe: for their sakes let the servants, and
messengers of the Lord, labor still. Again, the hearts of al men are in the
hands of God, as he made them of nothing, now they are made to convert men from
sin: Let all the servants, and children of God, in this case try, what they
can do with the Lord, and never give over calling upon him, for their
salvation, if it be his will to grant it. They have indeed hard faces, and
Ezech. 2. and 3.
hearts like adamants, that will not be bruised (says the Lord) yet go to them,
and let them know my mind, do thy office, Esaias. 58. 1.
though they be disobedient, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my
people their transgressions, and to the house of Iaacob Hos. 5. and 8.
their sins. Blow ye the trumpet in Gibeah, and the shaume in Rainah: set the
trumpet to thy mouth. It may be, that the walls of sin and wickedness, will
fall down flat, at thy shouting, and Iosu. 6. 20.
battering them, with the judgments of God, as the walls of Jericho did, at the
sound of the trumpets, and the shouts of the people: I beseech God, it may be
so. And indeed (good reader) that is the only thing that I desire, seek for,
and beg daily at the hands of God, even that all idolatry, hypocrisy,
superstition, blasphemy, breaking of the Lords sabbath, and whatsoever is
against Deuteronomy. 30. 20. Act. 4. 19. and Act. 5. 29.
any precept of the Lord, may be utterly abandoned. And if thou for thy part,
wilt begin and even strive to be the first, thou shall do well. Wed thou thy
self, as in deed we all ought, to do the will of God, whatsoever it cost
thee: something for my sake, thy poor brother in Christ, that most dearly does
love thee in the Lord Jesus: and something for thy souls sake, to keep it out
of hell, and that it may come to heaven: but especially for Gods sake, to whom
thou owe all obedience, and so shall I think my pains well bestowed, and be
ready all the days of my life, to labor still, to do thee good. Love to thee
in Christ Jesus, has constrained me, to send abroad this little book of
Similies, to let thee know, that I wish well to thee, and that I daily desire,
and beseech the almighty, that sin may be destroyed, and that the fear of
God may ever possess thee, dwell in thy heart, and flourish in thy hands. True
it is (good reader) that we ought to desire, to live no longer, than we have a
care to live well, and that the whole course of our lives, may be acceptable to
God: That is the Apostles meaning, 2. Cor. 5. 9.
when he says: Wherefore also we covet, that both dwelling at home, and
remoouing from home, we may be acceptable to the Lord. And a little after, the
same Apostle says: that Christ 2. Cor. 5. 15.
died for us, that henceforth we should not live to our selves, but unto him
that died for us. Therefore it is a mere vanity, to say we be Christians,
unless we cast from us, our old corruptions, and custom of sinning, and be
changed in our minds, and become Ibidem. 17.
new creatures in Christ Jesus. The which thing, I do most humbly crave at the
hands of God, even for his own name, and his only son Christ Jesus his
sake, both for thee and me, that when the days of our miseries, in this
dangerous and troublesome world, shall be expired, thou and I may have a
ioifull meeting, with the rest of the Lords saints, and all his holy angels, in
the glory of his endless, blessed, and eternal kingdom, through Jesus
Christ our Lord: to whom be all honor, power, praise, glory, and dominion,
now, and world without end.

A necessary Table, of the chief and principal things, contained within this
book, pointing the Reader to every page, and Similie, wherein the same is to
be found, by these two letters, S. P. the first signifieng the Similie, the
second the Page, with figures of both their numbers, as follows.
WHo they be, that are Christ's sheep, and who be not, Similie 1. Page 1. A
vein of our head is cut, that the whole body may be healed, S. 2. P. 1. As
the sun light offends bleared eyes: so the truth offends both ignorant,
and obstinate papists, S. 3. P. 2. As all the members of the body, have from
the soul, their moving and life, So every part of a commonwealth, is
governed by a godly prince, S. 4. P. 2. The sorcerie of the papists,
Brownists, Familists, and such others, S. 5. P. 2. The word of God signified
by rain, and sweet dewes, and the operation of them both, S. 6. P. 3. The
church of Christ, and true religion, now established in England, ought not to
be condemned, nor evil spoken of, because some bad men are mingled with the
good, S. 7. P. 3. A candle that is put out, cannot light another candle, S. 8
P. 3. The spots of the world are dangerous, and to be shunned of all, but
especially of them, that teach others, S 9. P 4. Those ministers of the word,
and shepherds of the Lords flocks, which smother their learning, and do not
impart their knowledge to the church of God, do offend greatly, S. 10. Page 4.
Evil and wicked counsel, is wont to fall upon the heads of the first
inuentors, and giuers of the same, S. 11. P. 4. and 5. The mind of man,
without the word of God is barren, and brings forth no good thing, S. 12. P.
5. People for the most part, do imitate their princes, whether they be good or
evil, S. 13. Page 5. The end of godly government, is peace, S. 14. P. 6. Where
true justice has no place, there peace is not to be looked for, S. 15. P. 6.
The prosperity of this world, is like winters weather, the calmnes of the sea,
and the stabilitie of the moon, S. 16. P. 6. The superfluous cares, of worldly
things, laid apart, our minds ought to be occupied in heaven, and ever waiting
upon our God, S. 17. P. 7. Men are very truly called, the sons of them, whose
manners and lives they choose, to imitate and follow, S. 18. P. 7. As sweet
waters, are corrupted and spoiled, when they run into waters which art salt,
bitter, or unwholesome: So good men, are greatly blemished, in using the
familiarity of the wicked and ungodly, S. 19. P. 8. Envy is always virtues
companion: misery only admits no envy, S. 20. P. 8. An envious man is as
unprofitable to a city, as darnell is to wheat, S. 21. P. 8. The envious man,
can neither abide a superior, an inferior, nor an equal. He is fitly compared
to a viper, and to the rustines of iron, S. 22. P. 8 and 9. Envy is a
dangerous disease, rife in all places, it is a picture of hell, S. 23. P. 9. To
put any trust or confidence in this world, or to depend upon vain man, is to
lean to a broken staff, the rod and the staff of the Lord, are only to be
leaned unto, S. 24. P. 9. In all our words and actions, a measure must be kept,
and consideration is to be had, what agrees with the time, place, and persons,
S. 25. P. 10. Humility ought to go before dignity, S. 26. P. 10. Many hearers
of sermons, delight more in the rolling tongue of the preacher, and his
retoricall phrases, than in the matter it self, which he delivers, S. 27. P.
10. Though sound doctrine, because it brideleth lusts, reprooueth sin, and is
a pore and clear looking glass, for men to behold themselves in, is not
welcome to many, yet ought the teachers of the word, to continue and to be
fervent therein, S. 28. P. 10. and 11. A common wealth is maintained and
vpholden with two things, to wit, with due reward and due punishment, S. 29 P.
11. Men are then wont to be ecclipsed, and darkened, concerning the love of
God, and their neighbors, when they grow rich in this world, S. 30. P. 11. and
12. The getting of great riches, is the loss of great quietness, S. 31. P. 12.
A just man is a mighty man, be he never so poor, and a wicked man is vile and
base, be he never so rich. S. 32. P. 12. and 13. A fine exchange between a
rich man that is naught, and a beggar that is honest and virtuous, S. ^^* P.
13. As clouds do cover the sun, so calami^ie darkeneth the mind of man, S.
34. P. 13. No sound judgment, can be given of a man, until he be thoroughly
tried, S. 35. P. 13. The best food for the soul of man, S. 36. P. 13. and 14.
Not proud, but humble men, do profit by reading and hearing of the word of
God, S. 37. and 38. P. 14. and 15. The riches, dignities, and honors of this
world, and the life of man, are fitly compared to clouds in the air, which are
suddenly dispersed, and scattered with the winds, S. 39. P. 15. and 16. The
word of God, is a looking glass that will deceive no man. If a man behold
himself well in it, he shall see plainly, that before he was man, he was
earth, and before he was earth, he was nothing, S 40, P 16. As a bird
thrusts her bill, through the loopes of her cage, in token of her great
desire to be at liberty: So the soul of a true Christian, groneth and
sigheth, in the body, in desire to be dissolved, and to go to dwell with the
Lord Jesus, S. 41. P. 16. and 17. Papists compared to vipers, S. 42. P. 17. Man
for his inconstancy, is compared to a balance, that is moved with every
little weight, S. 43. P. 17 and 18. Man is so wavering, that he is compared to
a Chameleon, which changes his color according to the thing that is next him,
and also because the Chameleon, will be changed into any color save white, S.
44. and 45. P. 18. Not they, that trust to a dead faith, but they that have a
lively, and working faith, shall be saved, S. 46 P. 18. Many men of very good
qualities, and indewed with sundry virtues, and full of good parts, have been
strongly altered, and greatly disgraced, through their familiarity, with the
wicked, S. 47. P. 18. and 19. When Peter came into Cayphas his hall, he denied
Christ, S. 48. P. 19. What it is not to eat the word of God, and not to fill a
man's belly and bowels with it, S. 49. P. 19. The harder that the tree of
sin, and wickedness is to be cut down, the more earnestly, and diligently,
ought the preachers of the word, to strike at it, with the sharp edge of Gods
most mighty and most holy word, S. 50. P. 20. The Lord does humble us in
this world, that he may exalt us in the world to come: this world does smile
upon us, with a purpose to deceive us, S. 51. and 32. P. 20. Wicked men are
wilful murderers of their own bodies and souls, S. 53. P. 21. Ungodly men
find no comfort, nor sweetness in the word of God, S. 54. P. 21. In men's
judgments, words and works, we may be deceived, in Gods we cannot. Whatsoever
is written in Gods word, is truth, whatsoever is taught in it, is virtue and
holiness, and whatsoever it promises, in the world to come, is eternity, S.
55. P. 22. The only weapon, that we must use, to over come the world, flesh,
and devil, is the word of God, and the practice of the same, S. 56. P. 22.
Poor men fear they God never so much, are little set by in this world, S. 57.
P. 23. Christ has his cup, and the world his, the one is bitter but wholesome,
the other very pleasant, but pestilent and deadly, S. 58. P. 23. and 24, and
also S 60. P. 24. As a guilty man, whose conscience does accuse him, would
never see the judge: and a traitor would never willingly be espied of his
prince, nor a disloyal person, of one that knows him: and on the other side,
a true and faithful subject, that has done dutiful service, desires the
presence of the prince, in hope to be well rewarded: So the wicked and ungodly
ones of the world, are grieved to hear of Christ's coming to judge the quick
and the dead: but they that have lived with good consciences, do groan for his
coming, S. 61. P. 24. There be great braggers of religion, which make a great
noise, as though none were right professors of the truth but themselves, such be
not the best men: humble minded Christians, are better than they, S. 62. P. 25.
Death comes suddenly upon many, that never thought to die, nor cannot tell
what shall become of them when they be dead, S. 63. P. 25. and 26. All men are
alike subject to death, whether they beyoong or old: this world is like a
potters warehouse, and all men in it, are earthen vessels, S. 64. P. 26. As the
moon decreasing, has her open side hanging downward: but increasing and
gathering light, has her opening up toward heaven: So men mere natural,
have their hearts set only upon earth, and earthly things: but men regenerate
have the open side of their hearts, ever toward God, heaven, and heavenly
things, S 65. P. 26. and 27. A common wealth without good laws and holy
ordinances put in practice, is like a body without a soul, S 66 P 28. As the
horse is ordained to run, the ox to plough, and the dog to hunt: So is man
borne to love God above all things, S. 67. P. 28. Man's heart is so hard, that it
must be smitten, with the Lords own hand, and bruised with one calamity or
other, or else no godo thing will ever issue out of it, S. 68. P. 28. and S.
69. P. 29. and S. 70. P. 29. The earth is the Lords steward, and does dispose,
and detain the increase of it self, at the Lords appointment, when God will,
plenty, and when he will, scarci^ie, S. 71. P. 29. and 30. If man cleave to
God, God will stick to him: if he will run from God, yet can he not escape his
hands, S. 72. P. 30. A man that is virtuous without hypocrisy, is an excellent
jewel, he is greatly grieved to see any bewitched with the forceries of the
world, he does what he can that none may. Carnal men are mere strangers to
true christianity, S. 73. P. 31. Vain, and carnal men, compared to organs,
S. 74. P. 31. Natural men will do no good thing, unless they be pricked
forward, with the praise, and commendations of the world, S. 75. P. 31. and 32.
Hypocrites most plainly and truly described, by a wood or grove full of goodly
trees, and pleasant plants, to delight men, and also, full of stinging
serpents, to poison and to kill men, S. 76. P. 32. Heavenly meditations, do
molli^ie and warm the heart, and do greatly inflame men with a fervent love of
God. This world and the things thereof, have ever been false, and have deceived
even their lovers, and dearest friends at the length, S. 77. P. 32. and 33. The
Lord suffers his own children, whom he loves most dearly, to be
oftentimes in great wants, when the wicked have even the world at will. The
afflictions of this, are not the maledictions and curses of God, but rather
most certain signs of his love, and tokens of his grace, S. 78. P. 33. and
34. God does su^fer his saints, here upon the earth, to be smitten, and sore
beaten of the world, and to be thoroughly tried with diverse tentations, to the
end, that their inward graces, may break out, that men seeing their
constancy, in the love of God, may glorify their father which as in heaven,
S. 79. P. 34. The good agreement, and well hanging together* of the in (...)
creatures of God, in this world, though differing in natures, and the apt
placing of the whole, may very well teach us, that there is a mighty creator,
a great governor, and a wise preserver of all these things, S. 80. P. 34. and
35. The cause of the sins and iniquities, which man commits, is in
himself, even as the tree is in the kernel, and the herb in the seed* Self
love is a perilous and common thief, ranging and robbing in every place, it
makes men fools, and does put out their eyes, and yet is welcome to all, S.
81. Page 35. They that be godly, are most easily moved to do good, upon any
occasion offered, the troubles and afflictions of their brethren, are to them,
as if they were their own, if they do but hear of any distressed, they by
and by cast with themselves, how to do them good, such be good, though few, S.
82. P. 36. A good christian, though he be here upon the earth, in body; in
affect and desire he is in heaven, S. 83. P. 36. Gods children despise those
things, which unto the worldlings, seem very precious, not earth, but heaven*
has their hearts, S. 84. P. 36. As he that walks upon coards, fastened on
high, had need to look to his footing, so it behooves us, to be very careful
where we place our affections. For there be two that daily strive for them. God
calls and satan allureth. Satan does keep a continual siege against all
virtue, to kill it, if he can, even when it is a hatching in the heart of man,
S. 85. P. 36. and 37. Many men have calling, but they answer it not,
knowledge, but they practice it not, words, but they work not, such are
compared to the ostridge, that has wings and flies not, S. 86 P. 38. All that
be advanced, into places of high dignity, are not the best men, though some be
very good, yet some seek more their own praise and profit, than gods glory:
but that is not to follow Christ, S. 87. P. 38. and 39. The greatest, highest,
and best service, that man can do unto God, for the comfort of his ownesoule,
and his happiness in the world to come, is his due obedience unto the word of
God, S. 88. P. 39. and 40. That man perishes for ever, and goes to hell, is
man's own fault, not the Lords, the Lord is no more to be blamed for man's
destruction, then the smith, that made for thee some instrument of iron or
steel, is to be blamed, if thou will suffer it to grow rustie and cankered,
the smith made not rustines, neither God thee to sin. S. 89. P. 40. The
children of God, understanding by the word, that this world, and all that is in
it, is mere vanity, they have their felicity, joy, and comfort, in knowing
of the word, and doing of the will of God, S. 90. P. 40. The Indian adamant,
which in hardness does excel all other stones, is said to be mollified, with
the warm blood of a goat: But the heart of man, hardened with continuance and
custom of sin, will not be mollified, with the blood of the immaculate
lamb Christ Jesus, S. 91. P. 41. Though the world entreat us unkindly, and be
daily harming us, yet we must no more give over doing good, then the sun
gives over shining, though many clouds do continually cover it, S. 92. P. 42.
Virtues lot is to be envied, and to find very cold intertainment (if any at
all) with the men of this world, and yet for all that, the servants of God,
will never be weary of well doing, S 93 P. 42. Man's heart being quiet, and not
troubled with horrors, nor distempered with fears, will plainly show a man what
he is, so that he may easily know himself: but being tossed with terrors, and
overwhelmed with fears, it cannot do so, S. 94. P. 42. A flatterer to see to,
is honest Cato, but in experience cruel Nero, and therefore very fitly
compared to a scorpion, S 95. P. 43. There be many dissemblers, and smooth
tongued flatterers in the world, that will even stroke as it were, men's humors
and dispositions, with words as soft as oil, and so sweet as honey, and al to
creep within them, that at the length they may work their woe and destruction,
S. 96. P. 43. As a candle that it may give light to others, is consumed it
self: and salt, that it may draw corruption out of flesh, and keep it sweet,
and wholesome for man's body, is all to bruised, broken, and wasted it self: So
every christian man, and especially teachers of others, ought to spare no
labor, to do good to others, and to win some souls to God, if it please him
to bless their labors, S. 97. P. 43. The sailors g^o^on, called the mar^iners
needle, locked, shut up, or kept, in a ^offer of gold, silver, wood, or
whatsoever, will ever still look toward the north pole: So right christians,
which are thoroughly resolved, concerning their salvation, and everlasting life,
will never turn from Christ, but have their hearts and minds still fixed in
him, come wealth or want, sickness or health, liberty or imprisonment, life or
death, S. 98. P. 43. and 44. A christian will not have two loves, one for
himself, and an other for his neighbor: but will love his neighbor, with one
and the same love, wherewith he loves himself, S. 99. P. 44. and 45. The
soul of man, so long as it is in bondage unto the body, it seeks only the
bodies pleasures and delights, but having once recovered that servitude, and
brought the body to be subject unto it, then it seeks no longer, the peace,
pleasure, ease and rest of the body, but now being freed from that bondage,
and restored to it self, it seeks it own peace, rest, health, and happiness
for ever. S. 99. P. 44. and 45. That man is in a woeful case, that has his
head under the girdle of this world, he shall never find any rest, peace or
quietness. Put no trust in the world, if thou do, it will deceive thee, and
give thee quid pro quo: that is, a mischief, in stead of a pleasure promised.
The going out of this world, to a christian, is like a safe and sure haue^, to
a man that has bin very long, and dangerously tossed, in a most troublesome
and perilous sea, S. 100. P. 45. and 46. A corrupted iusticer or judge, by the
virtue of a precious stone, or some other rich jewel, bestowed upon him
freely, will make a bad matter go for good, and a very just cause go for
naught. Yea, for a good round sum of money, though it be in an old leather
purse, he will now and then sell judgment and break the neck of justice.
Where this corruption and abuse is, it breeds this slanderous report of the
law which is good: Par^is cornis, and vexat censura columbas: that is, It does
favor ravening kites, and pinch and nip in the head innocent doves: and yet no
fault in the law, but in the corrupted lawyer, S. 101. P. 46. and 47. When a
man is in prosperity, in all wealth, and no want, infinite numbers of all
degrees, will make great and large shows of much love and friendship toward
him: but if the wind turn, and take away his wealth, renoume, authority,
c^edite, health and liberty, and he be fallen into any disgrace: the same
wind that did blow away these things, will blow away all his friends, such
friends, are at large painted out, S. 102. P. ^7. Nothing does more try a
friend, then the bearing of a friends burden. When a man is in prosperity, it
is hard for him to discern, whether those that pretend friendship to him, love
him or his riches most. But old experience has ever proved, that a man has
many friends, for his wealths sake, but very few for his own sake, S. 103. P.
47. and 48. Man has no such enemy as his sins be, they bring and pull upon
him, all manner calamities in this life, and will bring damnation upon his soul
and body, in the world to come, if he earnestly repent not, and speedily
forsake them, S. 104. P. 48. When the Lord punishes and scourges his
children, as though he had utterly forsaken them, then is he most mindful of
his mercy, yea he chasteneth to that end, that he may show mercy, S. 105. P*
48. and 49. The Lords justice will have punishment, and his promise will have
mercy, S. 105. P. 49. Extreme troubles, bitter afflictions, and manifold
pinching and nipping calamities, do make a sound and perfect trial, of true
christianity, unfeigned holiness, and voluntary patiente, S. 106* P. 49. To
preserve the health of the soul, the body must be pinched, and kept in
subjection unto the spirit, the lusts of the flesh, and the unruly affections,
must be tamed, and kept within the compass of reason, and obedience unto the
spirit, that they exceed not the limits of modesty, S. 107. P. 50. In times
past, good christians were geatly grieved, and would shed many bitter tears,
to hear and see injury and wrong done unto God, and his name dishonored: but
wrongs done to themselves, they would take and bear very patiently: but now in
these days of ours, we will with all rage and fury, revenge the least wrong
done to our selves: but whatsoever is done against the Lord does never once
trouble or grieve us, S. 108. P. 50. There be many very mischievous men in
these dangerous times, which have in them great pride, and very much subtlety,
mingled together. And these men will feign a lowlines, and crouch greatly, to
deceive others, and to advance themselves, they work woe to many, how humble
soever they seem to be, there is no good thing in them. Mortified men that are
truly humbled, are more grieved to hear vain, idle, and blasphemous
speeches, then with any violent tortures that can be offered and done to their
lives and bodies, S. 109. P. 50. and 51. That common wealth is in great danger,
and the people in much misery, where wicked and ungodly men, are put in
authority, there vicious men are supported, and encouraged, but such as are
virtuous, and fear the Lord, they go to wrack, havoc is made of them, S.
110. P. 51. and 52. When ungodly men, oppress their neighbors, and do harm
them in their bodies, goods or names, then do they hurt themselves most: for
they touch others, but in things of the body, but they kill their own souls,
S. 111. P. 52. The servants of God, do profit very much, by cruel
persecutions, and tyrannical dealings, of their enemies, and think themselves
happy, that they are thought worthy to suffer any thing for Christ's sake, S.
112. P. 52. The more that* an humble and faithful christian, shall read or
hear the word of God, and the nearer in understanding and knowledge, that he
shall com unto the mysteries, and secrets of God, contained in his word, and
with the greater purity of mind, strength of faith, and light of the grace of
God, he shall look into them, the more profound, the deeper, the more divine
and heavenly, and the more comfortable to his soul, shall he find them, S.
113. P. 53. A man is never farther short, of the true knowledge of the will and
meaning of God in his word, then when he thinks with his own wits and
cunning, to understand it best, S. 114. P. 54. The clear and bright light of
the word of God, is very comfortable to such as fear him, and love his name,
but unto the ungodly it is very offensive, S. 115. P. 54. The heart of man being
inflamed, with a true and sincere love of God, will give no place to those
dangerous temptations, which are continually houering, and flieng about it: but
being without that love, and being slothful and idle in holy things, and
godly exercises, it will be obuious, and wide open, to all manner of mischiefs,
and will be a receptacle of all wickedness and abominations, S. 116. P. 54. and
55. The peace and unity of the church of Christ, is by all possible means, to
be preserved, and by the example of Christ, we must do even that we need not to
do, rather then disturb the unity of the church, the breakers of that peace
are most wicked men, S. 117. P. 55. There be many in these days, which are not
ashamed, to say, that the church of England, is not the church of Christ,
because they can find no comfort in it. The reason why they find no comfort
in it, is declared, S. 118. P. 56. Man without the light of grace, and the
assistance of Gods most holy spirit, can never attain to the arriving, at the
haven of eternal glory, S. 119. P. 56. They that be in authority, and are to
lay their hands upon men, to call them into the ministry, are to take heed,
that they be men very fit for that function and high calling. If they do not,
they are condemned, by Christ his own example, yea the fowls of the air do
condemn them, S. 120. P. 56. Though Christ Jesus, our savior, touching his
manhood, be in heaven at the right hand of majesty and power, yet the eyes of
his mercy are still even to the end of the world, upon his servants, to defend
and preserve them from their enemies: and on the otherside, they with the eyes
of their faith do still behold him, and call to him, for help, in the perilous
times of troubles, and dangers, S. 121. P. 57. To retain and hold, a fashion
or likeness of virtue, without the substance of it, is nothing else but mere
hypocrisy, S. 122. P. 58. They that do counterfeit holiness and have none, are
compared to swans, whose feathers are white, and flesh black, S. 123. P. 58.
Godly men, that are truly regenerated, and well seasoned with the spirit of
grace, though they be bred and borne in the world, yet they very little or
nothing, resemble it: they rather resemble heaven in some measure, from whence
they receive the influe^ce, of the grace and favor of God, S. 124. P. 58.
Preachers of the word of God, must temper, and frame themselves, to meet with
the manners, qualities, conditions, and sins of all men, S. 125. P. 59. The
preacher of the word, is to take good heed, that none of his hearers, for want
of discretion in him, depart untouched, S. 126. P. 59. A preacher must do his
best endeavor, to know the manners, qualities, and dispositions of his
auditorie, S 127. P. 59. A Christian will show patience, and constancy in all
calamities, S. 128. P. 59. Whatsoever is in the heart of man, at the length it
will break out. For not only the tongue will speak, but the rest of the
members of the body, will also be exercised, according to the abundance of the
heart, S. 129. P. 60. That common wealth, house, or man, is very happy, that is
ruled, and governed by such counsel, as is grounded, and built upon the holy
word of God, S. 130. P. 60. By our words, deeds, gestures, and moouings, our
enemy satan, does know the secrets of our hearts, and so works upon us, S.
131. P. 60. and 61. The heart of man is like unto a smithes forge: his bad
cogitations are hot coals, he that does blow the bellows to make them burn
and consume both souls and bodies, is the devil, the evil thoughts in man's
heart, are compared, to the fry of vipers, which in coming to light, do break
the bellies of their breeders, and so kill them, S. 132. P. 61. The nearest
way for man, to obtain Gods favor, and free remission of sins, is to
acknowledge and confess them, with grief of heart, for committing of them, and
not to doubt through Jesus Christ, the forgiveness of them, and not to trust to
any merits, or righteousness of his own, S. 133. P. 62. Nothing in the word of
God, is superfluous, it must all be believed, embraced, and honored, with all
obedience possible. It is not gold and earth together, that a man may take the
one, and refuse the other, it is all most pure, and all to be applied to the
comfort of man, S. 134. P. 62. This world will cosen, and deceive all that put
their trust in it, S. 135 P. 63. Satan does very easily, draw after him, even
whither, and to what he will, men that are not settled in true religion, nor
armed with the holy word of God, yea the best armed, and strongest in faith,
have much ado to escape his snares, S. 135. P. 63. They that are continually
exercised, with great troubles, and afflictions in this life, are not to be
judged reprobates, and cast awaies, as though God had given them over, but
rather we are to think, that by that means, the Lord will thoroughly try
them, and finding them faithful and constant, does make them the fitter for
his kingdom; neither are we to judge all to be the children of God, that live
without afflictions, S. 136. P. 63. and 64. Unless a man be well grounded in
true religion, and clothed with the armor of righteousness, on the right hand,
and on the left, to wit on every side, and against all brunts, and assaults
whatsoever, he shall never quit himself well, against the subtle sleights, and
forcible tentations, of his professed enemies, world, flesh and devil, S 137.
P. 65. If man would remember, that he was molded of earth, dust, and ashes,
and that he must be tumbled, into the earth again, it would bring him, to a
far better temper than otherwise he will be brought unto, S. 138. Page 65.
The groundworke of Christian philosophy, is unfeigned humility, and the deeper
that the same, is laid and settled in our hearts, the surer and more permanent,
will the building of our religion be. S. 139. and 140. P. 66. The center, from
whence the lines, of all abominations do flow, is man's inordinate self love.
Two loves builded two cities, the love of God Jerusalem, and man's self love
Babylon, S. 141. P. 66. and 67. There is no misery comparable to this, that a
man knows not his own misery: and of follies, none greater, than that a man
sees not his own folly, S. 141. P. 67. After great troubles, do follow
quietness, of heart and mind, and peace of soul and conscience, S. 142. P. 67.
Overmuch ease, and pampering of the belly, are great prouocations to sin, S.
143. P. 67. and 68. They which care not, to keep a good conscience, do at the
length fall into an extreme contempt of faith: he that will have his faith
acceptable in the sight of God, must keep a good conscience, otherwise his
faith is dead, S. 144. P. 68. The riches of covetous tyrants, increasing, the
wealth of inferior persons does decrease: and as covetousness does increase in
men, virtues do decrease in them. Riches are the gift of God, and to be
bestowed to his own glory, and the comfort of our brethren. The covetous man
in gaining riches, loses himself. The covetous man, if he had more gold, and
greater riches, than was in that ship which came from Ophyre to Solomon, yet
would he never be contented, nor any whit near satisfied, S. 145. and 146. P.
68. 69. and 70. The riches of this world, are to very many poison, but godly
men possess their riches, and not their riches them. Their riches are drudges
to them, and not they to their riches, S. 147. P. 70. As the touch stone tries
gold, so gold tries man. A very good huntesman and his hounds, S. 148. P*
71. Not to give unto the poor, if a man be able to give, is sacrilege. It is a
very lamentable thing, to see and consider, how vi^ely and wickedly, many men
do lavish out, and consume the riches wherewith God has put them in trust, to
use them to his own glory, and the good of his church, S. 149. P. 72. Christ
suffered and died as he was man, but as he is God, he neither suffered, nor
died. All that be surely grounded, and graffed in Christ Jesus, whatsoever
tribulations, and heavy crosses they bear in their bodies, yet their faith,
hope, and love to God, will never shrink, but they will be constant, come what
shall, S. 150. P. 73. Wicked men are never satisfied, with committing of any
evil, they make no end of their ungodly practices, the more evil they do,
the more still, do they desire to do, S. 151. P. 73. and 74. The unskillful,
and ungodly minister, that delivers the word, and sacraments, to those that
are well prepared woorthily to receive the same, hurts himself only, though
he perish, they may be saved, they receiving it woorthily, his vnwoorthines
does not prejudice them, S. 152. P. 74. It greeueth our God greatly, to see man
make so little account of his soul, and so lightly to regard that, which he
has loved so deerly, he cannot abide to see it beset with wicked thoughts, on
every side, S 153. P. 74. and 75. To dwell among profane and wicked men, and
yet still to be constant, in thy faith and religion, is an evident argument of
Gods spirit dwelling in thee, and preserving thee from all the cunning and
sleights of satan: for as a looking glass is made foul with the breath of
those that blow upon it, so oftentimes good men are corrupted with evil
company, S. 154. P. 75. and 76. Satan does spread, and lay abroad, most
dangerous baits and snares, in the persons of lewd and ungodly men, and all to
trap us, and to prejudice our salvation, S. 155. P. 76. Wicked and graceless
men, cannot see this world, nor the sleights and deceits of the same, because
there is no distance between the world and themselves. For the eye it self,
cannot see a thing, unless there be some distance, between the eye and the
object that is to be seen, S. 156. P. 76. There is no manner of sin (as it is
sin) that can offend the wicked and ungodly sort, displease it God never so
greatly, in the midst of Babylon they see it not, in the midst of Sodom,
they feel not the stinch of it. As they be in the world, so they be of it, and
the world it self, and therefore they love and embrace it: they cannot, they
will not spy any faults in the world, the stinch of the world, is to them a
sweet savor, the foulnes of it, to them is beauty it self, S. 157. P. 76.
and 77. A flatterer is a wild beast, an unclean devil, a sorcerer, a witch,
a thief: and no thief in the world vnwoorthier to live, than he. He that does
dispraise thee, and he that does flatter thee, be both persecutors of thee,
but the flatterers tongue will do thee most harm. Flattery is a sweet music to
a man's ^ares, but in deed, there is none more pernicious and pestilent than
it, S. 158. P. 77. The flatterer has always at his fingers ends, and ready
under his girdle, the gestures, voices, inclinations and dispositions, of all
persons, high and low. Say what thou will, and do what thou will, he will
please thy humor in all things, S. 159. P. 78. Though the bloody minded
Papists, do want power and opportunity, yet they never want good will, to
perform their treachery and malice, against the servants of God, with all
tyrannical cruelty, S. 160. P. 79. Where the skin of a lion is not enough,
nor will not serve, it is wont to be peeced, with the skin of a fox: that
which a cruel man, cannot accomplish by force, he will perform it by fraud, S.
161. P. 79. An old fox is hardly snared: and yet at the length, they be
either snared for their conversion, or knared for their confusion. Hypocrites
and arrogant persons, do never follow Christ, S. 161. P. 80. An hypocrite is
like an apple that is very beautiful without, and rotten within: and like a
goodly tall tree, that florisheth, and is full of leaves, but fruitless: he
would seem to be that he is not, and hates to be that he seems, S. 162. P.
80. If thou love to be fed with flattery, then thou will feed thy flatterers,
and they at the length, will serve thee, as Acteons dogs served him. The
flattered shall be devoured of his dog the flatterer, and the flatterer
himself shall be devoured of that foul curre, and most cruel hell hound
satan, S. 163. P. 81. It is a very hard thing, for a man to give over his
acquaintance with the world. A child will love his nurse, for the dugs sake,
though she be an whore: and men love this present world, for the vain
pleasures, and carnal delights of the same, though indeed, the world be a
very strumpet, S. 164 Page 81. and 82. If men would even steal, as it were,
and privily convey themselves, but one hour in every day, from the service of
the world, flesh, and devil, to serve the Lord, in truth and sincerity, they
would at the length, by little and little, take such pleasure, and find such
comfort, in the service of God, that they would give themselves wholly, and most
willingly to it, and be ^orie, and repent them, from the bottom of their
hearts, that they had been so long, in so bad a service, S. 164. Page 82.
Vicious living is more oftensiue, and does more harm, in old age, than in
green youth. An old man or woman, ought to instruct others, as well by good
example, of godly life, as by counsels and admonitions, but when old men or
women, fall to folly, they hurt themselves with their sins, and infinite
others, with their evil example, S. 165. Page 82. The Lord does not open, the
mysteries and secrets of his word, unto those, whom he perceives vainly and
curiously to seek after them, but unto such as will both profit themselves,
and others by the same. He that will profit by hearing or reading the word of
God, must bring faith and humility with him, S. 166. P. 82. and 83. Many men
in the world, are fitly compared, to the dry skin, which a snake does cast, to
renew her a^e, the skin has the shape, likeness, and prints of eyes, and the
very rind also, wherewith the eye is covered, but yet no seeing eyes: So many
men, have eyes to see the creatures of God, but not one half eye, to see the
creator. And many that bear the name of christians, have no more true
knowledge of Christ, than they had of the sun or moon, when they were yet in
their mothers wombes. So that, when they read, or hear the word of God, they
profit no more, than a blind man should profit, by a looking glass set before
him, S. 167. P. 83. and 84. Some do come to church, to hear the word of God,
to the end they may know him, and his will to do it, and do bear away with
them such heavenly lessons, as they never forget, wherewith their faith is
strengthened, their souls comforted, and their consciences greatly quieted:
some again do come, in hope to hear, some thing fall from the preachers
mouth, unwisely, vndiscr^^tly, or barbarously spoken, wherewith they may sport
themselves, and scorn the preacher. Such men, as they come with wicked
purposes, and cauilling minds, so they depart, with hearts so hard as adamants,
far worse, than when they came, S. 168. P. 84. and 85. Afflictions, troubles,
and calamities, are great helps, to keep our souls from the canker, and
rottennes of sin, and the spots of the world, and to put us in remembrance,
of the goodness, mercies, and love of God toward us. Men are borne, under that
condition, that their lives should ever be open, and subject, to all the
inevitable darts, of infinite troubles, and that there is no refusing, to live,
and lead their lives, in that condition, where under they were borne. Come
what shall, the children of God, are still patient. S. 169 P. 85. 86. and 87.
Darkness and blindness, cannot remain in the heart of that man, which the holy
Ghost, the author of all light, and the only light it self, has chosen to be
his own seat, and holy habitation: Error cannot flow from the fountain of
wisdom, neither is it possible, that a line of wickedness should be drawn,
from the one a center of all goodness: the fruits of death, cannot grow out of
the tree of life, these are impossible things. And on the other side, where the
holy spirit of grace, and might, has not place and possession, there is no
good thing to be found, because the author of goodness is not there, S. 170. P.
87. and 88. Calamity patiently borne does avail very much, for the advancing
of the praise of true virtue, and unfeigned holiness, S. 171. P. 88 It is man's
only safety, to keep himself near unto God, for when he shakes off the
government of Gods word, and with his sins and iniquities, divides himself
from the Lord, then comes his danger, he cannot but fall into the hands of
satan, hell, and destruction, S. 172. P. 88. Sorrows, troubles, afflictions,
and vexations, are in the children of God, the armor and badges of Christ, S.
173. P. 89. Howsoever God deals with men, yet he is all one, there is no
change, nor any shadow of change in him, the change is in our selves, not in
the Lord. When we living in his fear, faith and love, do enjoy the light of
his countenance, his blessing, spiritual and temporal: if at any time he turn
his face from us, and shall take away the comforts of our souls and bodies, it
is because we are changed, not he, S. 174. P. 89. Man must be very careful,
and have in himself, at the least a desire, that something may be in him, to
move the Lord to grant that unto him, that he craves, or looks for at his
hand: as if he will have the Lord to be merciful, he must use mercy toward
others: if he would have him to be a good father to him, he must show himself
an obedient child, etc. S. 175. P. 89. 90. 91. Diverse and sundry names given to
Christ, to express his nature, and his disposition toward man, S. 175. P. 91.
Though a man be never so barren, bad, and without any good thing in him, yet if
the word of the Lord, once take hold of his heart, and find any rooting there,
it will draw him by degrees, to the nature of it self, and make him very
fruitful, S. 176. P. 91. A man may boldly inueigh against the sins of
others, when he has amended his own amisses, and very likely he shall be salt
to others, when himself is seasoned, S. 177. P. 92. Although virtue and
godliness, seem unto the wicked very bitter and vn^auorie, and all vice and
naughtines swee^e, and well savoring, and they are very unwilling, that the
gardens of their hearts should be weeded, and evil things drawn out of them,
or that any good should be planted in them, yet the ministers of the word, must
still do their office and duty, S. 178. P. 93. and 94. The holy ghost does
^^e, to call men and women, the sons and daughters of them, whose manners and
conditions they follow, and not of their natural parents, when they follow not
their footesteps, S, 179. P. 94. Men very honorably borne, and coming of
honorable parents, being themselves naked, that is, without virtues, and
honorable acts, do justly deserve the loss of their titles, honor and
dignity, and whiles they degenerate, from their noble parents, of whose honor
they brag, they are fitly and rightly compared to Aesops ^ay, S. 180. P. 95.
Even as in a threshing place, chafe will be above wheat, not because it is the
better, but because it is the lighter, so amongst men, they that be vain, and
have nothing in them, but pride, vainglory, and a false opinion of themselves,
will thrust forth themselves, before those, that have a far greater weight of
virtue, and just deserts, then they have: but on the otherside the humble man,
will ever take the lowest place, and be well contented with the least account
in this world, S. 181. P. 96. Whosoever will enter the gate, to go into that
most stately and princely house of the kingdom of heaven, must bow down,
humble himself, and stoop low, otherwise he break his head, be driven
backward, and never get in: for pride is pestilent sickness, it deuideth a man
from God, from himself, and from his neighbor, and does disperse and distract
him, into infinite evils, and innumerable vices, S. 182. P. 97. Rioting,
excess, and fulness of meat and drink, does make men's bodies unapt, to all
good and holy exercises, and very prone and apt to all sin and wickedness, S.
183. P. 98. A cable rope being singled into threads whereof it was made, may be
drawn through the eye of a needle, and a rich man dividing his riches as God
has appointed and commanded him, may enter into the kingdom of heaven, S. 184.
and 105. P 98. and 99. A rustie iron key, hanging at a whip coard, or at a
thong of leather, which will open the door, and let a man go into an house,
where is gold and great riches, is better then a k^i^ of gold tied to a
string, or lace of silk and silver, which will not open the lock, S. 186. P.
100. and 101. Idleness is a schoolmaster, and a teacher of all mischiefs, and
does extinguish all virtues in man, but godly and holy exercises, are very
profitable, do much good, and increase virtue, in all that use them, S. 187. P.
102. Ungodly rich men, have a veil or covering before their eyes, bird lime
in their wings, and fetters about their feet: that they cannot see the
kingdom of God, they cannot move one feather of a wing toward heaven, nor
set one foot before another toward everlasting life, and yet they be merry
now, but their sorrow is not far off, S. 188. P. 102. 103. 104. The higher that
proud, and vain men do clymbe, the fowler and the more mischievous is their
fall. Vanity, pomp, and pride, are very bad and naughty feathers, which
christians ought not to suffer, to grow in their wings, but to pull them out,
and to cast them into the dust, S. 189. P. 104. What difference soever, is
among men now, whiles they live in the world, death at the length, having don
his office, will make them all so equal and alike, that the dust of princes,
and poor men, of rich men and beggars, of the learned and unlearned, of those
that are wise, and of the foolish, being all mingled together, they can no more
be discerned, and known one from another, then the ashes of one tree, can be
divided from the ashes of another, being both burnt together in one furnace, S.
190. P. 104. and 105. Very many in this world being without the fear of God,
do live in great pomp, al pleasures, fulness of great riches, and wealth at
will, and are highly esteemed during their life, whose woes and sorrows do
then begin, when their pride, pleasures, and riches, and themselves be parted:
and on the other side, there be not a few, which do live here in great
troubles, and manifold afflictions, and are no whit regarded of the world f^^re
they God never so truly, the end of whose lives, does bring the beginning of
their joys, S. 191. 105. Whatsoever this world does or can afford us, is so
light as a feather, more subject to a change, then the moon, more unconstant
then the wind. The world therefore, with all the trifles and trash it has, is
to be contemned, and the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, is
diligently to be sought for, for that indureth for ever, S. 192. P. 106. 107.
The virtue of godly princes, do mightily move the hearts of subjects, to true
religion, a right worshipping of God, and due obedience, S. 193. P. 117. Humble
men when they stoop lowest, and prostrate themselves most before the Lords
throne, then rise they up highest, and draw nearest to the likeness of God: on
the otherside, vain and proud men, when they exalt themselves most, then are
they likest unto the devil, S. 194. P. 107. They that be in great prosperity,
are commonly in great dangers, a low and mean estate is safest, S. 195. P.
107. and 108. To be under the Lords protection, and in his favor, is to be in
all safety, against all power of men and devils, and to be from under the
wings of his grace, is to ^^e open to all dangers, even to death and
destruction of souls and bodies. It is good for us therefore, in all obedience
to keep our selves near unto the Lord, S. 196. P. 108. Calamities, troubles,
and afflictions, will overthrow any thing whatsoever is in man, save only
firm and constant virtue, but that is so goodly, so fresh, and so flourishing a
laurel tree, that it will not be consumed, burnt up, nor destroyed, with any
fire that breaks out of the clouds, be it never so fearce, nor with any
torments or troubles whatsoever, S. 197. P. 109. When princes will have godly,
virtuous, loyal, and obedient subjects, they must use them as Jacob did his
sheep, they may lay before them the rod of true religion, justice, holiness,
righteousness, and integrity of life, that by the sight of those things, they
may conceive good things, and bring forth fruit of that color. And so must
parents deal with their natural children, and ministers of the word with
their spiritual children, and masters with their servants, S. 198. P. 110.
When a man is in most danger, and greatest distress, then is his virtue and
constancy best tried, S. 199. P. 110. The last day of all days, that is the
general judgment day, will be a very glomy, and a black sessions day, for
those men, that do keep their gold, silver, and riches, and see their poor
brethren distressed, and in great want, and will not relieve them, S. 200. P.
110. 111. Riches, as gold, money, and such like, laid up in chestes, and locked
up in cofers, are in danger to be lost, through thieves, fire, or other means,
but being dispersed and scattered among the poor, they are in safety, and
will bring forth much fruit, and will be very profitable both to the giver,
and to the receiver, S. 201. P. 112. The Lord calls him a blessed man, that
releeueth the poor and needy, and does promise, that he will deliver him in
the day of trouble. A little is great riches to him that has nothing, S. 202.
P. 112. It is very unreasonable and ungodly, that one christian does not
comfort and relieve another, in their tribulations and wants, S. 203 P. 113.
Christians are commanded to lend, without looking for any gain thereby.
V^u^ers commit theft: they must die and not live: They make merchandise of
other men's myseries, and their own gain, of other men's losses. The usurer is
like him that under the color of love, will take his neighbor, which is
already down, by the hand to lift him up, that he may give him a greater
fall, S. 204. P. 114. In the ministers of the word, true doctrine and godly
life must go together. He that teaches good things to others, and teaches not
himself to do them, is like a sieue or boulter, wherewith meal is sifted or
boulted, which sends forth the finest flower, and best of the wheat, and
keeps the bran, and woorst of the wheat, to it self, S. 105. P. 114. The
tyranny and cruelty of princes, toward their loyal subjects, does threaten
the ruin of their kingdoms: but lenity and mercy, does make their kingdoms
mightily to flourish, and brings peace and safety to themselves. Mercy
becomes a christian prince very well. Mercy and truth have kept, and do
keep Elizabeth our gracious Queen of England, and elemencie does strengthen
her throne. Mercy does lift man up to Godward, but cruelty does cast man down
to hell ward, S. 206. P. 114 115. Ingratitude is a grievous sin, wherewith
the Lord has ever been highly offended, the Lords hand has ever been
stretched out against it. England has received great and infinite benefits
both for their bodies and souls, but England is far behind, with thanks giving
unto the Lord, wherefore we must be either more thankful, or else look
assuredly for more punishment. S. 207. P. 115. 116. Envy is not bred, in the
hearts of virtuous and godly men, but in the hearts and minds of the wicked and
ungodly. Envy will not be tamed, a man may overcome and subdue his enemies,
but not their envy. Envy does tear and rende in pieces the man in whom it
is. The envious man does make the felicity of another man, his own torment,
S. 208. P. 117. The Lord will have his servants tried in this world with many
afflictions, to the end, that the difference which is between them, and the
children of this world, may appear and be evident, and that virtue may grow
to perfection in them. A christian man may be a martyr and even living, without
losing his life by fire or sword, S. 209. P. 117. 118. 119. Words of doctrine
are very profitable, but when they are seen, to work holiness and
righteousness in the teachers, they then prevail the more, with them that are
taught, S. 210. P. 119. 120. The lighter balance will ever be highest, and the
vainer and worse man, will ever extol himself most: the heavier balance
will ever be lowest, and the better man will ever humble himself most. It is
in a christian man some perfection, to know, and to acknowledge his own
imperfection. S. 211. P. 120. A thief will speak thee fair, and yet will rob
or kill thee. The nature and conditions, the bloody tyranny, and more the
beastly cruelty, of usurers plainly and truly opened, S. 212. P. 120. 121.
122. A very true, perfect, and plain description of hypocrites, what is true
virtue among Christians. They that would seem to be religious, virtuous,
godly and honest, do differ so far, from that they seem to be, as the froth
of gold, does differ from gold it self, S. 215. P. 123. 124. They that with
their hypocrisy, do steal the praises and commendations of men, without any
just desert, they either lose them before they die, or not long after, for the
truth will out, it will not be hid for ever. The glory of this world is
buried with men's bodies, when they be dead, and posterities do forget it. To be
truly glorious, is to despise the glory of this world, S. 214. P. 125. 126.
Singlenes of heart, and true christian simplicity, is best seen, and made most
evident, in troubles and afflictions, S. 215. P. 126. 127. Sorrow and grief
shut up, and pestered in man's heart, and no way uttered is very dangerous and
deadly: weeping, mourning, and sighing, does lighten and ease the heart, S. 216.
P. 127. The reprobates and castawaies that be tormented in hell, do confess,
that the pomp and glory of this world is transitory, and that it is a vain
thing for man to set his heart upon. Let christians therefore, whiles it is to
day, that is, whiles they live here upon the earth, set their hearts and minds
upon God, heaven, and heavenly things, and not upon this world, or ought that
belongs to it: let them either confess here in their life time, that all
those things be vain, which the world does afford, unto man, or else they
must confess it in hell, where and when it will be too late, S. 218. P. 128.
All they, that with the eyes of faith, do behold the ioies and pleasures of
heaven, laid up, and kept in store, for the saints of God in the world to come,
although they sit here, in the princely seats, of all dignity, honor,
delights, or whatsoever may he had in this world, yet will they unfeignedly
desire to be dissolved, to remove out of this world, and to go to dwell with
the Lord Jesus, S. 219. Page 129. Men being thirsty, do earnestly desire
water, but their thirst being quenched, they turn their backs upon the
fountain, where they found water, so men distressed will cry, and seek after
God, but being eased, they will forget him, and turn their backs to him, S.
220. P. 130. The knowledge and understanding, of the word and will of God, does
not by and by work an hungring and thirsting, to lead a virtuous and a godly
life, in all those whom it has instructed, and most perfectly taught, what
they should do, and how they ought to live. He that will speak good things, and
will not do them, is like an instrument, that delights other men, but not it
self. To what end a man should desire knowledge, if he will desire to have it
aright, S. 221. P. 131. 132. and 133. Man's body must not be pampered, but
kept in subjection to the spirit, otherwise it will be unruly, and very unapt
to fear and serve the Lord, S. 222. P. 134. Many men when they be poor, and
in mean estate will be very lowly, but once enriched and advanced, they forget
both God and man, as in such men, honors change manners, so were it very well,
if manners might change honors, S. 223. P. 135. There be in this world two
principal and chief fishers, the one is Christ, the other is the devil.
Christ fisheth for men to save them, the devil fisheth for men, to destroy
them. The devil catches far more than Christ, the reason is, because his bait
is more agreeable, to the corrupted nature of man, than Christ's bait is, but
happy are they, that take Christ's bait, and not the devils, S. 224. P. 136.
137. and 138. Satan is a subtle fisher, and does not by and by deal very
roughlye with those, of whom he makes a sure account, but does suffer them a
little to play, and to sport them selves, with his hook in their mouths,
until at the length, they cannot escape, S. 225. Page 139. and 140. They be
most dangerous people, that can keep no counsel, nor secrets, S. 226. P. 140.
141. and 142. Very many will make a show of virtue, that have no delight in
virtue it self. Such men are fitly compared to painters, whose delight is more
in colors, than in the substance, S. 227. P. 142. Very many will follow
Christ with their lips, whose hearts do never come near him: in words they will
be with God, but in deeds with the devil, S. 228. P. 144. Christ is said to
make a feast, and to eat, at the conversion of a sinner, S. 229. Page 14^. and
146. Idleness does breed and cherish, all wickedness and abomination in man,
and does not become a Christian, S. 230. P. 147. The judgments of God, that
hang over our heads, for our unthankfulness, S. 231. Page 147. etc. When man in
troubles seeks for comfort from the world, he seeks for life, in the house
of death, S. 229. P. 145. The world with a smiling look, and the devil with a
fair word, can sooner have at commandment to follow them, and to do their
wills, the greatest number, than Christ can with his death and the promise of
his kingdom, S. 231. P. 148. Man is the dearest purchase, that ever was made
in heaven or earth, the like price and cost was never bestowed upon any
creatures as upon man, S. 231. P. 148. The goodness of Christ considered, there
was never any creatures dealt so unkindly with him, as man does, ibidem. When
Christ calls us to do good, then we run headlong, to do all manner of evil,
ibidem. It will profit man nothing, to abstain from the committing of sin,
if he love it in his heart, and does it rather for fear of shame here, or
condemnation in the world to come, than drawn with the love of God, ibidem.
Page 151. The people of Rome were mightily moved, with an oration made by
Marcus Antoninus, upon the death of Caesar, and expulsed the homicides out of
the city: but when we hear of the death of Christ, and know the cause of his
death to be our sins, yet we will not expulse sin out of our selves: they
shed tears, when they heard what Caesar had done for them, but we can hear
what Christ did for us, without one tear, or any grief of heart, S. 232. P.
152. Caesar was more beholden to the Romans, than Christ is to the most part of
the world, S. 232. P. 153. The cause of the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrhe,
and that the same sins be now very rife. S. 232 P. 154. Very many will
confess, that God in times past did most justly punish the sins of men, but
the same confessors, will do the like, without either fear or love of God. S.
232. P. 154. The examples of Gods judgments upon others, do no whit move the
ungodly in these days, S. 232. P. 155. and 156. Men in these days are worse
than some of those Jews which crucified Christ, S. 232. P. 156. They that will
not profit any thing by hearing the word preached, nor will suffer no drops
nor dewes of grace to bide upon them, are compared to lepers, ibidem. The Lords
ministers must go on in doing their office, and his business, though the people
be never so obstinate, and do what they can, that the walls of sin, may fall
down, as the walls of Jericho did, at the sound of the trumpets, and the
shoutes of the people, ^. 232. P. 158.
FINIS.

