THE DIAMOND of Devotion, Cut and squared into six several points: Namely, 1
The Footpath to Felicity. 1 2 A Guide to Godliness. 82 3 The School of Skill.
181 4 A Swarm of Bees. 209 5 A Plant of Pleasure. 245 6 A Grove of Graces. 283
Full Of many fruitful lessons, available to the leading of a godly and
reformed life:

BY ABRAHAM FLEMING.

Psalm. 119. verse. 72, 127. The Law of thy mouth (O Lord) is deerer to use
than thousands of gold and silver.

I love thy commandments above gold and precious stones.

Printed by Henry Denham dwelling in Pater Noster Row, being the assign of
William Seres. 1581

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

COMME IE TRUE.


TO THE Right Worshipful, Sir GEORGE Carey, Knight, Knight Marshall of her
Majesty's most Honorable household, Son and heir apparent to the right
Honorable Lord HENRY, Lord of Hi^^sdon, etc.
AND To the most virtuous and godly minded Lady, the Lady ELIZABETH his
wife, long life, and happy days.
NOT VNADVIsedlie (Right Worshipful) but upon singular circumspection did the
ancient Greeks call Hercules by the name of Musagetes. It is also recorded, as
a thing memorable, that Fuluius, Nobilior, at the great spoils of Ambratia,
preserved harmeles and vndamnified the images of the nine Muses, and conueieng
them into Hercules Temple, kept them there very carefully.

Now (right worshipful) upon what consideration those worthy Seniours did
this, I scarcely understand, unless this might be the reason, because they
perceived and saw, that between the affairs of learning, and the exploites
of valiantnes, there is a certain intercourse of dutifulnes, and a necessary
kind of service interchangeablie required.

For they (wisely no doubt) foresawe, and preciselie noted this as a warranted
principle, that the liberal sciences stood no less in need of the favorable
patronage of Great men for their supportation and maintenance: than the
strategemes and noble acts of Great men, of the liberal sciences, for the
reviving of their renown, and the continuing of their remembrance.

For Books are dedicated unto such as be of Worship and Honor, that under
their tuteleship and protection, as under the covert of Mineruas shield, they
might lodge in safety, and be sufficiently defended against the venomous
teeth of malicious mouths: and the commendable virtues and valiant acts of
worthy Gentlemen, are registered and sealed up in the monuments of the Muses,
that by their incessant utterance, and perpetual speech, they might be
exempted and set free from the envious shot of consuming time.

Pliny presented his natural Histories unto Vespasian: Lucane his historical
poe^trie unto Nero: Oppian his golden Book of fishes unto Antonine: and Julius
Pollux his volume of the names and terms of things unto Commodus: of whom
they were so well accepted, that they do at this instant, and shall for ever
hereafter, remain even to the end of the last generation.

The example of which aged writers, and the usual manner of our modern
Polygraphers, both strangers-borne, and home-bread, as heretofore I have been
induced, so presently I am persuaded to follow, for two alowable reasons.

First, because the hypothesis or argument of this Book, is generally
appliable to every private person, and will (I hope) requite the travel of
the understanding Reader, with reasonable profit and advantage.

Secondly, for that your Worship has the common name and report to be endued
with sundry singular gifts of mind, as utterance of foraigne tongues,
variety of knowledge in the Arts of greatest difficulty, judgment in
affairs of policy: beside the gifts of body and fortune, which if I might
deservedly decipher (though I spoke the truth, yet should I incur suspicion
of Gnatonisme) time would first fail me, before I could make an end.

But above all, (which is the foundation of my hope and confidence) for that
your Worship is so nobly minded, as with rare courtesy to favor and incline
unto such as profess themselves learned: or not professing, are so reputed: or
not reputed, appear so to be, by some extrinsecall testimony exhibited to the
open world.

But desirous to knit up that breeflie, which, were it not for the abusing of
your Woorship with vanity of words, would be written at large, I beseech you
favorably to accept this my travel, being a mixed treatise, partly
theological, and partly moral, and to vouchsafe it your Woorships protection.

Which I crave so much the more instantly, because the patronage of such, so
worshipful, so learned, so devout, and studious, will be means to prefer this
book, and to bring it the more in use and exercise, being (to speak
allegoricallie) a Ship of safeguard, wherein every Christian, high and low,
rich and poor, young and old, may sail through all seas and streights of this
troublesome and wicked world, without running upon the rock of repentance, and
come at last by a direct current, to the port of endless peace and happiness,
even the kingdom of Heaven, whereof the Lord God make you, and all your
Worships affinity and consanguinitie partakers, for the merits of his Son
Jesus Christ,

Amen.
At your Worships commandment always most dutiful Abraham Fleming.

THE FOOTEPATH to Felicity, Which every Christian must walk in, before he
can come to the land of Canaan.

BY ABRAHAM FLEMING.

Psalm. 25. 11, 12. 11 What man is he that fears the Lord? him shall he teach
in the way that he shall choose.

12 His soul shall dwell at ease, and his seed shall inherit the (...).

Apoc. 22, 14. 14 Blessed are they that do Gods commandments, that their right
may be in the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the City.

AT LONDON, Printed by Henry Denham, etc. 1581

A Preface to the true Christian Reader.
THere is some reason, why this first Treatise bears the name and title of
the Footepath to Felicity: although some, more captious than cunning,
pretending notwithstanding a singular secret knoweledge and judgment,
condemn many Books by their outward face, being nothing seen in the bowels
of the same, and utterly ignorant to what issue the conueiance of the matter
is like to grow. But to leave them in their own folly, albeit they would be
counted wise, and to touch the name of this present discourse, called The
Footepath to Felicity, I think it not unnecessary.

The present treatise, whereof this, for fault of a better, may be the Preface,
is named The Footepath to Felicity, and not without special reason. For, to
grow in favor with Princes, Potentates, and Governors of provinces, we see
there is a way, after the which diligent inquisition and search must be made,
and being found, it must be walked in with sincerity and vprightnes of mind.
Some by this gift, some by that ornament, either of mind or body, become
gracious and acceptable in the eyes of their Lords and masters: in which way
whiles they keep their feet with integrity and simplenes, they are so much
the more favored, by how much their good gifts are well and rightly used: and
in this grace and liking of their betters they are sure to continue, so long as
they make virtue the foundation of their service.

To draw to our purpose, God is omnipotent, all Princes are impotent: he
immortal, they mortal: he above, they below: he Creator, they creatures:
finally, he a clear fountain of all goodness, they filthy puddles of
wickedness: is it our wish, is it our will, is it our intent, affection, and
desire to please him, and to direct our lives after his good pleasure? then
must we know, then must we learn, then must we envre our selves to tread in
the Footepath of Faith, which conducteth such as walk in it to perpetual
felicity, and therefore deservedly has this denomination or name, to be
called The Footepath to Felicity. Now touching Faith, it is such a general
inclusiue, as that it admits the exception of no virtue, either moral or
intellectual, wherewith whosoever are endued, they have furniture enough to
enable them to serve both God and man. By this our forefathers grew famous,
this they possessed in full measure and weight, and therewith a supply of all
other good gifts: for Faith has her train, she has her retinue, she comes
not without a company of confederates.

To pass this over, because it is a point, wherein none (as I think) is to
seek: it is to be understood, that this footepath to felicity consists in
sundry particularities, which though they be many, yet may they be reduced
unto two principal heads, the first concerning God, the second touching man.
But cutting off all divisions and subdiuisions, for the avoiding of tediousnes,
abruptly concluding this Preface, I submit the title and the matter of the
treatise ensuing, to the censure of the wise and discreet Reader, unto whose
judgment, after due observation of the whole invention and conueiance, as unto
a sufficient referendarie, I appeal: and now to the purpose.

THE FOOTEPATH TO FELICITY.
The first Chapter.
1 Who they be that walk in the footepath which leads to felicity. 2 The
sentence of the Prophet David to the same purpose. 3 Of the ways wherein men
continually and commonly do walk. 4 Examples of Gods judgments upon such as
walked in the ways of wickedness. 5 The reward of the wicked, and who they be
that have their portion in hell fire. 6 What they are by name, and common
course of life.

1 THIS question was demanded of our savior Christ: namely, what a man might
do to win eternal lite? The answer was directly made, By keeping the
commandments. The Ruler (for so Luke notes him by that title of dignity, but
Matthew and Mark speak indefinitelie, making mention of one, but not
describing him by any name of preeminence) the Ruler I say, redemanding and
alleging for his own justification, the observation of the commandments from
his youth, and requiring to know what he did lack, as though he had fulfilled
all things in such ample manner, that he needed no further supply: Christ, to
lay open before him his inward disease, which the Ruler felt not before,
enioined him, if he would be perfect, and finally obtain everlasting life, to
go and sell his lands, his fermes, his impropriations (if he had any) his
purchases, his great offices, his corn, his cattle, his apparel of rich and
costly silk, his plate of silver and gold: finally, his dwelling house, with
the implements of the same, and to distribute the revenues of all these his
possessions to the poor. Which doctrine of Christ, the quesie stomach of this
wealthy Gentleman could in no case digest, albeit our savior, immediately
upon his iniunction, annexed a promise, that for recompense of his transitory
substance, he should have treasure in heaven. Whereby then we see, that the
bare opinion of innocence, and the extrinsecall and ceremonious righteousness,
which was the foundation of this Rulers justification, is so far from deserving
the name of truth and holiness, that it is judged mere hypocrisy and
dissimulation. Whereupon I infer this, that whosoever leads his life within
the limits of this resolution given by our Savior Christ, that is to say,
has not only the knowledge, but also the practice, use, and experience of his
counsel and advise, the selfsame person treads the footpath to felicity,
and is passing over into the Paradise of perpetual and perfect pleasure.

2 When the Prophet David, after sundry holy saiengs, savoring of spiritual
understanding and knowledge, thought in his heart, that albeit he said never so
much, yet he could not speak enough: to express the fervent zeal of his
heart toward God the author of all true felicity, he asks this question:
Whereby shall a young man redress his way? and answering the demand, thus he
says: In taking heed thereto, according to thy word.

3 Which speech of the Prophet has this meaning, that the way wherein men
take pleasure and delight, is the way of wantonness, sensuality, and
lasciuiousnes: the way of all uncleanness, vanity, and wickedness: the way
wherein flesh and blood triumphs, and reposeth perfect happiness: the way
which God hates and abhors, being as contrary to the prescript rule of his
commandments, as light and darkness, Christ and Antichrist, Heaven and Hell,
God and the Devil: the way which leads to the dongeon of destruction: the
way of Gods heavy wrath and vengeance: the way wherein sinners walk at
will, and pitch their pauilions of pleasure.

4 In this wicked way the old world went forward so long, till they were
overwhelmed with the irrecouerable plague of the flood: this way brought upon
Sodom, Gomorrha, and Pentapolis, fire and brimstone from heaven: in this way
Pharaoh of Egypt and his people took so long delight, that at last they were
all overthrown and cast away: by haunting this way, the Israelites provoked
God to be their adversary: yea, this way brought Babylon to desolation,
Jerusalem to ruin, Samaria to decaie, Absolon to shame, Saul to reproach,
Achan to his end, Judas to desperation, and all wicked livers, that walowe in
the filthy puddle of their sins, without remorse of conscience, or care of
repentance, to utter damnation.

5 This is the way that leads, as it were by a right and direct line, to
that bottomless pit, where Satan and his Angels dwell in dark dens of
discomfort, whither must repair all such as God has cast off from the hope of
everlasting joy, and blotted their names out of the book of life. Thither
shall be thrust all such as are divided and cut off from the communion and
fellowship of Saints, such as have not oil prepared in their lamps, such as
have not on the wedding garment, such as are not sealed in the forehead, such
as are not of the true sheepefold, such as march not under Christ's banner to
fight in his field, such as have not in them the spirit of sanctification, such
as have their consciences seered with an hot iron, such as are appointed to be
crushed in pieces in the winepresse of Gods wrath, such as have made themselves
strangers from the kingdom of heaven.

6 To be short, and to speak summarilie, in this pit is the portion of all
such, as have cast the commandments of God contemptuously behind them,
covetous persons, robbers, adulterers, swearers, rebels, blasphemers,
bloudsuckers, extortioners, usurers, idle livers, wantons, enemies to Gods
truth, Antichristians, liers, false disciples, teachers of devilish doctrines,
prophaners of holy things, superstitious persons, sowers of sects and schisms
in the Church, Atheists, Nullifidians, Apostataes, mainteiners of erroneous
opinions, Papists: and to conclude, all that live after the flesh, blundering
like Bitelles in blindness, hating the light like Bats and Owls, whose lot is
to drink the dregs of Gods wrath and vengeance, out of a full cup, to their
comfortless condemnation.

The second Chapter.
1 Of the way of the righteous. 2 Nothing can hurt them whom the Lord
defends. 3 Of the power of God and his grace: also who are fortunate, and who
miserable. 4 The same opened and proved by one special example instead of
many. 5 What we must do if we will walk in the way of the Lord. 6 Of the
way of righteousness, and who walk in the same. 7 Wholesome counsels and
admonitions.

THen, since it is apparent by this recital of offenders, who they be that
walk in the wide way that leads to destruction: it is soon to be gathered,
who they be that abhor and avoid, who they be that detest and defy it,
worse than a Scorpion which stingeth unto death.

1 The ways of the righteous are in the hands of God, and he disposes the
footesteps of the just: he is at the elbowe of the faithful to stay them from
falling, and by his spirit he makes their treadings steadfast. How then is it
possible for the godly man to miscarrie, having the Lord God his gracious
governor?

2 What afflictions can alter his happiness, that has the King of glory to be
his helper? What weapon can wound his soul, that is armed at all points with
the spirit of fortitude and strength? What temptations can overcome him, whose
right hand holds fast the sword of Gods word, which cutteth in sunder
whatsoever it smites, and pearseth between the marrowe and the bones?

3 With whom Gods power is present, nothing can turn to his annoiance. Before
whom the grace of God breaks the yse, his passage cannot be perilous: and
therefore that man is most happy and fortunate, whom God vouchethsafe to
govern: as he contrariwise is most miserable and accursed, whom the spirit of
the Almighty has forsaken.

4 Examples hereof are in the holy Scriptures, most plentifully to be
gathered. For let us but look unto the two first sons of Adam, Caine and
Abell, who being brethren, and both coming of the loins of the same parents,
were notwithstanding contrary in all respects: the one a murderer, the other
a Martyr: the one bloudthirstie and violent, the other merciful and innocent:
the first a persecuter, the second a sufferer: the elder refused, the younger
received: Caine accursed, Abell blessed. Here we see the effects of Gods
grace, and his judgments in one example for many.

5 But to return unto the footepath of felicity, which is nothing else, but
the way wherein the Lord has commanded us to walk: it is necessary that we
hear the counsel of the holy scripture: namely, that if we will be perfect,
we must walk before the Lord, as Noah did, who for so doing, was called the
just and upright man of his time. Salomons advice ought not only to be
received, but also followed, who teaches us a near and ready way to the
footepath of felicity, exhorting us in all our ways to think upon God, and
he will direct our steps.

6 There is a beginning of this good way, which the wicked have not the grace
to attain unto: but it pleases the Lord to reveal it to the just. This
beginning is expresselie noted by the holy Ghost to be righteousness, which is
the greatest riches that any Christian heart can wish. This way of
righteousness is the Lords way, it is the holy way, wherein the Jews in
Esaies time, and in them we and our posterities after us, are commanded to
walk, without shrinking aside either to the right hand, or to the left.

7 In this way, being the way of perfection, it is not possible for us,
unless we put off our imperfections, to walk: for it is a sanctified and
holy way, and therefore nothing that is common or unclean can tread in the
same. Let the counsel of Tobie teach us what to do in this case: namely, to
beseech the Lord that he would guide our paths, and direct us in our ways. Let
us harken to the counsel of David, and pray as he prayed: Stay my steps in
thy paths, O Lord, that my feet do not slide. For the saying of Solomon is
most agreeable unto truth, That the heart of man purposes his way, but the
Lord does direct his steps. Let us therefore go up to the Lords hill, and to
the house of the God of Jacob, and he shall teach us his ways, that we may
tread in his paths.

The third Chapter.
1 The manner how we ought to examine our selves, whether we walk in the way
of the Lord, or no: and first, of our Christian belief. 2 Of the keeping of
the commandments, and how we have discharged our duties therein. 3 Of the
violating of the sabbath day, and how it is profaned. 4 The sundry ways
whereby concupiscence is kindled. 5 A testimony and token of ae clear and
vnguiltie conscience.

HOW shall a man persuade himself that he walks in the way of the Lord, and
is guided and conducted by his grace? Let him enter into his own conscience,
and call to examination his continual trade of life and conversation, thus
communing with his own heart.

1 Have thou performed the solemn vow which thou made with God in thy
baptism? Have thou renounced and detested the devil and all his works? Have
thou believed in God the father, in God the son, and in God the holy Ghost?
Have thou been a mainteiner of the ancient and apostolical faith, which
acknowledges the incarnation of Jesus Christ, his passion, his descension, his
resurrection, his ascension, and his glorification?

2 Have thou been an unfeigned worshipper of God, and not mingled his divine
and sincere service with men's imaginations, vain ceremonies, irreligious
rites, superstitious traditions, and heretical constitutions? Have thou not
been derogatorie in thought, word, nor deed to the honor of God, whereby he
has been deprived of some part of his glory? Have thou not been a worshipper
of images, a favorer of idolatry, a popish canonist, an anoiled
sacramentarie, a Franciscane, a Dominicane, a Trinitarie, a popish Sectarie, a
Jesuit, a seed of Antichrists seminary, a bringer in of novelties into the
Church, to the sowing of sects, schisms, and heresies? Have thou not been a
swearer, a forswearer, a blasphemer, a lier, a dissembler, an hypocrite, and
falsehearted, whereby thou have taken the name of God in vain, and abused the
calling of a Christian? Have thou not been obstinate of life, rebellious, and
disobedient, casting behind thee the commandments of thy parents?

3 Have thou not been a breaker of the holy Sabbath, which God himself
sanctified for the imitation of all men, that with circumcised hearts they
should celebrate and solemnize the same? Have thou not applied that day,
severed to holy exercises, to vain pastimes for thine own pleasure and
recreation? yea, have thou not spent it in beastly behavior, as in
Epicurisme, belly cheer, sensuality, Gentilisme, and otherwise than the
precise vocation of a well reformed Christian requires? Have thou not been
maliciously minded, envious, merciless, uncharitable, covetous, an
extortioner, a briber, a ^surer, a violent oppresser, a defrauder of the poor,
a greedy gatherer, all which, with thousands the like enormities, tend to the
violating of the law of God?

4 Have thou not been wanton, lewd, lecherous, bawdie in speech and
communication, a defiler of thy vessel, an adulterus person, led into sundry
lusts and concupiscences, a tempter of maidens and wives to naughtines, an
allurer of young damsels to the violating of their virginity, a singer of light
songs and sonets, a teller of tales and stories of love, and what love is, a
nice danser, and such like? all which tend to the perverting of honesty, and
are as it were bellows to blow and kindle the fire of fleshly lust and
concupiscence? Have thou not been a privy pilferer, an open ^rea^er, a robber,
a thief, an usurper of that which is not thine own, a challenger of another
man's right, a false dealer, a seeker after filthy lucre, and a shameless
slaunderer, which is a kind of stealth most detestable? Have thou not coueted
this and that, as thou have been carried away with the violence of thy desires,
knowing, that although it might make for thy profit, yet it could not but
turn to the damage of thy brother?

5 Have thou offended in these cases, or art thou clear? If thou have so
walked, that thy conscience can plead faultles and unguilty, betwixt thee and
thine innocence, then may thou boldly believe, that the grace of God is thy
guide and governor: then may thou be assured, that thou art in the very
footepath to felicity, and passing into the land of promise, Jerusalem the
Lords city, not built with hands, as subject to ruin and corruption, but
eternal and everlasting.

The fourth Chapter.
1 None is void of sin, no not one: all have transgressed, and gone astraie.
2 The mercy of God the cause of man's restitution after his fall. 3 To what end
Christ suffered torments in this world. 4 None is able to fulfill the
commandments of God: and, that God has a regard to our infirmities. 5 What he
must do that would live eternally.

BUT alas! what is he that has not offended? Is there any man that is able to
stand in trial of his innocence?

1 Our parents sin stained us, and their transgression was delivered to us by
line all descent: how then can we, coming of unrighteous parents, be
inculpable and blameless children? Truth it is, A corrupt tree brings forth
corrupt fruit: and pitch defiles them that touch it.

2 Nevertheless, the mercy of God was such, after the fall of Adam and Eve in
Paradise, that in the blood of his son, shed upon the cross, in the open
face of the world, he wrought his restitution, and placed him in the hope of
salvation, from whence before he fell.

3 This did he, to the end that by his death, the force of sin being broken,
and the power of Satan crushed, we might no longer wallowe in the mire of
filthiness, like swine: but rear up our selves to heaven, there to have our
hearts fixed, where he sits, in whom the fulness of our felicity is reposed.

4 And though the law of the Lord be so upright and just: and our nature so
corrupt and defiled, that we have no ability nor power of our selves, to
fulfill the commandments: (for we have not so much as the least sparkle of
sufficiency in this consideration, such is our pronenesse to do amiss:) yet
the Lord God is so loving unto us, that he holds himself contented with our
weak working of his will, for his sons sake, in whom our want is supplied.

5 Who so therefore is desirous to taste of the fruit of the tree of life, and
to drink of the pleasant running rivers of rest: who so (I say) longs after
true happiness, and feign would see good days, let him endeavor to the
uttermost of his might, to tame and bridle his wandering desires, which if they
be not brought under, and constrained to groan under the yoke of subjection, he
shall have his mind so bent upon transitory vanities, and his wilso wedded to
this wicked world, that the light of his understanding being put out, he shall
never find the footepath of faith leading the high way to heaven. In this
respect therefore let us learn what is to be done?

The fifth Chapter.
1 The looking glass of Gods word, and the effects of the same. 2 The dignity
of man in comparison of al other creatures. 3 His state in the first Adam, and
his state in the second. 4 The assaults of Satan, notwithstanding our
redemption, and what we must do in temptation. 5 Our duties toward God for his
gracious gifts and benefits in prosperity.

1 THOU that would tread the footepath to felicity, must take into thy
hands the looking glass of Gods word, where thou shall see in thy self all
the stains and blemishes of sin, and shall likewise find in a readiness,
sweet water to wash them away, and to cleanse thee from all such filthiness
and pollusion.

2 There thou shall see the dignity of man, in comparison of all other
creatures: he only being endued with reason, and all other living things
beside lead by lust. Consider of this excellent blessing, be thankful for it,
and give God the glory: This is the footepath to felicity.

3 Again, let this be thy daily meditation, that through the fall of the
first Adam, thou becamest a castawaie: but by the death of the second Adam,
thine atonement in his bloodshed being accomplished, thou wast received again
into favor. Consider of this excellent blessing, be thankful for it, and
give God the glory: This is the footepath to felicity.

4 And though thy redemption be wrought by and through the innocent passion of
Christ, yet Satan thy cankered enemy is assaulting thee afresh, with new
trains and snares seeking to undermine thee: pray God to fortify thy faith,
cast out thine anchor on the firm land of constancy, cry for help at his
hand, whose help is in a readiness, repose all thy hope in him that has care
of thy safety, and is of power to confound thy ghostly enemy. Consider of
this excellent blessing, be thankful for it, and give God the glory: This is
the footepath to felicity.

5 If thou be crowned with the graces and gifts of God, either corporal or
mental, as with wealth, wisdom, strength, comlines, possessions, children,
knowledge, understanding, faith, honesty, credit, estimation, and such like:
Consider of this excellent blessing, be thankful for it, and give God the
glory: This is the footepath to felicity.

If thou have a house to hide thy head in, lodging fit for thy natural nights
rest and quietness, clothing to cover thy shame and nakedness, sustenance to
preserve thee alive, substance to maintain thy house and family: Consider of
this excellent blessing, be thankful for it, and give God the glory: This is
the footepath to felicity.

The sixth Chapter.
1 What we ought to do when God punishes us with adversity. 2 Affliction in
body and conscience, with an exhortation to patience. 3 Of what behavior we
should be, in the alterat ion of our state. 4 Considerations for him that is
disfranchised, either for some offense committed, or otherwise.

1 Moreover, if thou be punished of the Lord for thy sin, either in thy wife,
children, or any other thing that thou possessest, despair not therefore,
neither let diffidence or mistrust ransacke thy soul, and drown thee in
disquietnes: Consider of this fatherly chastisement, be thankful for it, and
give God the glory: This is the footepath to felicity.

2 If thou be afflicted in thine own body, and pricked in conscience at the
horror of thy sin, call to God for comfort, beseech him to mitigate and
assuage thine anguish, and to set thee at liberty: Let this be thy meditation
daily, in patience pitch thy pauilion, be thankful for it, and give God the
glory: This is the footepath to felicity.

3 If thou wast once rich, and now art poor: once in plenty, now in penury:
once a master, now a servant: once a commander, now an obeier: once favored,
now forsaken: once clothed, now naked: once a harbourer, now harbourles: once a
man, now a wretch: Consider thy condition: God can raise thee up, as he has
thrown thee down, murmur not at his chastisements: for he punishes his
children in compassion like a Father, and not with rigor like a Tyrant: in
any case be thankful, and give him the glory: This is the footepath to
felicity.

4 If thou having been sometimes a Citizen, art now an alien, be not
therewithal discontented, he can work thy restitution, by whose sufferance
thou art fallen into that condition. Consider whereof this alteration sprang,
either from some offense which purchased unto thee this punishment: or from a
good cause, as the quarrel of Christ, and his holy gospel, the profession
whereof has brought thee into such extremity. O be ioiful and glad in this
respect: thy banishment is liberty, thy heaviness is comfort, thy bitterness is
sweetness, thy shame is fame, thy damage is advantage, thy loss is lucre, thy
death is life. Consider this thoroughly, and faint not under the cross, but
pray unto the Lord to arm thee with constancy and patience, showing thy
self thankful, and giving unto God the glory: This is the footepath to
felicity.

The seventh Chapter.
1 The duty of all such as bear office in a Commonwealth, principally
toward God, and consequently toward man. 2 Admonitions for fathers of
families, and householders, concerning domestical government. 3 Lessons for
all estates and degrees. 4 Exhortations unto the rich and the poor. 5 The
perverse state of the world. 6 Of the way of death, and of such as walked
therein. 7 Of the way of life, and what is to be done of such as would walk
in the same.

1 FUrthermore, if thou bear office in the Commonwealth, and have authority
to command by virtue of thy place, pray to God to direct thy spirit, by his
spirit of equity and judgment, that thy vocation may be so followed and
discharged, as that by thy sincerity and vprightnes, thou may become a
mirror to all magistrates and officers. Pray instantly that this may so come
to pass: it is his special blessing, be thankful for it, and give God the
glory: This is the footepath to felicity.

2 If thou be a housekeeper, and have hanging on thy hands, wife, children,
servants, and a family: first see that God be sincerely served, and then thou
thy self honored. In the morning power forth thy prayers unto God
vnfeignedlie, beseeching him to guide thee and thy whole household in his faith,
fear, and love, truly and vprightlie to follow their functions and callings
at their handiworke, or other exercise whatsoever it be: put them in mind of
Gods goodness, and instill into their ears wholesome precepts of Christian
knowledge. At noone tide, preparing to dinner, lay before them in plain
speech, according to their slender capacities, the tender care and fatherly
love of God, in providing for them such food as is requisite toward the
supportation and maintenance of life: whereupon, put them in mind to have
always in their hearts a reguter of Gods care over his dear children, whose
bowels of compassion are so far extended, that he will not see his people
perish, through penury and want of necessary provision. The like exercise
also use at supper, and at every ordinary and extraordinary refection, that
as the external and elementarie sustance, which enters in at the mouth, and
goes down the stomach, where, after it is digested, it is dispearsed by just
measure and proportion, to the nourishment of all their bodily members: so
their minds may be fed fat with the food of the soul, that is, with
spiritual exercises, holy meditations, godly thoughts, Christian conversation,
obedience, and whatsoever else is acceptable in the sight of God. When the
night approaches, by reason of the declining and shrinking of the Sun to the
western angle of the world, call together, like a good shepherd, thy whole
family or flock, and thou among them, as a perfect pattern of piety,
kneeling down with humility, thank God for the use of the day past, for the
luckie success of your labors, for his loving kindness, in preserving you from
peril: and beseech him with integrity and holiness of heart, to make this
night comfortable unto you, to ouershadowe you with the shield of safety, when
you are asleep, that you may by no means be endangered: but as you lie down,
so you may rise up, the beloved of the Lord, and the adopted children of your
heavenly Father. Consider these circumstances, and account them all Gods
blessings, ascribe nothing to thy self, which art a lump of sin, but
attribute all unto Gods providence, which has wrought all in all, be
thankful for it, and give the glory to his eternal name. This is the
footepath of faith, which leads the high way to heaven.

3 To speak of all states and degrees of people, generally and inclusiuelie:
If thou be King or Queen, noble or unnoble, foreign or free, master or
servant, rich or poor, acknowledge thy self but dust and ashes, be not proud
in thine own conceit, glory in nothing, vaunt of nothing, brag of nothing:
remembering the saying of Paul, what have thou that thou have not received? and
that of Job, The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away: and that of David, The
earth is the Lords, and all that therein is. Praise him therefore, advance him,
magnify him, unto whom all glory does of right belong: This is the footepath
to felicity.

4 Let not the King triumph in his strength, least the omnipotency of the most
mighty confound him with Pharao, with Nabuchodonozor, with Achab, with Saul.
Let not the Queen trust to her glittering pomp, least it happen to her as
unto Iesabell. Let not the Noble man (...) too boldly upon the sand of his
honor, least he come tumbling down with Haman, and Achitophel. Let not the
unnoble repine at his baseness, for the Lord is able to crown him with
noblenes. Let not the forrener grudge at the want of his freedom: for if he
fear the Lord, he shall lack no good thing. So I say to him that is free,
boast not in it, for God is able to turn thy liberty into bondage: remember
the Jews. So I say to him that is a master, that he behave himself humbly,
casting an eye up to heaven, where he sits that sees all secrets. So I say
to the servant, that he be trusty and honest, faithful and obedient: forget
not Joseph. So I say to the godly rich, that they be merciful, distribute to
the needy, make amends where they have done wrong, restore their evil gotten
goods, and be liberal like Zacheus: and to the wicked rich, that they howl
and weep, mourn, and wring their hands, for that the day of their torment
approaches, and hour of their horrible vexation draws nearer and nearer, in
the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, with hard hearted Dives. So I
say to the poor, that they be not idle, neglecting the good and ordinary
means, provided of God to live by: namely, labor, if they be able to endure
it, thereby to sustain themselves and their family: if unable, and yet
distressed, vncomforted, vnesteemed, forsaken, miserable, compelled to beg, and
commonly denied, rebuked, rated and threatened: that they hold themselves
contented with this their cross of affliction, whereby they are in
possibility to have entrance to life everlasting: remember Lazarus, This is
the footepath to felicity.

5 If all states and degrees of men, would thus advise themselves, the
footepath to felicity should be more frequented, the pathwaie to paradise more
trodden, and the straight gate to heaven more violently thrust at. But alas!
what is he that thinks upon this? Every man deemeth his own way best, as
for the way of heaven, it is not regarded. The fathers have eaten sour
grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge: the successors have vowed to
tread in the steps of their progenitors, the yongers to keep the footepath of
their elders, the people to apply themselves to the example of the Prince, and
all degrees to swear allegiance to the devil, the prince of this world: the
word of the Lord continually sounded by the mouth of his Ambassadors
notwithstanding. Alas for pity!

6 There is a way, says Solomon, which men take to be good, but the end
thereof is death. In this way walked Adam and Caine, the father and the Son:
mother Eve, and Lots wife: yea David, by your leave, though he was a man
according to Gods own heart and liking, before his conversion and penance at
the sermon of Nathan. In this way walked proud Nemrod, Senacherib, Jeroboam,
and Manasses, in whose heart, if the grace of God had not kindled the fire of
repentance, he had received his portion with the wicked.

7 The safe and sure way, the plain and perfect way that leads to life
everlasting, Christ himself points out, as it were with his finger, saying,
I am the way, the truth, and the life. If therefore we will go to the father,
and wish to enter into the sheepefold of Saints, we must forsake the synagogue
of Satan, we must take our leave of the pleasures of this world: yea, if there
be any one thing deerer unto us than another, be it life it self, than which
nothing is more precious, we must set it naught, to find Christ the true way,
by whom we come to the Father, and the door which lets us in to the
sheepfold of the Saints: This is the footepath to sclicitie.

The eight Chapter.
1 Of the way of flesh, the remembrance and forgetfulness thereof. 2 The state
of man in this life like a plaier upon a stage. 3 The compass of the world
compared to a Theater. 4 The long life of Adam, who notwithstanding died, and
other Patriarchs. 5. Of Abraham, Moses, and Enoch. 6 None exempted from paieng
tribute unto Caesar. 7 Of Samson, and Solomon, walking the way of all flesh. 8
One way of all flesh, though the means be diverse.

1 THus far we have waded, in showing the ways of the world, wherein the
wicked are not only desirous, but also delighted to walk. It shall not be
amiss, to touch the way of all flesh, which if some did consider, they would
not run so desperately into voluntary destruction: for the due and daily
remembrance of this way, makes men to retire and draw back from serving
Satan in the wide and large field of sin: as the forgetfulness thereof
blinds the eyes of their minds, and makes them grow past grace, out of
hope to be reclaimed, reprobates, forsaken, and castawaies. To this purpose it
was wisely spoken, and as the counsel is good and necessary, so it is to be
embraced and followed: namely, to remember our end, if we will not sin
eternally: This is the footepath to felicity.

2 We are not placed in this world as continuers: for the scripture says, that
we have no abiding city here: but as travelers and soiourners, whose custom
it is to take up a new Inn, and to change their lodging, sometimes here,
sometimes there, during the time of their travel. Here we walk like plaiers
upon a stage, one representing the person of a King, another of a Lord, the
third of a plowman, the fourth of an artificer, and so forth, as the course
and order of the interlude requires, every act whereof being played, there
is no more to do, but open the gates, and dismiss the assembly.

3 Even so it fares with us: for what other thing is the compass of this
world, beautified with variety of creatures reasonable and unreasonable, but
an ample and large Theater, whereon all things are appointed to play their
pageants, which when they have done, they die, and their glory cease. We may
see this proved in men, the most excellent creatures of all other, and
therefore it must needs be confessed in the rest of the baser and inferior
kind.

4 Adam was the first that entered upon this stage: a long time it was before he
had rehearsed and played all his part, even the term of nine hundred and
thirty years, nevertheless, when death came, and gave him his last Q, he had
not a word to answer, but was conveyed away, and went from whence he came,
even to the earth, out of whose bowels he sprang. The like law of necessity
took hold of mother Eve, of Caine, Abel, Sheth, and the issue of him and his,
to the days of Noah, who notwithstanding his preservation in the Arc from the
general flood, went the way of his predecessors, having lived the space of
nine hundred and fifty years.

5 Abraham, the father of the faithful, so named by the holy Ghost, and after
him all the Patriarchs: yea Moses that good man, at whose intercession God
spared the wicked Jews many a time, and withdrew the whip of his vengeance,
wherewith he was purposed to smite them: even he, and the rest (Enoch only
excepted, who after his assumption was no more seen among men) had but their
time, beyond which they might not by any dispensation pass, so that we see
even in them, notwithstanding their excellency, the way of all flesh, which
is natural death, manifestly expressed.

6 It were more laborious and cumbersome, than necessary and requisite, to
add any more examples in so plain and undoubted an argument. Considering
then, that these men, being longer livers than the rest, paid tribute unto
Caesar: it is very unlikely that any, inferior unto them in all respects,
should be exempted from the discharge of so due a debt.

7 This way of all flesh walked Samson, notwithstanding his wonderful
strength diverse ways declared: Solomon for all his wisdom, the brute whereof,
together with his magnificence and roialtie, caused him to be renowned far and
near: so that neither the one, were his fortitude and might incomparable: yea,
so rare and strange, as that the Lion, of all beasts the valiantest, was in
his handling as weak as a Lamb: nor the other, were his knowledge so profound
and heavenly, as that the signification of no secret was too high for his wit,
could add one day, one hour, no not so much as one minute to the length of
their life, no more than it is in man's power to put one cubite to his stature,
or to make one hear white or black.

8 The conclusion therefore is evident, that there is one way of all flesh,
and that is death, chance it either on land by sickness, on sea by drowning, in
battle by the sword: chance it either by fire or famine, by pestilence, or
other malady: chance it either sleeping, or waking, eating or drinking, riding
or running, laughing or weeping: the common and ordinary end is death, and
all is but death, be the means never so diverse. This considered, and
advisedly thought upon, there were no better bridle to rain in the coltish
nature of man, and to restrain him from the filthy custom of sin,
whereupon depends eternal death and damnation: for this is the footepath to
felicity.

The ninth Chapter.
1 A dead coarse compared to a looking glass, and the necessary doctrine
thereupon depending. 2 Of two differing ways deciphered by the letter Y. 3 The
testimony of Christ touching these two ways. 4 Who they be that walk in the
wide way of wickedness, and of the preposterous course of the world. 5 That no
man has the power to reform himself. 6 Necessary considerations for true
Christians. 7 Of such as having gone astraie in the wrong way, retired and
drew back into the right: and of one that would not be persuaded to tread in
crooked paths. 8 Of such as walked in the wide way of wickedness, and of their
woeful case. 9 An exhortation how we ought to walk.

1 THe way of all flesh remembered, as it is rehearsed, the hearts of men by
little and little must needs grow into a misliking of sin. For as to have a
looking glass before thy face, and therein to take a view of thy phisiognomie,
is a present and ready way to make thee see any blemish, wart, speckle,
freckle, mole, stain, spot, or wrinkle in thy countenance, and to amend and
reform it, if it be not natural, and brought even from the very cradle: so,
to consider in a dead coarse, the state of thine own body, when thou shall be
called, if thou be touched with any care of conscience, should not only put
into thy mind the remembrance of death, but also the cause of the same, which
is sin: for, that men die, and return to earth, from whence they came, the
cause is sin only: wherewith, if the nature of man had not ben corrupted,
his state had been heavenly, divine, angelike, immortal.

2 This common and usual way of all flesh, is an entrance unto two other
ways, beside which ways there is no third to be looked for. These two ways,
as they differ in description, as they vary in compass, as they are unlike in
proportion: so the walkers in these two ways are contrary in disposition,
diverse in quality, nothing like inclined. These two ways, many hundred
years past, were signified and set forth by a profane Philosopher, in a
letter of the cross row, namely Y, wherein we may see, with what wisdom
that heathen man weighed the ways of worldlings, cutting his letter in two
parts, the one toward the left hand broad, ample, large, and wide, because of
the multitudes which it receives: the other toward the right, narrow and
straight, for that they are but few in number which tread in it, and yet room
enough remaining, and more indeed than is like to be occupied: the more to be
lamented.

3 Of these two ways spoke he, in whom the three principal and sovereign
callings were crowned, I mean Christ, King, Priest, and Prophet. For he,
tendering from time to time the sickly soul of man, and seeing by the
mystery of his divinity the manifold miseries wherein he was wrapped, like a
fish in a net: besides the danger of damnation, whereinto he was like, had not
the grace of God prevented him, deservedly to run, did not only by
preaching, but also by working miracles, seek to lay a plaster to his
festered sore, but he refused the helping hand of the Physician: the more pity
he had so little grace. This Christ, the express image of his father, noted
these two ways, no doubt to singular purpose, when he gave us this lesson
worthy the learning, saying: Enter in at the narowe way: for wide is the
way, and broad is the gate that leads to destruction, and many they be
that walk in it: but narowe is the way, and straight is the gate that leads
to life, and few they be that go in at it, because it is the footepath to
felicity.

4 In this wide way walk the wicked, whom no counsel, no admonition, no
preaching, no teaching, no denouncing of Gods judgments can revoke: whose
happiness and felicity seems unto them so much the more perfect, as they
exceed in heaping sin upon sin, and make no conscience of their inordinate
living: naie, who is in better case, who in greater credit, who more supported
than he that glories in his filthiness, and counts it no shame to bear about
him, even in his forhead, the notes, marks, and prints of his abominations?
How far these swine are from the footepath, to felicity, any man may judge.

5 It is not to be spoken, for the truth tries it self, that these men sit in
the shadow of death: and though they seem to have their heaven in this life,
yet doubtless both their feet are in hell mouth, and their bodies and souls,
are like to follow one day, except the wonderful grace of God, and his
unspeakable mercy, work in them a strange and unthought upon alteration.
For, no man of himself can streighten his crookednes, plain his roughnes,
soften his hardness, sweeten his sowrenes, tame his wildnes, refourme his
wickedness, cleanse his filthiness, supply his imperfectness: this is the work
of Gods spirit, the aid and assistance whereof, we must seek by prayer and
invocation, before we can tread the footepath to felicity.

6 Now, seeing that we are subject unto falling, and not able to stand, unless
the Lord stay us: moreover, for that the way of the King and the beggar, in
respect of this life, is all one: Again, seeing we have a day of
resurrection, when we all shall receive as we have deserved, pain in hell, or
joy in heaven: were it not madness, naie, were it not desperatenes in us, the
cogitation of these things, with a number more neglected, to run on still
with full rain in wickedness, to become slaves to sin, to serve Satan, to
fight against God, to adnihilate or make of none effect the merits of Christ's
passion, to minister occasion to the Angels of mourning, to grieve the holy
Ghost, to buffet and wound thine own soul, to throw thy self wilfully into
destruction? I think yes: what is thine opinion?

7 Well fare the prodigal child, for he wandering in this wrong way, and
being touched in conscience, and taught that he was not right, retired, and
came home with a sorrowful song, and lamentable outcrie, Father I have sinned.
Well fare Marie Magdalene, for she traveling in this bypath of perdition, and
inwardly called to a reformation of her filthy life, for she was a grievous
sinner, submitted her self, fell on the ground, stooped and kneeled upon her
knees, washed the feet of Jesus with her tears, and wiped them with the
hears of her head. Well fare the poor and contemned Publicane, for he in the
heaviness of his heart lamented that ever he ran at randon in this crooked
way: he thumped his breast with his fistes, and from the very bottom of his
heart, cried out for mercy, saying, O Lord, have mercy upon me a sinner. Well
fare the Ninevites, for they having gone astraie like lost sheep, and walking
in the way of sinners, which is the way of death, heard the Prophet Jonas
ringing unto them the alarm bell of repentance, and being revoked from their
wickedness, escaped threatened destruction. Well fare Joseph, that pattern of
integrity and vprightnes: for he would not in any wise walk with the wife of
Potiphar in the way of wantonness: her alluring looks, her flattering
enticements, her proffered violence, her instant and importunate temptations
notwithstanding. These, with millians more, may teach and instruct such as
tender the salvation of their own souls, that it is better to tread the
straight and narrow path of virtue and innocence, which leads unto life,
though it seem unpleasant and troublesome, than to wander in the wide way of
wickedness, which tends unto eternal death, though it be most delectable, and
fragrant: for this is no footepath to felicity.

8 But woe worth that cruel cutthrote, whose master having forgiven him a
great debt, even the sum of ten thousand talents, arrested his fellowseruant
for a debt of an hundred pence, cruelly cast him in prison, and would not
release him, till he had discharged the whole sum, which was but five and
twenty shillings. This fellow walked in the way of wickedness, and therefore
he is condemned unto death eternal. Woe unto that graceles and dissembling
son, who being commanded of his father to go and work in his Uineyard,
answered, that he would, and yet went not, but spent the time otherwise
vnthriftilie: this man walked in the way of disobedience, which is sin, and
therefore is in danger of eternal death. Woe unto those merciles husbandmen,
unto whom the traveling householder having let out his Uineyard, and requiring
the increase of the fame by his servants, whom he had sent to that purpose,
was not only withstoode in his message, but had not only his servants, but
also his only son, the heir of all his lands, keeping possession, abused,
beaten, and killed. These husbandmen, for their cruelty, and unjust dealing,
shall abie at the day of judgment, and as they walked in the way of death,
so death, even everlasting death, shall be their portion. Woe unto those
unthankful and careless worldlings, who being solemnly invited and bidden to
that great supper in the Gospel, excused themselves by the necessity of their
weighty affairs, and refused to come: for they, in so doing, neglected their
own souls health, and thereby most wilfully ran in danger of eternal death.
Woe unto him, that being ungarnished with a wedding garment, durst
notwithstanding sit down at the banquet, for he in so doing did highly offend
the master of the feast, and by his presumption ran in danger of death and
damnation. Woe unto that young man, whom Christ by his own mouth taught how to
become perfect: namely, by selling all that he had, and giving it unto the
poor: which doctrine seeming bitter unto him, and too sharp for his digestion,
he departed too too heavy and sorrowful, as very loath to pay so dear for
heavenly treasure. This rich Gentleman would not pay so hie a price for the
discipline of Christ, and therefore was so much the further off from life and
salvation, by how much he was nearer unto death and condemnation. Woe unto that
covetous fool, who having his heart set upon his halfepenie, enlarged his
barnes to receive his plentiful crop, singing sweetly to his soul, Be
merry, and take thine ease, thou have wealth enough for many years: not
mistrusting or doubting any thing, that the devils were agreed that same night
to fetch his soul away. And thus he, wretched worldling, walked in the way of
death and destruction. Woe unto the unclean and beastly Gergesens, among whom
Christ working many miracles, was so far from any courteous intertainment,
that he was desired, for the safety of their swine, to depart from their
coasts: thus, preferring their hogs before their souls health, they wilfully
walked the way of death and utter desolation, not passing a point for the
footepath to felicity.

9 The Scripture abounding with such examples, teaches us the danger of
walking in darkness, and sitting in the shadow of death. And therefore
needing no better schoolemaister unto Christ, let us be content to learn in
them the wholesome lessons of life, which if we print in the tables of our heart,
and keep graven in memory, as in a marble stone, to imitate and follow them,
to be ruled and guided by them, to square and frame the whole course of our
life by their rule, we shall not only not walk in the wais of the wicked, to
eat with them in hell fire the bread of affliction, and to drink the dregs of
torments: but we shall tread in the footepath of the godly, and at last enter
into the Common wealth of Israel, the kingdom of heaven: which God grant,

Amen.
The tenth Chapter.
1 Of ways the sundry kinds. 2 Of the way of life opened by authority of
Scripture. 3 A lesson how to be perfect and upright. 4 The safety of such as
walk in the Lords way. 5 The benefits flowing from this way. 6 The mischief
following the transgression of Adam and Eve. 7 Notable men's names remembered, who
walked in Gods way, and of the eternity of the word. 8 The excellency of the
Lords way set forth by similitudes. 9 Peter's boldness in venturing to tread
the Lords way without the staff of faith. 10 Of ten leapers, and the
thankful Samaritane. 11 That we of England are like to the Gaderens. 12 Of
Marie Magdalene, Ioanna, and Susanna, and what we may learn of them. 13 What
we must do if we mean to walk in the Lords way, and of the merchant and the
husbandman by way of example. 14 Of Nichodemus who sought the way of the Lord
by night. 15 Of the pretiousnesse of our souls. 16 The way of the Lord, and
the ways of the world are quite contrary. 17 How they differ is proved by
things that utterly disagree. 18 All creatures covet places correspondent to
their nature: of the Salamander and the Hydra: with an application of this
doctrine. 19 The immortality of the soul, and a lesson for all Christians to
learn. 20 A prayer or request, that it would please God to guide our feet in
his way.

1 THere is a way for the birds in the air, a way for the beasts in the
field, a way for the worms in the earth, a way for the fish in the sea.
There is a way for the wind, a way for the rain, a way for the sun, a
way for the moon. There is a way from the East, a way from the West, a way
from the North, a way from the South. There is a crooked way, a straight
way, a rough way, and a plain way. There is a sandy way, a stony way, a
soft way, and a hard way. There is a way above, a way beneath, a way
before, a way behind, a way on the right hand, and a way on the left. There
is an open way, a secret way, a dark way, a bright way. There is a way to
hell, a way to heaven, a way to death, and a way to life. Of this last way
I mean to open the commodity, and so to make a conclusion.

2 The way to life everlasting, is the way wherein we all should walk: it is
the safe way for the soul, to save it from all annoiances: all other ways,
this only excepted, are dangerous to enter: for they are dark lanes, as it
were, leading to the dungeon of death. The excellency of this way, is such as
that it cannot be described. For it is the way of God, even his own way,
established in righteousness and perfection. And therefore the Prophet very
notably speaking of this matter, has this worthy sentence: My thoughts are
not your thoughts, neither are my ways your ways, says the Lord. As if he
should say, your thoughts are unclean, corrupt, earthie, vile, vnpure,
imperfect, sinful, abominable, wicked, variable, momentanie, uncertain,
wavering: for they are ingendered in your hearts, which are nothing else but a
sinkehole of sinfulness, a dunghill of naughtiness, a puddle of filthiness,
a lake of uncleanness, and what is worst that is your heart. As for your
ways, they are no better. Thus by an antithesis, or opposition, the Lord
teaches us what his ways are, even the ways of truth, righteousness,
purity, and perfection: wherein who soever walks, no doubt, he is in the
high way to heaven, and treads the footepath to felicity.

3 Abraham being nintie and nine years old, was instructed and taught how to
become perfect, the Lord appearing unto him, and giving him his lesson in that
behalf: I am God all sufficient, walk before me (that is, keep thee within
the compass of my paths, wander not this way, or that way, but walk in one
way, even my way) and be thou upright. There was no means, either for Abraham,
or any other holy man to use, whereby to attain and come to uprightness, but
only the walking in the way of the Lord, as we may see proved and confirmed
in this place by Gods own mouth. How preposterouslie therefore they go to
work, which seek sinisterlie and indirectlie to recover perfection and
uprightness: some building upon traditions of men, some upon custom, some
upon ceremonies, some upon Paul, some upon Apollo, some upon Cephas, some upon
good works, some upon merits, some upon pardons, some upon indulgences, some
upon pilgrimages, some upon professions, all which to be but sand (Christ the
rock refused) a blind man may discern. For, is this to walk in the way of
the Lord? nothing less.

4 This way of the Lord is the way of beauty and peace, says Solomon: it is
the way of holiness, says Esaie: it is the way of straightness,
eeuennesse, plainness and smoothness, say Ose and Jeremy: in this way
whosoever walks, the moon shall not hurt him by night, nor the sun annoie
him by day: the pestilence shall not touch him, the arrows of the hunter shall
not wound him, he shall not stumble, nor hit his foot against a stone, the Lord
will ouershadowe him with the shield of safety, the Lord will be his defense,
his buckler, his spear against all his enemies, no lightning from above, no
earthquake beneath, no consuming fire on this side, no raging sea on that, no
element, no planet, finally, no creature shall do him any harm. This honor
will the Lord vouchsafe all such as walk in his way, which is the way of
life, the high way to heaven, and the footepath to felicity.

5 David oppressed with the cruelty of his enemies, and fearing great dangers,
calls unto God for succor. His petition consisting of many parts, whereof
some concern himself, othersome his adversaries, this is one thing which he
craves at the hands of his maker, Make thy way plain before my face, says
that good man. Giving us to understand, that by walking in the way of the
Lord, we have our felicity fulfilled, as by the contrary, the measure of our
confusion and cursednes is made up. Yea, to walk in the way of the Lord, is
the rule to make our crooked ways straight, the plainer to make our rugged
ways smooth, the lantern to make our dark ways bright and lightsome,
according to that saying of the Prouerbewriter, The way of the righteous
shines as the light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day. This is
the way of wisdom and knowledge, wherein who so walks, he shall have room
enough, and when he runs, he shall not stumble or fall.

6 In this way once were placed our great progenitors Adam and Eve, if they
could have been content: but they for sooth, so busy were they, and
inquisitiue after another way, which the devil put into their heads, forsook
the first way, which was the safe-waie, and took a second way, which was the
way of death, whereunto they were persuaded by Satan's subtle suggestion, and
overcome at length by his malignitie and hellish undermining, tasted of the
tree of life, whereupon did grow the fruit which they were bidden, not so
hardy of their hearts, so much as once to taste. Ah fools, void of wisdom,
and destitute of grace! why did you so? fie upon your folly, which has
purchased immortal shame. Were you placed in the way of perfection, in the
way of plentifulnes, in the way of felicity, in the way of blessedness, in
the Lords own way, and yet would be better? but see the judgment of God, the
earth by this means became accursed, and all the offspring of man subject unto
death.

7 There have been, that have walked in this way of the Lord, some, though in
number not many, whose names, for perpetual memory, are recorded in
Scripture. Among these were Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, oMses, Aaron,
Phinees, Iosue, Caleb, Samuel, Nathan, David, Solomon, Elias, Elizeus,
Ezechiell, Isaias, and diverse other, whom by name to rehearse, were labor
necessary I confess, but for tediousnes. That these men walked not in the
way of the Lord, who dare be so bold as to affirm, seeing the singer of the
holy Ghost has registered the same in the everlasting courtrolles of the holy
Scripture, the unchangeable word of the eternal God, whereof not so much as
one jot or tittle shall pass, when all things else shall be consumed, and
utterly come to naught.

8 Think you that this way of the Lord is any other thing, than the rich
treasure hid in the field, which when a man has found, he departs for joy,
and sells all that he has for ready money to purchase that field? Or is not
the way of the Lord that rich and precious pearl, which liked a Merchantman
so well, that he was content to make an exchange of all that he was worth for
the same? Or is not the way of the Lord that pure and fine silver, seven
times tried in the fire, and purged from all kind of dross, so that nothing
is comparable thereunto? Or is not the way of the Lord that same rich jewel
house, wherein are laid up for all such as walk therein, gifts of exceeding
great valuation: yea, so excellent, as that they cannot sufficiently be
commended? I think yes, and to warrant me herein, I have the express word of
God.

9 We read in the Gospel, that Jesus Christ walking upon the sea, was
supposed and thought of his disciples to be a spirit: for the resolution
whereof, Peter among the rest required to come unto him upon the water, which
being granted, he lept out of the ship, and walked on the waves toward Jesus:
but a mighty wind arising, Peter was afraid, and began to sink? Why was
this? even because he wanted the walkingstaffe, which every one that would go
in the way of the Lord, ought to hold in their hand, and that is faith. For
had not Christ stretched out his hand, and supported him, he had perished, had
he had a thousand lives.

10 Christ passing upon a time between Samaria and Galile, opened the way of
his father unto ten lepers. Among these ten, there was one Samaritane, who
only and alone, notwithstanding the benefit which they received was general,
had this walking staff, whereby he kept his feet right in the way of the
Lord. For the other nine, as soon as they were cured, forgot themselves, and
returned not to give thanks unto him, by whose help they were healed. Such
lepers there are among us not a few, who from the crown of the head, to the
sole of the foot, have no sound place, but all intected, loathsome, and
filthy, that is, ouergrowne with sin, in so much, that there is no part of
their soul, but it is attainted. If among this great and infinite number, one
Samaritane might be found, some sign it were, that the graces of God are not
powered upon us in waste, neither his benefits ill bestowed.

11 But it is so far unlike, that any of us should be a Samaritane, that we
show and prove our selves rather to be Gadarens, upon whom the common proverb
is justly verefied, that it is no casting of pearls before swine. It is now
twenty and odd years, since we have had among us the jewel of Gods word,
than the which nothing is more precious, unto the which any thing compared,
appears mere mucke, by the which any thing tried, is found lighter than
vanity. This word, notwithstanding it be the trumpet, whereby we are called
into the way of the Lord, and continually moved to tread the footepath to
felicity, is contemned, neglected, and despised, the preachers of the same
derided, the prophaners thereof preferred, the professers of it abused, the
suppressers thereof maintained, so that it is no marvel though the way of the
Lord be so little, naie, nothing at all in comparison, frequented or used,
seeing the ordinary means whereby we are called and lead thereunto, is so
carelessly rejected.

12 Among many that were healed of their infirmities, delivered of devils, and
restored to their right wits, we read of three women, namely, Marie Magdalen,
Ioanna, and Susanna: these (says the holy text) ministered unto Christ of
their substance, thereby acknowledging the benefits which they had received,
and declaring in like manner, by their perceiuerance and knowledge of God, that
they were in the way of the Lord. Is it not a shame that women, which are the
weaker vessels, should put us in mind what we ought to do? That which they
received, was temporal, it was corporal, it was transitory, and yet they
showed themselves thankful: we have had at Gods hands the riches of his
truth, which are spiritual, and everlasting, subject to no change, under no
alteration, and yet we have not the grace to glorify and praise God, as we
ought, for the same: naie rather, we loath the truth, we surfeit of it, such
fulness we have thereof: we are weary of hearing it taught, we prefer vanities,
yea, devilish vanities before it, whereby we bewraie our hellish inclination,
and manifestly prove how far wide we wander out of the Lords way, and leave
the footepath to fclicitie we know not in what corner.

13 To pass through this way, we must be content to carry the cross, even
the cross of Christ, I mean afflictions and persecutions for his holy name
sake: otherwise we shall not be thought worthy followers of him. We must
renounce our selves, we must forsake friends and kindred, we must cast away
wicked mammon, we must refuse no tribulation, no torment, no loss, no damage,
no wrong, no injury, no anguish, no not death it self, were it never so
terrible. For if the merchant man for lucres sake, and increase of commodity,
aduentureth life and goods upon the sea, enduring all tempests that arise, and
suffering even the woorst luck that may light upon him, with a contented
mind, in hope to obtain the fruit and profit of his travel: if the
husbandman repineth not to tarry the time of the year, after his painful
plowing, his diligent sowing, and other his necessary labors, with sweating
brows, and bedewed lims sustained, and then gathers into his barnes the
pleatifull crop of his ground: shall we think much to suffer for Christ's sake,
for the truths sake, for safe conscience sake, for our souls sake, temporal
pains, and momentanie troubles: knowing that these are preparatiues to life
everlasting, and that we can not walk in Gods way, unless we yield our
necks to bear his yoke?

14 Fondly played Nichodemus, that great lawier and ruler among the Jews, his
part, in coming to seek the way of the Lord by night. For he preferring his
worldly reputation and countenance, before the knowledge of Gods kingdom, and
being ashamed to be seen in the day time, to have recourfe unto so contemned a
person as Christ, proved himself to be as he was, even a lover of himself, a
popular fellow, that is, such a one as esteemed more of his worship and
credit, than of the doctrine of truth. Wherein he declared his infancy and
gross ignorance touching regeneration: his great learning, knowledge, and
experience in other points naught auailing. Thus we see, that for one
furtherance and help to lead us to the way of the Lord, and to bring us to
the footepath of felicity, there are twenty: yea, and twice twenty
hindrances and lets, which lie like blocks, over which there is no leaping,
unless the Lord put under his hand, and lift us over them.

15 Now therefore, for so much as there is but one way unto life everlasting,
but many ways unto death and condemnation: requisite it is, that we which are
placed in this world, as in a wilderness, and have a pilgrimage to walk,
should first and principally have, as they say, an eye to the maine chance,
that is, should have a singular regard to the safety of our souls: the
pretiousnesse whereof Christ commended unto us, when he said, what will it
profit a man to gain all the world, and to lose his soul? Meaning indeed
thereby, that all the pomp, the riches, the treasure, the pleasure, and
whatsoever belongs to this life, are nothing counteruailable or equivalent to
the soul, the excellency whereof, if there were none other proof to confirm
it, is sufficiently set forth by the rich ransom that was paid for it, to
redeem it out of captivity and thraldom: I mean the precious blood of Jesus
Christ.

16 Setting aside therefore all bywaies which lead unto death, it stands us
upon, if we tender our salvation, to seek the way of the Lord whiles it may
be found. The manner how, is declared before at large, even by denieng our
selves, and forsaking the world, with whom whosoever does acquaint himself,
impossible it is that he should once set foot in the way of the Lord. For
the ways of the Lord are good and righteous altogether, as says the
Psalmewriter: the whole world is set upon mischief and villainy, says the
Apostle. So that between the ways of the Lord, and the ways of the world
there is no affinity, no likeness, no equality: naie, there is a flat
opposition and contrariety.

17 Is it possible that the lamb and the woolfe, the spider and the fly, the
falcon and the feasant, the hound and the hare, the peacocke and the snake, the
cat and the mouse, the owl and the nightingale, the iuie and the oak, the
vinetree and the colewort, or what else is of contrary inclination, should
agree together, and the one not spoil the other? The ways of the Lord, and
the ways of the world, are much more at variance. For fire being hot and dry,
is not a greater enemy unto water that is cold and moist: life being sensible,
quickening, and pleasant, is not a more mortal foe unto death, that is
senseless, ouglie, and dreadful: black being dark and dim, is not more
contrary unto white, that is lightsome and bright: Christ being perfection it
self, is not more contrary unto Antichrist the child of perdition: heaven
above, is not more unlike to hell below: finally the triumphs of celestial
Sion, are not more differing from the torments of the infernal lake: than the
ways of the Lord; which are pure and clean, and the ways of the world, which
are filthy and loathsome.

18 We see that every thing coueteth a place to live in agreeable to their
nature. The fish in the river, the beast in the medowe, the bird in the air,
the worm in the earth. Experience teaches us no less, and reason proves it
to be true. Whereupon it is recorded in monuments of memory, that the
Salamander, and the Hydra, two mortal enemies, and creatures of contrary
quality, encountering upon the land, did so wound one another, that they were
well nigh destroyed. The Salamander, desirous to recover himself, left off
fighting, and flew into the fire, which restored unto him his former strength:
the Hydra seeing this, retired in like manner, and lept into the water, where he
recovered all the force that he had lost: and thus they both, by betaking
themselves to their natural places, preserved their lives, which otherwise had
been in hazard.

19 These creatures, and diverse other, may teach us wit. For seeing that we
have no continuing city here, but look for one to come: is it not our parts
to direct our steps thitherward, considering that we are not like unto beasts,
birds, fishes, worines, serpents, or any unreasonable thing: but immortal,
like our maker, whose image we bear about us? It were vantage for us to
meditate hereupon, and to have our minds above, not raking like dunghill cocks
for a barlie corn in mucke: but like eagles lifting our selves aloft with the
wings of faith.

20 And thus much touching the way of all flesh, which is death: the ways of
the world, which are sinful and lead unto hell: the ways of the Lord, which
conduct us unto the footepath of felicity, and so to life everlasting. In
which way, being the right way, the true way, the perfect way, the certain
way, the pure way, the clean way, the undefiled way, the Lord give us
grace to walk whiles we live and draw breath in this our earthly tabernacle,
that we may, when we are called out of the same, tread the footepath to
felicity, enter in at the glorious gate of heavenly Jerusalem, and there
enioie our appointed mansions, not made with hands, but established by the word
of eternity, to whom be all dominion, power, and majesty,

Amen.
A looking glass for the Christian Reader, containing summarilie the substance
of all the doctrines delivered before at large.
A Listening ear that loves to learn how to amend that is amiss,
By grace divine shall have the choice of that which good and healthful is.
Resist the force and strength of sin with spiritual artillery,
Abstain from noisome lusts: This is the footepath to felicity.
Have always in rememberance Christ Jesus crucifide to death,
And let the same thy comfort be, till utter gasp of life and breath.
Meek minded be, all pride detest, and learn of Christ humility,
Forbear thy furious foe: This is the footepath to felicity.
Lament the lack of faith and truth, which lies forsaken and forlorn,
Exhort to peace where it does want, and of the needy think no scorn.
Make much of such as pleasure take in fostring love and charity,
In such is hope of grace: This is the footepath to felicity.
Nothing so much does like the Lord, as loving of his heavenly law,
Give ear thereto, and from the same, let no alurement thee withdraw.
An upright life delight to lead, thy lust keep in captivity,
By virtue honor seek: This is the footepath to felicity.
Revolt not from the word of truth, but even to death the same profess,
And make account that thy reward will be eternal happiness.
Hell is the hire of every one, that is to truth an enemy,
A true believer die: This is the footepath to felicity.
Mark what reposed is in heaven, for such as do their masters will,
Free liberty from thraldoms yoke, and blessed Angels food their fill.
Lord lighten thou our mistie e^^s, that we may love the verity,
Extend to us thy spirit: This is the footepath to felicity.
Make us to joy in nothing more, than in thy word procuring peace,
I mean thy Gospel full of grace, the love whereof O Lord increase.
New hearts, new minds create in us and make us like thy majesty,
Good, like thy self, so shall we find the footepath to felicity.
Amen.
FINIS.
A Guide to Godliness, divided into three special branches: namely,
Confession, Petition, Thanksgiving, and their several blossoms. A Christian
treatise, and no less sweet and comfortable, than necessary and profitable
to be read, both for common and private use, etc.

BY ABRAHAM FLEMING.

1. Timoth. 4, 8. Godliness is profitable unto all things, which has the
promise of the life present, and of that which is to come.

Printed at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in Pater noster row, at the
sign of the Star. 1581.

A Preface to the true Christian Reader.
AMong all the means which God has ordained to bring man to the state of
blessedness, I find prayer to be precious, profitable, and necessary.
Precious, because it is the incense which we are commanded to burn unto the
Lord in the sanctuary of our hearts: precious I say, because thereby we
obtain at the hands of God, whatsoever tends to the good estate of the
soul: and yet once again precious, because the Lord God, at the ascending
thereof up into heaven, stretches forth his bountiful hand, and largely
bestows upon us whatsoever is beneficial for our mortal bodies.

Profitable, because it procures unto us the ministration of all manner
commodities behoofull for this life. For it is the only instrument, which we
are commanded by Christ in the Gospel to use, if we stand in need of any
thing, either temporal or spiritual, during our pilgrimage in this life, as
the very words of our savior seem to import in this sense, saying:
Whatsoever ye ask of the father in my name, it shall be given you. Again,
Ask, and ye shall have: as if he said, If ye ask not, ye are worthy to want,
because you neglect the use of the precept.

Now, who is so ignorant, but knows, that the asking, which Christ means,
is prayer. For to ask of God, is not to ask after the manner of men, with a
kind of carnal and corruptible affection, the end where of is to stay the
force of concupiscence, or desire, and the obteining of that which is required:
but it is an inward, secret, heavenly,

(...) by we are so far from profiting, that of our selves we should wax
worse and worse.

3 For the more light of knowledge is showed, the blinder would we remain: the
greater obedience is taught, the frowarder and stubberner would we become: if
thou by the mighty working of thy holy spirit, should not cause it to be
fruitful. And although we have this natural corruption in common, with the
whole rotten race of Adam: yet we confess, that in us it has budded, and shot
forth so much more than in others, as we have had mo means to kill it, and to
cause it to wither, than others have had.

4 Where first of all, the gracious offer of the treasure of thy holy Gospel
unto us, makes us guilty many ways. For where passing by many other
nations, thou have trusted our nation withal: yet with a number of us, it has
found as small entertainment, and felt as great resistance, as amongst them, at
whose gates it never knocked. For a great portion of the land, partly never
yielding themselves to the obedience thereof, and partly falling from it,
after they had once yielded: stand proudelie as it were at the staves end with
thee. The rest, which make profession of their submission unto it, do it not
accordingly. For first, there be heaps of our people, which either through a
deep rooted affection and love to Popish religion, or through a wicked opinion
which they nourish of embracing the truth set forth, are so nousled, blinded,
and misled, as that they still abide in an utter ignorance of the truth it
self, in such fort, that although there be no want of preaching, yet they are
as raw in the knowledge of the true service of thee, as they were expert
before in the service of the devil.

5 And where knowledge is to any such sufficiency as is requisite, for the
inheritors of the kingdom of heaven: there is it (for a great part) joined
with such hypocrisy, as makes them more detestable before thee, (which
searchest the very reins,) than if they had still continued in their
ignorance. Now, for the remnant of us, which through grace have truly, and
faithfully believed, it is with so great weakness of faith, and so small
reformation of manners, that our glorious profession of the Gospel, supported
and borne out with so small show of good fruits, which the excellency thereof
does require, makes not only the enemies to condemn us, but our selves to
suspect one another, whether we belong unto thee or no.

6 Wherein O Lord, we acknowledge that to be our great and horrible sin, that
being put in trust with this unspeakable treasure of thy holy Gospel, and
preferred before our neighbors, professors about us: yet we are in thankful
obedience unto thee, behind them all: first in knowledge, last in zeal:
before them in the doctrine of thy holy Gospel, behind them in the
discipline of the same.

7 The yoke of the slavery of our bodies, which the Popish religion laid upon
us, we willingly shake off: but the holy bands of thy law, whereby our
riotous life and affections should be brought into bondage, we do hardly and
heavily admit. The Gospel, which brought a freer use of our lawful honors,
pleasures, and commodities, was welcome unto us: but the same Gospel, which
restrains the unlawful licentiousnes of our ambition, intemperancie and
covetousness, is not so. Finally, so much of the Gospel, as does more neerelie
respect our salvation, we seem to have some care to retain: but so much of it
as does more directly respect thy glory, and the profit one of another, we
make small account of.

8 And seeing the naked treasure of thy holy Gospel, had been a rich reward of
a most serviceable subjection: it coming unto us not alone, but accompanied
with so long a peace, with so great a wealth, so plentiful abundance of all
things, as this land has never or seldom used, other lands about us have long
looked after, makes our guilt a great deal more: because that in thy so great
a larges toward us, we have been so ungracious toward thee again.

9 Here therefore is another staier, whereby our sin climeth higher. For that
we, in the commodities of this life, surmounting our ancestors of the same
profession of the Gospel, in the time of King Henry the eight of most famous
memory, and King Edward the sixth ^re, for the fruits that such a liberality
asks at our hands, a great deal worse than they: and going beyond other
lands in these outward blessings, are outrunne of them, even in the very
outward testimonies and tokens of our obedience toward thee.

The second Blossom, containing
1 A confession of particular sins in several estates, and first against
Governors. 2 Against Judges, and their indirect proceedings. 3 Against
ministers. 4 Their inordinate affections. 5 Their imperfections, wants, and
infirmities. 6 Against the people, and their lack of love to the truth. 7 Our
security, and want of grace. 8 The aggravating of our sins, and making of
them more huge and heinous. 9 The burden which Gods Law lays upon our
shoulders. 10 Our unworthiness of any benefit, or good blessing, either
temporal, or eternal.

1 Over and besides this huge heap, and (as it were) reeke of our general and
common sins, we have to confess (at the the bar of thy judgment seat)
the particular sins that we have cocked up in our several estates. For our
governors, O Lord, for the most part, being more mindful of the fulfilling of
their affections, than either of thy glory, or of their good estate, which are
committed unto them, have not held so steadie a hand as they ought to have
done, either for the stablishing of the laws, by which (under thee) they
should have ruled us, and we by them should have been governed of thee, or for
the thorough execution of so many, and so far forth as they have been well
established.

2 Our Judges, and other ministers of justice likewise, have either
ignorantly, or corruptly declined from righteous judgment: or giving
sentence for the truth, they have done it (diverse of them) with no conscience
of thy true fear; or love of truth, but for respect, either of vain glory,
or of persons.

3 The Ministers, which should have been lights unto all estates, have for the
most part, no light in themselves: and their estate, in whose good constitution
and sound health, the rest should have recovered their health, is of all other
the most sick unto death. For if the whole number be surueied, scarce the
hundred will be found to be in the lotte of a faithful ministry.

4 For ah alas! how many are there, which occupieng the place of Ambassadors,
either for want of ability, or for that they love ease and sleep, carry no
tolerable embassage at all? How many which carrieng the light of the Gospel
in their mouths, carry also in their hands, the filthy water of ambition and
covetousness, wherewith to quench it?

5 And those which by thy grace, are for their might and will in some good
measure justifiable: notwithstanding, for the most part, bear it with such
infirmity, through slippes, as well in a sound and substantial manner of
reaching, as also in an even life answering thereunto, that if thy blessing
were not marvelous upon their labors, we should not need to fear the
quenching of this fire of the holy Gospel, kindled among us by the enemies:
as that which having so small attendance of blowing, would die of it self.

6 Finally, the people bear so small love unto their governors of all sorts,
in love so small reverence, and in them both so little willing obedience, that
it may be (not vneasilie seen) that all the parts of the Church and
Commonwealth, have conspired to provoke the Lord God against them. These our
great and ouergrowne sins, albeit they are gotten above our heads, yet rest
they not here. For where thou have by thy holy servants, the Ministers of thy
blessed word, sharply chidden us, and in a seueare denouncing of thy
judgments due unto them, fearefullie threatened us for them: yet have we not
trembled at thy voice, at which the Mountains do melt, and the rocks do rent
asunder.

7* A strange thing, that the Lion should roar, and the weak Lambs should
not be affraide: that the Lord of hoastes should proclaim war against us, and
we should not go forth and meet him, for entreaty of peace. Naie, his wrath
(as has been showed) has been and yet is kindled amongst us: and yet as
senseless men, and as dead flesh, we are not moved: We are pricked, and we
feel it not. We are wounded, and we do not so much as ask, who has stricken
us. The tempest that is coming toward us, threateneth our utter drowning: and
yet as a drunken man, we lie sleeping in the very top of the mast.

8 Whereby it is evident against our selves, that unto the multitude of our
sins, we have added another degree of wickedness, which is the continuance in
them: unto our disobedience, we have joined stubbornes, and the biles and
botches of our rebellion being ouglie in thy sight, do through the
putrefaction, and festrednes of them cast out such a* stincke, as the earth
which we tread upon, the waters which we drink, and the air which we breath,
are tainted and poisoned with the infection of them.

9* Yea Lord, taught by the wonderful justice of thy righteous law, we charge
upon our heads all the sins* of our fathers and grandfathers, to the
uttermost of our generations which are past: as those whereunto we are iuster
inheritours, than unto any lands or goods that they have left us. whereby it
falls out against us, that our sins touch the clouds, yea, break into the
heavens of thy Majesty's own* residence: whose measure being already (as it
seems) filled, there remains nothing, but that it should be turned upon our
heads.

10 Whereupon we make against our selves another confession, that we are
unworthy of all the benefits of this life, or of the life to come: both those
which we either have, or yet hope to enioie, from the greatest, to the
smallest, from the kingdom of heaven, to one only drop of water: that we are
worthy of all the plagues, which either have heretofore seized, or been yet
possessed of us. Yea, if thou should ransacke all the hid and secret
treasures of thy fearful judgments, which in thy law thou threatenest
against the breakers thereof, not only to the rasing and sweeping of us from
the face of the earth, but also to the throwing of us headlong into the
bottomless pit of hell: yet would we therein also acknowledge thy righteous
judgments. For to us belongs shame and confusion of faces, but unto thee
glory and righteousness.

The third Blossom, containing
1 An appeal to Gods promises in Christ, for the remission of our sins. 2
The blood of the Lamb washes us wool white. 3 A prayer in the behalf of the
dispersed Church, against Papists and Heretics: and for godly unity. 4 Gods
blessing makes our land fruitful * and that we are the Lords sheep, our
unworthiness notwithstanding. 5 A request for the continuance of his love and
mercy. 6 To what end it is to be desired.

1 ALl this, both guilt of sin, and desert of punishment notwithstanding, (O
father of mercies, and God of all comfort) we trusting unto the promises which
thou have made us in Jesus Christ, are bold through him, humbly to call for
the performance of them. And first we humbly desire thee, to forgive us all
our sins. Thou have said, that if we confess our sins, thou art faithful to
forgive us them. We acknowledge the debt, cancel therefore the obligation: let
not the multitude of them prevail against us, but where our sin has
abounded, let thy grace more abound: and as we have multiplied our sins, so
we pray thee to multiply thy mercies.

2 And although we have by continuance in them, so soked ourselves, that
thereby we are not only lightly stained, but also have gotten as it were the
scarlet and purple die of them: yet let them all (we pray thee) being washed
in the blood of thy sweet Lamb, be made as white as the snow in Salmon, and
as the wool of the sheep which come from washing. And to conclude, as our
sins have magnified themselves in an infinite length, breadth, deapth, and
height: so let thy mercies (which pass all understanding) of all sides and
assaies outreach them.

3 Therefore also we most humbly desire thee, O Lord, that the sin being
pardoned, thy wrath which is already declared, may be appeased toward all the
Churches of our profession, and especially toward us, that the manifold
breaches of the Churches, and Commonwealthes may be made up, that those being
received into the bosom of the Church, which belong to thine election, the
rest of the Papists and Heretics may be utterly rooted out, and that our
enemies in religion being slain, we may to the uttermost think all one
thing, in the honest and peaceable government of the Commonwealth.

4 Upon which uniting of us in all truth and honesty, the curses of the plague
and barrenness being removed, a way may be made to thy blessings, which (as
the hills do the valleys) may make our land holesomelie fruitful. And that
not only the wrath, which is already kindled, may be quenched, but that which
has been lately threatened, may be caused to retire. For the grant whereof
unto us, we beseech thee to remember, that how unworthy soever, yet are we thy
people, and the sheep of thy pasture, whom thou have redeemed with thy most
precious blood, watched over with a careful eye, defended with a mighty hand:
despise not therefore, O Lord, the works of thy hands.

5 And seeing thou have loved us, when we hated thee, visited us, when we
desired thee not, then acknowledged us, when we knew thee not: now that there
be a number of us, which love thee, desire thine abode, and acknowledge thee:
hold on thy love still, depart not from us, deny us not, O thou God of truth,
which art the God that

sin, by the assistance of Gods spirit. 6 For the due examination of our
thoughts, and an upright heart. 7 For conversation fit and agreeable to our
calling. 8 For constancy in our profession, against all temptations and
impediments.

1 O Merciful and heavenly Father, we thy servants do humbly prostrate our
selves before thy divine Majesty, acknowledging here in thy sight our heinous
offenses committed against thine omnipotency, seeing and beholding thy heavy
wrath against them. We feel our selves laden (O Lord our God) with a huge
company of horrible sins, whereof even the very least (being but conceived
in thought) is sufficient in judgment, to throw us down to the everlasting
burning lake.

2 Our own consciences, O Lord, do bear witness against us. of our manifold
transgressions of thy blessed law, of our security and senseless blindness,
running headlong to destruction, committing sin after sin, although not
notorious to the world, yet horrible before thine eyes. The thoughts of our
hearts rise up in judgment against us: the vanity of our talk before thy
Majesty condemns us: the wickedness of our deeds from thy sight rejects
us: all our wicked thoughts, words, and deeds, with the inward corruption of
our nature, do altogether, as it were a whole lump and load of sin, lie
heavy upon us, and with their intolerable weight, do even press us down to
Hell.

3 We do daily groan under the burden of them, inwardly lamenting our own
folly, so greedily running into them. In heaven, earth, or hell, we see none
able to sustain the weight of them, but even thy dearly beloved son Jesus
Christ, who in mercy intinite, and compassion endless, has sustained and
overcome that endless punishment due unto them: in him therefore, in him most
merciful Father, and through him, we come to thee, being fully assured
according to thy promise, that thou will accept and take that full recompense,
which he thy dear son has made for us, as a just ransom for all the sins
of all those, who with a true faith take hold on him. In him therefore we see
thine anger toward us appeased, thy wrath satisfied, and our debts paid.

4 Increase in us (good Lord) we beseech thee, this lively and feeling faith:
for we feel it oftentimes in us very weak, and troubled with many doubts:
increase it in us (O Lord) that we may through thy holy spirit be assured,
that the punishment of our sins is fully in thy son discharged. Make us, O
Lord our God, to feel this ^ame in our souls and consciences, that Jesus
Christ is ours, and all that he has done, that we are graffed into his body,
and made one with him, and therefore fellow heirs with him of eucriasting
life. Let us not only have these words in our mouths (good Lord:) but
through thy holy spirit, let us feel the comfort of them in our hearts fully
sealed and settled in us, that we feeling our selves inwardly before thy
judgment seat discharged, and our consciences toward thee released, may be
swallowed up with an unfeigned love toward thy heavenly Majesty, and toward
our brethren for thy sake.

5 Make sin to die in us daily more and more, that we may hate, detest, and
utterly abhor all sin and wickedness in all men, but especially in our
selves: that we may strongly (through thy holy spirit) set our selves in open
war and defiance against all sin and wickedness, that we please not our selves
in our sins, but streightlie examining sin by the just rule of thy holy
laws, we may utterly from the bottom of our hearts, condemn even the least
sin in our selves, having our whole joy, comfort, and consolation upon those
things which be agreeable to thy blessed will.

6 Give us grace always to be afraid to do any thing contrary to thy good
pleasure: and from the bottom of our hearts, to examine and try our thoughts,
before thy presence, that they be upright and unfeigned, not hypocritical in
outward show only, and appearance, but that even all corners of our hearts
being opened and disclosed before thee, we may even as though it were openly
before the face of the whole world, bring them in show, knowing that a double
heart is detestable in thy sight.

7 O Lord, direct and guide our feet, that we may walk always as before
thine eyes, not only before the eyes of man, being more careful to walk
circumspectly, in this respect, that we have thee to be a viewer of our
doings, a thousand fold more than the eyes of man, that thus we may walk as
becomes thy children, not only in outward show, but also in sincerity of
heart, abhorring even the least sin in our selves, striving, resisting, and
fighting against sin, not delighting our selves in sin, nor nourishing the
same in our breast, but earnestly embracing, and studiously seeking after
those things which be pleasant in thine eyes.

8 O good Lord, make us constant, and firm hearted, that neither the fear of
man, nor loss of goods, life, lands, possessions, or friends, draw us away
from thee, to do any the least thing contrary to thy will and pleasure:
neither the favor or friendship of man, nor yet the flattering enticements of
this world, nor the vain promotions of the same, do move us any whit from the
true and endless joy, delight, and pleasure, which we ought to have in those
things which be agreeable to thy will, and the constant performance of the
same, but that always to the end of our life we may continue in thy paths,
growing and increasing from faith to faith, from strength to strength, till at
the length we shall come to thy everlasting rest,

Amen. T. C.
The second Branch, of Petition.
The first Blossom containing A prayer to God, at our vprising in the morning.
O Bountiful GOD, which among all other thine abundant blessings, have given
us the bright day and Sun shine, to be the guide and governor of all our
doings, we beseech thee, that as thou art the father of light, and have sent
light among us, not only the light of the clear day, but also the light of
thy glorious Gospel, so thou would direct all that we go about in light,
that we may show our selves children of light, in applieng our labor, and
occupieng both our minds and bodies in the works of light, that when the day
of retribution shall come, when thou will reward every one according to the
measure of their merits, we may enter into that light, whose brightness shall
never be darkened, there to live with him, who is the light of the world, Jesus
Christ the righteous, to whom, with thee, and the holy Ghost, be all laud,
praise, honor, and glory for evermore,

Amen.
The second blossom containing A petition to be said at the putting on of our
clothes.
O Eternal and most merciful Father, we beseech thee, as thou have given us
clothes to cover our bodies, to hide our nakedness, and to preserve our
corporal health: so to deck and beautify our souls with the riches of thy
true knowledge, which is the sum and substance of all perfect happiness:
through Jesus Christ our savior,

Amen.
The third Blossom containing A petition to be said at the washing of our
hands.
GRant O merciful savior, that as with this water, the filth and uncleanness
of our bodily members are washed and scowred: so our inward souls may by the
daily remembrance and virtue of thy bloody death and passion, be purged from
all sin and iniquity: that both body and soul being void of blemish, we
may come the nearer unto thee in perfection,

Amen.
The fourth Blossom containing A petition to God, at our going abroad, about
our worldly business.
O Gracious God, which sanctifiest the hearts of thy chosen servants, and
circumcisest their thoughts, in so much that they become wholly acceptable unto
thee, and are altogether cleansed from carnalitie and corruption: we beseech
thee so to pitch the tents of thy protection and providence about us this
present day, that all things whatsoever we purpose, may by thy gracious
guiding be so disposed and prospered, that our hearts be not carried away with
the cares of this world, as having little hope in thine all sufficiency and
bountifulnes. O Lord, so season us with the salt, not of vnsauourinesse, least
we be thrown out upon the dunghill of reprobation, and so trodden under foot
as outcasts of none account: but with the salt of sincerity and righteousness
so powder our spirits, that whatsoever we take in hand this present day, may
be so furthered, helped forward, and prospered by thy goodness, that we thereby
may reap sufficient commodity, none offended or discontented either with us,
or our labor, nor thou by any means dishonored, but highly praised and
glorified both in us and in our doings, according to the saying of thy son,
in the holy Gospel: Let your light so shine before men, that they seeing your
good works, may glorify your father which is in heaven. This, O Lord, and all
other graces necessary, grant unto us for thy sons sake, our only mediator
and advocate,

Amen.
The fifth Blossom containing A petition to be said when we are at work, and
about our business.
PRosper, O Lord, by the presence and assistance of thy grace, the business
which we have in hand. Put into our minds to do it faithfully, and rather for
conscience sake, than covetousness. Further our affairs, we beseech thee of
thine infinite goodness, give our labors prosperous and happy success, and
grant us grace to glorify thee in thy blessings,

Amen.
The sixth Blossom containing A petition unto God at the leaving off from our
labor, whether it be of body or mind.
Almighty God, and most merciful father, which cloathest the lillies of the
field, with such roialtie, as Solomon when he sat upon the throne of his
majesty, never possessed: which feedest the birds of the air, the beasts of
the land, and the fish of the sea with sustenance convenient and agreeing with
their nature: we beseech thee to accept at our hands, this sacrifice of
thanksgiving, offered up unto thee for thy manifold benefits, and among all
other, for that thou have hitherto prospered us in our business and labor,
which thou have not made frustrate and unfruitful, but with due measure and
weight of profit and advantage, have let it pass out of our hands.

And we beseech thee, O father, that as thou have hitherto been the ouerseer of
all our studies and travels, making them fruitful and beneficial unto us, so
it would please thee to continue still thine accustomed bountifulnes, and to
give us grace, that for the same we may offer unto thee not only the calves of
our lips, but also of our hearts, through Christ Jesus our only savior and
redeemer,

Amen.
The seventh Blossom containing A petition to be said at the putting off of
our apparel.
GRant, O gracious God, thou giver and preserver of all creatures, that as we
put off this our apparel, and cast it from us: so we may also, thy grace
helping and assisting us, put off the old man, even the man of sin, that
clogged with the less vice, and clothed with the more virtue, we may be found
fit for thee, whenever it shall please thee to call us out of this world:
thorough Jesus Christ our savior,

Amen.
The eight Blossom containing A petition unto God at our going to take
natural rest.
Heavenly God, which art so provident, and watchful for the health and
preservation of thy children, that they want nothing necessary for the
supportation and maintenance of this their transitory life, not houses to
harbor in, not garments to put on, not food wherewith to be nourished:
finally, nothing, whatsoever it is, that they stand in need of, whiles they
lead their lives in this transitory tabernacle: we beseech thee, that as thou
have let this day pass luckily over our heads, safely defending us from all
dangers, and giving us the fruits of our labors, least our working should be
waste: so it would please thee in like measure of mercy, and peize of
compassion, to be our watchman, this present night, and every night, so long
as our bodies and souls remain coupled in this vale of vileness and misery.

Also, O father, we heartily beseech thee, that although darkness dim the
eyes of our body, whereby the use of our external and outward sight is made
frustrate and void, yet the eyes of our mind may still be broad waking and
open, continually looking for that comfortable coming of thy Christ in
glory, that we may be in a readiness, when the trumpet sounds, Arise ye
dead and come to judgment, which whether it be in the evening, at midnight, at
the cockcrowing, or at the dawning of the day, none can tell, no not the
Angels. But whenever it is, O Lord, so keep us waking, that when thou
co^mest, our lamps may be found burning. Grant this most merciful father, for
thy sons sake, Jesus Christ the righteous, to whom, with thee, and the holy
Ghost, three persons, and one omnipotent, almighty, everlasting, and only
wise God, be all laud, praise, honor, dominion, and glory, now and for ever,

Amen.
The ninth Blossom containing A petition for a godly life.
OPen our cies, O Lord, that we may behold the wonderful secrets of thy law,
and therein as in a steel glass, discern and see our own weakness, and by
our weakness our wickedness, and by them both our accursednes. O procure thou
the pleasant comforts and consolations contained in thy Gospel, to sound the
very deapth and bottom of our souls, by the plummet of a true and lively
faith in Christ Jesus.

Grant also, we beseech thee, that our dry and stony hearts, by the sweet
dewes and showers of thy heavenly grace, dropping down and soking therinto,
may be so moistened and softened, that like good ground they may ever be
yielding forth plentiful and pleasant fruits, to the glorifieng of thy most
holy name, the supplanting of sin, and the advancement of virtue: through the
death and bloudshead of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,

Amen.
The tenth Blossom containing A petition to be said in time of health, being a
thanksgiving unto God for that good blessing.
WE know O merciful father, that a rotten tree can not fructify, no more can
the body of man diseased, take any pleasure in the use of thy creatures, at
leastwise very little, if any at all. For as the morning deaw, or waterie
clouds, falling upon the field, moisteneth the ground, and makes it fruitful
and pleasant: even so health and soundnes possessing every limme, makes the
whole body, and all the members of the same, apt and able for any exercise.
By the benefit whereof, we purueie for our selves, all such necessaries as are
requisite for this our frail life. Knowing this most merciful father, we
refer it unto thy goodness, praising and magnifieng thee for the same, and
humbly beseeching thee to continue it in us, and to give us grace that we
abuse it not any manner of way. Grant this O bountiful God, for Jesus sake,

Amen.
The eleventh Blossom containing A petition in form of a confession, to be
said in the time of sickness, or otherwise, when the party diseased seems
to be in danger.
Almighty and most merciful father, the punisher of sin, and the just
rewarder of iniquity, I confess unto thee, that the multitude of my
transgressions, and the lothsomnes of my life, cannot but deeply displease
thy divine Majesty, and deservedly cry out for vengeance against me: yea,
vengeance to death, for my misdeedes crave no better reward. I know that sin
is such a filthy and ouglie thing in thy sight, that who soever are stained
and defiled therewith* are even an abomination unto thee: for thou being the
God of righteousness, delightest not in wickedness, neither can take any
pleasure in iniquity. I confess that for sin, thou have sent many strange
and terrible punishments upon diverse people.

The old world, in the fulness of their offenses, were overwhelmed with water
from heaven, to their utter destruction. The Sodomites were burned, and their
neighbors about them, even with fire and brimstone, for the filthiness of their
offenses. The Egyptians, a people obstinate and rebellious, and always
setting shoulder against the Prophets, were rewarded for their misdeedes, with
most horrible plagues, in the heat of thine indignation.

Yea, the Israelits, a people peculiarly chosen to serve thee, at what time
they sinned greeuouslie, and displesed thy divine Majesty, turning by the
manifoldnesse of their transgressions, thy mercy into fury, thy clemency
into anger, thy long suffering into reuengement, they felt the smart of thy
rod, not wrathfullie confounding them as castawaies, but lovingly correcting
them like children.

So most merciful father, hoping that in the blood of Christ Jesus, I am
adopted into the number of thy children, albeit my misdeedes are so many, that
they far pass the sands in the seas, or the stars in the skies: yet I
believe that thy mercy, which is above all thy works, is able to dispense
with the multitude of my sins, and thoroughly to cleanse and wash me from the
blots and spots of mine iniquities.

And therefore (O gracious God) with unfeigned repentance I prostrate my self
before thee, crieng and calling unto thee, to deal with me in the measure of
thy mercy, and not in the weight of thy fury, though my transgressions
exceed number. For if thou should reckon with me in rigor, I should be
found more light than vanity, it would fare with me as with chafe before the
wind, or as with bauen in a scorching furnace: mine end would be death, my
reward confusion. O hear me therefore, O loving Lord, faithfully calling upon
thee, with him that said, O son of David, have mercy upon me: and with her
that said, If I might but touch the hemme of his garment, I shall be whole: and
with him that said, Lord, I believe, oh help mine unbelief: and with him that
said, Father I have sinned against heaven, and against thee: and with him that
said, O Lord be merciful unto me a sinner. Cast down thy loving looks upon
me* lamenting Lazarus, lieng in woeful case, visited by thy hand, and groaning
under the rod of thy correction: spare me O God, spare me O good Lord, and be
not angry with me for ever. I take it for an undoubted truth, that all manner
of punishments proceed from thee, as accustomed means and wonted ways which
thou vfest to call thy best children home: and therefore I am in so much the
more comfort, that this thy visitation and chastisement is no sign of thine
endless anger against me, though sickness, and all kind of annoiances sprang and
issued from sin: but a token and argument of thy favor and loving kindness.

Yea Lord, though it tend to temporal death, whereby my body is wounded, yet
I am reposed in this hope and affiance, that my soul shall not see corruption,
but shall be received into heaven, to rest in the bosom of faithful Abraham,
till the time be come of the general judgment and glorious resurrection.

I know, and it is the duty of all true Christians to confess no less,
that from the beginning thou visitedst thy children: yea, on them whom thou
most tenderly louedst, thou did lay some portion of thy correction:
partly, to try them in tribulation, and to confirm their faith by patience
in adversity: but specially to assure their spirit, that they are thy
children, and thou their father: they thy sheep, and thou their shepherd:
they thy people, and thou their governor: they thy soldiers, and thou their
captain: they thy chosen, and thou their glory. Thou calledst to the
inheritance of thy kingdom, after the days of his pilgrimage were spent,
Abraham the father of the faithful. Thou calledst unto the ioies of heaven
Jacob and Joseph, when they had run their appointed race. Thou calledst unto
endless blessedness, that mild minded man, the mirror of meekenes, Moses I
mean, thy righteous servant, when he had fulfilled his course. Thou calledst
unto the place of eternity, Joshua and Caleb, and other gracious Judges of thy
people, when the houreglasse of their life was run out. Thou calledst unto the
fort of felicity, Samuel and David, prophets of thine own appointment, when
their full years were expired. Thou calledst unto the Paradise of perfect
pleasure, Ezechias, Josias, and other virtuous Kings, when their earthly
tabernacle was torn and rent in sunder.

Thou calledst unto everlasting happiness, Esaie, Jeremy, and the rest of thy
servants the Prophets, when they had lived their full time in this world. Thou
calledst unto thy kingdom, James, John, Paul, Peter, and other thine
Apostles, when they had discharged their duty in fulfilling their commission.
And to conclude, thou calledst unto the throne of triumph and victory, Jesus
Christ thy son, that immaculate and unblemished lamb, that innocent sheep,
that sweet Samaritan and surgion of our souls, when he had finished the
spiritual building, whereof he himself was the foundation, and chief corner
stone: when (I say) he had accomplished thy will, and vanquished sin,
Satan, death, and hell. In bringing which things about, thou did use
ordinary means, even death the way of all flesh: that by their example, thy
servants might be comforted in sickness, that as thy kindness was plentifully
declared unto them, in delivering them out of this wilderness, and translating
them to eternal happiness: so to me no less than unto them, though for a
time thou laiest thy hand upon me, and scour gest me with thy rod, thy
fatherly love and affection is manifest. For whom thou love, him thou
chastenest, and whippest every child thou adoptest and choosest, that the
consolation of their spirit may be the more increased. Woe were I, if thou
should not visit me (O Lord:) wretched were my state, and condition, it thou
should not try me with the fire of afflictions. Sickness is thy messenger:
poverty is thy messenger: yea, death is thy messenger, whom thou incessantly
sendest unto thy servants, to call them unto thee and thy kingdom. In
consideration whereof, I thy child, as I faithfully believe, adopted in
Christ, visited at this present by thy hand, and patiently abiding the
sharpness of thy scourge, am erected and encouraged with a certain and
infallible hope, that at thy good pleasure thou will work all in me for the
best, to my soul salvation, and to thy self glorification.

Why should I murmur against thee, though I am griped with anguish? Why should
I mistrust thy mercy, though my pains be somewhat extreme? Why should I
despair, as though thou were not merciful? No, no: so long Lord, as there
remains breath in my nostrels: and so long as mine eyes are open: and so long
as my tongue has the power of speech, thy spirit being present with me, and
comforting me, I will thus think with my self: The Lords will be fulfilled:
when he sees best time he will make an end of my tribulation. He does not
punish me as a reprobate, to my condemnation: but he corrects me as a child,
to my salvation. I am the work of his hands, he created me, and made me of
nothing: to the honor of himself did he make me, and therefore I hope he will
not destroy his own workmanship, though it rests in his will and pleasure,
to dispose all things as seems best to his divine Majesty.

His child I am, adopted in the blood of his son Jesus Christ, inheritour of
the kingdom of heaven through the spirit of sanctification, a member of his
mystical body, a grape of his vine, a sheafe of his harvest, a sheep of his
flock: and therefore I trust he will be my gracious God. This is my comfort,
that thus thou do chastise me, not in judgment, to desperation: but in
mercy, to consolation: and this is my joy, that hereby I am assured, that my
name is written in his register: and as for my faults, he has raced them out
of his reckoning book.

Why then should I hang down my head, as though confusion were the portion of
mine inheritance? To them that love God, all things turn to good. This his
visitation is but a preparatiue to further felicity, which in due time he will
reveal to me his servant, when he has taken sufficient proof and experience
of my patience, which I beseech him to establish and confirm, that the
possession of eternity may be the reward of my sufferance.

Wherefore, O most merciful father, if it be thine appointment, (as thy
determinations are secret, and hidden from the heart of man,) that this my
sickness and trouble be unto death, O then graciously hear my supplication,
and let the voice of my cry enter into thine cares. Give me not over in my
distress and weakness, when Satan is most busy to spoil me: but stand
thou like an invincible Giant on my right hand, let the wings of thine
almightines ouershadowe me, even until my last gasp. Moreover, grant most
merciful father, that at the separation and dissolution of my soul and body,
I may still continue thine, my body turning into dust, whence it took first
substance: and my soul possessing heaven, whence it received bring. O Lord,
send me a toifull resurrection, at the date of judgment, and let me be numbered
among the lambs, whom thou have chosen to be ioint-heires with thee of thine
own happiness in heavenly ioies.

O Lord hear my prayer, and let my cry come unto thee. Lord have mercy upon
me, Christ have mercy upon me, O holy Ghost be my comforter: O blessed
Trinity, receive my soul into the place of glory,

Amen.
The twelfe Blossom containing A petition to be said at the hour of death,
over the party visited, and lieng speechless.
O Eternal God, the welspring of life, and the treasure of true and
everlasting riches, thou God of the quick and the dead, thou which have
appointed every man a mansion in this earthly pilgrimage, and placed us here
as tenants at thy pleasure, to remove and depart when it is thy will to call
us. thou, even thou which ridest upon the wings of the wind, whose seat is
the heaven of heavens: whose footstool is the earth: whose messengers are the
Angels and celestial host: O bow down thine cies of pity, and look upon us.

O thou glory of Sion, thou beauty of Jerusalem, thou Alpha and Omega, thou
which art incomprehensible, the first person of the holy. Trinity, open thy
gracious ears, and hear the petitions of us thy servants. O hear us, and
that betimes, thou sauer of souls, whiles breath is in the nostrels of this
thy diseased and sick creature: for after this life, it is too late to make
intercession. Thou have chastened him O Lord inwardly and outwardly, his
strength is turned into weakness, his health into sickness, his flesh consumes,
his limines are lame, his eiesight waxes dim, his speech is stopped, all his
senses are numined, his heart pants, life and death struggle within him, and
wrestle for superiority. He lies in pangs, he is past hope of recovery to
our judgment, he refuses sustenance, he can take no rest, O look upon him,
thou comfort of Israel, and deliver Joseph out of this prison. O Lord have
mercy upon him, O God make him strong to endure this sharp and bitter
conflict. Let not the terror of death, the torinent of his sickness, the loss
of life, or departing from any transitory pleasure, withdraw his heart from
thee: but, as thou did create it, and powredst it into his body, so
vouchsafe to reserve it for thy self, that thou may be glorifiedin it, both
now, and hereafter, when it shall please thee to raise it up with the rest of
the body in the last resurrection.

Behold Lord, he is not able to pray for himself, thy hand is so heavy upon
him at this present, he can not so much as lift up a limme, thou have whipped
him so sore: he is past hope of health in the eyes of man, thou have made such
deep furrows upon his back: he is speechless, because thou have taken away
the use of his tongue: lo Lord, he lifts up his eyes unto heaven,
notwithstanding all these infirmities and weaknesses: O remember him, forgive
him his sins, remit and blot out of thy reckoning book, the ten thousand
talents which he owes thee.

He is not able to testify the inward sorrow of his heart conceived for sin,
so sharp and seueare is thy present visitation, which justly and deservedly
thou have laid upon him: and surely, though thou did punish him more
rigorously, yet thou art not accusable of injustice. For just art thou O Lord
in all thy works, and righteous in all thy judgments. But yet Lord we beseech
thee, to assuage the heat of thy wrath, which if it burn still, and continue
unquenched, alas, who shall be able to abide it?

Behold Lord how low he is brought, all his bones are out of course, which
way so ever he is turned, he feels nothing but anguish: no rest, no ease, no
quietness can he take, such is the weight of thine anger against him, for the
instruction of us that are alive, and here present at his visitation, that we
may learn thereby to detest sin, which is the cause of thy displeasure, and
to amend, least a worse thing happen unto us.

O Lord we beseech thee to consider our supplications, and to accept the
prayers which we power out in thy presence, in the behalf of this our diseased
brother. And loving Lord, if it be thy will to take him hence, O then we
beseech thee to shorten his time, to end his lingering sickness, and so to
deliver him from all earthly trouble. But if it be thy pleasure to raise him
up, being thus cast down, and to quicken and strengthen him, whom thy hand
has driven almost to deaths door, then at the intercession of us thy
servants, hasten his time of recovery, and restore him unto health and
soundnes. We pray for him O Lord, not knowing the secrets of thy counsel,
which is unchangeable, deal with him as it pleases thee: thine he is to order
and dispose. For thou art the potter, and he but a lump of claie, unto thee we
commit his soul and body: thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven, for
thine is the kingdom, the power and the glory, for ever and ever,

Amen.
The thirteenth Blossom, containing
1 Gods universal government. 2 That he annointeth Kings and Queens, and
why. 3 A petition unto him in the behalf of our gracious Queen Elizabeth. 4
His mercy in preserving her in time of tribulation. 5 A prayer for the
continuance of her good estate. 6 Against the enemies of the truth, either to
be converted, or confounded. 7 The Church of God, and the Commonwealth, two
sisters. 8 The death of Christ a full ransom for all our sins. 9 Requests
to be daily made of every true Christian.

1 O Gracious Lord, and most merciful father, we acknowledge thee the Lord of
Lords, and the King of kings, creating at the beginning, and ruling all things
evermore in heaven and earth, according to thy wonderful wisdom and power:
and our selves to be thy poor servants, the work of thy hands, and the sheep
of thy pasture, subjected to thy Majesty, and depending upon thy fatherly
providence for all things.

2 Nevertheless, seeing thou in thy wisdom annointest Kings and Queens,
appointing them to rule over thy people, to sit as Lieutenants in thy seat, to
minister justice, and most of all, as Fathers and Nurses to maintain and
cherish thy Church: commanding us not only to obey and honor them, but
moreover to pray for them, as watching over us for our good.

3 We therefore beseech thee for the great mercies sake, and for Jesus Christ's
sake, to show thy mercy to all Kings and Princes, that maintain thy glorious
Gospel: but especially we pray thee to bless our most gracious Queen and
governor, Elizabeth thine handmaid, with all spiritual blessings in Christ
Jesus, and with all temporal blessings, according to thy good pleasure, that
in the great measures of thy effectual love, she may more and more find great
increase of virtue, and wisdom, and strength in Christ Jesus, to the
faithful and happy discharge of her duty, that her holiness, and joy, and
zeal of thy house may be multiplied and everlasting.

4 And seeing it has pleased thee, of thy singular mercy, to give her this
special honor, first to suffer for thy glorious truth and afterward
miraculouslie delivering her out of the hands of her enemies, to set a crown
upon her head, and to make her the instrument to advance thy glory and
Gospel, for which she suffered, and to bring it out of darkness into light,
out of persecution, into this great and long peace.

5 As we give thee most hearty thanks for this singular benefit, so we
beseech thee to make her and us evermore thankful for it, and in thy good
pleasure still to preserve her for the continuance of these blessings toward
us, with all increase from time to time, to thy glory, the benefit of the
Church, and her infinite peace in Christ Jesus, the prince of peace.

6 And furthermore, we pray thee for her, and the estate, that such as be
enemies of the Gospel, and her enemies also, for the defense thereof, may not
despise the peace offered them to repentance, but that they may account thy
long suffering, and her peaceable and unbloody government, an occasion of
salvation to their souls, and unfeigned love to the truth, and their merciful
sovereign. Otherwise, if they still remain disobedient to the truth,
rebellious to her highness, and dangerous to the state, then (O God of our
salvation) as thou have discovered them, so discover them still, as thou have
prevented them, so prevent them still, and let their eyes wax weary with
looking, and their hearts faint with waiting for the coming of that, which yet
comes not, neither let it come (O Lord) we beseech thee, but a blessed, and a
long reign to her, and peace to Sion for evermore.

7 Also (dear father) so bless, so love, so in thy spirit sanctify and keep
her, that she may in the spirit of counsel and fortitude so rule that other
sister also, namely, this her Commonwealth, that they may flourish together,
and grow up together as palm trees, in beauty, and in strength, giving aid
and help one to another, that in the Church the glory of God may appear, as
the Sun in his brightness, and that the land may flow with milk and honey,
and true peace abound therein, as in the triumphant reign of Debora.

8 These graces (O Lord) are great, and we miserable sinners unworthy of the
least of them: therefore look not to us, but to thy self, not to our
iniquities, but to thy great mercies, accepting the death and passion of thy
Son, as a full ransom for all our offenses, throwing them into the bottom
of the sea, and making his cross and resurrection effectual in us to all
obedience and godliness, as becomes thy Saints: that to all other thy good
blessings toward our gracious sovereign, this may be added, that she
governs blessedlie, over a blessed people, a people blessed of the Lord, and
beloved of the Lord.

9 Yea Lord, that thy graces may abound as the waters of the Sea, in the Prince
and in the people, in the Church, and in the Commonwealth, from day to day,
till the day of our translation into thy kingdom, where justice inhabiteth,
where also we shall inhabit and reign with thee, according to thy promise for
ever. Grant these things (O merciful father) for thy dear son our Lord
Jesus Christ his sake, in whose name we crave them at thy merciful hand,
praieng furthermore for them, as he has taught us to pray: Our Father which
art in heaven, etc.

The third Branch, of Thanksgiving: Generally deciphering in a pithie and
ample meditation, Gods great goodness manifestly appearing in the diversity of
the blessings wherewith he has crowned man. Also, a prayer for grace to be
thankful. The contents more particularly lie open in the sequeale,
The first Blossom.
1 An invocation, or calling upon God, joined with submission. 2 An
acknowledgement of Gods manifold blessings and his providence. 3 A petition for
the gracious gift of thankefulnes. 4 Testimonies of Gods infinite love, and of
the effects of the shining Sun. 5 The sundry uses of Gods good creatures
appointed for man's relief. 6 Ornaments of the mind. 7 A request for true
knowledge and perceiuerance, with the operation of the same. 8 Another for
thankefulnes. 9 What sacrifice God delights in. 10 A supplication for grace
to offer up the same.

1 SEtting before us (O most merciful and loving father) the godly
Patriarchs, the holy Prophets, the true Conuerts, the constant Martyrs, and
all such as have loved thy glory far above their own life, we prostrate our
selves with all submission on of soul and spirit, before thy throne of
Majesty, humbly beseeching thee (for Jesus Christ his sake) who is the fulness
of our tore and comfort, to bend down thine ears, and to hear the prayers
which we power forth before thee: and for thy son sake, in whom thou art
well pleased, grant the request of thy servants made unto thee at this present.

2 We know (most gracious God, and loving father,) yea, we cannot but in
conscience acknowledge, and with tongue confess, that manifold, yea
innumerable are the gifts which thou have heaped upon us: yea so many are
they, that we can not with voice utter, neither yet in heart conceive the
greatness and worthiness of them. For whereas all other creatures are made,
framed, and fashioned to serve the use of man, and to yield themselves obedient
and tractable to his commandment and government: only man representing and
bearing thine own image and likeness, rules as a Lord, and reigns as a
king, over all creatures endued with life: yea, there is nothing within the
compass of the ample and wide world: but thou (most gracious God) of thine
infinite love, and incomprehensible providence, have preordeined and appointed
from original of all beginnings, to turn to the profit, commodity, use and
benefit of mortal and miserable man. Beasts both wild and tame thou have made
subject to his power: some serving for sustenance and nourishment, othersome
being made appliable and fit for his ease and assistance in bodily labor, as
partakers of his pains, and fellow laborers with him in his bodily
business.

3 These creatures, O Lord, being thus ordained and ordered, by and through
thine everlasting and unchangeable appointment, thou have given and bestowed
upon us men, most unthankful, and of all other the unworthiest of such
singular benefits: thou have enriched us with their continual and incessant
increase, and thou do daily more and more, with new access of graces and
good gifts, enlarge thy bountiful liberality toward us, in such wise, that
if we had any feeling of Christianity: nay, if we were not altogether sold to
sin, and made bondslaues to our own sensuality and corrupt concupiscence,
we could not, but with zeal of spirit, and burning heat of heart, cry out
with the Prophet David: O Lord, how wonderful are thy works thorough all the
world! Great is God, and most worthy to be praised, and his greatness can not
be searched out. One generation shall praise thy works unto another, and they
shall declare thy mighty power. I will set forth in words the glorious
Majesty of thine excellentnes, and thy wonderful works, etc. In
consideration therefore, O Lord, of the benefits, which thou have, and at this
present do power upon us, (which are so many, that they can not be numbered,
and so great, that they can not be measured,) we beseech thee to plant in our
hearts the good property and virtue of thankefulnes, least we proving a barren
and unfruitful soil, be so far from yielding good and hoalesome herbs,
that we seem altogether choked with noisome weeds, wherewith being
ouergrowne, we become vile, despised, contemptible, and nothing worth.

4 There be most lively representations, and such testimonies of thy tender
love toward us, as more plain and manifest can not be by any means, neither
for the outward eye of the body to behold, nor yet for the inward eye of the
mind to contemplate and mark: namely, creatures both heavenly and also
earthly: heavenly, as the Sun, wherein the brightness of thine omnipatent
and unspeakable majesty is testified to the world, which with his glorious
beams, and most comfortable heat, (being the lamp of light and life to all
things, which thou by thy word in the beginning did create,) ministers not
only to man, but also to beast, foul, fish, yea to the creeping worm,
occasion of inward delight and joy. For, as when it declineth and draws
down, avoiding the scope and compass of our eyes, it carries away with it
in like manner the brightness and glory of the day, whereby the dark and
unpleasant night approaches, and creeps upon us: even so, when it appears,
clad with roabes of majesty, and comes like a Bridegroom forth of his
chamber, the fogges and mistes of the wearisome night are chased and driven
away, and thereby follows, over the face of the whole earth, most
comfortable appearances of thine eternal providence, and infallible arguments
and tokens of thine endless love, to the safety and health of us vile
wretches, and cursed caitifes, notablic continued. Without the lovely light of
this bright shining lamp, which this our transitory life can by no means
lack, it is not possible to accomplish any thing. Thou (most merciful
father) have assigned and appointed the same to be the directer of all our
doings: for the want of so necessary a benefit, procures palpable darkness,
and most uncomfortable blindness.

5 For the former excellent benefit therefore (most gracious God) as also for
all other: namely, thy creatures framed and made for the succor of man: for
cloth and apparel to cover his body, that it may not be annoied with the
force of sharp and nipping storms, nor feel the smart of any tempestuous
season: for giving him fowls of the air, fish of the salt sea and fresh
rivers, and beasts of the field and forest to be his sustenance, against the
assaults of hunger, and to break the force of famishment, to maintain
nature, prolong life, strengthen the body, cherish the heart, and to quicken
and revive the spirits of the whole man: for providing to his use whoalsome
herbs and plants of special virtue, to expel many contagious and hurtful
diseases, and flowers of most fragrant savor and pleasant smell, to delight
the senses: for making the earth bring forth and yield trees of wonderful
force, stones of marvelous indurance, and other metals of strange and singular
quality, to make him commodious dwelling places, wherein to inhabit and
harbor, that neither the rage of frostie winter, neither yet the heat of
smothering summer, nor any sudden tempest and storm (except it please thee to
work contrary to the common course of nature and expectation) can work his
inconvenience: for bestowing upon him the riches and treasures which lie hid in
the secret celles and bosom of the ground, and the precious pearls of the
unmeasurable and bottomless deapth of the Sea: finally, for making all
things, as well wanting, as endued with life, subject to his rule, ready at
his commandment, and appliable to his service, we give thee most hearty
thanks, and praise thee for thy goodness.

6 Besides these external gifts of thine, wherewith of thine unspeakable and
free liberality, thou have plentifully stored and furnished man, thou have
most graciously revealed, and evidently given trial of thy singular care and
tender affection wherewith thou love him, thou have illuminated and lightened
him with the lamp of understanding, reason, and judgment, whereby he being
conducted and guided, has knowledge to make choice of that which is good, and
that which is evil: of that which is whoalsome, and that which is noisome: of
that which is commodious, and that which is injurious: of that which is
hurtful, and that which is fruitful: and so consequently, of that which
with his nature is agreeable, and that which is repugnant and contrary to his
being.

7 As these thy gifts are great (good God and most loving father) as indeed
they are exceeding great and wonderful: so we beseech thee to power into our
hearts the liquor of true perceiuerance and knowledge, that we somewhat,
according as the deprauation and corrupt state of our nature will permit, may
discearne the force and fruit of thy fatherly favor, and that this vile and
filthy vessel of our body, which is polluted, and as it were waxen mooldie
with the dregs and leeze of sin and wickedness, being sanctified and
cleansed with the clear watersprinkle of thy purifieng spirit, may become a fit
and well seasoned vessel, to receive the sweet and comfortable water of the
fountain of life.

8 And because (most bountiful and gracious God) thou have given us the use of
all these things, and made us possessours of the same, we heartily beseech
thee, to instill and let drop into the furrows of our hearts, the acceptable
deaw of thankefulnes, wherewith our entrails being thoroughly moistened and
made souple, we may remember, and think upon thy tender love, and more than
fatherly kindness, and in thy gifts give thee glory, and magnify thy name
with the sound of our tongues, and the consent of our hearts.

9 For, alas, what are we miserable and beggarly wretches, that have nothing
by inheritance but sin and wickedness? What are we able to give, considering
that we have nothing but that which we have received? in respect whereof, our
own wretchedness bewraieth it self, and our continual need and nakedness is
manifest. Only this thou requirest, even the sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, which is the thing that we are commanded to pay unto thee. For
recompense thou requirest none, since that whatsoever thou give, thou give
freely, without looking for reward.

10 Wherefore (most merciful father and dear God,) make us thankful
receivers of thy benefits, and that we may give a testimony of our
thankefulnes, loose and untwist the strings of our tongues, and open the pipes
of our hearts, that they both may sound forth thy most magnificent majesty,
and praise thee, to whom perpetual praise belongs. Grant this necessary
petition most bountiful God, for the merits of thy son Christ Jesus, our
only mediator and advocate,

Amen.
The second Blossom containing A thanksgiving for the benefit of our creation.
WE praise and magnify thee O eternal GOD, for thy great mercy, in that it
has pleased thee, among all the works of thine hands, to make us the most
excellent and noblest examples of thy justice, wisdom, and goodness. We
glorify thee also for that immortal essence, the principal part of our
nature, even our reasonable soul, which although it be not properly
comprehended in place, yet is it resident in cur bodies, and there dwells as
in a mansion house, not only to minister life to all the members and parts of
our bodies, and to make the instruments thereof meet and fitly serving for
the actions whereunto they are appointed, but also to bear the chief office in
the government of our life, and that not only about the duties incident and
belonging to this earthly and transitory life, but also to stir and quicken
us up to the service and worship of thee our most merciful Creator.

And as we praise thee for creating us like to thine own image, not only in
the outward frame of our bodies, wherein thy glory does appear: but also in
the inward shape of the soul, which is the proper seat of thy likeness: so
do we magnify thee for all the graces and blessings wherewith it has pleased
thee to beautify, adorn, and enrich the one and the other. Beseeching thee to
voutsafe us the direction of thy spirit, that we may, during the time of our
journey in the wilderness of this world, emploie and use them to that
principal end whereto they were bestowed upon us, namely, to the benefit of
our brethren, and the setting forth of thine eternal glory: through Jesus
Christ our only mediator and advocate,

Amen.
The third Blossom containing A thanksgiving for the benefit of our election.
Glory and praise be given to thee, O Lord, in that thou have vouchsafed to
call and elect us a peculiar and chosen people unto thy self, and to reckon us
in the lot of thine inheritance, being ordained to salvation, whereas
contrariwise, a great number are appointed to condemnation. Which gracious gift
of thine eternal election, we refer not to any worthiness in us, or to any
merits of works that we are able to do, but only to the mere mercy, and
bountiful liberality of thee our maker, who adoptest some into the hope of
everlasting life, and iudgest othersome to eternal death: which mystery is
laid up in the height of thy heavenly wisdom, far above the reach of our
reason and understanding, that, according to thy will and pleasure, thou
might be honored.

Like thanks be given unto thee, O most merciful Father, for that thou have
not only called us unto this glorious estate of grace, but have so assigned
the same unto us, that the certainty of the effect thereof is not in suspense
or doubtful. For it has pleased thee, of thine incomprehensible goodness, to
bind us together one with another in Christ our head, we being his mystical
members, and to knit us unto thy self with a knot impossible to be loosed. For
this thine unspeakable mercy we praise and magnify thee, and thy son Jesus
Christ our tender mediator and advocate,

Amen.
The fourth Blossom containing A thanksgiving for the benefit of our
redemption.
WE give thee most hearty thanks for all thy good gifts O eternal GOD, of thy
great goodness testified unto us even from the beginning of the world to this
present hour, and specially for the performance of thy promise made unto our
forefathers the Patriarchs, and their generations, but accomplished to us,
upon whom the ends of the world approach: knowing that the noblenes and
excellency of our creation would so little profit us, considering our fall in
the person of Adam, that it would rather turn to our greater shame, such is
thy justice, who deniest us, when we be defiled and corrupted with sin, to be
thy handieworke.

And therefore we cannot sufficiently extol thy bottomless bounty in
tendering our decayed state, that when we were danmed, dead, and lost in our
selves, did send down from heaven, thy dearly and only begotten son, to
take our nature upon him, and to die for our redemption, that in him we might
seek for righteousness, deliverance, life, and salvation, according to the
testimony of thy servant Peter, teaching us, that there is none other name
under heaven given unto men, wherein they must be saved. By which name of
Jesus, he was not unadvisedly called, or by chance and adventure, nor yet by
the will of men, but brought even from heaven by an Angel, the publisher of
thy decree, and with a reason also given, because he was sent to save the
people from their sins. Unto thee therefore O God the father our Creator, and O
Christ the son our redeemer, be all honor and praise for ever and ever,

Amen.
The fifth Blossom containing A thanksgiving unto Christ, for the benefit of
our reconciliation.
MOst hearty thanks be given unto thee, O tender savior of our souls, who
being the immaculate and unspotted Lamb of God the father, wast well content
to be charged with our offenses, that we might taste the sweet fruits of
thine innocence, and did most willingly offer up thy body an oblation unto
thy father, after that definitive sentence, pronounced in the Consistory, had
passed against thee in judgment, that we the children of wrath, outcasts from
the Common wealth of Israel, strangers from the covenant, and enemies unto
God, might by the divine virtue of thy death and passion, be reconciled, and
escape the penalty of the law, to the curse whereof sin had made us
subject, but thou by thy sufferings have set us at liberty, and delivered us
from danger of damnation.

We cannot imagine how to extol thy mercy sufficiently, in taking upon thee
a work of such difficulty, even the appeasing of thy fathers wrath kindled
against us, in whom the glorious image of our Creator was shamefullie defaced.
Thy bowels of compassion, and tender love, exceed all comparison.

For the manifold torments which thou in thy mortal body did suffer, in the
presence of most unjust Judges, are assured warrants of thy tenderness over us:
whom to set free from punishment, thou gave thine own dear and most sweet
soul to be a satisfactorie oblation, upon the which all our filth of sin
might be cast, and so cease, as not imputable unto us any more, thereby
reconciling us unto thy father, and sealing the same atonement with thy
precious heart blood. To thee therefore be honor and praise for evermore,

Amen.
The sixth Blossom containing A thanksgiving for the benefit of our
justification.
Laud and praise be given unto thee, O eternal God who have vouchsafed to
adopt us into the number of thy chosen children, not for any of our merits,
but for thy mercy sake, the curse of the law taking force by sin
notwithstanding. And we extol thy goodness, O most bountiful father, for that
thou have of thy free grace, for Jesus sake, in whom thou art delighted,
stayed the execution of thy wrath and vengeance against us, who have provoked
thee to indignation by our manifold sins and wickedness, which had utterly
excluded and shut us out of the gates of thy good will, did it not please thee,
at the intercession of thy beloved son, to receive us into favor, and to
reckon us for righteous, by the remission of our sins, and the imputation of
thy sons righteousness.

We have so lead our life since the first time that thy hand planted us in this
world, as that the whole race which we have run, has been a kind of
continual kindling of thy fury to consume us: and yet (O unmeasurable
mercy!) thou have so pitied our weaknesses, that thou have and do justify
us, that is to say, acquit us that were accused, from all filthiness, and that
by the mediation of thy son Jesus Christ, not by allowance of our innocence,
but by imputation of his righteousness, that in him, we which in our selves are
judged unrighteous, might be counted righteous. To thee therefore, O most
loving father, and to Jesus Christ thy son, be all honor and glory,

Amen.
The seventh Blossom containing A thanksgiving for the gift of our
sanctification.
Almighty God, which from time to time have sanctified thy people, and purged
their hearts from the profane imaginations of idolatrous and heathenish
unbelievers, that they might be a holy heritage, and a peculiar people unto
thee, zealous of good works, and addicted unto the devout service of thee: we
praise and magnify thy goodness, in that it has pleased thee to sequester us
from the number of the pagan people, who are altogether ignorant of thee, and
thy divine worship, and have opened the eyes of our understandings, and
sanctified them by the visitation and presence of thy holy spirit, whereby we
have atteined to the knowledge of thy truth, and the mysteries revealed in the
same.

Which sanctification, as thou have vouchsafed to begin in us, so we most
humbly beseech thee to continue even to the end and term of our life, that
the old leaven of maliciousnes being quite cleanfed away, we may be changed
into new dowe, to serve thee in holiness and righteousness, which is the end of
our election. O holy Ghost, which did descend in the similitude of a dove,
and in the likeness of cloven tongues, ouershadowe us we beseech thee, and take
up thy dwelling in our hearts, that whatsoever we say, think, or do, may
lauour and taste of sanctification: so shall we for this, and all other thy good
graces, as we are bound by duty, praise and glorify thee for ever and ever,

Amen.
The eight Blossom containing A thanksgiving for our preservation.
OMnipotent God, most mighty in word and deed, which hate nothing that thy
holy hands have created, we praise and magnify thee for all thy benefits
bestowed upon us from our infancy, until this our present age: for caring and
providing for us all necessaries convenient and agreeable to this our mortal
life: we thank thee for our health, wealth, and liberty: our peace, quietness,
and tranquillity: our children, offspring, and affinity: all which are thy
blessings, not due to us by desert, but bestowed upon us of thy goodness and
free will.

And as we glorify thee for these thy temporal benefits, so we magnify thee,
and extol thy most holy name, for the rich treasure of thy word and Gospel,
for thy holy sacraments, and other gifts powered upon thy Church and
congregation: of whom we confess our selves to be members, and thy son Christ
Jesus the principal and supreme head: in whom, being knit together like
lively stones, we make one spiritual building, erected to the honor of thy
most blessed name.

We give thee thanks also, O merciful father, for thy patience, thy long
sufferance, and forbearing to punish us, daily offending against thy divine
majesty: for the preaching of thy word, to call us home unto thee by
repentance, and to a reformed life: for defending us from bodily dangers at
home and abroad, by water and land, in company and alone: whereas many a one
does miscarrie, as we see, and by due proof are able to testify. For some are
drowned, some hanged, some burned, some boiled, some dismembered, some
murdered, one this way, another that way destroyed, in strange form and
fashion, by fire, by water, by weapon, by famine, by sickness, and other
casualties, some suddenly, some lingeringlie, some infamouslie, and diverse
diversely, as they are eating, as they are drinking, as they are dansing, as
they are cursing, as they are forswearing, as they are sleeping, as they are
waking, some betrayed of their counterfeit friends, some insnard of their
malicious enemies, some falling into the hands of thieves on land, some
assaulted of pirates on sea, and many by manifold means overtaken with diverse
dangers, oftentimes denouncing extremity of death.

From the which perils, for that it has pleased thee of thine infinite
clemency to preserve and save us from our very cradle, wherewith we might
have been overthrown, and so speedily dispatched, had not thy holy hand
ouershadowed us, and compassed us round about, being wrapped in our swathling
cloutes, we give thee most hearty thanks, and praise thy blessed name with
pure and undefiled lips. Accept our service, receive our sacrifice, even the
elevation and lifting up of our hands and hearts unto thee, and the oblation of
thanksgiving presented unto thy divine Majesty, for thine innumerable graces
and blessings plentifully powered upon us from generation to generation. Glory
be to thee O Father, glory be to thee O Son, glory be to thee O holy Ghost,
from age to age, from posterity to posterity, and let all people say Amen,

Amen.
The ninth Blossom containing A thanksgiving for the gracious gift of the
Gospel.
O Almighty God, which in thy due and appointed time did abrogate the law
of Moses, by planting in the place thereof the Gospel of thy Son Christ,
whom, when the fulness of years was come, thou did send down from heaven,
that he might for our safety accomplish the sum of thy divine pleasure and
will. We give thee most hearty thanks, for that it has pleased thee, of thine
especial goodness, to admit us among the number of Gentiles, unto whom the
same Gospel, which he brought from the bosom of thee his heavenly father, is
preached, and the mysteries of the same revealed.

We magnify thy most excellent and right glorious Name, for that thou have
called us to this state of godly life, lightening the dim eyes, and opening
the dull ears of our understandings by the finger of thy grace, whereby we are
put in possession of the jewel of true Christian joy, even thy sacred and
holy word, the key of knowledge conducting us thereunto. Give us we beseech
thee, O merciful father, such measure of thy spirit, that we may highly
esteem of this most precious pearl, and show our selves not unthankful,
with the Gadarens, unto whom thy son did disclose the virtue of his
divinity: but thankful, with the Samaritane, whom he cured of the leprosy.
In the mean time, we praise thee, and as we have hitherto magnified thee,
though not as we should, yet as we could, so will we extol thy goodness,
which is praiseworthie world without end,

Amen.
The tenth Blossom containing A thanksgiving for the safety of the Church.
O Eternal God, who from the beginning did so tenderly love thy little
flock, that as the hen covers her chickens, so thou ouerspreadest thy
people with the wings of thy providence. Example we have of Noah and his
family, of Lot and his kindred, and of diverse other, whom thou preseruedst
from imminent peril, when the contrary part, even the wicked thine enemies
were utterly confounded.

We give thee the glory due unto thy most blessed Name, for saving the ship of
thy Church shaken with the tempests of tyrannous and tempestuous seas: for
protecting it from the malice of spiteful pirates, who with the gunshot of
their bloudthirstines, seek to sink this thy little vessel, and to
ouerwhelme it in the waves, that the remnant of thy beloved may be rooted out,
and utterly destroyed.

Praise and thanks be ascribed unto thee, for rescuing thy sellie sheep from
the chops of ravening wolves, whom it has pleased thee, whiles they have
attempted the ruin and undoing of thy little household, to overthrow, and to
cast the shame of their own envious devises in their own faces, confounding
thy foes, who bragged of triumph, by making flesh their arm: and crowning thy
soldiers with garlands of victory, contrary to hope and expectation.
Beseeching thee to continue this thy care and kindness to thy congregation,
cooped up in narrow and straight corners of the world, and trenched about with
thousands of enemies, who watch a due time to mingle our blood with our own
sacrifices. From the which unhappy hour deliver us, increasing our number,
strengthening our power, and fighting for us thy people. For unto thee only we
appeal, who art able to prevent all the policies of Satan, and every member
of his ministry. So shall we sing songs of thanksgiving in thy sanctuary,
and lift up our voices of praise both evening and morning unto thee the holy
one of Israel, Hosanna in the highest:

Amen.
FINIS.
THE School of Skill, OR The rule of a reformed life: Digested into three
sententious sequences of the A, B, C. Wherein the weak have their full measure
of pure milk, and the strong their just weight of sound meat.

BY ABRAHAM FLEMING.

Matthew. 7, 12. Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, even so do ye to
them: for this is the Law and the Prophets.

Printed at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in Pater noster row, at the
sign of the Star. 1581.

A Preface to the true Christian Reader.
IT is the custom of parents, disposed to train up their children in learning
and knowledge of tongs, arts, and sciences: first in their infancy to commit
them to some honest schoolemaister, under whom they might be taught the
principles of their own natural tongue, and afterward in tract of time, as
their capacity increased, the (...) of foraigne speeches. For he that
determines to erect and build a dwelling house, begins not at the roof,
but at the foundation: otherwise, as it were a preposterous kind of attempt,
so all the world would judge it fond and ridiculous.

Again, we see, and experience teaches no less, that the expertst and
valiantst Captain that ever fought in field, was not a perfect warrior borne,
though peradventure there was in him some vehement inclination to martial
policy and prowess, but first he had his slender beginnings, and simple
trainings up, fit and convenient for the nature of his age, which trainings up
in military knowledge, and warlike actiuitie continued, the learner becomes
more skillful and courageous, and at last, by frequenting the field, and
envring himself to trials of valiantnes, proves a passing soldier.

Even so we, whom nature indeed has adorned with a goodly likeness, with
amiablenes of countenance, and with apt proportion of body, but yet thrust out
into the world with polluted souls, if we be desirous to please God, and not
to offend man, we must endeavor our selves to lead a life agreeable to the
written word of the Lord. The ways and means to atteine hereunto, do stand
upon certain principles, or positions, whereof some being affirmative, and
some negative, do jointly teach us what we ought to follow, and what to
eschew.

These principles or rules leading us to the knowledge and practice of a godly
and upright life, I have thought good to call The School of skill. For, as to
neglect the due observation of such precepts, and utterly to contemn the use
of so wholesome counsels, is a manifest reason and argument of folly: so, to
esteem of them, as of acceptable treasures, and to order the course of life,
according to their prescription and platform, is an evident sign and token of
good skill.

Now the Schoolemaister, whose School I entitle this to be, is such a one
indeed, as being taught by the holy Ghost from above, has had the use and
practice of a godly and blameless life: the commodity whereof, and
incomparable sweetness issuing from thence, when he had tasted, and saw that
the end of the same was the reward of eternal life, he pitied the miserable
state of men walking in blindness, ignorance, and destruction: and to revoke
them, or rather instruct and teach them knowledge, that thereby they might
amend their inordinate trade of life, he professed himself a teacher in this
School, to the end that others, as well as he, might perceive what advantage a
well disposed life affords.

This Schoolemaister we must presuppose to be such a one, whose heart the finger
of the Lord had touched, and into whose understanding the sun of
sanctification had shined. He was not one that walked in carnal liberty,
neither in the concupiscence of the eye, neither in the vanity of the mind,
for then should there be a repugnancie and dissension between his conversation
and profession, which ought to agree like musical concords. Take him therefore
to be such a one, as being renewed in the spirit of the inner man, is able to
teach, to instruct, to rebuke, and to inform, that the man of God might be
made perfect in all righteousness. But now entering into this School of
Skill, let us like good scholars with full purpose (Gods grace being our
governor) to profit and go forward in that we profess, learn by heart our A,
B, C, in this School, and according to our lessons frame the course of our
life.

Abraham Fleming.

To the Reader.
The starkest fool,
if well he mark
This skillful School,
proves greatest clarke.
Come therefore you
that wise would be,
And learn anew,
this A, B, C.
The School of Skill, or, The rule of a reformed life.
The first sententious sequence of the A, B, C, delivering diverse doctrines of
virtue and vice to be followed and avoided.






















friend to him that gives gifts.























The second sententious sequence of the A, B, C, delivering diverse doctrines of
virtue and vice, to be followed and avoided.






evil men, neither desire to be with them.















when he talks most friendly, he means least honesty.















make of thy counsel, least he bewraie thy secrets.















to the poor, that God may bless thy store.

















the messenger of death: but a wise man will pacify him.



















The third sententious sequence of the A, B, C, delivering diverse doctrines of
virtue and vice, to be followed and avoided.






















such as think on good things, shall be mercy and truth.















disobedient is hated.













person, the ignorant shall take better heed: and if thou reprouest one that
has understanding, he will be the wiser.











him: for he refreshes his masters mind.





























done amiss.

















his own neighbors, but the rich has many friends.















thy blood.









FINIS.
A Referendarie to the Premises.
THough praise it be to fight in feeld
With valiant magnanimity,
Yet, till thy foe be forced to yield,
As prisoner in captivity,
Thou can not vaunt of victory:
Subdue the band rebellious,
So shall thou be victorious.
Again, in running of a race,
We see by plain experience,
That he which has the swiftest pace,
And gets the gole by diligence,
Receives a winners recompense:
The rest with running weried,
are slenderly considered.
Even so this School of godly skill,
In order Alphabeticall,
To Scholars wanting wit and will
Is nothing beneficial:
Because they are the principal,
Requird in each capacity:
Bring these, and reap commodity.
A swarm of Bees: With their honey, and Honicombes. Gathered out of the
sweet and odoriferous Garden of Gods Word. Herein such lessons are to be
learned, as concern the whole course of our life, both toward God and man,
being in number two hundred: whereof some persuade us to virtue and godliness,
othersome dissuade us from vice and wickedness.

BY ABRAHAM FLEMING.

Ecclesiasticus. 11. 3. The Be is but small among fowls, yet does her fruit
pass in sweetness.

AT LONDON, Printed by Henry Denham. Anno Dom. 1581.

The Preface to the Christian Reader.
WE see that Bees being a sociable creature, that is, apt for company, flee
together in swarms, and assembled under one hiue, discharge the duty
whereunto they are ordained, namely, to make Honey. The benefit of this
laboring and diligent creature is so necessary, that such as have known and
tasted by due proof and experience the fruit of their travel, and the
sweetness of their work, will be hardly persuaded to neglect the fostering
of them, for fear of losing so singular commodities as they do yield.

Even so this swarm of Bees, which I, not by the sound of a basen, but by the
painfulness of my pen, have gathered together out of the pleasant garden of
Gods most holy word, where I found them scattered here and there among the
fragrant flowers, and sweet beds of wholesome herbs, making most comfortable
Honey, and offering thee a taste thereof, are not lightly to be esteemed,
considering that the issue and event of their travel, well ordered and used,
is so beneficial, as nothing more, if any thing like.

For their Honey has this virtue, that to such as eat it, and digest it
thoroughly, it gives a regenerated mind, a sanctified soul, a circumcised
heart, a mortified body, and all good things that man can imagine or devise: of
which spiritual graces, who so has once possession, his conscience will tell
him what it is to taste, to suck, to eat, and thoroughlie to digest Honey
made by such a swarm of Bees. These Bees follow one another orderly and
decently, without desire of first or highest place: out of one garden they
gathered it, in one hiue they made it, and for all godly disposed peoples
feeding here they leave it in their Honicombes.

There is none that having wit, will find fault with water of the cleerest
fountain, with flower of the finest wheat, with a garment of the costliest
silk, with a ring of the purest gold, with a jewel of the highest price. For
it is the nature of man to covet the very best things, yea, and to obtain
them, if they may be gotten for any money. Here thou have a swarm of Bees,
making most excellent Honey, sweet, pleasant, and whoalsome. It differs from
ordinary Honey, because the Bees that made it, are extraordinary, and the
flowers whereout they sucked it, grew in no common garden: it is offered unto
thee gratis, no gain looked for, but only thy good will in receiving it, and
thy diligence in using it. Make much therefore of these Bees, and open thy
mouth wide, that thy throat swallowing their sweet Honey, may distribute the
same to all thine inward parts, and that the outward and inward man may be
reformed.

Abraham Fleming.

A SWARM of Bees.
The first Honicombe, yielding most wholesome exhortations unto virtue and
virtuous life.
1 BE merciful and faithful, bind these two jewels about thy neck, and write
them in the tables of thine heart.

2 Be ioifull in the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and lean not upon
thine own will.

3 Be obedient to the law of the Lord, honor him with thy substance, and with
thy firstlings.

4 Be a searcher after wisdom, and an inquirer after understanding and
knowledge.

5 Be wise, so shall thou have honor in possession, but shame is the promotion
that fools shall have.

6 Be a lover of wisdom, she shall beautify thy head with manifold graces,
and garnish thee with a crown of glory.

7 Be conversant with the righteous, for their path shines as the light that
is brighter and brighter.

8 Be careful to keep thine own counsel in a matter of weight: for therein
consists the safety of thy soul.

9 Be obedient to the voice of thy teachers, and harken unto them that infourme
thee.

10 Be circumspect in choosing thy way, so shall thou escape misfortune and
danger.

11 Be thou a drinker of the water of thine own well, and of the rivers that
run out of thine own spring.

12 Be bountiful, and let thy wells flow abroad, that there may be rivers
of waters in the streets.

13 Be thou contented with thine own provision, and be glad with the wife of
thy youth.

14 Be glad with thy young wife, let her be as the loving hind and pleasant
roe, let her breasts alwaie satisfy thee.

15 Be wise and wary in thy ways, for the Lord sees thy footesteps, and
pondereth all thy goings.

16 Be careful to save thy self as a Do from the hand of the hunter, and as
a bird from the hand of the fowler.

17 Be provident in Summer what shall serve thee in winter, least thou have not
to supply thy want.

18 Be obedient to thy fathers commandment, and forsake not the law of thy
mother.

19 Be at defiance with a wicked and naughty woman, for her house is the high
way to hell.

20 Be temperate in thy diet: for gluttony and gormondising is vnineete for a
man.

The second Honicombe, yielding most wholesome exhortations to virtue, and
virtuous life.
21 BE true and trusty to thy friend, so shall he be bold to commit the
secrets of his soul into thy hands.

22 Be conversant with the wise, and with such as be of understanding keep
company.

23 Be desirous of the fear of the Lord: for it is the beginning of wisdom
and understanding.

24 Be a wise son, so shall thou make thy fathers heart glad, and drive away
heaviness from thy mother.

25 Be a worshipper of the Lord thy God, and in the day of thine hunger, he
will refresh thee.

26 Be thou painful and laborious in thy trade and occupation, so shall thou
atteine to be rich.

27 Be just and righteous in thy life and conversation, so shall thou have a
good report.

28 Be warned at the mouth of the wise, and despise not the counsel of such as
have experience.

29 Be diligent in doing thy duty, and toward such as are thy betters use
reverence.

30 Be a moderate spender, so shall thou be thriftie: for prodigality brings
poverty.

31 Be earnest in a quarrel of equity, and whiles thou live be never ashamed
of the truth.

32 Be zealous in religion and righteousness, rebuke the offender that he may
amend.

33 Be patient in the time of trouble, so shall thou receive a garland of
glory at the last.

34 Be worldly wise according to honesty, and in all thy dealings have an
upright conscience.

35 Be painful in thy life whiles thou art strong and healthful, so shall
thou be counted wise.

36 Be rich in virtue, and poor in vice, with such riches God is glorified,
and with such poverty he is honored.

37 Be merciful to the needy, and from such as lack, turn not thy face,
least God be displeased.

38 Be a harbourer of the succourles, and let thine hands be open to the
refreshing of the needy.

39 Be plentiful in good works, and where occasion is ministered, leave a
testimony of compassion.

40 Be sparing in speech and laughter, for a babbler is abhorred of such as be
sober and wise.

The third Honicombe, yielding most whoalsome exhortations to virtue and
virtuous life.
41 BE merciful, so shall thou do thy self a benefit: for who so hurts his
neighbor, is a Tyrant.

42 Be liberal in giving, so shall thou have plenty: for he that waters,
shall be watered also himself.

43 Be a sercher after good things, so shall thou find favor: for who so
seeks after mischief, it shall happen unto him.

44 Be a lover of correction, so shall thou love knowledge: for he that hates
to be reproved, is a fool.

45 Be true in thy talk, and speak that which is right: for a false witness
deceives by his lieng.

46 Be just and righteous, so shall no adversity happen unto thee: but the
ungodly shall be filled with misery.

47 Be a wise son, and hearken to thy fathers warning, least being scornful
thou be reproved.

48 Be sure to keep thy mouth, so shall thou keep thy life: for who so
rashly opens his lips, destroieth himself.

49 Be righteous, and thou shall abhor lies: whereas the ungodly shameth
himself, and is put to silence.

50 Be innocent and harmless in thy wa^e^ for ungodliness overthrows and
drowneth the sinner.

51 Be righteous if thou will excel, and love wisdom if thou will be
honorable and worshipful.

52 Be a walker in the way of righteousness, for therein is life: but in the
contrary is death and destruction.

53 Be virtuous, and thou shall leave unto thy children an everlasting
inheritance, and riches that shall never rust.

54 Be plentiful in thine alms, and God shall increase thy store, and give
thee his blessing abundantly.

55 Be faithfully occupied in the fear of the Lord, and thou shall walk
vprightlie before him all thy life long.

56 Be contented with a little in righteousness, for that is better than great
rents wrongfullie gotten.

57 Be content to commit thy works unto the Lord, so shall that prosper which
thou deuisest and intendest.

58 Be righteous in thy tongue, and sober in thy talk, for such are pleasant
unto Kings and great estates.

59 Be obedient and loiall, so shall thou be in favor, and thine order of
living shall be a good example unto others.

60 Be careful to do thy duty, and have a single eye over the charge
committed unto thine hand.

The fourth Honicombe, yielding most wholesome exhortations to virtue and
virtuous life.
61 BE humble and lowly in the whole course of thy life, let the law of the
Lord be the rule to guide thy goings.

62 Be ready to do thy friend good in the days of his distress, for in so
doing thou sauest his life.

63 Be comforted in thy heaviness with the counsel of thy neighbor, and cast
not away all hope.

64 Be to other, as thou would have other be to thee: that is, just, loving,
favorable, gentle, and courteous.

65 Be in thy youth mindful of thine age, and lay up in thy young years, to
keep thee when thou art old.

66 Be merry of heart, for that makes a lusty age: but a sorrowful mind
dries up the bones.

67 Be wise, and use few words, embrace understanding, and make much of
knowledge and science.

68 Be a searcher after virtue, and an enemy to vice, so shall thou find
perfect blessedness in the end.

69 Be merry with them that be merry, and mourn with them that mourn, yet
exceed not measure.

70 Be careful over thy charge, so shall thou get double credit, and increase
in favor.

71 Be discreet in thy talk and communication, and in thy behauior be mild,
humble, and courteous.

72 Be pitiful to the distressed, succor such as be afflicted, and to the
needy reach out thine hand.

73 Be to thy friend in adversity a present help, that in thy necessity he
may make retribution.

74 Be true and trusty in thy vocation, and in all thy dealings set Gods fear
before thy face.

75 Be content with thine estate, and break not beyond thy tedder: for in so
doing thou want wisdom.

76 Be gentle and courteous in speech: for a smooth tongue purchases favor
among the people.

77 Be liberal and lend, lay not up thy treasure and see thy brother lack,
but give of thy goods to the needy.

78 Be obedient to thy parents, to thy betters give reverence, live within law
and loialtie.

79 Be circumspect and wary in all thy business, and attempt nothing without
aduisement.

80 Be gealous over thine honest name, least thou bring thy self to shame
among the people.

The fifth Honicombe, yielding most whoalsome exhortations to virtue and
virtuous life.
81 BE near to thy self in the time of need, least such as be wise laugh
thee to scorn, and make thee a byword.

82 Be faithful to thy friend in all his affairs, for thereupon depends
thine estimation and credit.

83 Be a companion with honest women, but of wanton minions beware: for they
are the very doors of death.

84 Be modest at the table, least they that sit by, seeing thine intemperance,
abhor thee.

85 Be sparing at wine, for too much drinking thereof infeebleth the wit, and
weakeneth the memory.

86 Be loving and careful over thy wife, for to use her hardly, and not like
a husband, is the next way to make her an harlot.

87 Be wary how thou viewest the beauty of a woman too narrowly, least thou
be taken in her love, and so fall to folly.

88 Be chaste in communication and talk, for many times the heart gives
utterance to the tongue.

89 Be careful to keep thee in one place, and continue in thy calling, if
thou intend to be thriftie.

90 Be more desirous to save than to spend, least in the time of need thou
have not to serve thy turn.

91 Be a true paimaister of thy hired servant, and let him have his wages for
his work.

92 Be courteous and gentle, so shall such as be absent commend thee, and they
that be present, shall rejoice in thy company.

93 Be merry at thy meat, and give God thanks for the same, so shall thou
have always enough.

94 Be mindful of thy duty to God, and every morning and evening magnify
his holy name.

95 Be sober and continent among young women, in the presence of thy wife, least
she burn in gealousie over thee.

96 Be in thy conversation humble and gentle, and have a regard to the whole
course of thy life.

97 Be in thine apparel modest, in thy communication honest, in thy behavior
sober, and in all thy doings discreet.

98 Be to the stranger courteous, to thy neighbor friendly, to all a
wellwiller, to none an enemy.

99 Be to thy prince trusty and loiall, to the magistrate obedient, and to thy
betters dutiful.

100 Be thankful to God for all his benefits, and let his praise be always
in thy mouth.

(...) harlot.

16 Be not suertie for a stranger, and for him whom thou knowwest not, be not
handfasted.

17 Be not in thy neighbors danger: if thou be, humble thy self, and with thy
friends entreat thy creditour.

18 Be not sluggish, but consider the Emmet, and by her example learn to be
wise.

19 Be not slothful and idle, least poverty creep upon thee, and beggerie
overtake thee as a traveler.

20 Be not proud of countenance, abhor a lieng tongue, and detest hands that
shed innocent blood.

The seventh Honicombe, yielding most whoalsome dehortations from vice and
vicious life.
21 BE not haunted with an heart that is full of wicked imaginations: for that
is the next way to mischiese.

22 Be not a false witness that brings lies, nor a sower of discord among
brethren.

23 Be not a company keeper with a fair woman, least thou be taken and
intrapped with her fair looks.

24 Be not familiar with an harlot, for she brings a man to beggerie: but an
honest woman is worth gold.

25 Be not a tempter of thy neighbors wife to lewdness, least thou run in
danger of Gods curse.

26 Be not a blasphemer of the Lords name, least he be sharply avenged of thee
for thy presumption.

27 Be not a reprouer of the scornful, least he owe thee evil will: but
rebuke a wise man, and he will love thee.

28 Be not of the number that say, Stolen waters are sweet, and the bread
that is privily eaten has a good taste.

29 Be not a gatherer of goods wrongfullie, for they profit nothing in the end.

30 Be not a stirrer up of hatred and strife, but embrace love: for love
covers the multitude of sins.

31 Be not a much babbler, for therein is great offense: but refrain thy lips,
so shall thou be wise.

32 Be not double of tongue, and a dissembler: for the Lord abhors the
counterfeite hypocrite.

33 Be not an extortioner, nor an oppresser of the poor: for the Lord will
take their cause in hand.

34 Be not fugitive and lightfooted from place to place, but continue content
with thine own estate.

35 Be not gealous over thy fair and youthful wife, least thou turn her love
into hate.

36 Be not covetous and greedy of money, for in time both thou and thy wealth
shall away.

37 Be not delicate and nice: for that is the property of women, but avoid all
such vanities.

38 Be not inquisitiue after things above thy knowledge, least thou be counted
a busy body.

39 Be not a mainteiner of wrong judgment, least the Lord confound thee in thy
wickedness.

40 Be not over careful for thy life, least thou fall into mistrust and
despair of Gods providence.

The eight Honicombe, yielding most whoalsome dehortations from vice and
vicious life.
41 BE not a talebearer from care to ear, least thou be forsaken of thy
friends, and made an outcast.

42 Be not unjust in buieng and selling, let thy balance be even, and thy
weights without fault.

43 Be not a dissembler, nor a discouerer of secrets: but faithful of heart,
and trusty in counsel.

44 Be not a purchaser of thy neighbors house over his head, for in so doing
thou suckest his blood.

45 Be not suertie for a stranger, least thou smart for it: for he that hates
suertiship is sure.

46 Be not a worker of deceiptfull works, but a sower of righteousness, so
shall thou receive thy reward.

47 Be not corrupt in heart, for such does the Lord abhor: but in such as are
of an undefiled conversation, he has pleasure.

48 Be not over bold to trust in thy riches, least thou have a fall, but use
them in the fear of the Lord.

49 Be not a sower of disquietnes in thine own house, least thou have wind for
thine heritage.

50 Be not malicious, least thou be ensnared with thine own mouth: but be
meek of speech, so shall thou be honored.

51 Be not a medler in other men's matters, least thou be ill thought of, and
have small thanks for thy labor.

52 Be not hasty in uttering thy wrath, least thou be counted a fool, and in
the end thou discover thine own shame.

53 Be not a slanderous person, for such a one wounds like a sword: but a
wise man's tongue is wholesome.

54 Be not an imaginer of evil, for commonly mischief does follow: but be a
counselor of that which is honest.

55 Be not a lier, and a forger of untruths, for such does the Lord abhor:
but they that deal truly, please him.

56 Be not a sluggard, feign to have, and not to get: but be diligent, and thou
shall have plenty and abundance.

57 Be not proud, for after pride follows strife, whilst thou think none
comparable in worthiness unto thy self.

58 Be not a getter of thy goods by vanity, for they are soon spent: but
they that are gathered together with the hand, shall increase.

59 Be not desperate, and out of hope in thy heaviness: for that is the next
way to kill thy heart.

60 Be not a bolsterer of the wicked in his wickedness, least thou be partaker
of his punishment.

The ninth Honicombe, yielding most whoalesome dehortations from vice and
vicious life.
61 BE not deceitful: for such a one shall not roste that he took in hunting:
but the riches of the just are of great value.

62 Be not shameless in sinning, least the vengeance of the Lord overtake
thee, and thou be crushed in pieces.

63 Be not sparing in using the rod, least thou hating thy son, be an
occasion that he curse thee another day.

64 Be not scornful, least in seeking for wisdom, thou find it not, though
thou would give gold for it.

65 Be not familiar with a foolish man, when thou perceiuest not in him the
lips of knowledge and understanding.

66 Be not injurious and wrongful to the poor: for therein thou blasphemest
thy maker, and dishonourest his majesty.

67 Be not proud and haughty of heart: for such does the Lord abhor, and he
hates them even to hell.

68 Be not froward in thy ways, if thou will please the Lord, but follow the
path of peace and equity.

69 Be not a deviser of vanities which please thine own heart, for with such
toies is the Lords wrath kindled.

70 Be not a wicked dooer: for such as exercise themselves in naughtiness, are
an abomination unto him.

71 Be not careless at the Kings displeasure: for the wrath and anger of the
Prince, is the messenger of death.

72 Be not rash in thine enterprises: for of rashness and hardiness comes
repentance and sorrow.

73 Be not a controller of thy betters: for in so doing, thou do run among
thorns and thistles.

74 Be not offensive to thy brother in any thing, least he being grieved,
complain against thee bitterly.

75 Be not a prouoker of the angry, least by heaping fire upon fire, thou thy
self feel the flaming heat.

76 Be not acquainted with a sorcerer, and with an inchanter or soothsaier
keep not company.

77 Be not curious in vanities, least thou become a scorn among the wise, and
a mockingstocke among the sober.

78 Be not overcome with wine and strong drink: for thereby many a wise man
has showed him self a fool.

79 Be not favorable to the malefactor, and seucare against the innocent, for
that is to pervert justice.

80 Be not a shifter, to live by other men's sweat, but let thine own labor
minister unto thee allowance.

The tenth Honicombe, yielding most whoalsome dehortations from vice and
vicious life.
81 BE not wanton nor light in thy behavior, least thy manners being marked,
thou reap shame and rebuke.

82 Be not a couerer of an offense, where the offender falls wilfully, but
open his fault that he may be reproved.

83 Be not seditious and given to discord and strife, least thou be counted a
mainteiner of mischief.

84 Be not vainglorious and confident in thy foolishness, for such a one is
like a she Bear robbed of her whelps.

85 Be not a rewarder of evil for good: for if thou so do, evil shall not
depart from thy house.

86 Be not a iustifier of the ungodly, nor a condemner of the innocent: for
both these does the Lord abhor.

87 Be not delighted in sin and wickedness: for that is to bring destruction
and everlasting death to thine own soul.

88 Be not froward of heart, least thou thereby obtain no good: neither bear
thou a double tongue in thy mouth.

89 Be not wilful in thine own opinion, neither defend thou obstinately that
which is not right.

90 Be not wise in thine own conceipte, least in so doing thou be counted a
fool among the discreet.

91 Be not married to thine own fancy, and like not so well of thy self, as
to have other in contempt.

92 Be not hasty to be revenged upon thine enemy, but bridle thy raging lust
for a time with reason.

93 Be not stubborn and revellious against a magistrate, least thou heap
coals of fire upon thine head.

94 Be not presumptuous, and of an haughty heart: for the end of pride is
shame and confusion.

95 Be not a listener after news, nor a raiser up of reports, least thou
become a common scorn.

96 Be not a laughter at other men's miseries: for thine estate is subject to
the like wretchedness and calamity.

97 Be not a grudger against God, if he afflict thee: but patiently bear all
tribulations and sorrows.

98 Be not suspicious where there is no appearance, and though there be, yet be
not too rash in thy judgment.

99 Be not liberal of another man's, least thereby thou grow out of credit
with thy friends.

100 Be not a deceiuer of the simple, nor guilefull in thy dealings: for that
is the way to lose love and favor.

The Conclusion.
Taste of the honey here in this hiue,
If thou will learn to live well, and thrive.
FINIS.
A Referendarie to the Premises.
NO cookerie is so exquisite,
No dish so deintie dressed,
But ouercommes the appetite,
By gluttony oppressed:
And therefore wise King Solomon
Commends moderation.
No kind of sweet restoritie,
Though curiously compounded,
No isntrumental melody,
In time and measure sounded,
But by degrees superlatiue,
Offends the virtue sensitive.
Such store of honey is gathered,
Here in this swarming Beehiue,
As being often swallowed,
So whets the power digestive,
That more and more it coueteth,
And never faints or surfeteth.
Who would not then most hungerlie,
Eat plenty of this honey,
Which tastes so sweet and sauourlie,
And costs so little money?
The use thereof is general,
God grant it prove effectual.
A Plant of Pleasure, Bearing fourteen several flowers, called by the names
of Holy Hymns, and Spiritual Songs. Wherein such godly exercises are
presented to the hands of every particular person, as may conveniently be
applied to their private use, not only in the pleasant Spring of prosperity:
but also in the hard Winter of adversity.

BY ABRAHAM FLEMING.

Ephesians. 5. verse, 18, 19. Be ye fulfilled with the spirit, speaking unto your
selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, singing and making melody
in your hearts.

AT LONDON, Printed by Henry Denham. Anno Dom. 1581.

A Preface to the true Christian Reader.
IT is a natural inclination of man, for the delighting and solacing of
himself, after some labor or exercise, to seek such recreations, as do
best agree with his disposition. Hereupon, some covet this game, othersome
that: and every man indeed what makes most for his contentment. Which kind
of recreations and refreshings, men are not forbidden in Gods word to use, so
that the fear of his divine majesty prevent them in all their actions: and
that they abuse not those benefits of recreation to a licentious and wanton
liberty.

Very necessary it is, that consideration be had of the state of the body,
which cannot always endure labor, but that now and then it must be refreshed,
not only with some intermission and ceassing from travel, but also with some
kind of exercise coupled with delectation and pleasure, whereby not only the
body, and every member thereof, is comforted, but the mind also, and the
faculties or powers of the same iollilie quickened.

Such care taken for the body, which is earthly and corruptible, should teach
us (I think) a point of wit, which we want, touching the regard wherewith we
ought to be moved for the good estate of the mind or soul, which is heavenly
and immortal. For how much the mind is more precious than the body, so much
the more, wisdom would, it should be esteemed: otherwise we shall seem to
prefer the shell before the kernel, the bark before the pith, the shadow
before the substance, yea, most absurdlie, we shall refuse wheat for chafe,
pure gold for dross, clear wine for dregs, and in conclusion repent our want
of grace.

It were behoofull therefore for us, first and principally to see to our mind,
which is chiefest part of our essence and being, that the same, after some
serious study and contemplation, desiring to be refreshed, be not fed with
fond fancies, fables, dotages, imaginations, dreams, and I cannot tell what
idle and unfruitful discourses, which kindle the affections, and set the
flesh a gogge: but rather with holy exercises, and godly meditations, such as
are and may be provided for the purpose, to revive the spirit, and quicken the
new man, if the party be graciously affected.

Thou have here therefore presented unto thine hand (good Reader) a plant of
pleasure, bearing fourteen several flowers, called by the name of holy
Hymns and spiritual Songs, to read at thy leisure for thy recreation, and
not so much for thy recreation, as for thy profit: which I have put partly in
rythme, and partly in prose, for the satisfaction of sundry Readers desires,
some being addicted to this, and some delighted in that kind of writing. I
would to God it were in me to frame my wit to the will of the well disposed in
all points. I have done what I could, the Lord knows what I would: his name
be praised for all, whose glory to seek and set forth, I beseech him give us
all grace, so shall the faithful rejoice and clap their hands, but shame shall
fall upon the reprobat, and force them to hang down their heads.

Abraham Fleming.

A Plant of Pleasure, bearing fourteen several Flowers.
The first Flower called a holy Hymn,
containing 1 A petition unto God for the remission of sins. 2 A description
of Gods greatness. 3 Of his habitation, and that he sees all things.

A.
1 AS the Sun is the soul and life of the world, so is thy word (O God) the
comfort of my heart.

Be gracious and favorable unto me thy servant, that I may be free from the
malice of mine enemies.

Reward me not according to my deseruings (O Lord) for I am full of sin, and
in me there is no righteousness.

According to thy loving kindness therefore (O merciful father,) blot mine
offenses out of thy register, and pardon me.

Have mercy on me, O founteine of all mercy, cleanse me from the corruption
of sin, and wash me with the water of thy word.

Am not I a reasonable creature, endued with knowledge and understanding? O
Lord, to whom should I then come, but to thee?

2 Men, beasts, fishes, and fowls, they are the works of thine hands, by the
virtue of thy word they were created and made.

From the rising of the Sun, to the going down of the same, I will continue
in the contemplation and view of thy greatness.

Lighten the eyes of my heart (O Lord) that they may see the mightines of thy
majesty in thy creatures.

Endless is thy glory, and thy power is incomprehensible: wonderful art thou
in thy judgments.

Marvelous things are wrought by thine omnipotent hand day by day, the eyes of
all people are witnesses of thy power.

3 In heaven is thy dwelling place, from whence thou beholdest the commings in,
and the goings out of all men.

Nothing is hidden from thine eyes, O Lord, the brightness of thy majesty can
not be absent.

Give me grace (O God) to lead my life in the love of thy law, so shall I not
miscarrie.

The second Flower called a spiritual Song,
containing 1 A commemoration or remembrance of the benefits of Christ's death
and passion. 2 A petition for thankfulness. 3 A confession of Gods greatness
and almightinesse.

B.
1
AL people praise the Lord,
with faithful heart and voice,
Be bold to magnify his name,
and therein to rejoice.
Remember well the work,
which he for us has wrought,
And laud his name accordingly,
in word, in deed, and thought.
Hell gates he has shut up,
in spite of Satan's power,
And saved the souls of sinful men
from torments sharp and sower.
Most mighty is his arm,
his greatness has none end,
From force of foes that us assault,
all his he does defend.
2
Lord lighten thou our hearts,
that we may praise thy power,
Eternally which flourishes,
and works every hour.
3
Most mighty is thy word,
thy majesty surmounts,
In glory none so excellent,
(as scriptures cast accounts.)
No Prince nor Potentate,
may once with thee compare,
Give us thy grace no less to learn,
(O Lord) with Christian care.
The third Flower called a holy Hymn,
containing 1 A request for assistance against our adversaries. 2 A confession
of our vileness by reason of sin. 3 A petition for true mortification and
regeneration. 4 Of the pretiousnesse of man's soul.

R.
1 ACcording to thine unmeasurable mercies, O God, hear my prayer, and let
thine ears be open to the cry of my complaint.

Be my savior and deliverer from danger and distress, and bridle thou the
desperateness of mine adversary, that he do me no mischefe.

Rebuke them (O Lord) that go about to raise reproaches against me: chastise
them, that they may see wherein they have offended.

As for me, I will withstand them in their maliciousness: for I hope thou will
arm me with the spirit of fortitude and patience.

Holy one of Israel, hear the supplication of me thy servant, and in the
time of necessity assist me.

2 A worm and no man I confess my self to be, yea, more vile and
contemptible, than any unreasonable creature: for sin has s^oong my soul.

My heart is defiled with a thousand corrupt cogitations: yea, the thoughts
which are hidden in my heart, are not so infinite, as they are wicked.

From mine infancy and cradle I have been blemished with sin, and as for
righteousness or justice, there is none in mine entrails.

Lord, I am so overwhelmed in sin and iniquity, that I stand in continual
fear of thy punishment: Oh give me grace to repent!

Evening and morning I call my sins to memory, and they are more in number
than the hairs of my head: yet (O Lord) be merciful.

3 Make me a new creature by the inspiration of thy sanctifieng spirit, and let
mine inward man be circumcised with the razour of mortification.

Increase in me godly desires, and let all carnal concupiscences be quite
quenched in me, that I may long after nothing, but the love of thy law.

4 Nothing is more precious in thy sight (O Lord) than the soul of man, O let
not sin prevail against it.

Grant me thy grace even to the last hour of my life, that I may have in
heaven mine inheritance, purchased by Christ his death and passion,

Amen.
The fourth Flower called a Spiritual Song,
containing 1 A glorifieng of God. 2 An exhortation to praise him. 3 A
repetition of certain properties in him. 4 A protestation or vow of Christian
duty to do him reverence.

A.
1
ALl glory unto God,
the guider of the just,
Blessed be his name in heaven and earth
whereto the righteous trust.
2
Repair his temples to,
him worship and adore,
Alleluiah sing and say,
to him for evermore.
3
He is the God of grace,
whose kingdom knows none end,
A mighty God, from all annoies
that can his flock defend*
Most merciful is he,
to such as do repent,
Forgiving them, which for their sins
are sorry and lament.
Laud we his holy name,
as duty does command,
Each tongue sound out his majesty,
adore him sea and land.
4
My heart, my tongue, and voice,
shall play the organ pipes
In praising him, out of the skore
our desperate debts which wipes.
No time will I let slip,
(if God do give me grace)
Great thanks to render to his name
which fills every place.
The fifth Flower called a holy Hymn,
containing 1 The reward of the proud and impenitent. 2 An admonition not to be
high minded. 3 To be touched with compassion toward the afflicted. 4 To be
mindful of Gods mercies in tribulation. 5 A declaration of his omnipotency
and power. 6 A petition that the word of God might be the rule of our life.

H.
1 AN humble heart is a sacrifice unto the Lord, a contrite spirit he will not
despise: as for the proud and impenitent, he casts them out of his favor in
the heat of his indignation.

2 Be not high minded, neither puffed up with a vain opinion of thy self: but
consider that thou art but dust and ashes, and that thou have nothing but
naughtiness by nature.

3 Relent at the adversities and afflictions of thy neighbor, and in the
bowels of compassion mitigate his misery, for nothing falls upon him, but
the same may in time chance to thee.

Arm thy self with patience, to endure all tribulations: if God chastise thee
with any kind of punishment, acknowledge thine own transgressions in that
behalf, and be penitent.

4 Have in thy mind the greatness of Gods mercies, which are above all his
works: put thy trust in him in the time of trouble, he will deliver thee, and
set thee at liberty.

Ask after succor where it is to be found, the Lord is all sufficient, he
has treasures of good things for them that love him: as for the wicked of this
world, they are out of his favor.

Much mightier is the mercy of the Lord, than the heart of man can conceive:
of his power there is no end: all the world is replenished with his greatness
most excellent and glorious.

5 Fall down ye hills before his presence, tremble ye deepes at the sight of
his majesty: for the whole compass of the world he holds in his hand, to
dispose the same at his pleasure.

Lord God of Jacob, who is like unto thee? Heaven and earth are witnesses of
thine excellency: the Sun and the Moon declare the greatness of thy glory
to all nations.

Every creature tells abroad that thou art omnipotent: for at thy beck all
things obeie, yea heaven it self, which is thine own habitation, trembles
and quaketh at thy thundering voice.

6 Make me (O Lord God) obedientlie to lead my life, direct thou my footesteps
by the rule of thy law, and let thy holy word be a lantern before me, that
I go not astraie.

If I have at any time swarued and done amiss, it has come to pass through
the want of thy word, which (I beseech thee) let lighten my goings, like a
bright burning lamp.

Notwithstanding (O Lord) I deserve no such favor and love at thy hands: yet
for thine own sake, which art the founteine of mercy, vouchsafe to show thy
self gracious.

Glory, honor, and praise be ascribed unto thee, which have been from
beginning of beginnings, and shall continue in power and majesty, when all
things vanish and decaie.

The sixth Flower called a spiritual Song,
containing 1 A petition for humility, and assistance against our enemies. 2
For mercy and love of Gods law. 3 For the leading of a good life.

A.
1
AN humble heart, O God,
unto thy servants give,
Be thou to them a loving Lord,
whiles in this world they live:
Regard thy little flock,
be thou to them a sheeld,
And the^ defend from greedy Wolves,
least overcome, they yield.
2
Have mercy on us all,
whose ways most wicked are,
And to the path of Paradise,
our speedy steps prepare.
Make us to love thy law,
and therein to delight,
For that is an oblation
most pleasant in thy sight.
3
Let me so lead my life,
that what I think, or say,
Extend unto the laud and praise,
of thee (my God) alwaie.
Make me an instrument,
thine excellence to sound,
In faith and in good works (O God)
vouchsafe I may abound.
Nothing, though high of price,
and glorious to the eye,
Grant mighty God from thy precepts
may draw my feet awrie.
The seventh Flower called a holy Hymn,
containing 1 An invocation to God for succor in affliction. 2 For restitution
of perfection lost by sin. 3 For the fortifieng of faith in time of trial. 4
For prosperous success of our enterprises. 5. For protection and strength in
persecution of the Gospel. 6 A deprecation against Gods enemies, and the
adversaries of his Word.

M.
1 AT evening and at morning I praise thee, O God, early do I call upon thee:
yea, before the rising of the Sun do I direct my voice to thee, my King, and
my God.

Be not far from me in the time of mine affliction, but when troubles assault
me, be thou present and at hand to defend me, so shall I feel comfort in my
soul, and glorify thy most excellent name.

2 Restore to me the fullness of thy grace, which mine own sins, and the
transgressions of my progenitors have diminished, that by the restitution of
the same, I may the more vprightlie lead my life before thy face.

3 And though the world be full of wickedness, and thy glory daily derogated
by the devilish devises of lewd livers, yet so fortify my faith, that I fall
not away from thee.

Help me, O God, to withstand the subtle suggestions of Satan, and all
Sathanicall soldiers, such I mean as set shoulder against thee, and thy son
Christ.

4 Accept me among thy chosen children, and ouershadowe me with the shield of
thine omnipotency, that whatsoever I take in hand, may have happy success,
to my profit, and to thy glory.

5 Mightily protect me in all perils and dangers, specially in the time of
persecution, when thy Gospel is called in question among false Heretics,
superstitious Papists, and cauilling Scismatikes.

Fortific my spirit with the armor of thy word, that I may power it out
plentifully in the presence of thine enemies, to their shame and confusion,
and to the advancement of thy name.

Let not their sophistical assertions entangle or entrap me, but let thy
sacred Scripture so flourish and fructify in my heart, that by thy gracious
gift of understanding, I may control them in their errors.

Enter thou with me, O Lord, when I am cited to appear before the Sathanicall
synagogue, which presumptuouslie call the professors of thy Gospel to a
reckoning of their religion: O be thou mine assistant!

Make them ashamed of their malicious imaginations, and in their own snares
let them be entangled, ouerwhelme them in the pit which they have prepared for
others, so shall I magnify thy heavenly power.

Increase in them the spirit of wilful blindness, because they have not been
harbourers of thy faithful ministers, and because they have contemptuoustie
withstoode thy word, which is the liquor of life.

Nevertheless, if it be thy pleasure, such as feel any remorse of
conscience, and be sorry for their obstinacy, vouchsafe to receive them into
thy favor, that they may be witnesses of thine unspeakable mercy.

God the father, God the son, and God the holy Ghost, hear my prayer, and
let my cry be considered: for thine own sake, and for thy sons sake (O God)
look down from aloft, and show thy loving kindness to all people.

The eight Flower called a spiritual Song,
containing 1 The chiefest comfort in this life. 2 The means whereby to
obtain blessedness. 3 The cause of a quiet conscience, and how it is come by.
4 An exhortation to glorify GOD.

F.
1
AMid so many miseries
depending on our life,
Behold a comfort, namely this,
with sin to be at strife.
2
Resisting of concupiscence,
subduing fleshly lust,
Are means to come to blessedness,
enioied of the just.
3
Hereof the true tranquillity,
remaining in the mind,
According to her quality,
does flourish in her kind.
Most mighty Jove be praisd,
whose grace does compass this,
For no deserts of ours, whose lives
are daily lead amiss.
4
Land we his holy name,
as does us best become,
Exalt him in his holiness,
O nations all and some.
Make all your mirth and glee,
on him alone to rest,
In him rejoice and clap your hands,
oblations such are best.
Nothing so much becoms
a Christian, than death this:
Grant us the same, O gracious God
that live aloft in blis.
The ninth Flower called a holy Hymn,
containing 1 A petition for repentance and remission of finnes. 2 A
deliverance from our enemies. 3 An invocation upon God for present help. 4 A
dep^ecation against the adversaries of Gods truth.

L.
1 A Penitent heart (O God) thou will not despise, O teach me thy statutes,
that I may see my sin.

Be favorable unto me, whose iniquities are gone over my head: O heal my
sores and ulcers, which stink in thy sight.

2 Rise up thou holy one of Israel, like a Giant in triumph, and rescue me
from the irruptions and inrushings of mine enemies.

According to thy greatness deliver me, O set me free from the furiousness of
my foes, from the furiousness of my mortal and deadly foes.

Horrible are the mischeefes which they have imagined against me: but thou
which art omnipotent, wilt ouerwhelme them in their maliciousness.

3 As for me, I will be confident, upon thy providence will I depend, upon an
assured hope of thy heavenly help will I attend, O Lord.

Make no long tarieng, O my King and my God: for upon thee only does the
anchor of my salvation rest, thou art my health and my safety.

Forsake me not in the time of need, least mine enemies taking courage against
me, scorn at me in their pride, and say, where is thy God?

4 Let not the enemies of thy truth, bear up their bristles against thee, and
contemptuously cast thy glory to the ground: O Lord destroy both them and
their devises.

Even as the Sun consumes snow, and as wax wastes in the furnace, so let
them be put to silence in the rigor of thy wrath and judgment.

Make them like unto Sodom, and like unto Gomorrha, make them like unto
Pentapolis and Babylon, that they may know thou live which art Lord over all.

Enlarge their torments far above the torments wherewith they have persecuted
thy people: deal with them according to thine own pleasure.

Not my will, but thy will be fulfilled, O father: according to thine own
decree deal with them, either in mercy, or in judgment.

Give them proofs of thine omnipotency, that they may know thee which
sit above, whose eyes see their devises, and art able to revenge thine own
cause.

The tenth Flower called a spiritual Song,
containing 1 An exhortation to praise the Lord. 2 That all states and degrees
ought to stoop before him, and do him reverence. 3 Wherein our mirth and
melody should consist. 4 That all creatures must magnify Gods Majesty.

E.
1
ATtend ye nations and give ear,
O learn to laud the Lord,
Behold his wondrous works, and praise
his name with one accord*
2
Rich, poor, weak, strong, old folk and young,
approach and praises sing,
All people dwelling in the world,
to God oblations bring.
High potentates and all estates,
the king that crown does wear,
And subjects sworn to loialtie,
the Prince of Princes fear.
3
Make all your mirth and melody,
his honor to resound,
Fear him in truth and faithfulness,
whose blessings do abound.
Let every thing lift up their voice,
and laud his holy name,
4
Each creature drawing vital breath,
extol and praise the same.
Magnificent and wonderful,
yea* only God is he,
In these his works before our eyes,
his puissance we may see.
No time therefore let us omit,
in publishing his praise,
Give glory, oh heaven, oh earth and sea,
to him which lives always.
The eleventh Flower called a holy Hymn,
containing 1 A petition to God under a continued allegory, for a renewed
life. 2 The weeds of the heart. 3 The good and wholesome herbs of the soul.

M.
1 AS silver is purged from dross by the force of the fire, so by thy mercy,
O Lord GOD, let me be purged from mine offenses and sins.

Be favorable unto me an unfruitful bough of old Adams rotten and putrified
stock, O water thou me with thy sanctifieng spirit.

Rain down from heaven upon me, I beseech thee: O let the drops of thy grace
fall upon me, that I may bud and bear blossoms.

As for the weeds of wickedness and sin, let them wither and die in me,
that I may lead an upright life in thy sight and glorious presence.

Husband me in such wise, O Lord, that I may fructify and increase
abundantly, that I may bring forth thirty, sixty, and an hundred fold,
according to thy good pleasure.

A river of pleasantness be thou unto me, whereby I may be filled full of sap,
and flourish continually like the green Baie tree.

Make my leaves never to wither or vade, let not the Sun scortch or dry
them, to the loss of their beautiful color and seemelinesse.

From all storms and tempests sheeld and ouershadowe me, that my root may be
replenished with pith, and my branches spread abroad.

Let not the blustering blasts of winter do me any harm, but as (...)

my lips and my tongue, gratte in me a desire and delight to speak the truth
justly, vprightlie, and Christianlie.

Lighten thou my ways, and direct all my goings, let the deaw of thy blessed
spirit drop into my heart, so shall I be obedient unto thy law.

4 Enter not against me in judgment and rigor, but let thy mercy prevent thy
justice, so shall I be sure to escape shame, reproach, and confusion.

5 My heart, my tongue, and my voice, shall become instruments of praise, to
sound out thy greatness and goodness, in the cares of all people and nations.

In my bed will I meditate of thy commandments, at my meat thy law shall be
in my mouth, thine ordinances and statutes shall be my daily exercise.

Neither gold nor silver, neither precious stones, neither robes of roialtie,
nor princely treasure, delight me like thy word.

Greedily will I seek after the love of thy law, at morning and at evening:
yea, at midnight will I comfort my soul in thy gracious Gospel.

The fourteenth Flower called a spiritual Song,
containing 1 Sententious exhortations from sundry sins. 2 To live according
to Gods law. 3 Not to mistrust his power in the time of trouble. 4 The reward
of them that do after Gods will. 5 To esteem the Preachers of the Gospel. 6
To take no evil thing in hand.

G.
1
Abstain from fleshly lust,
and spiritual peace possess,
Be slow to follow wanton ways,
all wicked thoughts suppress.
Revolt from vicious works,
forbidden deeds detest,
Alluring looks, and lieng lips,
in silence let them rest.
2
Have God before thine eyes,
who searches heart and raines,
And live according to his law,
then glory is thy gains.
3
Mistrust not thou his might,
when sorrows thee assail,
For he is of sufficient force,
in perils to prevail.
Lay up within thy heart,
his testament and will,
4
Eternal life is their reward,
that do his laws fulfill.
5
Make much of such as teach,
and preach his gospel pure,
In them, if thou attend their talk,
God will thy peace procure.
6
Nothing attempt in have,
which hurtful may be found,
Grow day by day from grace to grace
so shall thy bliss abound.
The Conclusion.
Not only with tongue,
and sound of thy voice,
But with thy whole heart,
in JESUS rejoice.
FINIS.
A Referendarie to the premises for the godly Reader.
SOme live in fleshly pleasure,
And some in courtly bravery,
Consuming lands and treasure,
About a golden slavery,
Whose sweetness whiles they couit,
They cannot choose but love it.
Some never cease lamenting,
Because they are in penury,
And always are inuenting
Their end by mortal injury,
Whereas they should content them,
With that which God has sent them.
But be thou better learned,
Which love Christ his verity,
Whereby thou have discearned,
That every thing is vanity,
The world, and all within it,
Though worldlings sweat to win it.
And when convenient leisure,
Does serve for recreation,
Then use these plants of pleasure,
And grifts of consolation:
Yea then, and always use them,
And at no time refuse them.
A Grove of Graces, Supplied with plenty of Plants, appliable to pleasure and
profit: Whereof whosoever be disposed devoutly to take a view, they shall have
the choice of forty (and not so few) godly exercises of Christian duty:
ordinarily to be used before and after their daily diet.

BY ABRAHAM FLEMING.

1. Tim. 4. ver. 4, 5. Every creature of God is good, and nothing ought to be
refused, if it be received with thanksgiving, for it is sanctified by the word
of GOD, and prayer.

AT LONDON, Printed by Henry Denham. Anno Dom. 1581.

A Preface to the true Christian Reader.
AS the benefits of God are manifold, or rather infinite, bestowed upon man,
from the time of his creation, even so ought the fruits of his obedience and
thankfulness to be abundant and plentiful. For, if a man having diverse good
friends, but some more beneficial than othersome, shows himself most
officious and dutiful to them, of whom he has received most commodity: by
how much the greater reason ought we so to behave our selves in all kind of
holy service toward God, who has heaped upon us more blessings, than the
tongue of any man can utter, or his memory contain?

We see that all things are created by God, all things nourished by him, all
things increased by him, all things multiplied by him, and all things preserved
by him, for the use of man, unto whose government he has committed them, put
him in full possession, and given him a lordly title over them, to use and
dispose at his pleasure: requiring at his hands for this singular
bountifulness, nothing but an understanding heart, a renewed mind, and
religious lips, which might tell abroad the great goodness of so loving a God,
and stir up others to magnify his name.

And although we ought to glorify God at all times, according to the continued
course of his compassion and kindness showed unto us, from the day of our
birth, until this present hour, sundry and many ways, as well in clothing
us, as also in nourishing and feeding us, besides other invisible graces, which
not appearing to the world, can not so well be remembered: yet, because my
purpose is particular, and stretches no further than to Christian
dutifulness, proper unto God for his daily blessings presented unto us all
upon our ordinary tables, I would not wish thee (good Reader) to look for
any other matter at my hands, than the very title of this treatise does
import, which I have called by the name of A Grove of Graces.

For as in a Grove there do grow many plants of great variety and choice,
the weakest and slenderest whereof may in due and convenient time do some good
and necessary service: even so (gentle Reader) thou have here in this Grove
sundry good Graces put into thine hands, some in verse, and othersome in
prose, all and every of them tending to Gods glory, as blessings and
thanksgiuings unto his divine Majesty, for his unspeakable clemency, and
fatherly providence, which he has over us sinful and wretched creatures,
whereof the Lord give us grace to continue mindful, and keep us in the
reverent use of his good gifts, for Jesus Christ's sake, our only mediator and
advocate, Amen.

Abraham Fleming.

A Grove of Graces.
The first Plant. Grace before Dinner.
Almighty God, thou giver of all good things, bless we beseech thee the meat
which is set before us for our repast, and us the receivers of the same, that
we may prosper with it, and that the substance thereof converted into
nourishment, may make us strong, and able of body to endure and go through
our daily labor. Open our eyes also, O Lord, that we may see from whom all
things do come, and seeing, may extol and magnify thy name, through Jesus
Christ,

Amen.
The 2. Plant. Grace after Dinner.
BRethren and Sisters assembled and refreshed with the blessings of God, forget
not to give him thanks for the present use of these his comfortable and
nourishing creatures, beseeching him to continue them among us, and to make us
thankful partakers of the same, for his sons sake Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
The 3. Plant. Grace before Supper.
REason requires, and duty demands, that in partaking of these good
creatures of God, we use a Christian reverence, and have before our eyes the
fear of his divine Majesty, which we beseech thee, O God, to vouchsafe us,
for his sake, in whom thou art best pleased, Jesus Christ our savior,

Amen.
The 4. Plant. Grace after Supper.
A Thankful heart, which is the sacrifice that thou requirest O Lord, grant
unto us thy servants, nourished and fed at this present by thy providence. Open
our mouths, that we may sound forth thy praise, and also with one consent
glorify thy divine Majesty, saying: Blessed be thou O eternal God in all thy
gifts, and extolled in all thy works. All glory, honor, power, and dominion,
be ascribed unto thee world without end,

Amen.
The 5. Plant. Grace before Dinner.
HEre we see most manifest and apparent signs of Gods love and fatherly care
over us: who daily feeds our mortal bodies with nourishment convenient and
agreeable to our nature. Let us therefore soberlie receive them as
preservatives against hunger, and forget not to magnify his goodness, which so
mercifully and favorably tendereth our weakness, through Jesus Christ our
Lord,

Amen.
The 6. Plant. Grace after Dinner.
ALl praise and thanks be given unto thee O God omnipotent, which have fed us,
not only this day, but the whole term of our life. We bring unto thee the
bullocks of our lips, beseeching thee to accept our oblation of thankfulness,
offered and presented unto thee for thine unmeasurable and undeserved
bountifulness. This we do, O Lord, in his name, who for our sakes became
accursed, Jesus the righteous, who with thee and the holy Ghost, be evermore
glorified,

Amen.
The 7. Plant.. Grace before Dinner.
MOst gracious God, the giver of all good gifts, without whom nothing is
nourishable, be it never so delicate: we beseech thee that these thy creatures,
proceeding from thine almighty providence, and set upon this table for our
sustenance, may turn into wholesome substance of flesh and blood in our bodies.

And because many times, even thy good creatures, through our intemperance,
turn into poison, and by our own abuse, breed sundry diseases: grant (we
beseech thee) that we may moderately eat and drink that which is daily
ministered unto us for our relief, and give thee continual thanks for these
and all other thy benefits, through Christ our Lord,

Amen.
The 8. Plant. Grace after Dinner.
FAther everlasting, continual thanks and praise be ascribed unto thee, which
from our creation and first coming into the world, even till this present day
and hour, have given us all things necessary for our bodies: grant (we
beseech thee) that as we have received corporal food and sustenance from thy
hands, so we may be faithful and true partakers of the spiritual Manna,
whereby our souls are sustained to everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our
Savior,

Amen.
The 9. Plant. Grace before Dinner.
LOrd God, whose daily hand death feed
the beast, the foul, and fish
Vouchsafe to bless and sanctify,
this board, and every dish:
That as we touch and taste the things
proceeding from thy grace,
Our bodies to sustain, and feed
our flesh in every place:
So we may yield thee thanks therefore
and give thy name the praise,
Which does deserve of all the world,
extold to be always,
Amen.
The 10. Plant. Grace after Dinner.
Eternal God thy name be blessed,
which do us daily feed,
And soul and body satisfiest,
when as they stand in need:
The body by the staff of bread,
which gives strength and power,
The soul with sweetness of thy word
and gospel every hour:
Thy holy name perpetually,
be magnified therefore,
As has been since the world began,
and shall be evermore,
Amen.
The 11. Plant. Grace before Supper.
MOst gracious God, which cloathest the Lillies of the field with beauty, far
above the roialtie of Solomon: and feedest the little Sparrowes* which fall not
to the ground without thy providence: be present (we beseech thee) at this
table, and season with the salt of thy blessing these thy creatures, that in
receiving them, as becomes Christians, we may also be sanctified, and in all
our eatings and drinkings evermore remember to confess and acknowledge thee in
thy benefits, from whom all good things proceed, for the succor of thy
servants, and receive them according to the rule of true Christianity, through
Christ our Lord and only Savior, So be it.

The 12. Plant. Grace after Supper.
IN so much as it has pleased thee (O merciful father) to call us to the
communicating and partaking of thy creatures, and by them have refreshed us at
this present: we give thee hearty thanks for this thy bountiful liberality,
beseeching thee to kindle in us a Christian care and compassion of them that
are in necessity, that we considering their poor and succourlesse estate, may
with pitiful eyes tender their poverty, and with charitable hands relieve
them in misery: always remembering, that whatsoever is done to thy needy and
naked members, thou do account it done to thine own body. Grant this (O
gracious God) for Jesus Christ's sake thy son our savior,

Amen.
The 13. Plant. Grace before Supper.
NO grace the gluton nor his gests,
amid their deintie fare,
Vouchsaft to show to Lazarus,
a beggar poor and bare.
Their service was superfluous,
their meat was ouermutch,
Poor Lazarus, who scarce could go*
or stand without a crutch,
Lay begging at the gluttons gat^
some crumbes for his relief,
But none there was that of his case,
were touched with any grief.
His dog lay licking of his limbs,
the botches, biles and blaines,
And with his tongue did seek a mean
and way t'asswage his pains.
This deed of pity in the dog,
condemns such as save
All for themselves, and for the poor
and needy nothing have.
God grant that we may not be such,
as this rich glutton was,
Least we with him in pit of Hell,
cry out, woe and alas.
From thence the Lord deliver us,
and guide us by his grace,
That when we die in earth, in heaven
we may possess a place.
The 14. Plant. Grace after Supper.
GOod Zache enterteining Christ,
became a ioifull man,
His soul to feed on food of life,
with faith and hope began.
Then called he to straight account,
his thoughts, his words, and deeds,
His conscience, and his life misseled,
and thus in speech proceeds:
lord, if I have done any man
(...) turn, or offered wrong,
Or causd the poor to make complaint,
with sobs and sighings strong:
Lo restitution I will make,
and fourfold them reward,
With ready purpose so to do,
^o (...) and heart prepared.
(...) Zaches speech, and ponder it,
(...)
