THE PURPLE ISLAND, OR THE ISLE OF MAN TOGETHER WITH PISCATORIE ECLOGS AND
OTHER POETICAL MISCELLANIES

By P. F.

Printed by the Printers to the Universitie of CAMBRIDGE. 1633.

TO MY MOST WORTHY AND LEARNED FRIEND, EDWARD BENLOWES ESQVIRE.
SIR,
AS some Optick-glasses, if we look one way, increase the object; if the other,
lessen the quantity: Such is an Eye that looks through Affection; It doubles
any good, and extenuates what is amiss. Pardon me, Sir, for speaking plain
truth; such is that eye whereby you have viewed these raw Essays of my very
unripe years, and almost childehood. How unseasonable are Blossoms in
Autumn! (unless perhaps in this age, where are more flowers then fruit) I am
entering upon my Winter, and yet these Blooms of my first Spring must now show
themselves to our ripe wits, which certainly will give them no other
entertainment but derision. For my self, I cannot account that worthy of your
Patronage, which comes forth so short of my Desires, thereby meriting no other
light then the fire. But since you please to have them see more Day then their
credit can well endure, marvel not if they fly under your Shadow, to cover
them from the piercing eye of this very curious (yet more censorious) age. In
letting them abroad I desire only to testify, how much I prefer your
desires before mine own, and how much I owe to You more then any other: This if
they witness for me, it is all their service I require. Sir, I leave them to
your tuition, and entreat you to love him who will contend with you in nothing
but to out-love you, and would be known to the world by no other Name, then

Your true friend, P. F.
Hilgay. May 1. 1633.
To the Readers.
HE that would learn Theology, must first study Autologie. The way to God is
by our selves: It is a blind and dirty way; it has many windings, and is
easy to be lost: This Poem will make thee understand that way; and therefore
my desire is, that thou may understand this Poem. Peruse it as thou should
thy self, from thy first sheet to thy last. The first view, perchance, may
run thy judgment in debt; the second will promise payment; and the third
will perform promise. Thou shall find here Philosophy, and Morality, two
curious handmaids, dressing the Kings daughter, whose garments smell of Myrrh
and Cassia, and being wrought with needlework, and gold, shall make thee take
pleasure in her beauty. Here are no blocks for the purblinde; no snares for
the timorous; no dangers for the bold: I invite all sorts to be readers; all
readers to be understanders; all understanders to be happy.

DANIEL FEATLY. D. D.

ON THE EXCELLENT MORAL POEM, ENTITLED THE ISLE OF MAN.
LOrd! how my youth with this vain world has erred,
Applauding theirs as the only happy fate,
Whom to some Empire blood, choice, chance preferred,
Or who of learned arts could wisely prate;
Or traveling the world, had well conferred
Men's natures with the mysteries of state!
But now thy wiser Muse has taught me this,
That these and most men else do aim at bliss;
But these and most men else do take their aim amiss.
Reign over the world, not over this Isle of Man,
Worse then a slave thou thine own slaves obey'st.
Study all arts devised since time began,
And not thy self, thou studiest not, but play'st.
Out-travell wise Ulysses, (if you can)
Yet miss this Isle, thou travell'st not, but stray'st.
Let me (O Lord) but reign over mine own heart,
And master be of this self-knowing art,
I Will dwell in the Isle of Man, never travel foreign part.
E. BENLOVVES.
E. BENEVOLUS.

INgeniose tuo ne libro supprime nomen;
Ingenio Authorem deteget ille suo.
Nempe verecundo memini te scribere vati,
Quod pulchre ingenio quadrat, amice, tuo.
QVid tuas retegis nimis tegendo
Noctiluca faces? pates latendo:
Ipsa es sphaera tuae comesque stellae.
Diem si repetas, die latebis.
Non te nox tenebris tegit fovendo,
Sed te nox tenebris fovendo prodit.
TO THE LEARNED AUTHOR, SON AND BROTHER TO two judicious Poets, himself the
third, not second to either.
GRave Father of this Muse, thou deem'st too light
To wear thy name, 'cause of thy youthful brain
It seems a sportfull child; resembling right
Thy witty childehood, not thy graver strain,
Which now esteems these works of fancy vain.
Let not thy child, thee living, orphan be;
Who when the art dead, will give a life to thee.
How many barren wits would gladly own,
How few of the pregnantest own such another!
Thou Father art, yet blushest to be known;
And though 't may call the best of Muses Mother,
Yet thy severer judgment would it smother.
O judge not Thou, let Readers judge thy book:
Such Cates should rather please the Guest, then Cook.
O but thou fear'st't will stain the reverend gown
Thou wearest now; nay then fear not to show it:
For were it a stain, 't were natures, not thine own:
For thou art Poet born; who know thee, know it:
Thy brother, sire, thy very name's a Poet.
Thy very name will make these Poems take,
These very Poems else thy name will make.
W. BENLOWES.

TO THE INGENIOUS COMPOSER OF THIS PASTORAL, THE SPENCER of this age.
I Vow (sweet stranger) if my lazy quill
Had not been disobedient to fulfill
My quick desires, this glory which is thine,
Had but the Muses pleased, had been mine.
My Genius jumpt with thine; the very same
Was our Foundation: in the very Frame
Thy Genius jumpt with mine; it got the start
In nothing, but Prioritie, and Art.
If (my ingenious Rival) these dull times
Should want the present strength to prize thy rhymes,
The time-instructed children of the next
Shall fill thy margent, and admire the text;
Whose well read lines will teach them how to be
The happy knowers of themselves and thee.
FRAN. QUARLES.

TO THE UNKNOWN Mr P. F. UPON SURVAY of his ISLE OF MAN.
REnowned Author, let it not seem strange
A Merchants eye Should thus thy Island range:
It is a Merchants progress to surround
The earth, and seek out undiscovered ground.
What though my foot has trod the fourefold shore?
And eyes survaid their subdivided store?
Yet rarer wonders in this Isle of thine
I viewed this day, then in twice six years time.
Justly did thou, great Macedo, repine
That thou could add no other world to thine.
He is not truly great, nor stout, who can
Curb the great world, and not the lesser, Man.
And American.
thou whose name the Western world imposed
Upon it self, first by thy skill disclosed;
Yet is thy skill by this far overcome,
Who has descri'd an unknown World at home:
A World, which to search out, subdue, and till,
Is the best object of man's wit, strength, skill:
A World, where all may dangerlesse obtain.
Without long travel, cheapest, greatest gain.
LOD. ROBERTS.

ON THE MOST ACCURATE POEM, INSCRIBED THE PVRPLE ISLAND.
HEnceforth let wandering Delos cease to boast
Herself the God of Learnings dearest coast;
And let that double-headed mountain hallow
No more the honored name of great Apollo:
And may the Pegasean spring, that uses
To cheer the palats of the thirsty Muses,
Dry up: and let this happy Isle of thine
Preserve Apolloes harp; where every line
Carries a Suada with it, and does display
The banners of heaven-born Urania.
Henceforth let all the world thy verse admire
Before that Thracean Orpheus charming lyre:
He but enchanted Beasts, but thy divine
And higher aires bring Deities to this Isle of thine.
A. C.

Man's Body's like a house: his greater bones
Are the main timber; and the lesser ones
Are smaller splints: his ribs are laths, daubed over,
Plastered with flesh, and blood: his mouth's the door,
His throat's the narrow entry, and his heart
Is the great chamber, full of curious art:
His midriffe is a large partition wall
'Twixt the great chamber, and the spacious hall:
His stomach is the kitchen, where the meat
Is often but half sod, for want of heat:
His splene's a vessel nature does allot
To take the skumme that rises from the pot:
His lungs are like the bellows, that respire
In every office, quickening every fire:
His nose the chimney is, whereby are vented
Such fumes as with the bellows are augmented:
His bowels are the sink, whose part's to drein
All noisome filth, and keep the kitchen clean:
His eyes are crystal windows, clear and bright;
Let in the object, and let out the sight.
And as the timber is or great, or small,
Or strong, or weak, it is apt to stand, or fall:
Yet is the likeliest building sometimes known
To fall by obvious chances; overthrown
Ofttimes by tempests, by the full-mouthed blasts
Of heaven; sometimes by fire; sometimes it wastes
Through unadvised neglect: put case the stuff
Were ruine-proofe, by nature strong enough
To conquer time, and age; put case it should
Never know an end, alas our leases would.
What have thou then, proud flesh and blood, to boast?
Thy days are evil, at best; but few, at most;
But sad, as merriest; and but weak, at strongest;
Unsure, at surest; and but short, at longest.
FRAN. QUARLES.

THE PURPLE ISLAND, OR THE ISLE OF MAN.
CANT. I. STAN. I.
THe warmer Sun the golden Bull outran,
And with the Twins made haste to inn and play:
Scattering ten thousand flowers, he new began
To paint the world, and piece the lengthening day:
(The world more aged by new youths accrewing)
Ah wretched man this wretched world pursuing,
Which still grows worse by age, and older by renewing!
2
The shepherd-boyes, who with the Muses dwell,
Met in the plain their May-lords new to choose,
(For two they yearly choose) to order well
Their rural sports, and year that next ensues:
Now were they sat, where by the orchyard walls
The learned Chame with stealing water crawls,
And lowly down before that royal temple falls.
3
Among the rout they take two gentle swains,
Whose sprouting youth did now but greenly bud:
Well could they pipe and sing; but yet their strains
Were only known unto the silent wood:
Their nearest blood from self-same fountains flow,
Their souls self-same in nearer love did grow:
So seemed two joined in one, or one disjoined in two.
4
Now when the shepherd-lads with common voice
Their first consent had firmly ratified,
A gentle boy thus 'gan to wave their choice;
Thirsil, (said he) though yet thy Muse untri'd
Has only learned in private shades to feign
Soft sighs of love unto a looser strain,
Or thy poor Thelgons wrong in mournful verse to plain;
5
Yet since the shepherd-swains do all consent
To make thee lord of them, and of their art,
And that choice lad (to give a full content)
Has joined with thee in office, as in heart;
Wake, wake thy long-(thy too long) sleeping Muse,
And thank them with a song, as is the use:
Such honor thus conferred thou may not well refuse.
6
Sing what thou list, be it of Cupids spite,
(Ah lovely spite, and spiteful loveliness!)
Or Gemma's grief, if sadder be thy sprite:
Begin, thou loved swain, with good success.
Ah, (said the bashful boy) such wanton toys
A better mind and sacred vow destroys,
Since in a higher love I settled all my joys.
7
New light new love, new love new life has bred;
A life that lives by love, and loves by light:
A love to him, to whom all loves are wed;
A light, to whom the Sun is darkest night:
Eyes light, hearts love, souls only life he is:
Life, soul, love, heart, light, eye, and all are his:
He eye, light, heart, love, soul; he all my joy, and bliss.
8
But if you deigne my ruder pipe to hear,
(Rude pipe, unused, untuned, unworthy hearing)
These infantine beginnings gently bear,
Whose best desert and hope must be your bearing.
But you, O Muses, by soft Chamus sitting,
(Your dainty songs unto his murmures fitting,
Which bears the under-song unto your cheerful dittying;)
9
Tell me, ye Muses, what our father-ages
Have left succeeding times to play upon:
What now remains unthought on by those Sages,
Where a new Muse may try her pineon?
What lightning Heroes, like great Peleus heir,
(Darting his beams through our hard-frozen air)
May stir up gentle heat, and virtues wane repair?
10
Who knows not Jason? or bold Tiphys hand,
That durst unite what Natures self would part?
He makes Isles continent, and all one land;
Over seas, as earth, he marched with dangerous art:
He rides the white-mouth'd waves, and scorneth all
Those thousand deaths wide gaping for his fall:
He death defies, fenc't with a thin, low, wooden wall.
11
Who has not often read Troyes twice-sung fires,
And at the second time twice better sung?
Who has not heard the Arcadian shepherds quires,
Which now have gladly changed their native tongue;
And sitting by slow Mincius, sport their fill,
With sweeter voice and never equaled skill,
Chaunting their amorous lays unto a Roman quill?
12
And thou, choice wit, Loves scholar, and Loves master,
Art known to all, where Love himself is known:
Whether thou bidd'st Ulysses hie him faster,
Or do thy fault and distant exile moan.
Who has not seen upon the mourning stage
Dire Atreus feast, and wronged Medea's rage,
Marching in tragic state, and buskined equipage?
13
And now of late Sannazar.
the Italian fisher-swain
Sits on the shore to watch his trembling line;
There teaches rocks and prouder seas to plain
By Nesis fair, and fairer Mergiline:
While his thin net, upon his oars twined,
With wanton strife catches the Sun, and wind,
Which still do slip away, and still remain behind.
14
And that Bartas
French Muses eagle eye and wing
Has soared to heaven, and there has learned the art
To frame Angelick strains, and canzons sing
Too high and deep for every shallow heart.
Ah blessed soul! in those celestial rays,
Which gave thee light these lower works to blaze,
Thou sitt'st emparadis'd, and chaunt'st eternal lays.
15
Thrice happy wits, which in your springing May
(Warmed with the Sun of well deserved favors)
Disclose your buds, and your fair blooms display,
Perfume the air with your rich fragrant favors!
Nor may, nor ever shall those honored flowers
Be spoiled by summers heat, or winters showers;
But last when eating time shall gnaw the proudest towers
16
Happy, thrice happy times in silver age?
When generous plants advanced their lofty crest;
When honor stoopt to be learned wisdoms page;
When baser weeds starved in their frozen nest;
When the highest flying Muse still highest climbes;
And virtues rise keeps down all rising crimes.
Happy, thrice happy age! happy, thrice happy times!
17
But wretched we, to whom these iron days
(Hard days) afford nor matter, nor reward!
Sings Maro? men deride high Maro's lays;
Their hearts with lead, with steel their sense is barred:
Sing Linus, or his father, as he uses,
Our Midas ears their well tuned verse refuses.
What cares an ass for arts? he brayes at sacred Muses.
18
But if fond Bavius vent his clowted song,
Or Maevius chaunt his thoughts in brothell charm;
The witless vulgar, in a numerous throng,
Like summer flies about their dunghills swarm:
They sneer, they grinne. Like to his like will move.
Yet never let them greater mischief prove
Then this, Who hates not one, may he the other love.
19
Witness our Spencer.
Colin; whom though all the Graces,
And all the Muses nursed; whose well taught song
Parnassus self, and Glorian embraces,
And all the learned, and all the shepherds throng;
Yet all his hopes were crossed, all suits denied;
Discouraged, scorned, his writings vilifi'd:
Poorly (poor man) he lived; poorly (poor man) he di'd.
20
And had not that great Heart, (whose honored head
Ah lies full low) piti'd thy woeful plight;
There had thou lien unwept, unburied,
Unblest, nor graced with any common rite:
Yet shall thou live, when thy great foe shall sink
Beneath his mountain tomb, whose fame shall stink;
And time his blacker name shall blurre with blackest ink.
21
O let the Iambick Muse revenge that wrong,
Which cannot slumber in thy sheets of lead:
Let thy abused honor cry as long
As there be quills to write, or eyes to read:
On his rank name let thine own votes be turned,
Oh may that man that has the Muses scorned,
Alive, nor dead, be ever of a Muse adorned!
22
Often therefore have I chid my tender Muse;
Often my chill breast beats off her fluttering wing:
Yet when new spring her gentle rays infuse,
All storms are laid, I 'gin to chirp and sing:
At length soft fires dispersed in every vein,
Yield open passage to the thronging train,
And swelling numbers tide rolls like the surging main.
23
So where fair Thames, and crooked Isis son
Pays tribute to his King, the mantling stream
Encountered by the tides (now rushing on
With equal force) of's way does doubtful seem;
At length the full-grown sea, and waters King
Chide the bold waves with hollow murmuring:
Back fly the streams to shroud them in their mother spring.
24
Yet thou sweet numerous Muse, why should thou droop
That every vulgar ear thy music scorns?
Nor can they rise, nor thou so low can stoop;
No seed of heaven takes root in mud or thorns.
When owls or crows, imping their flaggy wing
With thy stolen plumes, their notes through the air fling;
Oh shame! They howl and croke, while fond they strain to sing.
25
Enough for thee in heaven to build thy nest;
(Far be dull thoughts of winning dunghill praise)
Enough, if Kings enthrone thee in their breast,
And crown their golden crowns with higher baies:
Enough that those who wear the crown of Kings
(Great Isreal's Princes) strike thy sweetest strings:
Heavens Dove when highest he flies, flies with thy heavenly wings.
26
Let others trust the seas, dare death and hell,
Search either Inde, vaunt of their scarres and wounds;
Let others their dear breath (nay silence) sell
To fools, and (swollen, not rich) stretch out their bounds
By spoiling those that live, and wronging dead;
That they may drink in pearl, and couch their head
In soft, but sleeplesse down; in rich, but restless bed.
27
Oh let them in their gold quaffe dropsies down;
Oh let them surfets feast in silver bright:
While sugar hires the taste the brain to drown,
And bribes of sauce corrupt false appetite,
His masters rest, health, heart, life, soul to sell.
Thus plenty, fullness, sickness, ring their knell:
Death weds and beds them; first in grave, and then in hell.
28
But (ah!) let me under some Kentish hill
Near rolling Medway among my shepherd peers,
With fearlesse merrie-make, and piping still,
Securely pass my few and slow-paced years:
While yet the great Augustus of our nation
Shuts up old Ianus in this long cessation,
Strengthening our pleasing ease, and gives us sure vacation.
29
There may I, master of a little flock,
Feed my poor lambs, and often change their fare:
My lovely mate shall tend my sparing stock,
And nurse my little ones with pleasing care;
Whose love and look shall speak their father plain.
Health be my feast, heaven hope, content my gain:
So in my little house my lesser heart shall reign.
30
The beech shall yield a cool safe canopie,
While down I fit, and chaunt to the echoing wood:
Ah singing might I live, and singing die!
So by fair Thames, or silver Medwayes flood,
The dying swan, when years her temples pierce,
In music strains breathes out her life and verse;
And chaunting her own dirge tides on her watery hearse.
31
What shall I then need seek a patron out,
Or beg a favor from a mistress eyes,
To fence my song against the vulgar rout,
Or shine upon me with her Geminies?
What care I, if they praise my slender song?
Or reck I, if they do me right, or wrong?
A shepherds bliss nor stands nor falls to every tongue.
32
Great prince of shepherds, then thy heavens more high,
Low as our earth, here serving, ruling there;
Who taught'st our death to live, thy life to die;
Who when we broke thy bonds, our bonds would bear;
Who reignedst in thy heaven, yet felt'st our hell;
Who (God) bought'st man, whom man (though God) did sell;
Who in our flesh, our graves, (and worse) our hearts would dwell:
33
Great Prince of shepherds, thou who late did deigne
To lodge thy self within this wretched breast,
(Most wretched breast such guest to entertain,
Yet oh most happy lodge in such a guest!)
Thou first and last, inspire thy sacred skill;
Guide thou my hand, grace thou my artlesse quill:
So shall I first begin, so last shall end thy will.
54
Hark then, ah hark, you gentle shepheard-crue;
An Isle I fain would sing, an Island fair;
A place too seldom viewed, yet still in view;
Near as our selves, yet farthest from our care;
Which we by leaving find, by seeking lost;
A foreign home, a strange, though native coast;
Most obvious to all, yet most unkown to most:
35
Coevall with the world in her nativitie:
Which though it now has passed through many ages,
And still retained a natural proclivitie
To ruin, compast with a thousand rages
Of foe-mens spite, which still this Island tosses;
Yet ever grows more prosperous by her crosses;
By withering springing fresh, and rich by often losses.
36
Vain men, too fondly wise, who plough the seas,
With dangerous pains another earth to find;
Adding new worlds to the old, and scorning ease,
The earths vast limits daily more unbinde!
The aged world, though now it falling shows,
And hastes to set, yet still in dying grows.
Whole lives are spent to win, what one deaths hour must lose.
37
How like's the world unto a tragic stage!
Where every changing scene the actours change;
Some subject crouch and fawn; some reign and rage:
And new strange plots brings scenes as new and strange,
Till most are slain; the rest their parts have done:
So here, some laugh and play; some weep and groan;
Till all put of their robes, and stage and actours gone.
38
Yet this fair Isle, sited so nearely near,
That from our sides nor place nor time may sever;
Though to your selves your selves are not more dear,
Yet with strange carelessness you travel never:
Thus while your selves and native home forgetting,
You search far distant worlds with needless sweating,
You never find your selves; so lose ye more by getting.
39
When that great Power, that All, far more then all,
(When now his fore-set time was fully come)
Brought into act this undigested Ball,
Which in himself till then had only room;
He labored not, nor suffered pain, or ill;
But bid each kind their several places fill:
He bid, and they obeyed; their action was his will.
40
First stepped the Light, and spread his cheerful rays
Through all the Chaos; darkness headlong fell,
Frighted with sudden beams, and newborn days;
And plunged her ougly head in deepest hell:
Not that he meant to help his feeble sight
To frame the rest, he made the day of night:
All else but darkness; he the true, the only Light.
41
Fire, Water, Earth, and Air (that fiercely strove)
His sovereign hand in strong alliance ti'd,
Binding their deadly hate in constant love:
So that great Wisdom tempered all their pride,
(Commanding strife and love should never cease)
That by their peaceful fight, and fighting peace,
The world might die to live, and lessen to increase.
42
Thus Earths cold arm cold Water friendly holds,
But with his dry the others wet defies:
Warm Air with mutual love hot Fire infolds;
As moist, his dryth abhorres: dry Earth allies
With Fire, but heats with cold new wars prepare:
Yet Earth drencht Water proves, which boiled turns Air;
Hot Air makes Fire: condenst all change, and home repair.
43
Now when the first weeks life was almost spent,
And this world built, and richly furnished;
To store heavens courts, and steer earths regiment,
He cast to frame an Isle, the heart and head
Of all his works, composed with curious art;
Which like an Index briefly should impart
The sum of all; the whole, yet of the whole a part.
44
That Trine-one with himself in council sits,
And purple dust takes from the newborn earth;
Part circular, and part triang'lar fits,
Endows it largely at the unborn birth,
Deputes his Favorite Viceroy; does invest
With aptness thereunto, as seemed him best;
And loved it more then all, and more then all it blessed.
45
Then placed it in the calm pacifick seas,
And bid nor waves, nor troublous winds offend it;
Then peopled it with subjects apt to please
So wise a Prince, made able to defend it
Against all outward force, or inward spite;
Him framing like himself, all shining bright;
A little living Sun, Son of the living Light.
46
Nor made he this like other Isles; but gave it
Vigor, sense, reason, and a perfect motion,
To move it self whither it self would have it,
And know what falls within the verge of notion:
No time might change it, but as ages went,
So still returned; still spending, never spent;
More rising in their fall, more rich in detriment.
47
So once the Delos.
Cradle of that double light,
Whereof one rules the night, the other day,
(Till sad Latona flying Juno's spite,
Her double burden there did safely lay)
Not rooted yet, in every sea was roving,
With every wave, and every wind removing;
But since to those fair Twins has left her ever moving.
48
Look as a scholar, who does closely gather
Many large volumes in a narrow place;
So that great Wisdom all this All together
Confined into this Islands little space;
And being one, soon into two he framed it;
And now made two, to one again reclaimed it;
The little Isle of Man, or Purple Island named it.
49
Thrice happy was the worlds first infancy,
Nor knowing yet, nor curious ill to know:
Joy without grief, love without jealousy:
None felt hard labor, or the sweating plough:
The willing earth brought tribute to her King;
Bacchus unborn lay hidden in the cling
Of big-swoln grapes; their drink was every silver spring.
50
Of all the winds there was no difference:
None knew mild Zephyres from cold Eurus mouth;
Nor Orithyia's lovers violence
Distinguished from the ever-dropping South:
But either gentle West-winds reigned alone,
Or else no wind, or harmfull wind was none:
But one wind was in all, and all the winds in one.
51
None knew the sea; (oh blessed ignorance!)
None named the stars, the North carres constant race,
Taurus bright horns, or Fishes happy chance:
Astraea yet changed not her name or place;
Her ev'n-pois'd balance heaven yet never tried:
None sought new coasts, nor foreign lands descri'd;
But in their own they lived, and in their own they di'd.
52
But (ah!) what lives long in happiness?
Grief, of an heavy nature, steady lies,
And cannot be removed for weightinesse;
But joy, of lighter presence, easily flies,
And seldom comes, and soon away will go:
Some secret power here all things orders so,
That for a sunshine day follows an age of woe.
53
Witness this glorious Isle, which not content
To be confined in bounds of happiness,
Would try what e're is in the continent;
And seek out ill, and search for wretchedness.
Ah fond, to seek what then was in thy will!
That needs no curious search; it is next us still.
It Is grief to know of grief, and ill to know of ill.
54
That old sly Serpent, (sly, but spiteful more)
Vexed with the glory of this happy Isle,
Allures it subt'ly from the peaceful shore,
And with fair painted lies, and colored guile
Drencht in More mortuum.
dead seas; whose dark streams, full of fright,
Empty their sulphur waves in endless night;
Where thousand deaths and hells torment the damned sprite.
55
So when a fisher-swain by chance has spied
A big-grown Pike pursue the lesser fry,
He sets a withy Labyrinth beside,
And with fair baits allures his nimble eye;
Which he invading with our-streched finne,
All suddenly is compast with the ginne,
Where there is no way out, but easy passage in.
56
That deathfull lake has these three properties;
No turning path, or issue thence is found:
The captive never dead, yet ever dies;
It endless sinks, yet never comes to ground:
Hells self is pictured in that brimstone wave;
For what retiring from that hellish grave?
Or who can end in death, where deaths no ending have?
57
For ever had this Isle in that foul ditch
With curelesse grief and endless error strai'd,
Boiling in sulphur, and hot-bubbling pitch;
Had not the King, whose laws he (fool) betrayed,
Unsnarl'd that chain, then from that lake secured;
For which ten thousand tortures he endured:
So hard was this lost Isle, so hard to be recur'd.
58
O thou deep well of life, wide stream of love,
(More deep, more wide then widest deepest seas)
Who dying, Death to endless death did prove,
To work this wilfull-rebell Islands ease;
Thy love no time began, no time decaies;
But still increases with decreasing days:
Where then may we begin, where may we end thy praise?
59
My callow wing, that newly left the nest,
How can it make so high a towering flight?
O depth without a depth! in humble breast
With praises I admire so wondrous height.
But thou, my A book called Christ's Victory and Triumph.
sister Muse, may well go higher,
And end thy flight; never may thy pineons tire:
Thereto may he his grace and gentle heat aspire.
60
Then let me end my easier taken story,
And sing this Islands new recovered sear.
But see, the eye of noon, in brightest glory,
(Teaching great men) is never so little great:
Our panting flocks retire into the glade;
They crouch, and close to the earth their horns have laid:
Vail we our scorched heads in that thick beeches shade.
CANT. II.
DEclining Phoebus, as he larger grows,
(Taxing proud folly) gentler waxes still;
Never less fierce, then when he greatest shows;
When Thirsil on a gentle rising hill
(Where all his flock he round might feeding view)
Sits down, and circled with a lovely crew
Of Nymphs and shepherd-boyes, thus 'gan his song renew:
2
Now was this Isle pulled from that horrid main,
Which bears the fearful looks and name of death;
And settled new with blood and dreadful pain,
By him who twice had given (once forfeit) breath:
A baser state then what was first assigned;
Wherein (to curb the too aspiring mind)
The better things were lost, the worst were left behind.
3
That glorious image of himself was razed;
Ah! scarce the place of that best part we find:
And that bright Sun-like knowledge much defaced,
Only some twinkling stars remain behind:
Then mortal made; yet as one fainting dies,
Two other in its place succeeding rise;
And drooping stock with branches fresh immortalize.
4
So that'lone bird in fruitful Arabie,
When now her strength and waning life decaies,
Upon some airie rock, or mountain high,
In spiced bed (fired by near Phoebus rays)
Her self and all her crooked age consumes:
Straight from the ashes and those rich perfumes
A newborn Phoenix flies, and widowed place resumes.
5
It grounded lies upon a sure The foundation of the body is the bones. Bones
are a similar part of the body, most dry, or cold; made by the virtue
generative, through heat of the thicker portion of seed, which is most earthy
and Fat for the establishment and figure of the whole.
foundation,
Compact, and hard; whose matter (cold and dry)
To marble turns in strongest congelation;
Framed of fat earth, which fires together tie:
Through all the Isle, and every part extent,
To give just form to every regiment;
Imparting to each part due strength and stablishment.
6
A cartilage, or gridle, is of a middle nature betwixt bones, and ligaments or
sinews made of the Lime matter, and in the same manner as bones, for variety
and safety in motion.
Whose looser ends are glu'd with brother earth,
Of nature like, and of a near relation;
Of self-same parents both, at self-same birth;
Some of these (even as bones) sustain and uphold some parts
That often it self stands for a good foundation:
Both these are knit with ligaments: A ligament or sinew is of nature between
grisles, and nerves, framed of a rough and clammy portion of the seed, for
knitting and holding the bones together, and fitting them for motion.
Both these a third does soulder fast, and bind;
Softer then both, yet of the self-same kind;
All instruments of motion, in one league combined.
7
Upon this base a Upon the bones as the foundation, is built the flesh. Flesh
is a similar part of the body, soft, ruddy, made of bload indifferently dried,
covered with the common membrane or skin.
curious work is raised,
Like undivided brick, entire and one;
Though soft, yet lasting, with just balance pais'd;
Distributed with due proportion:
And that the rougher frame might lurk unseen,
All fair is hung with coverings slight and thin;
Which partly hide it all, yet all is partly seen:
8
As when a virgin her snow-circled breast
Displaying hides, and hiding sweet displaies;
The greater segments covered, and the rest
The vail transparent willingly betraies;
Thus takes and gives, thus lends and borrows light:
Lest eyes should surfeit with too greedy sight,
Transparent lawns withhold, more to increase delight.
9
The whole body is as it were watered with great plenty of rivers veins*
arteries, and nerves.
Nor is there any part in all this land,
But is a little Isle: for thousand brooks
In azure channels glide on silver sand;
Their serpent windings, and deceiving crooks
Circling about, and wat'ring all the plain,
Empty themselves into the all-drinking main;
And creeping forward slide, but never turn again.
10
Three differing streams from fountains different,
Neither in nature nor in shape agreeing,
(Yet each with other friendly ever went)
Give to this Isle his fruitfulness and being:
A vein is a vessel long, round, hollow, rising from the liver, appointed to
contein, conduct, and distribute the blood, It has but one tunicle, and that
thin; the color of this blood is purple.
The first in single channels skie-like blue,
With lukewarm waters di'd in porphyr hue,
Sprinkle this crimson Isle with purple-colour'd dew.
11
An artery is a vessel long, round, hollow, formed for conveyance of that more
spritely blood, which is elaborate in the heart. This blood is frothy,
yellowish, full of spirits, therefore compast with a double tunicle, that it
might not exhale or sweat out by reason of the thinness
The next, though from the same springs first it rise,
Yet passing through another greater fountain,
Does lose his former name and qualities:
Through many a dale it flows, and many a mountain;
More fiery light, and needful more then all;
And therefore fenced with a double wall,
All froths his yellow streams with many a sudding fall.
12
A nerve is a spermaticall part rising from the brain and the pith of the
backbone, the outside skin, the inside full of pith, carrying the animal
spirits for sense and motion and therefore doubly skinned as the brain: none of
them single, but run in couples.
The last, in all things differing from the other,
Fall from an hill, and close together go,
Embracing as they run, each with his brother;
Guarded with double trenches sure they flow:
The coldest spring, yet nature best they have;
And like the lacteall stones which heaven pave,
Slide down to every part with their thick milky wave.
13
The veins convey nourishment from the liver, the arteries life and heat from
the heart, the nerves sense and motion from the brain. The will commands, the
nerve brings, and the part executes the mandate, all almost in an instant.
These with a thousand streams through the Island roving,
Bring tribute in; the first gives nourishment,
Next life, last sense and arbitrarie moving:
For when the Prince has now his mandate sent,
The nimble poasts quick down the river run,
And end their journey, though but now begun;
But now the mandate came, and now the mandate's done.
14
The whole body may be parted into three regions: the lowest, or belly; the
middle, or breast, the highest, or head. In the lowest the liver is sovereigne,
whose regiment is the widest, but meanest. In the middle the heart reigns,
most necessary. The brain obtains the highest place, and is as the least in
compass, so the greatest in dignity.
The whole Isle, parted in three regiments,
By three Metropolies is jointly swayed;
Ord'ring in peace and war their governments
With loving concord, and with mutual aid:
The lowest has the worst, but largest See;
The middle less, of greater dignity:
The highest least, but holds the greatest soveraigntie.
15
Deep in a vale does that first province lie,
With many a city graced, and fairly town'd;
And for a fence from foreign enmity,
The parts of the lower region are either the contained, or containing: the
containing either common or proper: the common are the skin, the fleshie
pannicle, and the far: the proper are the muscles of the belly-peece, or the
inner rimme of the belly.
With five strong-builded walls encompast round;
Which my rude pencil will in limming stain;
A work more curious, then which poets feign
Neptune and Phoebus built, and pulled down again.
16
The skin is a membrane of all the rest the most large, and thick, formed of
the mixture of seed and blood; the covering, and ornament of parts that are
under it: the temper moderate, the proper organ of outward touching (say
Physicians.)
The first of these is that round spreading fence,
Which like a sea girts the Isle in every part;
Of fairest building, quick and nimble sense,
Of common matter framed with special art;
Of middle temper, outwardest of all,
To warn of every chance that may befall:
The same a fence, and spy; a watchman, and a wall.
17
The native color of the skin is white but (as Hippocrates) changed into the
same color which is brought by the humor predominant. Where melancholy
abounds, it is swarthy; where phlegm, it is white, and pale; where choler
reigns, it is red, and fiery; but in sanguine of a rosy color
His native beauty is a lilie white,
Which still some other colored stream infecteth;
Least like it self, with diverse stainings dight,
The inward disposition detecteth:
If white, it argues wet; if purple, fire;
If black, a heavy cheer, and fixed desire;
Youthful and blithe, if suited in a rosy tire.
18
The skin is covered with the cuticle, or flourishing of the skin, it is
the mean of touching* without which we feel, but with pain. It polisheth the
skin, which many times is changed, and (as it is with snakes) put off, and a
new, and more amiable brought in.
It covered stands with silken flourishing,
Which as it often decaies, renews again,
The others sense and beauty perfecting;
Which else would feel, but with unusual pain:
Whose pleasing sweetness, and resplendent shine,
Softning the wanton touch, and wandering ey'n,
Does often the Prince himself with witch'ries undermine.
19
The fat comes from the airy portion of the blood; which when it flows to the
membranes, by their weak heat (which Physicians account, and call cold) grows
thick, and close.
The second rampire of a softer matter,
Cast up by the purple rivers overflowing:
Whose airy wave, and swelling waters, fatter
For want of heat congealed, and thicker growing,
The fat increases inward heat by keeping it from outward parts, and defends
the parts subject to it from bruises.
The wandering heat (which quiet never subsisteth)
Sends back again to what confine it lists;
And outward enemies by yielding most resists.
20
The fleshie panniele is a membrane very thick, sinewy, woven in with little
veins.
The third more inward, firmer then the best,
May seem at first but thinly built, and slight;
But yet of more defense then all the rest;
Of thick and stubborn substance, strongly dight.
These three (three common fences) round impile
This regiment, and all the other Isle;
And saving inward friends, their outward foes beguile.
21
Beside these three, The proper parts enfolding this lower region are two, the
first the muscles of the belly-peece, which are eight four side-long, two
right, and two cross.
two more appropriate guards
With constant watch compass this government:
The first eight companies in several wards,
(To each his station in this regiment)
On each side four, continual watch observe,
And under one great Captain jointly serve;
Two fore-right stand, two cross, and four obliquely swerve.
22
Peritonaeum (which we call the rimme of the belly) is a thin membrane taking
his name from compassing the bowels: round, but longer: every where double, yet
so thin, that it may seem but single. It has many holes, that the veins,
arteries, and other needful vessels might have passage both in, and out.
The other framed of common matter, all
This lower region girts with strong defense;
More long then round, with double-builded wall,
Though single often seems to slighter sense;
With many gates, whose strangest properties
Protect this coast from all conspiracies;
Admitting welcome friends, excluding enemies.
23
The double tunicle of the rimme is plainly parted into a large space, that
with a double wall it might fence the bladder, where the vessels of the navil
are contained. These are four: first, the norse; which is a vein nourishing
the infant in the womb: 2, two arteries in which the infant breaths: the
fourth, the Outachos, a pipe whereby (while the child is in the womb) the
urine is carried into the Allantoid, or rather Amnion* which is a membrane
receiving the sweat and urine.
Between this fences double-walled sides,
Four slender brooks run creeping over the lea;
The first is called the Nurse, and rising slides
From this low regions Metropolie:
Two from the Heart-citie bend their silent pace;
The last from Urine-lake with waters base
In the Allantoid sea empties his flowing race.
24
The passages carrying the urine from the kidneys to the bladder. Some action
that in the passage stands a curious lid, or cover.
Down in a vale, where these two parted walls
Differ from each with wide distending space,
Into a lake the Urine-river falls,
Which at the Nephros hill begins his race:
Crooking his banks he often runs astray,
Left his ill streams might backward find a way:
Thereto, some say, was built a curious framed bay.
25
The bladder ends in a neck of Hesh, and is guarded with a muscle which is
called Sphincter: which holds in the urine lest it flow away without our
permission. If this be loosened, or cold, the urine goes away from us of it
self without any feeling.
The Urine-lake drinking his colored brook,
By little swells, and fills his stretching sides:
But when the stream the brink 'gins overlook,
A sturdy groom empties the swelling tides;
Sphincter some call; who if he loosed be,
Or stiff with cold, out flows the senseless sea,
And rushing unawares covers the drowned lea.
26
Hence the urine is conveyed through the ordinary passages and cast out.
From thence with blinder passage, (flying name)
These noisome streams a secret pipe conveys;
Which though we term the hidden parts of shame,
Yet for the skill deserve no lesser praise
Then they, to which we honored names impart.
Oh powerful Wisdom, with what wondrous art
Made thou the best, who thus have framed the vilest part!
27
Beside the bladder there are six special parts contained in this lower
region: the liver, stomach, with the guts; the gall, the spleen, or milt; the
kidneys, and parts for generation.
Six goodly Cities, built with suburbs round,
Do fair adorn this lower region:
The stomach (or Koilia) is the first in order though not in dignity.
The first Koilia; whose extremest bound
On this side bordered by the Splenion,
On that by sovereign Hepars large commands:
The merry Diazome above it stands,
To both these joined in league and never failing bands.
28
Koilia, or the stomach is long and round, like a bag-pipe, made to receive and
concoct the meat, and to perfect the Chyle or white juice, which rises from
thee meat concocted.
The form (as when with breath our bag-pipes rise,
And swell) round-wise, and long, yet long-wise more;
Framed to the most capacious figures guise:
For it is the Islands garner; here its store
Lies treasured up, which well prepared it sends
By secret path that to the Arch-citie bends;
Which making it more fit, to all the Isle dispends.
29
Far hence at foot of rocky Cephals hills
This Cities Gustus, the taste, is the caterer, or steward to the stomach,
which has his place in Cephal, that is, the head.
Steward dwells in vaulted stone;
And twice a day Koilia's storehouse fills
With certain rent, and due provision:
Aloft he fitly dwells in arched cave;
Which to describe I better time shall have,
When that fair mount I sing, and his white curdy wave.
30
At that caves mouth In either chap are sixteen teeth; four cutters, two
dog-teeth, or breakers, ten grinders.
twice sixteen Porters stand,
Receivers of the customarie rent;
Of each side four, (the foremost of the band)
Whose office to divide what in is sent:
Straight other four break it in pieces small;
And at each hand twice five, which grinding all,
Fit it for convoy, and this cities Arsenall.
31
From thence a The tongue with great agilitie delivers up the meat (well
chewed) to the instruments of swallowing: eight muscles serving to this purpose
which instantly send the meat through the Oesophagus or meat-pipe into the
stomach.
Groom with wondrous volubilitie
Delivers all unto near officers,
Of nature like himself, and like agilitie;
At each side four, that are the governors
To see the vict'als shipped at fittest tide;
Which straight from thence with prosperous chanel slide,
And in Koilia's port with nimble oars glide.
32
The The upper mouth of the stomach has little veins, or strings circular, to
shut in the meat, and keep it from returning.
haven, framed with wondrous sense and art,
Opens it self to all that entrance seek;
Yet if ought back would turn, and thence depart,
With thousand wrinkles shuts the ready creek:
But when the rent is slack, it rages rife,
And mutines in it self with civil strife:
Thereto a Vas breve, or the short vessel, which sending in a melancholy
humor, sharpens the appetite.
little groom eggs it with sharpest knife.
33
In the bottom of the stomach (which is placed in the midst of the belly) is
concoction perfected.
Below dwells in this Cities marketplace
The Islands common Cook, Concoction;
Common to all; therefore in middle space
Is quartered fit in just proportion,
Whence never from his labor he retires;
No rest he asks, or better change requires:
Both night and day he works, never sleeps, nor sleep desires.
34
The concoction of meats in the stomach is perfected, as by an innate
property, and special virtue, so also by the outward heat of parts adjoining.
For it is on every side compassed with hotter parts, which as fire to a caldron
helps to seethe, and concoct; and the hot steams within it do not a little
further digestion.
That heat, which in his furnace ever fumeth,
Is nothing like to our hot parching fire;
Which all consuming, self at length consumes;
But moistning flames a gentle heat inspire,
Which sure some in-born neighbor to him lends;
And often the bord'ring coast fit fuel sends,
And often the rising fume, which down again descends.
35
Like to a pot, where under hovering
Divided flames, the iron sides entwining,
Above is stopped with close-laid covering,
Exhaling fumes to narrow straits confining;
So doubling heat, his duty doubly speedeth:
Such is the fire Concoctions vessel needs,
Who daily all the Isle with fit provision feeds.
36
There many a groom the busy Cook attends
In under offices, and several place:
This gathers up the scumme, and thence it sends
To be cast out; another liquours base,
Another garbage, which the kitchen cloyes,
And diverse filth, whose sent the place annoyes,
By diverse secret ways in under-sinks convoyes.
37
The lower orifice, or mouth of the stomach, is not placed at the very bottom,
but at the side, and is called the (Janitor or) Porter, as sending out the food
new concocted through the entrails, which are knotty, and full of windings,
left the meat too suddenly passing through the body should make it too subject
to appetite and greediness.
Therefore a second Port is sidelong framed,
To let out what unsavorie there remains:
There sits a needful groom, the Porter named,
Which soon the full-grown kitchen cleanly drains
By diverse pipes, with hundred turnings giring;
Lest that the food too speedily retiring,
Should whet the appetite, still cloyed, and still desiring.
38
So Erisicthon once fired (as men say)
With hungry rage, fed never, ever feeding;
Ten thousand dishes served in every day,
Yet in ten thousand, thousand dishes needing,
In vain his daughter hundred shapes assumed:
A whole camps meat he in his gorge inhum'd;
And all consumed, his hunger yet was unconsum'd.
39
Such would the state of this whole Island be,
If those pipes windings (passage quick delaying)
Should not refrain too much edacitie,
With longer stay fierce appetite allaying.
It is approved that the entrails dried, and blown, are seven times longer then
the body: they are all one entire body, yet their differing substance has
distinguished them into the thin, and thick: the thin have the more noble
office.
These pipes are sevenfold longer then the Isle,
Yet all are folded in a little pile,
Whereof three noble are, and thin; three thick, and vile.
40
The first is straight without any winding, that the chyle might not return;
and most narrow, that it might not find too hasty a passage. It takes in a
little passage from the gall, which there purges his choler, to provoke the
entrails (when they are slow) to cast out the excrements. This is called
Duodenum (or twelve finger) from his length.
The first is narrow'st, and downright does look,
Lest that his charge discharged might back retire;
And by the way takes in a bitter brook,
That when the chanel's stopped with stifeling mire,
Through the idle pipe with piercing waters soking,
His tender sides with sharpest stream provoking,
Thrusts out the muddy parts, and rids the miry choking.
41
The second is called the lank or hungry gut, as being more empty then the
rest: for the liver being near it sucks out his juice, or cream: it is known
from the rest by the red color.
The second lean and lank, still pill'd, and harri'd
By mighty bord'rers often his barns invading:
Away his food and new-inn'd store is carried;
Therefore an angry color, never fading,
Purples his cheek: The third called Ilion (or winding) from his many folds and
turnings, is of all the longest.
the third for length exceeds,
And down his stream in hundred turnings leads:
These three most noble are, adorned with silken threads.
42
The first of the baser is called blind: at whose end is an appendant, where
if any of the thinner chyle do chance to escape, it is stopped, and by the veins
of the midriffe sucked out.
The foremost of the base half blind appears;
And where his broad way in an Isthmos ends,
There he examines all his passengers,
And those who ought not escape, he backward sends:
The second is Colon (or the tormenter) because of the wind there staying, and
vexing the body.
The second Aeols court, where tempests raging
Shut close within a cave the winds encaging,
With earthquakes shakes the Island, thunders sad presaging.
43
The last called Rectum, or straight, has no windings, short, larger toward
the end; that the excrement may more easily be ejected, and retained also upon
occasion.
The last downright falls to port Esquiline,
More strait above, beneath still broader growing;
Soon as the gate opes by the Kings assign,
Empties it self, far thence the filth out-throwing:
This gate endowed with many properties,
Yet for his office sight and naming flies;
Therefore between two hills, in darkest valley lies.
44
The thin entrails serve for the carrying, and through-concocting of the
chyle: the thicker for the gathering, and containing the excrements.
To that Arch-citie of this government
The three first pipes the ready feast convoy:
The other three, in baser office spent,
Fling out the dregs, which else the kitchen cloy.
They are all sprinkled with numberless little veins, that no part of the
chyle might escape till all be brought to the liver.
In every one the Hepar keeps his spies;
Who if ought good with evil blended lies,
Thence bring it back again to Hepars treasuries.
45
Two several covers fence these twice three pipes:
Epiploon (or Overswimmer) descends below the navill; and ascends above the
highest entrails, of skinny substance all interlaced with fat.
The first from over-swimming takes his name,
Like cobweb-lawn woven with hundred stripes:
The Mesenterium (or midst amongst the entrails, whence it takes the name) ties
and knits the entrails together: it has a double tunicle.
The second, strengthened with a double frame,
From foreign enmity the pipes maintains:
Pancreas (or All flesh, for so it seems) is laid as a pillow under the
stomach; and sustains the veins that are dispread from the gate-vein.
Close by the Pancreas stands, who never complains;
Though pressed by all his neighbors, he their state sustains.
46
Next Hepar, chief of all these lower parts,
One of the three, yet of the three the least.
But see, the Sun, like to undaunted hearts,
Enlarges in his fall his ample breast:
Now hie we home; the pearled dew ere long
Will wet the mothers, and their tender young:
To morrow with the day we may renew our song.
CANT. III.
THe Morning fresh, dappling her horse with roses,
(Vexed at the lingering shades, that long had left her
In Tithons freezing arms) the light discloses;
And chasing Night, of rule and heaven bereft her:
The Sun with gentle beams his rage disguises,
And like aspiring tyrants, temporises;
Never to be endured, but when he falls, or rises.
2
Thirsil from withy prison, as he uses,
Lets out his flock, and on an hill stood heeding
Which bites the grass, and which his meat refuses;
So his glad eyes fed with their greedy feeding:
Straight flock a shoal of Nymphs and shepherd-swains
While all their lambs ranged on the flowery plains;
Then thus the boy began, crowned with their circling trains.
3
You gentle shepherds, and you snowie fires,
That sit around, my rugged rimes attending;
How may I hope to quit your strong desires,
In verse uncomb'd such wonders comprehending?
Too well I know my rudeness all unfit
To frame this curious Isle, whose framing yet
Was never thoroughly known to any humane wit.
4
Thou Shepherd-God, who only know it right,
And hid'st that art from all the world beside;
Shed in my mistie breast thy sparkling light,
And in this fogge my erring footsteps guide;
Thou who first made, and never wilt forsake it:
Else how shall my weak hand dare undertake it,
When thou thy self ask'st counsel of thy self to make it?
5
Next to Koilia, on the right side stands,
Fairly dispread in large dominion,
The Of all this lower region the Hepar, or liver, is the principal. The
situation strong and safe, walled in by the ribs.
Arch-citie Hepar, stretching her commands
To all within this lower region;
Fenc't with sure bars, and strongest situation;
So never fearing foreiners invasion:
Hence are the It is covered with one single cunicle; and that very thin, and
slight.
walls slight, thin; built but for sight and fashion.
6
The liver is tied to the heart by arteries, to the head by nerves, and to both
by veins dispersed to both.
To the Heart and to the Head-citie surely ti'd
With firmest league, and mutual reference:
His liegers there, theirs ever here abide,
To take up strife, and casual difference:
The liver consists of no ordinary flesh, but of a kind proper to it self.
Built all alike, seeming like rubies sheen,
Of some peculiar matter; such I ween,
As over all the world may no where else be seen.
7
The livers upper part rises and swells gently; is very smooth, and even; the
lower in the outside like to an hollow rock, rugged and craggy.
Much like a mount it easily ascends;
The upper part's all smooth as slipperie glass:
But on the lower many a cragge depends;
Like to the hangings of some rockie mass:
From it rise all the springs of blood, which runs in the veins.
Here first the purple fountain making vent,
By thousand rivers through the Isle dispent,
Gives every part fit growth and daily nourishment.
8
The steward of the whole Isle is here fitly placed, because as all (that is
brought in) is here fitted, and disposed, so from hence returned, and dispensed.
In this fair town the Isles great Steward dwells;
His porphyre house glitters in purple die;
In purple clad himself: from hence he deals
His store to all the Isles necessity:
And though the rent he daily duly pay,
Yet does his flowing substance never decay;
All day he rent receives, returns it all the day.
9
And like that golden star, which cuts his way
Through Saturns ice, and Mars his fiery ball;
Temp'ring their strife with his more kindly ray:
So 'tween the Splenions frost and the angry Gall
The joviall Hepar sits; with great expense
Cheering the Isle by his sweet influence;
So slakes their envious rage and endless difference.
10
Within, some say, Here Plato disposed the seat of love. And certainly though
lust (which some perversely call love) be otherwhere seated, yet that affection
whereby we wish, and do well to others, may seem to be better fitted in the
liver, then in the heart, (where most do place it) because this moderate heat
appears more apt for this affection; and fires of the heart where (as a
Salamander) anger lives, seem not so fit to entertain it.
Love has his habitation;
Not Cupids self, but Cupids better brother:
For Cupids self dwells with a lower nation,
But this more sure, much chaster then the other;
By whose command we either love our kind,
Or with most perfect love affect the mind;
With such a diamond knot he often souls can bind.
11
Hence rise the two great rivers of blood, of which all the rest are lesser
streams: The first is Porta, or the gate-vein, issuing from the hollow part and
is shed toward the stomach, spleen, guts, and the Epiploon. The second is Cava,
the hollow vein, spreading his river over all the body.
Two purple streams here raise their boiling heads;
The first and least in the hollow cavern breeding,
His waves on diverse neighbor grounds dispreads:
The next fair river all the rest exceeding,
Topping the hill, breaks forth in fierce evasion,
And sheds abroad his Nile-like inundation;
So gives to all the Isle their food and vegetation.
12
Yet these from other streams much different;
For others, as they longer, broader grow;
These as they run in narrow banks impent,
Are then at least, when in the main they flow:
Much like a tree, which all his roots so guides,
That all the trunk in his full body hides;
Which straight his stem to thousand branches subdivides.
13
The chyle, or juice of meats concocted in the stomach could not all be turned
into sweet blood by reason of the diverse kinds of humors in it: Therefore
there are three kinds of excrementall liquors sucked away by little vessels, and
carried to their appointed places: one too light, and fiery; an other too
earthy, and heavy; a third wheyish and watery.
Yet lest these streams might hap to be infected
With other liquours in the well abounding;
Before their flowing channels are detected,
Some lesser delfs, the fountains bottom sounding,
Suck out the baser streams, the springs annoying,
An hundred pipes unto that end employing;
Thence run to fitter place their noisome load convoying.
14
Such is fair Hepar; Famous the controversy between the Peripateticks, and
Physicians: one holding the heart, the other the liver to be first. That the
liver is first in time and making, is manifest; because the Nurse (the vein
that feeds the infant yet in the womb) empties it self upon the liver.
which with great dissension
Of all the rest pleads most antiquity;
But yet the Heart-citie with no less contention,
And justest challenge, claims prioritie:
But sure the Hepar was the elder bore;
For that small river, called the Nurse, of yore
Laid boths foundation, yet Hepar built before.
15
Three poisonous liquours from this purple well
Rise with the native streams; The first excrement drawn from the liver to the
gall is choleric, bitter, like flame in color; which were it not removed, and
kept in due place, would fill all the body with bitterness, and gnawing.
the first like fire,
All flaming hot, red, furious, and fell,
The spring of dire debate, and civil ire;
Which were not surely held with strong retention,
Would stir domestic strife, and fierce contention,
And waste the weary Isle with never ceased dissension.
16
Therefore close by a little conduit stands,
Choledochus or the Gall, is of a membranous substance, having but one, yet
that a strong tunicle. It has two passages, one drawing the humor from the
liver, another conveying the overplus into the first gut, and so emptying the
gall. And this fence has a double gate to keep the liquour from returning.
Choledochus, that drags this poison hence,
And safely locks it up in prison bands;
Thence gently drains it through a narrow fence;
A needful fence, attended with a guard,
That watches in the straits all closely barred,
Lest some might back escape, and break the prison ward.
17
The The second ill humor is earthy, and heavy, which is drawn from the liver
by little vessels unto the spleen the native seat of melancholy, here some
have placed laughter: but the spleen seems rather the seat of malice and
heaviness.
next ill stream the wholesome fount offending,
All dreery black and frightfull, hence convay'd
By diverse drains unto the Splenion tending,
The Splenion over against the Hepar laid,
Built long, and square: some say that laughter here
Keeps residence; but laughter fits not there,
Where darkness ever dwells, and melancholy fear.
18
If the spleen should fail in this office, the whole body would be filled with
melancholy fancies, and vain terrors.
And should these ways, stopped by ill accident,
To the Hepar streams turn back their muddie humors;
The cloudie Isle with hellish dreeriment
Would soon be filled, and thousand fearful rumors:
Fear hides him here, locked deep in earthy cell;
Dark, doleful, deadly-dull, a little hell;
Where with him fright, despair, and thousand horrors dwell.
19
Where the spleen flourishes, and the body decays, and withers; where the
spleen is kept down, the body flourishes. Hence Stratonicus merrily said, that
in Crete dead men walked, because they were so splenitive, and pale-coloured.
If this black town in over-growth increases,
With too much strength his neighbors over-bearing;
The Hepar daily, and whole Isle decreases,
Like ghastly shade, or ashie ghost appearing:
But when it pines, the Isle thrives; its curse, his blessing:
Trajan compared the spleen to his exchequer: because as his coffers being full
drained his subjects purses, so the full spleen makes the body saplesse.
So when a tyrant raves, his subjects pressing,
His gaining is their loss, his treasure their distressing.
20
The watery humor with some good blood (which is spent for the nourishment of
those parts) is drawn by the kidneys.
The third bad water, bubbling from this fountain,
Is wheyish cold, which with good liquours meint,
Is drawn into the double Nephros mountain;
Which suck the best for growth, and nourishment:
The Ureters receive the water separated from the blood, as distilled from
little fleshie substances in the kidneys, like to teats.
The worst, as through a little pap, distilling
To diverse pipes, the pale cold humor swilling,
Runs down to the Urine-lake, his banks thrice daily filling.
21
The kidneys are both alike; the left somewhat higher: both have a double
skin, and both compassed with fat.
These mountains differ but in situation;
In form and matter like: the left is higher,
Left even height might slack their operation:
Both like the Moon which now wants half her fire;
Yet into two obtuser angles bended,
Both strongly with a double wall defended;
And both have walls of mudde before those walls extended.
22
The sixth and last town in this region,
With largest stretched precincts, and compass wide,
Is that, where Venus and her wanton son
(Her wanton Cupid) will in youth reside:
For though his arrows and his golden bow
On other hills he frankly does bestow,
Yet here he hides the fire with which each heart does glow.
23
For that great Providence, their course foreseeing
Too easily led into the sea of death;
After this first, gave them a second being,
Which in their offspring newly flourishes:
He therefore made the fire of generation
To burn in Venus courts without cessation,
Out of whose ashes comes another Island nation.
24
For from the first a fellow Isle he framed,
(For what alone can live, or fruitful be?)
Arren the first, the second Thelu named;
Weaker the last, yet fairer much to see:
Alike in all the rest, here disagreeing,
Where Venus and her wanton have their being:
For nothing is produced of two in all agreeing.
25
But though some few in these hid parts would see
Their Makers glory, and their justest shame;
Yet for the most would turn to luxury,
And what they should lament, would make their game:
Fly then those parts, which best are undescri'd;
Forbear, my maiden song, to blazon wide
What the Isle and Natures self does ever strive to hide.
26
These two fair Isles distinct in their creation,
Yet one extracted from the others side,
Are often made one by Loves firm combination,
And from this unity are multiplied:
Strange may it seem; such their condition,
That they are more dispread by union;
And two are twenty made, by being made in one.
27
For from these two in Loves delight agreeing,
Another little Isle is soon proceeding;
At first of unlike frame and matter being,
In Venus temple takes it form and breeding;
Till at full time the tedious prison flying,
It breaks all lets its ready way denying;
And shakes the trembling Isle with often painful dying.
28
So by the Bosphor straits in Euxine seas,
Not far from old Byzantum, closely stand
Two neighbor Islands, called Symplegades,
Which sometime seem but one combined land:
For often meeting on the watrie plain,
And parting often, tossed by the boisterous main,
They now are joined in one, and now disjoined again.
29
Here often not Lust, but sweetest Chastity,
Coupled sometimes, and sometimes single, dwells;
Now linkt with Love, to quench Lusts tyranny,
Now Phoenix-like alone in narrow cells:
Such Phoenix one, but one at once may be:
In Albions hills thee, Basilissa, thee,
Such only have I seen, such shall I never see.
30
What Nymph was this, (said fairest Rosaleen)
Whom thou admirest thus above so many?
She, while she was, (ah!) was the shepherds Queen;
Sure such a shepherds Queen was never any:
But (ah!) no joy her dying heart contented,
Since she a dear Deers side unwilling rented;
Whose death she all too late, too soon, too much, repented.
31
Ah royal maid! why should thou thus lament thee?
Thy little fault was but too much believing:
It is too much so much thou should repent thee;
His joyous soul at rest desires no grieving.
These words (vain words!) fond comforters did lend her;
But (ah!) no words, no prayers might ever bend her
To give an end to grief, till endless grief did end her.
32
But how should I those sorrows dare display?
Or how limme forth her virtues wonderment?
She was (ay me! she was) the sweetest May
That ever flowr'd in Albions regiment.
Few eyes fallen lights adore: yet fame shall keep
Her name awake, when others silent sleep;
While men have ears to hear, eyes to look back, and weep.
33
And though the curres (which whelpt and nursed in Spain,
Learn of fell Geryon to snarle and brawl)
Have vowed and strove her Virgin tomb to stain;
And grinne, and foam, and rage, and yelp, and bawl:
Yet shall our Cynthia's high-triumphing light
Deride their houling throats, and toothlesse spite;
And sail through heaven, while they sink down in endless night.
34
So is this Islands lower region:
Yet ah much better is it sure then so.
But my poor reeds, like my condition,
(Low is the shepherds state, my song as low)
Mar what they make: but now in yonder shade
Rest we, while Suns have longer shadows made:
See how our panting flocks run to the cooler glade.
CANT. IIII
THe shepherds in the shade their hunger feasted
With simple cates, such as the country yields;
And while from scorching beams secure they rested,
The Nymphs dispersed along the woody fields,
Pulled from their stalks the blushing strawberries,
Which lurk close shrouded from high looking-eyes;
Showing that sweetness often both low and hidden lies.
2
But when the day had his meridian run
Between his highest throne, and low declining;
Thirsil again his forced task begun,
His wonted audience his sides entwining.
The middle Province next this lower stands,
Where the Isles Heart-city spreads his large commands,
Leagued to the neighbor towns with sure and friendly bands.
3
Such as that star, which sets his glorious chair
In midst of heaven, and to dead darkness here
Gives light and life; such is this city fair:
Their ends, place, office, state, so nearely near,
That those wise ancients from their natures sight,
And likeness, turned their names, and called aright
The sun the great worlds heart, the heart the less worlds light.
4
The heart is the seat of heat, and life; therefore walled about with the ribs,
for more safety.
This middle coast to all the Isle dispends
All heat and life: hence it another Guard
(Beside those common to the first) defends;
Built whole of massy stone, cold, dry, and hard:
Which stretching round about his circling arms,
Warrants these parts from all exterior harms;
Repelling angry force, securing all alar'ms.
5
But in the front The breasts, or paps, are given to men for strength, and
ornament; to women, for milk and nurserie also.
two fair twin-bulwarks rise,
In the Arren built for strength, and ornament;
In Thelu of more use, and larger size;
For hence the young Isle draws his nourishment:
Here lurking Cupid hides his bended bow;
Here milkie springs in sugared rivers flow;
Which first gave the infant Isle to be, and then to grow.
6
When the infant grows big, he so oppresses the vessels of blood, that partly
through the readiness of the passage, but especially by the providence of God,
the blood turns back to the breast, and there by an innate but wonderful
faculty is turned into milk.
For when the lesser Island (still increasing
In Venus temple) to some greatness swells,
Now larger rooms and bigger spaces seizing,
It stops the Hepar rivers; backward reels
The stream, and to these hills bears up his flight,
And in these founts (by some strange hidden might)
Dies his fair rosy waves into a lily white.
7
So where fair Medway, down the Kentish dales
To many towns her plenteous waters dealing,
Lading her banks, into wide Thamis falls;
The big-grown main with fomie billows swelling,
Stops there the sudding stream; her steady race
Staggers awhile, at length flies back apace,
And to the parent fount returns its fearful pace.
8
The breasts are in figure hemisphericall; whose tops are crowned with the
teats, about which are reddish circles, called (Areolae, or) little altars.
These two fair mounts are like two hemispheres,
Endowed with goodly gifts and qualities;
Whose top two little purple hillocks reares,
Most like the Poles in heavens Axletrees:
And round about two circling altars gire,
In blushing red; the rest in snowy tire
Like Thracian Haemus looks, which never feels Phoebus fire
9
That mighty hand in these dissected wreathes,
(Where moves our Sun) his thrones fair picture gives;
The pattern breathless, but the picture breathes;
His highest heaven is dead, our low heaven lives:
Nor scorns that lofty one thus low to dwell;
Here his best stars he sets, and glorious cell;
And fills with saintly spirits, so turns to heaven from hell.
10
About this Region round in compass stands
A Guard, both for defense, and respiration,
In the Thorax or breast, are sixty five muscles for respiration, or breathing,
which is either free, or forced: The instruments of forced breathing are sixty
four, whereof thirty two distend, and as many contract it.
Of sixty four, parted in several bands;
Half to let out the smokie exhalation,
The other half to draw in fresher winds:
Beside both these, a third of both their kinds,
That lets both out, and in; which no enforcement binds.
11
This third the merry The instrument of the free breathing is the Diazome or
Diaphragme, which we call the midriffe, as a wall parting the heart and liver:
Plato affirms it a partition between the seats of desire, and anger. Aristotle,
a bar to keep the noisome odor of the stomach from the heart.
Diazome we call,
A border-citie these two coasts removing;
Which like a balk, with his crosse-builded wall,
Disparts the terms of anger, and of loving;
Keeps from the Heart-citie fuming kitchen fires,
And to his neigbours gentle winds inspires;
The midriffe dilates it self when it draws in, contracts it self when it
puffes out the air.
Loose when he sucks in air, contract when he expires.
12
The midriffe consists of two circles, one skinny, the other fleshie. It has
two tunicles, as many veins and arteries, and four nerves.
The Diazome of several matter's framed:
The first moist, soft; harder the next, and drier:
His fashion like the fish a Raia named;
Fenced with two walls, one low, the other higher;
By eight streams watered; two from Hepar low,
And from the Heart-town as many higher go;
But two twice told down from the Cephal mountain flow.
13
Here most men have placed the seat of laughter: It has much sympathy with
the brain, so that if the midriffe be inflamed, present madness easues it.
Here sportfull Laughter dwells, here ever sitting,
Defies all lumpish griefs, and wrinkled care;
And twenty merrie-mates mirth causes fitting,
And smiles, which Laughters sons, yet infants are.
But if this town be fired with burnings nigh,
With selfsame flames high Cephals towers fry;
Such is their feeling love, and loving sympathy.
14
This coast stands girt with a Within, the Pleura (or skin which clotheth the
ribs on the inside) compasses this middle region.
peculiar wall,
The whole precinct, and every part defending:
The chiefest part of this middle region is the Heart, placed in the midst of
this province, and of the whole body: fitly was it placed in the midst of all,
as being of all the most needful.
The chiefest City, and Imperial,
Is fair Kerdia, far his bounds extending;
Which full to know were knowledge infinite:
How then should my rude pen this wonder write,
Which thou, who only made it, only know aright?
15
In middle of this middle Regiment
Kerdia seated lies, the center deemed
Of this whole Isle, and of this government:
If not the chiefest this, yet needfull'st seemed,
Therefore obtained an equal distant seat,
More fitly hence to shed his life and heat,
And with his yellow streams the fruitful Island wet.
16
The Heart is immured partly by a membrane going round about it, (and thence
receiving his name) and a peculiar tunicle; partly with an humor like whey or
urine, as well to cool the heart, as to lighten the body.
Flankt with two several walls (for more defense)
Betwixt them ever flows a wheyish moat;
In whose soft waves, and circling profluence
This City, like an Isle, might safely float:
In motion still (a motion fixed, not roving)
Most like to heaven in his most constant moving:
Hence most here plant the seat of sure and active loving.
17
Built of a substance like smooth porphyrie;
The flesh of the heart is proper and peculiar to it self, not like other
muscles; of a figure pyramicall. The point of the heart is (as with a diadem
(girt with two arteries, and a vein, called the crowns.
His matter hid, and (like it self) unknown:
Two rivers of his own; another by,
That from the Hepar rises, like a crown,
Infold the narrow part: for that great All
This his works glory made pyramicall;
Then crowned with triple wreath, and clothed in scarlet pall.
18
The Cities self in two Though the heart be an entire body, yet it is severed
into two partitions, the right, and left; of which the left is more excellent
and noble.
partitions reft,
That on the right, this on the other side:
The right receives into his hollownesse the blood flowing from the liver, and
concocts it.
The right (made tributarie to the left)
Brings in his pension at his certain tide,
A pension of liquours strangely wrought;
Which first by Hepars streams are hither brought,
And here distilled with art, beyond or words or thought
19
This right side sends down to the lungs that part of this blood which is less
labored, and thicker; but the thinner part it sweats through a fleshie
partition into the left side.
The grosser waves of these life-streams (which here
With much, yet much less labor is prepared)
A doubtful chanel does to Pneumon bear:
But to the left those labored extracts shared,
This fleshie partition severs the right side from the left; at first it seems
thick, but if it be well viewed, we shall see it full of many pores, or
passages.
As through a wall, with hidden passage slide;
Where many secret gates (gates hardly spied)
With safe convoy give passage to the other side.
20
At each hand of the left Two skinny additions (from their likeness called the
ears) receive, the one the thicker blood, (that called the right) the other
(called the left) takes in the air sent by the lungs.
two streets stand by,
Of several stuff, and several working framed,
With hundred crooks, and deep-wrought cavitie:
Both like the ears in form, and so are named.
In The right hand street the tribute liquour sits:
The left forced air into his concave gets;
Which subtle wrought, and thin, for future workmen sits.
21
The Cities The left side of the heart takes in this air, and blood; and
concocting them both in his hollow bosom, sends them out by the great artery
into the whole body.
left side, (by some hid direction)
Of this thin air, and of that right sides rent,
(Compound together) makes a strange confection;
And in one vessel both together meynt,
Stills them with equal never-quenched firing:
Then in small streams (through all the Island wiring)
Sends it to every part, both heat and life inspiring.
22
In the heart are four great vessels: the first is the hollow vein bringing in
the blood from the liver; at whose mouth stand three little folding doors,
with three forks giving passage, but no return to the blood.
In this Heart-citie four main streams appear;
One from the Hepar, where the tribute landeth,
Largely poures out his purple river here;
At whose wide mouth a band of Tritons stands,
(Three Tritons stand) who with their three-forkt mace
Drive on, and speed the rivers flowing race,
But strongly stop the wave, if once it back repace.
23
The second vessel is called the arterie-vein, which rising from the right side
of the heart, carries down the blood here prepared to the lungs for their
nourishment. Here also is the like three-folding door, made like half circles;
giving passage from the heart, but not backward.
The second is that doubtful chanel, lending
Some of this tribute to the Pneumon nigh;
Whose springs by careful guards are watched, that sending
From thence the waters, all regresse deny:
The third is called the Veiny artery, rising from the left side, which has
two folds three-forked.
The third unlike to this, from Pneumon flowing,
And his due ayer-tribute here bestowing,
Is kept by gates and bars, which stop all backward going.
24
The fourth is the great artery. This has also a floudgate made of three
semicircular membranes, to give out load to the virall spirits, and stop their
regresse.
The last full spring out of this left side rises,
Where three fair Nymphs, like Cynthia's self appearing,
Draw down the stream which all the Isle suffices;
But stop back-waies, some ill revolture fearing.
This river still it self to less dividing,
At length with thousand little brooks runs sliding,
His fellow course along with Hepar channels guiding.
25
The Heart is the fountain of life and heat to the whole body, and the seat of
passions.
Within this City is the palace framed,
Where life, and life's companion, heat, abides;
And their attendants, passions untamed:
(Often very hell in this strait room resideth)
And did not neighboring hills, cold aires inspiring,
Allay their rage and mutinous conspiring,
Heat all (it self and all) would burn with quenchlesse firing.
26
Yet that great Light, by whom all heaven shines
With borrowed beams, often leaves his lofty skies,
And to this lowly seat himself confines.
Fall then again, proud heart, now fall to rise:
Cease earth, ah cease, proud Babel earth, to swell:
Heaven blasts high towers, stoops to a low-rooft cell;
First heaven must dwell in man, then man in heaven shall dwell.
27
Close to Kerdia The Pneumon (or lungs) is nearest the heart, whose flesh is
light, and spongie, very large. It is the instrument of breathing, and
speaking, divided into many parcels, yet all united into one body.
Pneumon takes his seat,
Built of a lighter frame, and spungie mold:
Hence rise fresh aires to fan Kerdia's heat;
Temp'ring those burning fumes with moderate cold:
It self of largest size, distended wide,
In diverse streets and out-wayes multiplied:
Yet in one Corporation all are jointly ti'd.
28
Fitly 't is clothed with hangings The Lungs are covered with a light and very
thin tunicle, left it might be an hinderance to the motion.
thin and light,
Lest too much weight might hinder motion:
His chiefest use to frame the voice aright;
(The voice which publishes each hidden notion)
And for that end The windepipe, which is framed partly of cartilage, or grissy
matter, because the voice is perfected with hard and smooth things, (these
cartilages are compassed like a ring) partly of skin, which tie the grisles
together.
a long pipe down descends,
(Which here it self in many lesser spends)
Until low at the foot of Cephal mount it ends.
29
This pipe was built for the aires safe purveiance,
To fit each several voice with perfect sound;
Therefore of diverse matter the conveiance
Is finely framed; the first in circles round,
In hundred circles bended, hard and dry,
(For watrie softness is sounds enemy)
Not altogether close, yet meeting very nigh.
30
The seconds drith and hardness somewhat less,
But smooth and pliable made for extending,
Fills up the distant circles emptiness;
All in one body jointly comprehending:
And because the rings of the grifles do not wholly meet, this space is made up
by muscles, that so the meat-pipe adjoining might not be galled, or hurt.
The last most soft, which where the circles scanted
Not fully met, supplies what they have wanted,
Not hurting tender parts, which next to this are planted
31
The Larynx, or covering of the windepipe, is a grisly substance, parted into
four grisles of which the first is ever unmoved, and in women often double.
Upon the top there stands the pipes safe covering,
Made for the voices better modulation:
Above it foureteen careful warders hovering,
Which shut and open it at all occasion:
The cover in four parts it self dividing,
Of substance hard, fit for the voices guiding;
One still unmoved (in Thelu double often) residing.
32
Adjoining to it is the Oesophagus, or meat-pipe* conveying meats and drinks to
the stomach.
Close by this pipe runs that great chanel down,
Which from high Cephals mount twice every day
Brings to Koilia due provision:
At whose end is the Epiglottis, or cover of the throat, the principal
instrument of tuning, and apting the voice: and therefore grisly, that it might
sooner fall when we swallow, and rise when we breathe.
Straight at whose mouth a floud-gate stops the way,
Made like an Ivy leaf, broad-angle-fashion;
Of matter hard, fitting his operation,
For swallowing soon to fall, and rise for inspiration.
33
But see, the smoke mounting in village nigh,
With folded wreaths steals through the quiet air;
And mixed with duskie shades in Eastern sky,
Begins the night, and warns us home repair:
Bright Vesper now has changed his name and place,
And twinkles in the heaven with doubtful face:
Home then my full-fed lambs; the night comes, home apace.
CANT. V.
BY this the old nights head (grown hoary gray)
Foretold that her approaching end was near;
And gladsome birth of young succeeding day
Lent a new glory to our Hemispheare:
The early swains salute the infant ray;
Then drove the dammes to feed, the lambs to play:
And Thirsil with nights death revives his morning lay.
2
The highest region in this little Isle
Is both the Islands and Creatours glory:
Ah then, my creeping Muse, and rugged style,
How dare you pencill out this wondrous story?
Oh thou that made this goodly regiment,
So heavenly fair, of basest element,
Make this inglorious verse thy glories instrument.
3
So shall my flagging Muse to heaven aspire,
Where with thy self thy fellow-shepherd sits;
And warm her pineons at that heavenly fire;
But (ah!) such height no earthly shepherd fits:
Content we here low in this humble vale
On slender reeds to sing a slender tale.
A little boat will need as little sail and gale.
4
The head of these three regions is the least, but noblest in frame, and
officer: most like to heaven as well in site, being highest in this style
world, as also in figure, being round.
The third precinct, the best and chief of all,
Though least in compass, and of narrow space,
Was therefore framed like heaven, sphericall,
Of largest figure, and of loveliest grace:
Though shaped at first the least of all the three;
Yet highest set in place, as in degree,
And over all the rest bore rule and soveraigntie.
5
So of the three parts fair Europe is the least,
In which this earthly Ball was first divided;
Yet stronger far, and nobler then the rest,
Where victory and learned arts resided,
And by the Greek and Roman monarchy
Swaid both the rest; now pressed by slaverie
Of Mosco, and the big-swoln Turkish tyranny.
6
The Brain is the seat of the mind, and senses.
Here all the senses dwell, and all the arts;
Here learned Muses by their silver spring:
The The head is divided into the City, and Suburbs; the brain within the wall
of the skull, and the face without.
City severed in two diverse parts,
Within the walls, and Suburbs neighboring;
The Suburbs girt but with the common fence,
Founded with wondrous skill, and great expense;
And therefore beauty here keeps her chief residence.
7
And sure for ornament and buildings rare,
Lovely aspect, and ravishing delight,
Not all the Isle or world with this compare;
But in the Thelu is the fairer sight:
These Suburbs many call the Islands face;
Whose charming beauty, and bewitching grace
Ofttimes the Prince himself enthralls in fetters base.
8
For as this Isle is a short summarie
Of all that in this All is wide dispread;
So the Islands face is the Isles Epitomie,
Where even the Princes thoughts are often read:
For when that All had finished every kind,
And all his works would in less volume bind,
Fair on the face he wrote the Index of the mind.
9
Fair are the Suburbs; yet to clearer sight
The Cities self more fair and excellent:
A thick-grown wood, not pierced with any light,
Yields it some fence, and much more ornament:
The divers-colour'd trees and fresh array
Much grace the town, but most the Thelu gay:
Yet all in winter turn to snow, and soon decay.
10
Like to some stately work, whose queint devices,
And glittering turrets with brave cunning dight,
The gazers eye still more and more entices
Of the inner rooms to get a fuller sight;
Whose beauty much more winnes his ravished heart,
That now he only thinks the outward part
To be a worthy covering of so fair an art.
11
Beside the common tunicles of the whole body, the brain is covered first with
the bone of the skull, secondly with the Perieranium, or skin covering the
skull, and thirdly with two inward skins.
Four several walls, beside the common guard,
For more defense the city round embrace:
The first thick, soft; the second dry and hard;
As when soft earth before hard stone we place.
The second all the City round enlaces,
And like a rock with thicker sides embraces;
For here the Prince his court and standing palace places.
12
These two are called the hard, and tender mother.
The other two of matter thin and light;
And yet the first much harder then the other;
Both cherish all the City: therefore right
They call that the hard, and this the tender mother.
The whole substance of the brain is divided into four parts by diverse folds
of the inward skin.
The first with diverse crooks and turnings wries,
Cutting the town in four quaternities;
But both join to resist invading enemies.
13
Next these, the buildings yield themselves to sight;
The The outside of the brain is softer, and of a shie color; the inward part
white, and harder, framed of seed.
outward soft, and pale, like ashes look;
The inward parts more hard, and curdy white:
Their matter both from the Isles first matter took;
Nor cold, nor hot: heats needful sleeps infest,
Cold nummes the workmen; middle temper's best;
When kindly warmth speeds work, and cool gives timely rest.
14
Almost in the midst of the brain are two hollow places, like half moons, of
much use for preparing the spirits, emptying rheugme, receiving odours, etc.
Within the center (as a market place)
Two caverns stand, made like the Moon half spent;
Of special use, for in their hollow space
All odours to their Judge themselves present:
Here first are born the spirits animal,
Whose matter, almost immateriall,
Resembles heavens matter quintessentiall.
15
Here is a knot of veins and arteries weaved together, by which the animal
spirits are concocted, thinned and fitted for service: and close by are two
little branches like teats, the instruments of smelling.
Hard by, an hundred nimble workmen stand,
These noble spirits readily preparing;
Laboring to make them thin, and fit to hand,
With never ended work, and sleeplesse caring:
Hereby two little hillocks jointly rise,
Where fit two Judges clad in seemly guise,
That cite all odours here, as to their just assise.
16
Next in that Septum lucidum, or bright wall, severing these hollow caverns.
Next these, a wall built all of saphires shining,
As fair, more precious, hence it takes his name;
The third cavitie is nothing else but a meeting of the two former
By which the third cave lies, his sides combining
To the other two, and from them has his frame;
(A meeting of those former cavities)
It lies under (corpus Cameratum or) the chamber-substance, width with three
arches bears up the whole weight of the brain.
Vaulted by three fair arches safe it lies,
And no oppression fears, or falling tyrannies.
17
By the third cavitie are two passages; and at the end of the first is the
(Infundibulum or, tunnell, under which is (Glans Pituitaria or) the
Rheugmkernell, as a sponge sucking the rheugms, and distilling them into the
palate.
By this third cave the humid city drains
Base noisome streams the milkie streets annoying;
And through a wide-mouthed tunnel duly strains,
Unto a bibbing substance down convoying;
Which these foul dropping humors largely swills,
Till all his swelling sponge he greedy fills,
And then through other sinks by little soft distills.
18
The other passage reaches to the fourth cavitie, which yields a safe way for
the spirits.
Between this and the fourth cave, lies a vale,
(The fourth, the first in worth, in rank the last)
Where two round hills shut in this pleasant dale,
Through which the spirits thither safe are past;
The fourth cavitie is most noble, where all the spirits are perfected. By it
is the pith, or marrow, the fountain of these spirits.
Those here refined their full perfection have;
And therefore close by this fourth wondrous cave
Rises that silver well, scattering his milkie wave.
19
Not that bright spring, where fair Hermaphrodite
Grew into one with wanton Salmacis,
Nor that where Biblis dropped, too fondly light,
Her tears and self, may dare compare with this;
This pith, or marrow, springing in the brain flows down through the back bone.
Which here beginning down a lake descends,
Whose rockie chanel these fair streams defends,
Till it the precious wave through all the Isle dispends.
20
All the nerves imparting all sense and motion to the whole body have their
root partly from the brain, and partly from the back bone.
Many fair rivers take their heads from either,
(Both from the lake, and from the milkie well)
Which still in loving channels run together,
Each to his mate a neighbor parallel:
Thus widely spread with friendly combination,
They fling about their wondrous operation,
And give to every part both motion and sensation.
21
The pith of the back bone springs from the brain, whence by four passages
it is conveyed into the back; and there all four join in one, and again are
thence divided into diverse others.
This silver lake, first from the Head-citie springing,
To that bright fount four little channels sends;
Through which it thither plenteous water bringing,
Straight all again to every place dispends:
Such is the Head-citie, such the Princes Hall;
Such, and much more, which strangely liberal,
Though sense it never had, yet gives all sense to all.
22
Of other stuff the Suburbs have their framing;
May seem soft marble, spotted red and white:
The first part of the face is the forehead, at whose base are the eyes.
First stands an Arch, pale Cynthia's brightness shaming,
The Cities forefront, cast in silver bright:
At whose proud base are built two watching towers,
Whence hate and love skirmish with equal powers;
Whence smiling gladness shines, and sullen sorrow showers.
23
The eyes are the index of the mind, discovering every affection.
Here sits retired the silent reverence;
And when the Prince, incensed with angers fire,
Thunders aloud, he darts his lightning hence;
Here dusky-reddish clouds foretell his ire:
Of nothing can this Isle more boast aright:
A twin-born Sun, a double seeing light;
With much delight they see, are seen with much delight.
24
That Orpheus called the eyes the looking glass of nature.
Thracian shepherd called them Natures glass;
Yet then a glass in this much worthier being:
Blind glasses represent some neare-set face;
But this a living glass, both seen and seeing:
Plato affirmed them lighted up with heavenly fire not burning, but shining.
Like heaven in moving, like in heavenly firing;
Sweet heat and light, no burning flame inspiring:
Yet (ah!) too often we find they scorch with hot desiring.
25
They mounted high, sit on a lofty hill;
(For they the Princes best intelligence,
And quickly warn of future good, or ill)
Here stands the palace of the noblest sense;
Here Visus keeps, whose Court then crystal smoother,
And clearer seems; he, though a younger brother,
Yet far more Visus, or the light, is the most noble above all the senses.
noble is, far fairer then the other.
26
There are six muscles moving the eye, thus termed by Anatomists.
Six bands are set to stir the moving tower:
The first the proud band called, that lifts it higher;
The next the humble band, that shoves it lower;
The bibbing third draws it together nigher;
The fourth disdainful, often away is moving:
The other two, helping the compass roving,
Are called the circling trains, and wanton bands of loving.
27
Above are the eyebrows keeping off the sweat that it fall not into the eyes.
Above, two compass groves, (Loves bended bows)
Which fence the towers from floods of higher place:
The eyelids shutting the eye are two; the lower ever unmoved in man: and hairs
keeping off dust, flies, etc.
Before, a wall, deluding rushing foes,
That shuts and opens in a moments space:
The low part fixed, the higher quick descending;
Upon whose tops spearmen their pikes intending,
Watch there both night and day, the castles port defending.
28
There are three humors in the eye: the first the Watrie, breaking the too
vehement light, and stopping the spirits from going out too fast.
Three diverse lakes within these bulwarks lie,
The noblest parts and instruments of sight:
The first, receiving forms of bodies nigh,
Conveys them to the next, and breaks the light,
Danting his rash and forcible invasion;
And with a clear and whitish inundation,
Restrains the nimble spirits from their too quick evasion.
29
The second is the Crystalline, and most noble, seated and compast between the
other two, and being altered by the entering shapes, is the chief instrument of
sight.
In midst of both is placed the Cyrstall pond;
Whose living water thick, and brightly shining,
Like Saphires, or the sparkling Diamond,
His inward beams with outward light combining,
Alt'ring it self to every shapes aspect,
The diverse forms does further still direct,
Till by the nimble poast the are brought to the Intellect.
30
The third from the likeness is called the glassie humor.
The third, like molten glass, all clear and white:
Both round embrace the noble Crystalline.
There are six tunicles belonging to the eye:

The first called the conjunctive, solid, thick, compassing the whole eye, but
only the black window.


Six inward walls fence in this Tower of sight:
The first, most thick, does all the frame inshrine,
And girts the Castle with a close embrace,
Save in the midst is left a circles space,
Where light and hundred shapes flock out and in apace.
31
The second is Cornea or, hornie tunicle, transparent, and made of the hard
mother.
The second not so massy as the other,
Yet thicker then the rest, and tougher framed,
Takes his beginning from that harder mother:
The outward part like horn, and thence is named;
Through whose translucent sides much light is born
Into the Tower, and much kept out by the horn,
Makes it a pleasant light, much like the ruddie morn.
32
The third is ((...) or) grapie, made of the tender mother, thin, and
pervious by a little and round window: it is diversely colored without, but
exceeding black within.
The third, of softer mold, is like a grape,
Which all entwines with his encircling side:
In midst a window lets in every shape;
Which with a thought is narrow made, or wide:
His inmost side more black then starrelesse night;
But outward part (how like an hypocrite!)
As painted Iris looks, with various colors dight.
33
The fourth is more thin then any cobweb (and thence so called) immediately
compassing the Crystalline humor.
The fourth of finest work, more slight, and thin,
Then or Arachne, (which in silken twine
With Pallas strove) or Pallas self could spinne:
This round enwraps the fountain Crystalline.
The fifth, Reticularis, netty tunicle, framed of the substance of the brain:
this diffuseth the visil spirits, and perceives the alteration of the
Crystalline; and here is the mean of sight.
The next is made out of that milkie spring,
That from the Cephal mount his waves does fling,
Like to a curious net his substance scattering.
34
His substance as the Head-spring, perfect white;
Here thousand nimble spies are round dispread:
The forms caught in this net, are brought to sight,
And to his eye are lively pourtrayed.
The sixth is called the glassie tunicle, ^^asping in the glassie humor.
The last the glassie wall (that round encasing
The moat of glass, is named from that enlacing)
The white and glassy wells parts with his strict embracing
35
Thus then is framed the noble Visus bower;
The outward light by the first walls circle sending
His beams and hundred forms into the tower,
The wall of horn, and that black gate transcending,
Is lightened by the brightest Crystalline,
And fully viewed in that white nettie shine,
From thence with speedy haste is poasted to the mind.
36
Much as an one-ey'd room, hung all with night,
(Only that side, which adverse to his eye
Gives but one narrow passage to the light,
Is spread with some white shining tapestrie)
An hundred shapes that through flit ayers stray,
Shove boldly in, crouding that narrow way,
And on that bright-fac'd wall obscurely dancing play.
37
The eye has two nerves, the Optic or seeing nerve, and moving. The optic,
separate in their root, in the midst of their progress meet, and strengthen
one the other.
Two pair of rivers from the Head-spring flow
To these two Towers: the first in their mid-race
(The spies conveying) twisted jointly go,
Strengthening each other with a firm embrace.
The moving, rising from the same stem, are at length severed; therefore as
one moves, so moves the other.
The other pair these walking Towers are moving;
At first but one, then in two channels roving:
And therefore both agree in standing, or removing.
38
Hearing is the second sense, less noble then the eye, more needful.
Auditus, second of the Pemptarchie,
Is next, not all so noble as his brother;
Yet of more need, and more commodity:
His seat is placed somewhat below the other:
Of each side of the mount a double cave;
Both which a goodly Portall does embrave,
And winding entrance, like Maeanders erring wave.
39
The outward ear is of a grisly matter, covered with the common tunicle. It is
framed with many crooks, left the air should enter too forcibly.
The Portall hard and dry, all hung around
With silken, thin, carnatian tapestrie:
Whose open gate drags in each voice and sound,
That through the shaken air passes by:
The entrance winding; lest some violence
Might fright the Judge with sudden influence,
Or some unwelcome guest might vex the busy sense.
40
The inward ear consists of four passages: the first is steeple left any
thing should creep in.
This caves first part framed with a steep ascent
(For in four parts it is fitly severed)
Makes the entrance hard, but easy the descent:
Where stands a braced drum, whose sounding head
(Obliquely placed) struck by the circling air,
Gives instant warning of each sounds repair,
Which soon is thence conveyed unto the Judgment chair.
41
If the Drum be wet with falling of rheugm, we are hard of hearing; but if it
grow thick, we are irrecoverably deaf.
The drum is made of substance hard and thin;
Which if some falling moisture chance to wet,
The loudest sound is hardly heard within:
But if it once grows thick, with stubborn let
It bars all passage to the inner room;
No sounding voice unto his seat may come:
The lazy sense still sleeps, unsummon'd with his drum.
42
The Drum parts the first and second passage. To it are joined three little
bones, the instruments of hearing, which never grow, or decrease in childehood
or age: they are all in the second passage.
This drum divides the first and second part,
In which three hearing instruments reside;
Three instruments compact by wondrous art,
With slender string knit to the drums inner side:
Their native temper being hard and dry,
Fitting the sound with their firm quality,
Continue still the same in age and infancy.
43
The first of these bones is called the Hammer, the second the Stithe, the
third the Stirrup, all taking their names from their likeness: all tied to the
Drum by a little string.
The first an Hammer called, whose out-grown sides
Lie on the drum; but with his swelling end
Fixed in the hollow Stithe, there fast abides:
The Stithes short foot does on the drum depend,
His longer in the Stirrup surely placed;
The Stirrups sharp side by the Stithe embraced,
But his broad base ti'd to a little window fast.
44
These are two small passages, admitting the sounds into the head, and
cleansing the air.
Two little windows ever open lie,
The sound unto the caves third part convaying;
And slender pipe, whose narrow cavitie
Does purge the in-born air, that idle staying
Would else corrupt, and still supplies the spending:
The caves third part in twenty by-ways bending,
Is called the Labyrinth, in hundred crooks ascending.
45
Such whilome was that eye-deceiving frame,
Which crafty Daedal with a cunning hand
Built to empound the Cretan Princes shame:
Such was that Woodstock cave, where Rosamand,
Fair Rosamand, fled jealous Ellenore;
Whom late a shepherd taught to weep so sore,
That woods and hardest rocks her harder fate deplore.
46
The third part with his narrow rockie straits
Perfects the sound, and gives more sharp accenting;
Then sends it to the The last passage is called the Cochlea, snail, or
Periwincle; where the nerves of hearing plainly appear.
fourth; where ready waits
A nimble poast, who never his haste relenting,
Flings to the judgment seat with speedy flight:
There the equal Judge attending day and night,
Receives the entering sounds, and dooms each voice aright.
47
As when a stone, troubling the quiet waters,
Prints in the angry stream a wrinkle round,
Which soon another and another scatters,
Till all the lake with circles now is crowned:
All so the air struck with some violence nigh,
Begets a world of circles in the sky;
All which infected move with sounding quality.
48
These at Auditus palace soon arriving,
Enter the gate, and strike the warning drum;
To those three instruments fit motion giving,
Which every voice discern: then that third room
Sharpens each sound, and quick conveys it thence;
Till by the flying poast it is hurried hence,
And in an instant brought unto the judging sense.
49
This sense is made the Master of request,
Prefers petitions to the Princes ear,
Admits what best he likes, shuts out the rest;
And sometimes cannot, sometimes will not hear:
Ofttimes he lets in anger-stirring lies,
Often melts the Prince with oily flatteries.
Ill might he thrive, that loves his Masters enemies!
50
'Twixt Visus double court a Tower stands,
Placed in the Suburbs center; whose high top,
And lofty raised ridge the rest commands:
Low at his foot a double door stands open,
Admitting passage to the aires ascending;
And diverse odours to the City sending,
Revives the heavy town, his liberal sweets dispending.
51
This vaulted Tower's half built of massy stone,
The other half of stuff less hard and dry,
Fit for distending, or compression:
The outward wall may seem all porphyrie.
The sense of smelling.
Olfactus dwells within this lofty fort;
But in the city is his chief resort,
Where 'twixt two little hills he keeps his judging court.
52
By two great caves are placed these These are those two little bunches like
paps, or teats, spoken of the 15 Stanz. of this Cant.
little hills,
Most like the nipples of a virgins breast;
By which the air that the hollow Tower fills,
Into the City passes: with the rest
The odours pressing in are here all staid;
Till by the sense impartially weighed,
Unto the common Judge they are with speed conveyed.
53
At each side of that Tower stand two fair plains,
More fair then that which in rich Thessalie
Was once frequented by the Muses trains:
Here ever sits sweet-blushing Modesty;
Here in two colors Beauty shining bright,
Dressing her white with red, her red with white,
With pleasing chain enthralls, and binds loose wandering sight.
54
Below, a cave rooft with an Gustus, or the taste is in the palate, which in
the Greek is called the heaven.
heav'n-like plaster,
And under strewn with purple tapestrie,
Where Gustus dwells, the Isles and Princes Taster,
Koilia's Steward, one of the Pemptarchie;
Taste is a kind of touch, nor can it exist but by touching.
Whom Tactus (so some say) got of his mother:
For by their nearest likeness one to the other,
Tactus may easily seem his father, and his brother.
55
Tactus or the sense of touching.
Tactus the last, but yet the eldest brother;
(Whose office meanest, yet of all the race
The first and last, more needful then the other)
Has his abode in none, yet every place:
Through all the Isle distended is his dwelling;
He rules the streams that from the Cephal swelling
Run all along the Isle, both sense and motion dealing.
56
With Gustus Lingua dwells, his prattling wife,
Indu'd with strange and adverse qualities;
The nurse of hate and love, of peace and strife,
Mother of fairest truth, and foulest lies:
Or best, or worst; no mean: made all of fire,
Which sometimes hell, and sometimes heavens inspire;
By whom often Truth self speaks, often that first murdering liar.
57
The idle Sun stood still at her command,
Breathing his fiery steeds in Gibeon:
And pale-faced Cynthia at her word made stand,
Resting her coach in vales of Aialon.
Her voice often open breaks the stubborn skies,
And holds the Almighties hands with suppliant cries:
Her voice tears open hell with horrid blasphemies.
58
Therefore that great Creator, well foreseeing
To what a monster she would soon be changing,
(Though lovely once, perfect and glorious being)
Curbed her with iron The Tongue is held with a ligament, ordinarily called the
bridle.
bit, and held from ranging;
And with strong bonds her looser steps enchaining,
Bridled her course, too many words refraining,
And doubled all his guards, bold liberty restraining.
59
The Tongue is guarded with thirty two teeth, and with the lips* all which do
not a little help the speech, and sweeten the voice.
For close within he sets twice sixteen guarders,
Whose hardened temper could not soon be moved:
Without the gate he placed two other warders,
To shut and open the door, as it behooved:
But such strange force has her enchanting art,
That she has made her keepers of her part,
And they to all her slights all furtherance impart.
60
Thus (with their help) by her the sacred Muses
Refresh the Prince dulled with much business;
By her the Prince unto his Prince often uses
In heav'ly throne from hell to find access.
She heaven to earth in music often brings,
And earth to heaven: but oh how sweet she sings,
When in rich graces key she tunes poor natures strings!
61
Thus Orpheus wanne his lost Eurydice;
Whom some deaf snake, that could no music hear,
Or some blind neut, that could no beauty see,
Thinking to kiss, killed with his forked spear:
He, when his plaints on earth were vainly spent,
Down to Avernus river boldly went,
And charmed the meager ghosts with mournful blandishment.
62
There what his mother, fair Calliope,
From Phoebus harp and Muses spring had brought him,
What sharpest grief for his Eurydice,
And love redoubling grief had newly taught him,
He lavisht out, and with his potent spell
Bent all the rigorous powers of stubborn hell:
He first brought pity down with rigid ghosts to dwell.
63
The Amazed shades came flocking round about,
Nor cared they now to pass the Stygian ford:
All hell came running there, (an hideous rout)
And dropped a silent tear for every word:
The aged Ferrieman should out his boat;
But that without his help did thither float;
And having taken him in, came dancing on the moat.
64
The hungry Tantal might have filled him now,
And with large draughts swill'd in the standing pool:
The fruit hung listening on the wondering bough,
Forgetting hells command; but he (ah fool!)
Forgot his starved taste, his ears to fill.
Ixions turning wheel unmoved stood still;
But he was rapt as much with powerful musicks skill.
65
Tired Sisyphus sat on his resting stone,
And hoped at length his labor done for ever:
The vulture feeding on his pleasing moan,
Glutted with music, scorned grown Tityus liver:
The Furies flung their snakie whips away,
And molt in tears at his enchanting lay,
No shrieches now were heard; all hell kept holy day.
66
That treble Dog, whose voice never quiet fears
All that in endless nights sad kingdom dwell,
Stood pricking up his thrice two listening ears,
With greedy joy drinking the sacred spell;
And softly whining, piti'd much his wrongs;
And now first silent at those dainty songs,
Often wished himself more ears, and fewer mouths and tongues.
67
At length returned with his Eurydice,
But with this law, not to return his eyes,
Till he was past the laws of Tartarie;
(Alas! who gives love laws in miseries?
Love is loves law; love but to love is ti'd)
Now when the dawns of neighbor day he spied,
Ah wretch! Eurydice he saw, and lost, and di'd.
68
All so who strives from grave of hellish night
To bring his dead soul to the joyful sky;
If when he comes in view of heavenly light,
He turns again to hell his yielding eye,
And longs to see what he had left; his sore
Grows desperate, deeper, deadlier then before:
His helps and hopes much less, his crime and judgment more.
69
But why do I enlarge my tedious song,
And tire my flagging Muse with weary flight?
Ah! much I fear I hold you much too long.
The outward parts be plain to every sight:
But to describe the people of this Isle,
And that great Prince, these reeds are all too vile:
Some higher verse may fit, and some more lofty style.
70
See, Phlegon drenched in the hizzing main,
Allayes his thirst, and cools the flaming carre;
Vesper fair Cynthia ushers, and her train:
See, the apish earth has lighted many a star,
Sparkling in dewie globes: all home invite:
Home then my flocks, home shepherds, home; it is night:
My song with day is done; my Muse is set with light.
71
By this the gentle boys had framed well
A myrtle garland mixed with conquering bay,
From whose fit match issued a pleasing smell,
And all enameled it with roses gay;
With which they crown their honored Thirsils head:
Ah blessed shepherd-swain! ah happy meed!
While all his fellows chaunt on slender pipes of reed.
CANT. VI.
THe hours had now unlockt the gate of day,
When fair Aurora leaves her frosty bed,
Hasting with youthful Cephalus to play,
Unmaskt her face, and rosy beauties spread:
Tithonus silver age was much despised.
Ah! who in love that cruel law devised,
That old love's little worth, and new too highly prized?
2
The gentle shepherds on an hillock placed,
(Whose shadie head a beechie garland crowned)
Viewed all their flocks that on the pastures grazed:
Then down they sit, while Thenot 'gins the round;
Thenot! was never fairer boy among
The gentle lads, that in the Muses throng
By Chamus yellow streams learn tune their pipe and song.
3
See, Thirsil, see the shepherds expectation;
Why then, (ah!) why sitt'st thou so silent there?
We long to know that Islands happy nation:
Oh! do not leave thy Isle unpeopled here.
Tell us who brought, and whence these colonies;
Who is their King, what foes, and what allies;
What laws maintain their peace, what wars and victories.
4
Thenot, my dear, that simple fisher-swain,
Whose little boat in some small river strayes;
Yet fondly lanches in the swelling main,
Soon, yet too late, repents his foolish plays.
How dare I then forsake my well-set bounds,
Whose new-cut pipe as yet but harshly sounds?
A narrow compass best my ungrown Muse impounds.
5
Two shepherds most I love with just adoring;
That Mantuan swain, who changed his slender reed
To trumpets martial voice, and wars loud roaring,
From Corydon to Turnus derring-deed;
And next our homebred Colins sweetest firing;
Their steps not following close, but far admiring:
To lackey one of these is all my prides aspiring.
6
Then you my peers, whose quiet expectation
Seems my backward tale would fain invite;
Deigne gently hear this purple Islands nation,
A people never seen, yet still in sight;
Our daily guests, and natives, yet unknown;
Our servants born, but now commanders grown;
Our friends, and enemies; aliens, yet still our own.
7
Not like those Heroes, who in better times
This happy Island first inhabited
In joy and peace; when no rebellious crimes
That God-like nation yet dispeop'led:
Those claimed their birth from that eternal Light,
Held the Isle, and ruled it in their fathers right,
And in their faces bore their parents image bright.
8
For when the Isle that main would fond forsake,
In which at first it found a happy place,
And deep was plunged in that dead hellish lake;
Back to their father flew this heavenly race,
And left the Isle forlorn, and desolate,
That now with fear, and wishes all too late,
Sought in that blackest wave to hide his blacker fate.
9
How shall a worm, on dust that crawls and feeds,
Climb to the empyreall court, where these states reign,
And there take view of what heavens self exceeds?
The Sun less stars, these lights the Sun distain:
Their beams divine, and beauties do excel
What here on earth, in air, or heaven do dwell:
Such never eye yet saw, such never tongue can tell.
10
Soon as these Saints the treacherous Isle forsook,
Rusht in a false, foul, fiend-like company,
And every fort, and every castle took;
All to this rabble yield the soveraigntie:
The goodly temples which those Heroes placed,
By this foul rout were utterly defaced,
And all their fences strong, and all their bulwarks razed.
11
So where the neatest Badger most abides,
Deep in the earth she frames her pretty cell,
And into halls and closulets divides:
But when the stinking fox with loathsome smell
Infects her pleasant cave, the cleanly beast
So hates her inmate and rank-smelling guest,
That far away she flies, and leaves her loathed nest.
12
But when those Graces (at their fathers throne
Arrived) in heavens high Court to Justice plained,
How they were wronged, and forced from their own,
And what foul people in their dwellings reigned;
How the earth much waxt in ill, much wan'd in good,
So full-ripe vice, how blasted virtues bud,
Begging such vicious weeds might sink in vengefull flood:
13
Forth stepped the just Dicaea, full of rage;
(The firstborn daughter of the Almighty King)
Ah sacred maid, thy kindled ire assuage;
Who dare abide thy dreadful thundering?
Soon as her voice but Father only spoke,
The faultlesse heavens, like leaves in Autumn, shake;
And all that glorious throng with horrid palsies quake.
14
Heard you not See that sweet poem entitled Christ's victory and triumph.
part. 1. stan. 18.
late, with what loud trumpet sound
Her breath awaked her fathers sleeping ire?
The heavenly armies flamed, earth shook; heaven frowned,
And heavens dread King called for his three-forkt fire.
Hark how the powerful words strike through the ear;
The frighted sense shoots up the staring hair,
And shakes the trembling soul with fright and shudd'ring fear.
15
So have I seen the earth strong winds detaining.
In prison close; they scorning to be under
Her dull subjection, and her power disdaining,
With horrid struglings tear their bonds in sunder:
Mean while the wounded earth, that forced their stay,
With terror reels, the hills run far away;
And frighted world fears hell breaks out upon the day.
16
But see how 'twixt her sister and her sire,
Soft-hearted Mercy sweetly interposing,
Settles her panting breast against his fire,
Pleading for grace, and chains of death unloosing:
Hark, from her lips the melting honey flows;
The striking Thunderer recals his blows,
And every armed soldier down his weapon throws.
17
So when the day, wrapped in a cloudie night,
Puts out the Sun, anon the rattling hail
On earth poures down his shot with fell despite:
His powder spent, the Sun puts off his vail,
And fair his flaming beauties now unsteeps;
The plough-man from his bushes gladly peeps,
And hidden traveller out of his covert creeps.
18
Ah fairest maid, best essence of thy father,
Equal unto thy never equaled sire;
How in low verse shall thy poor shepherd gather,
What all the world can never enough admire?
When thy sweet eyes sparkle in cheerful light,
The brightest day grows pale as leaden night,
And heavens bright burning eye loses his blinded sight.
19
Who then those sugared strains can understand,
Which calmed thy father, and our desperate fears;
And charmed the nimble lightning in his hand,
That all unwares it dropped in melting tears?
Then thou dear A book entitled Christ's victory and triumph.
swain, thy heavenly load unfraught;
For she her self has thee her speeches taught;
So near her heaven they be, so far from humane thought.
20
But let my lighter skiffe return again
Unto that little Isle which late it left,
Nor dare to enter in that boundless main,
Or tell the nation from this Island reft;
But sing that civil strife, and home dissension
'Twixt two strong factions with like fierce contention;
Where never peace is heard, nor ever peaces mention.
21
For that foul rout, which from the Stygian brook
(Where first they dwelt in midst of death and night)
By force the left and empty Island took,
Claim hence full conquest, and possessions right:
But that fair band, which Mercy sent anew,
The ashes of that first heroic crew,
From their forefathers claim their right, and Islands due.
22
In their fair look their parents grace appears,
Yet their renowned sires were much more glorious;
For what decaies not with decaying years?
All night, and all the day, with toil laborious,
(In loss and conquest angry) fresh they fight:
Nor can the other cease or day or night,
While the Isle is doubly rent with endless war and fright.
23
As when the Britain and Iberian fleet
With resolute and fearlesse expectation
On trembling seas with equal fury meet,
The shore resounds with diverse acclamation;
Till now at length Spains fiery Dons 'gin shrink:
Down with their ships, hope, life, and courage sink:
Courage, life, hope, and ships the gaping surges drink.
24
But who (alas!) shall teach my ruder breast
The names and deeds of these heroic Kings?
Or downy Muse, which now but left the nest,
Mount from her bush to heaven with newborn wings?
Thou sacred maid, which from fair Palestine
Through all the world have spread thy brightest shine
Kindle thy shepherd-swain with thy light flaming eyn.
25
Sacred Thespio, which in Sinaies grove
First took'st thy being and immortal breath,
And vaunt'st thy offspring from the highest Jove,
Yet deign'dst to dwell with mortals here beneath,
With vilest earth, and men more vile residing;
Come holy Virgin in my bosom sliding,
With thy glad Angel light my blindfold footsteps guiding.
26
And thou dread Spirit, which at first did spread
On those dark waters thy all-opening light;
Thou who of late (of thy great bounty head)
This nest of hellish fogges and Stygian night
With thy bright orient Sun have fair renewed,
And with unwonted day have it endu'd,
Which late both day and thee, and most it self eschew'd:
27
Dread Spirit, do thou those several bands unfold,
Both which thou sent'st a needful supplement
To this lost Isle, and which with courage bold
Hourly assail thy rightful regiment;
And with strong hand oppress and keep them under:
Raise now my humble vein to lofty thunder,
That heaven and earth may sound, resound thy praises wonder.
28
The Islands Prince, of frame more then celestial,
Is rightly called the all-seeing Intellect;
All glorious bright, such nothing is terrestrial;
Whose Sun-like face, and most divine aspect
No humane sight may ever hope descrie:
For when himself on's self reflects his eye,
Dull and amazed he stands at so bright majesty.
29
Look as the Sun, whose ray and searching light
Here, there, and every where it self displayes,
No nook or corner flies his piercing sight;
Yet on himself when he reflects his rays,
Soon back he flings the too bold vent'ring gleam;
Down to the earth the flames all broken stream:
Such is this famous Prince, such his unpierced beam.
30
His strangest body is not bodily,
But matter without matter; never filled,
Nor filling; though within his compass high
All heaven and earth, and all in both are held;
Yet thousand thousand heavens he could contain,
And still as empty as at first remain;
And when he takes in most, readi'st to take again.
31
Though traveling all places, changing none:
Bid him soar up to heaven, and thence down throwing
The center search, and Dis dark realm; he is gone,
Returns, arrives, before thou saw him going:
And while his weary kingdom safely sleeps,
All restless night he watch and warding keeps,
Never his careful head on resting pillow steeps.
32
In every quarter of this blessed Isle
Himself both present is, and President;
Nor once retires, (ah happy realm the while,
That by no Officers lewd lavishment,
With greedy lust, and wrong consumed art!)
He all in all, and all in every part,
Does share to each his due, and equal dole impart.
33
He knows nor death, nor years, nor feeble age;
But as his time, his strength and vigor grows:
And when his kingdom by intestine rage
Lies broke and wasted, open to his foes,
And battered sconce now flat and even lies;
Sooner then thought to that great Judge he flies,
Who weighs him just reward of good, or injuries.
34
For he the Judges Viceroy here is placed;
Where if he live, as knowing he may die,
He never dies, but with fresh pleasures graced,
Bathes his crowned head in soft eternity;
Where thousand joys, and pleasures ever new,
And blessings thicker then the morning dew,
With endless sweets rain down on that immortal crew.
35
There golden stars set in the crystal snow;
There dainty joys laugh at white-headed caring:
There day no night, delight no end shall know;
Sweets without surfeit, fullness without sparing,
And by its spending growing happiness:
There God himself in glories lavishnesse
Diffused in all, to all, is all full blessedness.
36
But if he here neglect his Masters law,
And with those traitors against his Lord rebels;
Down to the deeps ten thousand fiends him draw,
Deeps, where night, death, despair and horror dwells;
And in worst ills, still worse expecting fears:
Where fell despite for spite his bowels tears,
And still increasing grief, and torment never wears.
37
Prayers there are idle, death is wooed in vain;
In midst of death poor wretches long to die:
Night without day or rest, still doubling pain;
Woes spending still, yet still their end less nigh:
The soul there restless, helpless, hopeless lies;
The body frying roars, and roaring fries:
There Is life that never lives, there is death that never dies.
38
Hence while unsettled here he fighting reigns,
Shut in a Tower where thousand enemies
Assault the fort, with wary care and pains
He guards all entrance, and by diverse spies
Searches into his foes and friends designs:
For most he fears his subjects wavering minds.
This Tower then only falls, when treason undermines.
39
Therefore while yet he lurks in earthly tent,
Disguised in worthless robes and poor attire,
Try we to view his glories wonderment,
And get a sight of what we so admire:
For when away from this sad place he flies,
And in the skies abides, more bright then skies,
Too glorious is his sight for our dim mortal eyes.
40
So curl'd-head Thetis, waters feared Queen,
But bound in cauls of sand, yields not to sight;
And planets glorious King may best be seen,
When some thin cloud dimmes his too piercing light,
And neither none, nor all his face discloses:
For when his bright eye full our eye opposes,
None gains his glorious sight, but his own sight he loses.
41
Within the Castle sit eight Counselors,
That help him in this tent to govern well:
Each in his room a several office bears;
Three of his inmost private counsel deal
In great affairs: five of less dignity
Have outward Courts, and in all actions pry,
But still refer the doom to Courts more fit and high.
42
Those The five senses.
five fair brethren which I sung of late,
For their just number called the Pemptarchie;
The other three, three pillars of the state:
The The commen sense.
first in midst of that high Tower does lie,
(The chiefest mansion of this glorious King)
The Judge and Arbiter of every thing,
Which those five brethrens poasts in to his office bring.
43
Of middle years, and seemly personage,
Father of laws, the rule of wrong and right;
Fountain of judgment, therefore wondrous sage,
Discreet, and wise, of quick and nimble sight:
Not those seven Sages might him parallel,
Nor he whom Pythian Maid did whilome tell
To be the wisest man that then on earth did dwell.
44
As Neptunes cestern sucks in tribute tides
(Yet never full) which every chanel brings,
And thirsty drinks, and drinking thirsty bides;
For by some hidden way back to the springs
It sends the streams in erring conduits spread,
Which with a circling duty still are led;
So ever feeding them, is by them ever fed:
45
Even so the first of these three Counselors
Gives to the five the power of all-descrying;
Which back to him with mutual duty bears
All their informings, and the causes trying:
For through strait ways the nimble Poast ascends
Unto his hall; there up his message sends,
Which to the next well scanned he straightway recommends.
46
The The fancy.
next that in the Castles front is placed,
Phantastes hight; his years are fresh and green,
His visage old, his face too much defaced
With ashes pale, his eyes deep sunken been
With often thoughts, and never slackt intention:
Yet he the fount of speedy apprehension,
Father of wit, the well of arts, and quick invention.
47
But in his private thoughts and busy brain
Thousand thin forms, and idle fancies flit;
The three-shap't Sphinx, and direful Harpyes train,
Which in the world had never being yet:
Often dreams of fire and water, loose delight;
And often arrested by some ghastly sprite,
Nor can he think, nor speak, nor move for great affright.
48
Phantastes from the first all shapes deriving,
In new abiliments can quickly dight;
Of all material and gross parts depriving,
Fits them unto the noble Princes sight;
Which soon as he has viewed with searching eye,
He straight commits them to his Treasury,
Which old Eumnestes keeps, Father of memory.
49
Eumnestes old, who in his living screen
(His mindful breast) the rolls and records bears
Of all the deeds, and men, which he has seen,
And keeps locked up in faithful Registers:
Well he recalls Nimrods first tyranny,
And Babels pride daring the lofty sky;
Well he recalls the earths twice-growing infancy.
50
Therefore his body weak, his eyes halfblinde,
But mind more fresh, and strong; (ah better fate!)
And as his carcass, so his house declined;
Yet were the walls of firm and able state:
Only on him a nimble Page attends,
Who when for ought the aged Grandsire sends,
With swift, yet backward steps, his helping aidance lends.
51
But let my song pass from these worthy Sages
Unto this Islands highest The understanding.
Sovereign,
And those hard wars which all the year he wages:
For these three late a gentle shepherd-swain
Most sweetly sung, as he before had seen
In Alma's house: his memory yet green
Lives in his well-tuned songs, whose leaves immortal been.
52
Nor can I guess, whether his Muse divine
Or gives to those, or takes from them his grace;
Therefore Eumnestes in his lasting shrine
Has justly him enrolled in second place:
Next to our Mantuan poet does he rest;
There shall our Colin live for ever blessed,
Spite of those thousand spites, which living him oppressed.
53
The Prince his time in double office spends:
For first those forms and fancies he admits,
Which to his Court busy Phantastes sends,
And for the easier discerning fits:
For shedding round about his sparkling light,
He cleares their duskie shades, and cloudy night,
Producing like himself their shapes all shining bright.
54
As when the Sun restores the glittering day,
The world late clothed in nights black livery,
Does now a thousand colors fair display,
And paints it self in choice variety,
Which late one color hid, the eye deceiving;
All so this Prince those shapes obscure receiving,
With his suffused light makes ready to conceiving.
55
This first is called the Active Faculty,
Which to an higher power the object leaves:
That takes it in it self, and cunningly
Changing it self, the object soon perceives:
For straight it self in self same shape adorning,
Becomes the same with quick and strange transforming;
So is all things it self, to all it self conforming.
56
Thus when the eye through Visus jettie ports
Lets in the wandering shapes, the crystal strange
Quickly it self to every sort consorts,
So is what e're it sees by wondrous change:
Thrice happy then, when on that 2. Cor. 3.18.
mirror bright
He ever fastens his unmoved sight,
So is what there he views; divine, full, glorious light.
57
Soon as the Prince these forms has clearly seen,
Parting the false from true, the wrong from right,
He straight presents them to his beauteous Queen,
Whose Courts are lower, yet of equal might;
The will.
Voletta fair, who with him lives, and reigns;
Whom neither man, nor fiend, nor God constrains:
Often good, often ill, often both; yet ever free remains.
58
Not that great Sovereign of the Fayrie land,
Whom late our Colin has eternized,
(Though Graces decking her with plenteous hand,
Themselves of grace have all unfurnished;
Though in her breast she Virtues temple bare,
The fairest temple of a guest so fair)
Not that great Glorians self with this might e're compare.
59
Her radiant beauty, daz'ling mortal eye,
Strikes blind the daring sense; her sparkling face
Her husbands self now cannot well descrie:
With such strange brightness, such immortal grace,
Has that great parent in her cradle made,
That Cynthia's silver cheek would quickly fade,
And light it self to her would seem a painted shade.
60
But (ah!) entic't by her own worth and pride,
She stained her beauty with most loathsome spot;
Her Lords fixed law, and spouses light denied,
So filled her spouse and self with leprous blot:
And now all dark is their first morning ray.
What verse might then their former light display,
When yet their darkest night outshines the brightest day?
61
On her a royal damsel still attends,
And faithful Counselor, Conscience.
Synteresis:
For though Voletta ever good intends,
Yet by fair ills she often deceived is;
By ills so fairly dressed with cunning slight,
That Virtues self they well may seem to sight,
But that bright Virtues self often seems not half so bright.
62
Therefore Synteresis of nimble sight,
Often helps her doubtful hand, and erring eye;
Else might she ever stumbling in this night
Fall down as deep as deepest Tartarie:
Nay thence a sad-fair maid, Repentance, rears,
And in her arms her fainting Lady bears,
Washing her often stains with ever-falling tears.
63
Thereto she adds a water sovereign,
Of wondrous force, and skillful composition:
For first she pricks the heart in tender vein,
Then from those precious drops, and deep contrition,
With lips confession, and with pickled cries,
Stilled in a broken spirit, sad vapors rise,
Exhaled by sacred fires, and drop through melting eyes.
64
These cordial drops, these spirit-healing balms
Cure all her sinful bruises, clear her eyes,
Unlock her ears, recover fainting qualms:
And now grown fresh and strong, she makes her rise,
And glass of unmaskt sin she bright displaies,
Whereby she sees, loathes, mends her former ways;
So soon repairs her light, trebling her newborn rays.
65
But (ah!) why do we (simple as we been)
With curious labor, dim and veiled sight,
Pry in the nature of this King and Queen,
Groping in darkness for so clear a light?
A light which once could not be thought or told,
But now with blackest clouds is thick enrolled,
Pressed down in captive chains, and pent in earthly mold.
66
Rather lament we this their wretched fate,
(Ah wretched fate, and fatal wretchedness!)
Unlike those former days, and first estate,
When he espoused with melting happiness
To fair Voletta, both their lights conspiring,
He saw what e're was fit for her requiring,
And she to his clear sight would temper her desiring.
67
When both replenisht with celestial light,
All coming evils could foresee and fly;
When both with clearest eye, and perfect sight
Could every natures difference descrie:
Whose pictures now they scarcely see with pain,
Obscure and dark, like to those shadows vain,
Which thin and empty glide along Avernus plain.
68
The flowers that frighted with sharp winters dread,
Retire into their mother Tellus womb,
Yet in the Spring in troops new mustered
Peep out again from their unfrozen tomb:
The early Violet will fresh arise,
And spreading his flour'd purple to the skies,
Boldly the little elf the winters spite defies.
69
The hedge green Satin pinkt and cut arayes,
The Heliotrope to cloth of gold aspires;
In hundred-colour'd silks the Tulip plays,
The Imperial flower his neck with pearl attires,
The Lily high her silver Grogram reares,
The Pansie her wrought Velvet garment bears;
The red Rose Scarlet, and the Provence Damask wears.
70
How falls it then that such an heavenly light,
As this great Kings, should sink so wondrous low,
That scarce he can suspect his former height?
Can one eclipse so dark his shining brow,
And steal away his beauty glittering fair?
One only blot so great a light empair,
That never could he hope his waning to repair?
71
Ah! never could he hope once to repair
So great a wane, should not that newborn Sun
Adopt him both his brother and his heir;
Who through base life, and death, and hell would run,
To seat him in his lost, now surer cell.
That he may mount to heaven, he sunk to hell;
That he might live, he di'd; that he might rise, he fell.
72
A perfect Virgin breeds and bears a Son,
The immortal father of his mortal mother;
Earth, heaven, flesh, spirit, man, God, are met in one:
His younger brothers child, his childrens brother,
Eternity, who yet was born and di'd;
His own creator, earths scorn, heavens pride;
Who the deity inflesht, and man's flesh deifi'd.
73
Thou uncreated Sun, heavens glory bright,
Whom we with knees and hearts low bent adore;
At rising, perfect, and now falling, light;
Ah what reward, what thanks shall we restore?
Thou wretched wast, that we might happy be:
Oh all the good we hope, and all we see,
That we thee know and love, comes from thy love, and thee.
74
Receive, which we can only back return,
(Yet that we may return, thou first must give)
A heart, which fain would smoke, which fain would burn
In praise; for thee, to thee would only live:
And thou (who sat'st in night to give us day)
Light and inflame us with thy glorious ray,
That we may back reflect, and borrowed light repay.
75
So we beholding with immortal eye
The glorious picture of thy heavenly face,
In his first beauty and true Majesty,
May shake from our dull souls these fetters base;
And mounting up to that bright crystal sphere,
Whence thou strik'st all the world with shudd'ring fear,
May not be held by earth, nor hold vile earth so dear.
76
Then should thy shepherd (poorest shepherd) sing
A thousand Canto's in thy heavenly praise,
And rouse his flagging Muse, and fluttering wing,
To chant thy wonders in immortal lays,
(Which once thou wrought'st, when Nilus slimie shore,
Or Iordans banks thy mighty hand adore)
Thy judgments, and thy mercies; but thy mercies more.
77
But see, the stealing night with softly pace,
To fly the Western Sun, creeps up the East;
Cold Hesper 'gins unmask his evening face,
And calls the winking stars from drouzie rest:
Home then my lambs; the falling drops eschew:
To morrow shall ye feast in pastures new,
And with the rising Sun banquet on pearled dew.
CANT. VII.
THe rising morn lifts up his orient head,
And spangled heavens in golden robes invests;
Thirsil up starting from his fearlesse bed,
Where useless nights he safe and quiet rests,
Unhous'd his bleating flock, and quickly thence
Hasting to his expecting audience,
Thus with sad verse began their grieved minds incense:
2
Fond man, that looks on earth for happiness,
And here long seeks what here is never found!
For all our good we hold from heaven by lease,
With many forfeits and conditions bound;
Nor can we pay the fine and rentage due:
Though now but writ, and sealed, and given anew,
Yet daily we it break, then daily must renew.
3
Why should thou here look for perpetual good,
At every loss against heavens face repining?
Do but behold where glorious Cities stood,
With gilded tops, and silver turrets shining;
There now the Heart fearlesse of greyhound feeds,
And loving Pelican in safety breeds;
There shrieching Satyrs fill the peoples empty steads.
4
Where is the Assyrian Lions golden hide,
That all the East once graspt in lordly paw?
Where that great Persian Bear, whose swelling pride
The Lions self tore out with ravenous jaw?
Or he which 'twixt a Lion, and a Pard,
Through all the world with nimble pineons fared,
And to his greedy whelps his conquered kingdoms shared?
5
Hardly the place of such antiquity,
Or note of these great monarchies we find:
Only a fading verbal memory,
And empty name in writ is left behind:
But when this second life, and glory fades,
And sinks at length in times obscurer shades,
A second fall succeeds, and double death invades.
6
That monstrous beast, which nursed in Tibers fenne,
Did all the world with hideous shape affray;
That filled with costly spoil his gaping den,
And trod down all the rest to dust and clay:
His batt'ring horns pulled out by civil hands,
And iron teeth lie scattered on the sands;
Backed, bridled by a Monk, with sev'n heads yoked stands.
7
And that black The Terk.
Vulture, which with deathfull wing
O're-shadows half the earth, whose dismal sight
Frighted the Muses from their native spring,
Already stoops, and flagges with weary flight.
Who then shall look for happiness beneath;
Where each new day proclaims chance, change, and death,
And life it self's as flit as is the air we breathe?
8
Ne might this Prince escape, though he as far
All these excells in worth and heavenly grace,
As brightest Phoebus does the dimmest star:
The deepest falls are from the highest place.
There lies he now bruised with so sore a fall,
To his base bonds, and loathsome prison thrall,
Whom thousand foes besiege, fenced with frail yielding wall.
9
Tell me, oh tell me then, thou holy Muse,
Sacred Thespio, what the cause may be
Of such despite, so many foemen use
To persecute unpiti'd misery:
Or if these cankred foes (as most men say)
So mighty be, that gird this wall of clay;
What makes it hold so long, and threatened ruin stay?
10
When that great Lord his standing Court would build,
The outward walls with gemmes and glorious lights,
But inward rooms with nobler Courtiers filled;
Pure, living flames, swift, mighty, blessed sprites:
But some his royal service (fools!) disdain;
So down were flung: (often bliss is double pain)
In heaven they scorned to serve, so now in hell they reign.
11
There turned to serpents, swollen with pride and hate,
Their Prince a Dragon fell, who burst with spite
To see this Kings and Queens yet happy state,
Tempts them to lust and pride, prevails by slight:
To make them wise, and gods he undertakes.
Thus while the snake they hear, they turn to snakes;
To make them gods he boasts, but beasts, and devils makes.
12
But that great Revel. 5.5.
Lion who in Iudahs plains
The awful beasts holds down in due subjection,
The Dragons craft, and base-got spoil disdains,
And folds this captive Prince in his protection;
Luke 4.18.
Breaks open the jayl, and brings the prisoners thence,
Yet placed them in this castles weak defense,
Where they might trust and seek an higher providence.
13
So now spread round about this little hold,
With armies infinite encamped lie
The enraged Dragon and his Serpents bold:
And knowing well his time grows short and nigh,
He swells with venomed gore and poisonous heat;
Revel. 12.4.
His tail unfolded heaven it self does beat,
And sweeps the mighty stars from their transcendent seat.
14
With him goes The flesh.
Caro, cursed damme of sin,
Foul filthy damme of fouler progeny;
Yet seems (skin-deep) most fair by witching gin
To weaker sight; but to a purged eye
Looks like (nay worse then) hells infernal hagges:
Her empty breasts hang like lank hollow bags,
And Iris ulcer'd skin is patcht with leprous rags.
15
Therefore her loathsome shape in steel arayd,
All rust within, the outside polisht bright:
And on her shield a Mermaid sung and played;
Whose humane beauties 'lure the wandering sight,
But slimy scales hid in their waters lie:
She chants, she smiles, so draws the ear, the eye,
And whom she winnes, she kills: the word, Hear, gaze, and die.
16
And after march her fruitful serpent fry,
Whom she of diverse lechers diverse bore;
Marshalled in several ranks their colors fly:
The fruits of the flesh are described Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. and may be ranked
into four companies, 1. of Unchastitie. 2. of Irreligion. 3. of
Unrighteousness 4. of Intemperance.
Four to Anagnus, four this painted whore
To loathsome Asebie brought forth to light;
Twice four got Adisus, a hateful wight;
But swollen Acrates two, born in one bed, and night.
17
Adultery. Gal. 5.19.
Moechus the first, of blushlesse bold aspect;
Yet with him Doubt and Fear still trembling go:
Often looked he back, as if he did suspect
The approach of some unwisht, unwelcome foe:
Behind, fell Jealousy his steps observed,
And sure Revenge, with dart that never swerved:
Ten thousand griefs and plagues he felt, but more deserved.
18
His armor black as hell, or starlesse night;
And in his shield he lively portrayed bare
Mars fast impound in arms of Venus light,
And ti'd as fast in Vulcans subtle snare:
She feigned to blush for shame now all too late;
But his red color seemed to sparkle hate:
Sweet are stolen waters, round about the marge he wrate.
19
Fornication.
Porneius next him pac't, a meager wight;
Whose leaden eyes sunk deep in swimming head,
And joylesse look, like some pale ashie spright,
Seemed as he now were dying, or now dead:
And with him Wastefulnesse, that all expended,
And Want, that still in theft and prison ended:
A hundred foul diseases close at's back attended.
20
His shining helm might seem a sparkling flame,
Yet sooth naught was it but a foolish fire:
And all his arms were of that burning frame,
That flesh and bones were gnawn with hot desire:
About his wrist his blazing shield did fry
With sweltring hearts in flame of luxury:
His word, In fire I live, in fire I burn and die.
21
With him Sodomie. Romans 1.26, 27. Levit. 20.15, 16.
Acatharus in Tuscan guise;
A thing, that neither man will own, nor beast:
Upon a boy he leaned in wanton wise,
On whose fair limbs his eyes still greedy feast;
He sports, he toys, kisses his shining face:
Behind, reproach and thousand devils pace;
Before, bold Impudence, that cannot change her grace.
22
His armor seemed to laugh with idle boys,
Which all about their wanton sportings played;
All Is would himself help out their childish toys,
And like a boy lend them unmanly aid:
In his broad targe the bird her wings dispread,
Which trussing wafts the Trojan Ganymed:
And round was writ, Like with his like is coupeled.
23
Lasciviousness.
Aselges followed next, the boldest boy,
That ever played in Venus wanton court:
He little cares who notes his lavish joy;
Broad were his jests, wild his uncivil sport;
His fashion too too fond, and loosly light:
A long love-lock on his left shoulder plight,
Like to a woman's hair, well showed a woman's sprite.
24
Lust in strange nests this Cuckoe egg conceived;
Which nursed with surfets, dressed with fond disguises,
In fancies school his breeding first received:
So this brave spark to wilder flame arises;
And now to court preferred, high bloods he fires,
There blows up pride, vain mirths and loose desires;
And heavenly souls (oh grief!) with hellish flame inspires.
25
There often to rivalls lends the gentle Dor,
Often takes (his mistress by) the bitter Bob:
There learns her each days change of Gules, Verd, Or,
(His sampler) if she pouts, her slave must sob:
Her face his sphere, her hair his circling sky;
Her love his heaven, her sight eternity:
Of her he dreams, with her he lives, for her he will die.
26
Upon his arm a tinsell scarf he wore,
Forsooth his Madams favor, spangled fair:
Light as himself, a fan his helmet bore,
With ribbons dressed, begged from his Mistress hair:
On's shield a winged boy all naked shined;
His folded eyes willing and wilful blind:
The word was wrought with gold, Such is a lovers mind.
27
These four, Anagnus and foul Caro's sons,
Who led a different, and disordered rout;
Fancy, a lad that all in feathers wons,
And loose desire, and danger linkt with doubt;
And thousand wanton thoughts still budding new:
But lazy ease ushered the idle crew;
And lame disease shuts up their troops with torments due.
28
Next band by Asebie was boldly led,
And his four sons, begot in Stygian night:
First Idolatry, either by worshipping the true God by false worship; as by
images, against the second commandment: or giving away his worship to any thing
that is not God, against the first.
Idololatros, whose monstrous head
Was like an ugly fiend, his flaming sight
Like blazing stars; the rest all different:
For to his shape some part each creature lent,
But to the great Creator all adversly bent.
29
Upon his breast a bloody Cross he scor'd,
Which often he worshipped; but the Christ that di'd
Thereon, he seldom but in paint adored;
Yet wood, stone, beasts, wealth, lusts, fiends deifi'd:
He makes mere pageants of the Psalm. 62.7.
saving Rock,
Puppet-like trimming his Almighty stock:
Which then, his god or he, which is the verier block?
30
Of Giant shape, and strength thereto agreeing,
Wherewith he whilome all the world oppressed;
And yet the greater part his vassals being,
Slumbring in ignorance, securely rest:
A golden calf (himself more beast) he bore;
Which brutes with dancings, gifts, and songs adore:
Idols are laymens books, he round had wrote in Ore.
31
Next Witchcraft and curious arts.
Pharmacus, of gashly wild aspect;
Whom hell with seeming fear, and fiends obey:
Full easily would he know each past effect,
And things to come with double guess foresay,
By slain beasts entrails, and fowls marked flight:
Thereto he tempests raised by many a spright,
And charmed the Sun and Moon, and changed the day and night.
32
So when the South (dipping his fablest wings
In humid Ocean) sweeps with his dropping beard
The air, earth, and seas; his lips loud thunderings
And flashing eyes make all the world afeard:
Light with dark clouds, waters with fires are met:
The Sun but now is rising, now is set;
And finds west-shades in East, and seas in ayers wet.
33
By birth, and hand, he juggling fortunes tells;
Often brings from shades his grandsires damned ghost;
Often stolen goods forces out by wicked spells:
His frightfull shield with thousand fiends embost,
Which seemed without a circles ring to play:
In midst himself dampens the smiling day,
And prints sad characters, which none may write, or say.
34
The third Heresy.
Haereticus, a wrangling carle,
Who in the way to heaven would wilful err;
And often convicted, still would snatch and snarle:
His Crambe often repeats; all tongue, no ear.
Him obstinacy, Pride, and Scorn attended:
On's shield with Truth Error disguised contended:
His Motto this, Rather thus err, then be amended.
35
Last marched Hypocrisy, false form of grace,
That vaunts the show of all, has truth of none:
A rotten heart he masks with painted face;
Among the beasts a mule, among bees a drone,
Among stars a meteor: all the world neglects him;
Nor good, nor bad, nor heaven, nor earth affects him:
The earth for glaring forms, for bare forms heaven rejects him.
36
His wanton heart he vails with dewy eyes,
So often the world, and often himself deceives:
His tongue his heart, his hands his tongue belies:
In's path (as snails) silver, but slime he leaves:
He Babels glory is, but Sions taint;
Religions blot, but Irreligions paint:
A Saint abroad, at home a Fiend; and worst a Saint.
37
So tallow lights live glittering, stinking die;
Their gleams aggrate the sight, steams wound the smell:
So Sodom apples please the ravished eye,
But sulphur taste proclaims their root's in hell:
So airy flames to heavenly seem allied;
But when their oil is spent, they swiftly glide,
And into jelly'd mire melt all their gilded pride.
38
So rushes green, smooth, full, are spungie light;
So their ragg'd stones in velvet peaches gown:
So rotten sticks seem stars in cheating night;
So quagmires false their mire with emeralds crown:
Such is Hypocrisies deceitful frame;
A stinking light, a sulphur fruit, false flame,
Smooth rush, hard peach, sere wood, false mire, a voice, a name.
39
Such were his arms, false gold, true alchymie;
Glittering with glassie stones, and fine deceit:
His sword a flattering steel, which gulled the eye,
And pierced the heart with pride and self-conceit:
On's shield a tomb, where death had dressed his bed
With curious art, and crowned his loathsome head
With gold, and gems: his word, More gorgeous when dead.
40
Before them went their nurse, bold Ignorance;
A loathsome monster, light, sight, 'mendment scorning:
Born deaf and blind, fitter to lead the dance
To such a rout; her silver heads adorning
(Her dotage index) much she bragged, yet feigned:
For by false tallies many years she gained.
Wise youth is honored age; fond's age with dotage stained.
41
Her failing legs with erring footsteps reeled;
(Lame guide to bliss!) her daughters on each side
Much pained themselves her stumbling feet to weeld;
Both like their mother, dull and beetle-ey'd:
The first was Error false, who multiplies
Her numerous race in endless progenies:
For but one truth there is, ten thousand thousand lies.
42
Her brood o're-spread her round with sin and blood,
With envy, malice, mischiefs infinite;
While she to see her self amazed stood,
So often got with child and big with spite:
Her offspring fly about and spread their seed;
Straight hate, pride, schism, wars and seditions breed,
Get up, grow ripe. How soon prospers the vicious weed!
43
The other Owl-ey'd Superstition,
Deformed, distorted, blind in shining light;
Yet styles her self holy Devotion,
And so is called, and seems in shadie night:
Fearful, as is the hare, or hunted hind;
Her face and breast she often with crosses signed:
No custom would she break, or change her settled mind.
44
If hare or snake her way, herself she crosses,
And stops her'mazed steps; sad fears affright her,
When falling salt points out some fatal losses,
Till Bacchus grapes with holy sprinkle quite her:
Her only bible is an Erra Pater;
Her antidote are hallowed wax and water:
IN the dark all lights are sprites, all noises chains that clatter.
45
With them marched (sunk in deep security)
Profaneness, to be feared for never fearing;
And by him, new-oaths-coyning Blasphemy,
Who names not God, but in a curse, or swearing:
And thousand other fiends in diverse fashion,
Disposed in several ward, and certain station:
Under, Hell widely yawn'd; and over, flew Damnation.
46
Next Adicus his sons; first Hatred.
Ecthros sly,
Whose prickt-up ears kept open house for lies;
And sleering eyes still watch and wait to spy
When to return still-living injuries:
Fair weather smiled upon his painted face,
And eyes spoke peace, till he had time and place;
Then poures down showers of rage, and streams of rancour base.
47
So when a sable cloud with swelling sail
Comes swimming through calm skies, the silent air
(While fierce winds sleep in Aeols rockie jayl)
With spangled beams embroid'red, glitters fair;
But soon 'gins lowr: straight clatt'ring hail is bred,
Scattering cold shot; light hides his golden head,
And with untimely winter earth's o're-silvered.
48
His arms well suit his mind, where smiling skies
Breed thundering tempests: on his lofty crest
Asleep the spotted Panther couching lies,
And by sweet sents and skin so quaintly dressed,
Draws on her prey: upon his shield he bears
The dreadful monster which great Nilus fears;
(The weeping Crocadile) his word, I kill with tears.
49
With him Dissemblance went, his Paramour,
Whose painted face might hardly be detected:
Arms of offense he seld' or never wore,
Lest thence his close designs might be suspected;
But clasping close his foe, as loath to part,
He steals his dagger with false smiling art,
And sheaths the traitorous steel in his own masters heart.
50
Two Jewish Captains, close themselves enlacing
In loves sweet twines, his target broad displayed;
One the others beard with his left hand embracing,
But in his right a shining sword he swayed,
Which unawares through the others ribs he smites;
There lay the wretch without all burial rites:
His word, He deepest wounds, that in his fawning bites.
51
Variance.
Eris the next, of sex unfit for war:
Her arms were bitter words from flaming tongue,
Which never quiet, wrangle, fight, and jarre;
Ne would she weigh report with right, or wrong:
What once she held, that would she ever hold,
And Non-obstantes force with courage bold:
The last word must she have, or never leave to scold.
52
She is the trumpet to this angry train,
And whets their fury with loud-railing spite:
But when no open foes did more remain,
Against themselves themselves she would incite.
Her clacking mill, driven by her flowing gall,
Could never stand, but chide, rail, bark, and bawl:
Her shield no word could find; her tongue engrost them all.
53
Emulation*
Zelos the third, whose spiteful emulation
Could not endure a fellow in excelling;
Yet slow in any virtues imitation,
At easy rate that fair possession selling:
Still as he went, he hidden sparkles blew,
Till to a mighty flame they sudden grew,
And like fierce lightning all in quick destruction drew.
54
Upon his shield lay that Tirinthian Swain,
Sweltring in fiery gore and poisonous flame;
His wives sad gift venomed with bloody stain:
Well could he bulls, snake, shell, all monsters tame;
Well could he heaven support and prop alone;
But by fell Jealousy soon overthrown,
Without a foe, or sword: his motto, First, or none.
55
Wrath
Thumos the fourth, a dire, revengefull swain;
Whose soul was made of flames, whose flesh of fire:
Wrath in his heart, hate, rage and fury reign;
Fierce was his look, when clad in sparkling tire;
But when dead palenesse in his cheek took seizure,
And all the blood in's boiling heart did treasure,
Then in his wild revenge kept he nor mean, nor measure.
56
Look as when waters walled with brazen wreath
Are sieg'd with crackling flames, their common foe;
The angry seas 'gin foam and hotly breathe,
Then swell, rise, rave, and still more furious grow;
Nor can be held, but forced with fires below,
Tossing their waves, break out and all overflow:
So boiled his rising blood, and dashed his angry brow.
57
For in his face red heat, and ashie cold
Strove which should paint revenge in proper colors:
That, like consuming fire, most dreadful rolled;
This, liker death, threatens all deadly dolours:
His trembling hand a dagger still embraced,
Which in his friend he rashly often encas't:
His shields devise fresh blood with foulest stain defaced.
58
Next him Strife.
Erithius, most unquiet swain,
That all in law and fond contention spent;
Not one was found in all this numerous train,
With whom in any thing he would consent:
His Will his Law, he weighed not wrong or right;
Much scorned to bear, much more forgive a spite:
Patience he the asses load, and cowards Virtue hight.
59
His weapons all were framed of shining gold,
Wherewith he subt'ly fought close under hand:
Thus would he right from right by force withhold,
Nor suits, nor friends, nor laws his slights withstand:
Ah powerful weapon! how do thou bewitch
Great, but base minds, and spott'st with leprous itch,
That never are in thought, nor ever can be rich!
60
Upon his belt (fastened with leather laces)
Black boxes hung, sheaths of his paper-swords;
Filled up with Writs, Sub-poena's, Triall-cases;
This trespast him in cattle, that in words:
Fit his device, and well his shield became,
A Salamander drawn in lively frame:
His word was this, I live, I breathe, I feed in flame.
61
Next after him marched proud Sedition or Schism.
Dichostasis,
That wont but in the factious court to dwell;
But now to shepherd-swains close linked is;
And taught them (fools!) to change their humble cell,
And lowly weed for courts, and purple gay,
To sit aloft, and States and Princes sway:
A hook, no scepter needs our erring sheep to stay.
62
A Miter trebly crowned the Impostour wore;
For heaven, earth, hell he claims with lofty pride.
Not in his lips, but hands, two keys he bore,
Heavens doors and hells to shut, and open wide:
But late his keys are marred, or broken quite:
For hell he cannot shut, but opens light;
Nor heaven can open, but shut; nor buys, but sells by slight.
63
Two heads, often three, he in one body had,
Nor with the body, nor themselves agreeing*
What this commanded, the other soon forbad;
As different in rule, as nature being:
The body to them both, and neither prone,
Was like a double-hearted dealer grown;
Endeavoring to please both parties, pleasing none.
64
As when the powerful wind and adverse tide
Strive which should most command the subject main;
The scornful waves, swelling with angry pride,
Yielding to neither, all their force disdain:
Mean time the shaken vessel doubtful plays,
And on the stagg'ring billow trembling stays,
And would obey them both, and none of both obeyes.
65
A subtle craftsman framed him seemly arms,
Forged in the shop of wrangling sophistry;
And wrought with curious arts, and mighty charms,
Tempered with lies, and false philosophy:
Millions of heedlesse souls thus had he slain.
His sev'n-fold targe a field of Gules did stain;
In which two swords he bore: his word, Divide, and reign.
66
Envy the next, Envy with squinted eyes;
Sick of a strange disease, his neighbors health:
Best lives he then, when any better dies;
Is never poor, but in another wealth:
On best men's harms and griefs he feeds his fill;
Else his own maw does eat with spiteful will.
Ill must the temper be, where diet is so ill.
67
Each eye through diverse optics slily leers,
Which both his sight, and object self belie;
So greatest virtue as a mote appears,
And molehill faults to mountains multiply.
When needs he must, yet faintly, then he praises;
Somewhat the deed, much more the means he raises:
So marreth what he makes, and praising most dispraises.
68
Upon his shield that cruel Herd-groom played,
Fit instrument of Juno's jealous spite;
His hundred eyes stood fixed on the maid;
He pip't, she sighed: his word, Her day my night.
His missile weapon was a lying tongue,
Which he far off like swiftest lightning flung,
That all the world with noise and foul blaspheming rung.
69
Last of this rout the savage Murder.
Phonos went,
Whom his dire mother nursed with humane blood;
And when more age and strength more fierceness lent,
She taught him in a dark and desert wood
With force and guile poor passengers to slay,
And on their flesh his barking stomach stay,
And with their wretched blood his fiery thirst allay.
70
So when the never-setled Scythian
Removes his dwelling in an empty wain;
When now the Sun has half his journey ran,
His horse he bloods, and pricks a trembling vein,
So from the wound quenches his thirsty heat:
Yet worse, this fiend makes his own flesh his meat.
Monster! the ravenous bear his kind will never eat.
71
Ten thousand Furies on his steps awaited;
Some seared his hardened soul with Stygian brand:
Some with black terrors his faint conscience baited,
That wide he star'd, and starched hair did stand:
The firstborn man still in his mind he bore,
Foully aray'd in guiltless brothers gore,
Which for revenge to heaven from earth did loudly roar.
72
His arms offensive all, to spill, not spare;
Swords, pistols, poisons, instruments of hell:
A shield he wore (not that the wretch did care
To save his flesh, often he himself would quell)
For show, not use: on it a viper swilling
The dammes spilt gore, his empty bowels filling
With flesh that gave him life: his word, I live by killing.
73
And last his brutish sons Acrates sent,
Whom Caro bore both in one birth and bed;
Drunkenness.
Methos the first, whose panch his feet out-went,
As if it ushered his unsettled head:
His soul quite sowced lay in grapie blood;
In all his parts the idle dropsy stood;
Which, though already drowned, still thirsted for the flood.
74
This thing, nor man, nor beast, tons all his wealth
In drink, his days, his years in liquour drenching:
So quaffes he sickness down by quaffing health,
Firing his cheeks with quenching, strangely quenching
His eyes with firing; dull and faint they rolled:
But nimble lips known things, and hid unfold;
Belchings, oft-sips, large spits point the long tale he told.
75
His armor green might seem a fruitful vine;
The clusters imprisoned in the close-set leaves,
Yet often between the bloody grape did shine;
And peeping forth, his jaylers spite deceives:
Among the boughs did swilling Bacchus ride,
Whom wilde-grown Moenads bore, and every stride
Bacche, Io^ Bacche, loud with madding voice they cried.
76
On's shield the goatish Satyrs dance around,
(Their heads much lighter then their nimble heels)
Silenus old, in wine (as ever) drowned,
Closed with the ring, in midst (though sitting) reels:
Under his arm a bag-pipe swollen he held,
(Yet wine-swoln cheeks the windy bag out-swell'd)
So loudly pipes: his word, But full, no mirth I yield.
77
Insatiate sink, how with so general stain
Thy spu'd-out puddles court, town, fields entice!
Ay me! the shepherds selves thee entertain,
And to thy Curtian gulf do sacrifice:
All drink to spue, and spue again to drink.
Sour swil-tub sin, of all the rest the sink,
How can thou thus bewitch with thy abhorred stink?
78
The eye thou wrong'st with vomits reeking streams,
The ear with belching; touch thou drown'st in wine;
The taste thou surfet'st; smell with spuing steams
Thou woundest: foh! thou loathsome putrid swine,
Still thou increasest thirst, when thirst thou slakest;
The mind and will thou (wits bane) captive take:
Senseles thy hoggish filth, and sense thou senseles make.
79
Thy fellow sins, and all the rest of vices
With seeming good are fairly clothed to sight;
Their feigned sweet the bleare-ey'd will entices,
Coz'ning the daz'led sense with borrowed light:
Thee neither true, nor yet false good commends;
Profit nor pleasure on thy steps attends:
Folly begins thy sin, which still with madness ends.
80
With Methos, Gluttony, his gutling brother,
Twinne parallels, drawn from the self-same line;
So foully like was either to the other,
And both most like a monstrous-panched swine:
His life was either a continued feast,
Whose surfets upon surfets him oppressed;
Or heavy sleep, that helps so great a load digest.
81
Mean time his soul, weighed down with muddie chains,
Can neither work, nor move in captive bands;
But dulled in vaprous fogges, all careless reigns,
Or rather serves strong appetites commands:
That when he now was gorged with cramm'd-down store,
And porter wanting room had shut the door,
The glutton sighed that he could gurmandize no more.
82
His crane-like neck was long unlac'd; his breast,
His gowtie limbs, like to a circle round,
As broad as long; and for his spear in rest
Often with his staff he beats the yielding ground;
Wherewith his hands did help his feet to bear,
Else would they ill so huge a burden stear:
His clothes were all of leaves, no armor could he wear.
83
Only a target light upon his arm
He careless bore, on which old Gryll was drawn,
Transformed into a hog with cunning charm;
In head, and paunch, and soul it self a brawn:
Half drowned within, without, yet still did hunt
In his deep trough for swill, as he was wont;
Cased all in loathsome mire: no word; Gryll could but grunt.
84
Him served sweet-seeming lusts, self-pleasing lies;
But bitter death flowed from those sweets of sin:
And at the Rear of these in secret guise
Crept Theeverie, and Detraction, near akinne;
No twins more like: they seemed almost the same;
One stole the goods, the other the good name:
The latter lives in scorn, the former dies in shame.
85
Their boon companions in their joviall feasting
Were new-shapt oaths, and damning perjuries:
Their cates, fit for their taste, profanest jesting,
Sauc'd with the salt of hell, dire blasphemies.
But till the ambitious Sun, yet still aspiring,
Allayes his flaming gold with gentler firing,
We Will rest our weary song in that thick groves retiring.
CANT. VIII.
THe Sun began to slack his bended bow,
And more obliquely dart his milder ray;
When cooler ayers gently 'gan to blow,
And fan the fields parcht with the scorching day:
The shepherds to their wonted seats repair;
Thirsil, refresht with this soft-breathing air,
Thus 'gan renew his task, and broken song repair:
2
What watchful care must fence that weary state,
Which deadly foes begirt with cruel siege;
And frailest wall of glass, and traitorous gate
Strive which should first yield up their woeful liege?
By enemies assailed, by friends betrayed;
When others hurt, himself refuses aid:
By weakness self his strength is foiled and overlay'd.
3
How comes it then that in so near decay
We deadly sleep in deep security,
When every hour is ready to betray
Our lives to that still-watching enemy?
Wake then thy soul that deadly slumbereth:
For when thy foe has seized thy captive breath,
Too late to wish past life, too late to wish for death.
4
Caro the Vantguard with the Dragon led,
The World or Mammon.
Cosmos the battle guides, with loud alarms;
Cosmos, the first son to the Dragon red,
Shining in seeming gold, and glittering arms:
Well might he seem a strong and gentle Knight,
As e're was clad in steel and armor bright;
But was a recreant base, a foul, false, cheating sprite.
5
And as himself, such were his arms; appearing
Bright burnisht gold, indeed base alchymie,
Dim beetle eyes, and greedy worldlings blearing:
His shield was dressed in nights sad liverie,
Where man-like Apes a Gloworm compass round,
Glad that in wintrie night they fire had found;
Busy they puff and blow: the word, Mistake the ground.
6
Mistake points all his darts; his sunshines bright
(Mistaken) light appear, sad lightning prove:
His clouds (mistook) seem lightnings, turn to light;
His love true hatred is, his hatred love;
His shop, a Pedlers pack of apish fashion;
His honors, pleasures, joys are all vexation:
His wages, glorious care, sweet surfets, wooed damnation.
7
His lib'rall favors, complementall arts;
His high advancements, Alpine slippery straits;
His smiling glances, deaths most pleasing darts;
And (what he vaunts) his gifts are gilded baits:
Indeed he nothing is, yet all appears.
Hapless earths happy fools, that know no tears!
Who bathes in worldly joys, swimmes in a world of fears.
8
Pure Essence, who have made a stone descrie
'Twixt natures hid, and check that metals pride
That dares aspire to golds high soveraigntie;
Ah leave some touchstone erring eyes to guide,
And judge dissemblance; see by what devices
Sin with fair gloss our mole-ey'd sight entises,
That vices virtues seem to most; and virtues, vices.
9
Strip thou their meretricious seemlinesse,
And tinfold glittering bare to every sight,
That we may loath their inward ugliness;
Or else uncloud the soul, whose shadie light
Adds a fair luster to false earthly bliss:
Thine and their beauty differs but in this;
Theirs what it is not, seems; thine seems not what it is.
10
Next to the Captain coward Fearfulness.
Deilos fared;
Him right before he as his shield projected,
And following troops to back him as his guard;
Yet both his shield and guard (faint heart) suspected:
And sending often back his doubtful eye,
By fearing taught unthought of treachery;
So made him enemies, by fearing enmity.
11
Still did he look for some ensuing cross,
Fearing such hap as never man befell:
No mean he knows, but dreads each little loss
(With tyranny of fear distraught) as hell.
His sense he dare not trust, (nor eyes, nor ears)
And when no other cause of fright appears,
Himself he much suspects, and fears his causeless fears.
12
Harnest with massy steel, for fence, not fight;
His sword unseemly long he ready drew:
At sudden shine of his own armor bright
He started often, and star'd with ghastly hue:
He shrieks at every danger that appears,
Shaming the knightly arms he goodly bears:
His word, Safer that all, then he that nothing fears.
13
With him went Doubt, stagg'ring with steps unsure,
That every way, and neither way inclined;
And fond Distrust, whom nothing could secure;
Suspicion lean, as if he never dined:
He keeps intelligence by thousand spies;
Argus to him bequeathed his hundred eyes:
So waking still he sleeps, and sleeping wakefull lies.
14
Fond Deilos all, Overboldnesse, or foolhardinesse.
Tolmetes nothing fears;
Just frights he laughs, all terrors counts base;
And when of danger, or sad news he hears,
He meets the thundering fortune face to face:
Yet often in words he spends his boistrous threat;
That his hot blood, driven from the native seat,
Leaves his The Philosopher rightly calls such (...) Ethic. 3. cap. 7. not
only foolhardy, but fainthardy.
faint coward heart empty of lively heat.
15
Himself (weak help!) was all his confidence;
He scorns low ebs, but swimmes in highest rises:
His limbs with arms or shield he would not fence;
Such coward fashion (fool!) he much despises:
Even for his single sword the world seems scant;
For hundred worlds his conquering arm could dant:
Much would he boldly do, but much more boldly vant.
16
With him went self-admiring Arrogance,
And Brag, his deeds without an helper praising:
Blind Carelessness before would lead the dance;
Fear stole behind, those vaunts in balance peysing,
Which far their deeds outweigh'd; their violence,
Before danger spent with lavish diffluence,
Was none, or weak in time of greatest exigence.
17
As when a fiery courser ready bent,
Puts forth himself at first with swiftest pace;
Till with too sudden flash his spirits spent,
Already fails now in the middle race:
His hanging crest far from his wonted pride,
No longer now obeyes his angry guide;
Rivers of sweat and blood flow from his gored side:
18
Thus ran the rash Tolmetes, never viewing
The fearful fiends that duly him attended;
Destruction close his steps in poast pursuing,
And certain ruins heavy weights depended
Over his cursed head, and smooth-faced guile,
That with him often would loosly play and smile;
Till in his snare he locked his feet with treacherous wile.
19
Next marched Prodigality.
Asotus, carelesse-spending Swain;
Who with a fork went spreading all around,
Which his old sire with sweating toil and pain
Long time was raking from his racked ground:
In giving he observed nor form, nor matter,
Arist. Eth. 4.
But best reward he got, that best could flatter;
Thus what he thought to give, he did not give, but scatter.
20
Before aray'd in sumptuous braverie,
Decked court-like in the choice and newest guise;
But all behind like drudging slaverie,
With ragged patches, rent, and bared thighs:
His shameful parts, that shun the hated light,
Were naked left; (ah foul unhonest sight!)
Yet neither could he see, nor feel his wretched plight.
21
His shield presents to life deaths latest rites,
A sad black hearse born up with sable swains;
Which many idle grooms with hundred lights
(Tapers, lamps, torches) usher through the plains
To endless darkness; while the Suns bright brow
With fiery beams quenches their smoking tow,
And wastes their idle cost: the word, Not need, but show.
22
A vagrant rout (a shoal of tatling daws)
Strew him with vain-spent prayers, and idle lays;
And flatt'rie to his sin close curtains draws,
Clawing his itching ear with tickling praise:
Behind, fond pity much his fall lamented,
And misery, that former waste repented:
The usurer for his goods, jayl for his bones indented.
23
His steward was his kinsman, Vain-expence,
Who proudly strove in matters light to show
Heroic mind in braggard affluence;
So lost his treasure, getting naught in liew,
But ostentation of a foolish pride;
While women fond, and boys stood gaping wide;
But wise men all his waste and needless cost deride.
24
Next Covetousness.
Pleonectes went, his gold admiring,
His servants drudge, slave to his basest slave;
Never enough, and still too much desiring:
His gold his god, yet in an iron grave
Himself protects his god from noisome rusting;
Much fears to keep, much more to loose his lusting;
Himself, and golden god, and every god mistrusting.
25
Age on his hairs the winter snow had spread;
That silver badge his near end plainly proves:
Yet as to Arist. Eth.
earth he nearer bows his head,
So loves it more; for Like his like still loves.
Deep from the ground he digs his sweetest gain,
And deep into the earth digs back with pain:
From hell his gold he brings, and hoords in hell again.
26
His clothes all patcht with more then honest thrift,
And clouted shoon were nailed for fear of wasting;
Fasting he praised, but sparing was his drift;
And when he eats, his food is worse then fasting:
Thus starves in store, thus does in plenty pine,
Thus wallowing on his god, his heap of Mine,
He feeds his famisht soul with that deceiving shine.
27
Oh hungry metal, false deceitful ray,
Well laid'st thou dark, pressed in the earths hidden womb;
Yet through our mothers entrails cutting way,
We dragge thy buried coarse from hellish tomb:
The merchant from his wife and home departs,
Nor at the swelling ocean ever starts;
While death and life a wall of thin planks only parts.
28
Who was it first, that from thy deepest cell,
With so much costly toil and painful sweat
Durst rob thy palace, bord'ring next to hell?
Well may thou come from that infernal seat;
Thou all the world with hell-black deeps do fill.
Fond men, that with such pain do woo your ill!
Needless to send for grief, for he is next us still.
29
His arms were light, and cheap, as made to save
His purse, not limbs; the money, not the man:
Rather he dies, then spends: his helmet brave,
An old brass pot; breast plate a dripping-pan:
His spear a spit, a pot-lid broad his shield,
Whose smokie plain a chalkt Impresa filled,
A bag sure sealed: his word, Much better saved, then spilled.
30
By Pleonectes shameless Sparing went,
Who whines and weeps to beg a longer day,
Yet with a thundering voice claims tardie rent;
Quick to receive, but hard and slow to pay:
His care's to lessen cost with cunning base;
But when he is forced beyond his bounded space,
Loud would he cry, and howl, while others laugh apace.
31
Long after went Feeble-mindednesse.
Pusillus, weakest heart,
Able to serve, and able to command,
But thought himself unfit for either part;
And now full loath, amidst the warlike band
Was hither drawn by force from quiet cell:
Lonenesse his heaven, and business was his hell.
A weak distrustful heart is virtues aguish spell.
32
His goodly arms, eaten with shameful rust;
Bewrayed their masters ease, and want of using;
Such was his mind, tainted with idle must,
His goodly gifts with little use abusing:
Upon his shield was drawn that noble Swain
That loath to change his love and quiet reign
For glorious warlike deeds, did crafty madness feign.
33
Finely the workman framed the toilsome plough
Drawn with an ox and ass, unequal pair;
While he with busy hand his salt did sow,
And at the furrows end his dearest heir
Did helpless lie, and Greek lords watching still
Observed his hand guided with careful will:
About was wrote, Who nothing does, does nothing ill.
34
By him went Idleness, his loved friend,
And Shame with both; with all, ragg'd Poverty:
Behind sure Punishment did close attend,
Waiting a while fit opportunity;
And taking count of hours misspent in vain,
And graces lent without returning gain,
Poured on his guilty corse late grief, and helpless pain.
35
This dull cold earth with standing water froze;
At ease he lies to coin pretense for ease;
His soul like Ahaz dial, while it goes
Not forward, poasteth backward ten degrees:
In's couch he is pliant wax for fiends to seal;
He never sweats, but in his bed, or meal:
He Would rather steal then work, and beg then strive to steal.
36
All opposite, though he his brother were,
Was Arrogancy.
Chaunus, that too high himself esteemed:
All things he undertook, nor could he fear
His power too weak, or boasted strength misdeem'd,
With his own praise like windy bladder blown:
His eyes too little, or too much his own;
For The arrogant are more stupid. Arist. Ethic. 4.
known to all men weak, was to himself unknown.
37
Fondly himself with praising he disprais'd,
Vaunting his deeds and worth with idle breath;
So razed himself, what he himself had raised:
On's shield a boy threatens high Phoebus death,
Aiming his arrow at his purest light;
But soon the thin reed, fired with lightning bright,
Feel idly on the strond: his word, Yet high, and right.
38
Next brave Ambition.
Philotimus in poast did ride:
Like rising ladders was his climbing mind;
His high-flown thoughts had wings of courtly pride,
Which by foul rise to greatest height inclined;
His heart aspiring swelled until it burst:
But when he gained the top, with spite accursed
Down would he fling the steps by which he clamb'red first.
39
His head's a shop furnished with looms of state:
His brain the weaver, thoughts are shuttles light,
With which in spite of heaven he weaves his fate;
Honor his web: thus works he day and night,
Till fates cut off his thread; so heapeth sins
And plagues, nor once enjoyes the place he winnes;
But where his old race ends, there his new race begins.
40
Ah silly man, who dream'st that honor stands
In ruling others, not thy self! thy slaves
Serve thee, and thou thy slaves: in iron bands
Thy servile spirit pressed with wild passions raves.
Would thou live honored? clip ambitions wing;
To reasons yoke thy furious passions bring:
Thrice noble is the man, who of himself is King.
41
Upon his shield was framed that venurous lad,
That durst assay the Suns bright-flaming team;
Spite of his feeble hands, the horses mad
Fling down on burning earth the scorching beam;
So made the flame in which himself was fired;
The world the bonefire was, where he expired:
His motto written thus, Yet had what he desired.
42
But Baseness of mind.
Atimus, a careless idle swain,
Though Glory off'red him her sweet embrace,
And fair Occasion with little pain
Reached him her ivory hand, yet (lozel base!)
Rather his way, and her fair self declined;
Well did he thence prove his degenerous mind:
Base were his restie thoughts, base was his dunghill kind.
43
And now by force dragged from the monkish cell,
(Where teeth he only used, nor hands, nor brains,
But in smooth streams swam down through ease to hell;
His work to eat, drink, sleep, and purge his reins)
He left his heart behind him with his feast:
His target with a flying dart was dressed,
Poasting unto his mark: the word, I move to rest.
44
Next Flattery.
Colax all his words with sugar spices;
His servile tongue, base slave to greatness name,
Runs nimble descant on the plainest vices;
He lets his tongue to sin, takes rent of shame:
He temp'ring lies, porter to the ear resides,
Like Indian apple, which with painted sides,
More dangerous within his lurking poison hides.
45
So Echo, to the voice her voice conforming,
From hollow breast for one will two repay;
So, like the rock it holds, it self transforming,
That subtle fish hunts for her heedlesse prey:
So crafty fowlers with their fair deceits
Allure the hungry bird; so fisher waits
To bait himself with fish, his hook and fish with baits.
46
His art is but to hide, not heal a sore,
To nourish pride, to strangle conscience;
To drain the rich, his own dry pits to store,
To spoil the precious soul, to please vile sense:
A carrion crow he is, a gaping grave,
The rich coats moth, the courts bane, trenchers slave;
Sins and hells winning baud, the devils fact'ring knave.
47
A mist he casts before his patrons sight,
That blackest vices never once appear;
But greater then it is, seems virtues light;
His Lords displeasure is his only fear:
His clawing lies, tickling the senses frail
To death, make open way where force would fail.
Less hurts the lions paw, then foxes softest tail.
48
His arms with hundred tongues were poud'red gay,
(The mint of lies) gilt, filled, the sense to please;
His sword which in his mouth close sheathed lay,
Sharper then death, and framed to kill with ease.
Ah cursed weapon, life with pleasure spilling!
The Sardoin herb with many branches filling
His shield, was his device: the word, I please in killing.
49
Base slave! how crawl'st thou from thy dunghill nest,
Where thou wast hatched by shame and beggerie,
And pearchest in the learned and noble breast?
Nobles of thee their courtship learn, of thee
Arts learn new art their learning to adorn:
(Ah wretched minds!) He is not nobly born,
Nor learned, that does not thy ignoble learning scorn.
50
Close to him Pleasing went, with painted face,
And Honor, by some hidden cunning made;
Not Honors self, but Honors semblance base,
For soon it vanished like an empty shade:
Behind, his parents duly him attend;
With them he forced is his age to spend:
Shame his beginning was, and shame must be his end.
51
Next followed Morositie.
Dyscolus, a froward wight;
His lips all swollen, and eyebrows ever bent,
With sootie locks, swart looks, and scouling sight,
His face a tell-tale to his foul intent:
He nothing liked, or praised; but reprehended
What every one beside himself commended.
Humors of tongues impostum'd, purged with shame, are mended.
52
His mouth a poisonous quiver, where he hides
Sharp venomed arrows, which his bitter tongue
With squibs, carps, jests, unto their object guides;
Nor fears he gods on earth, or heaven to wrong:
Upon his shield was fairly drawn to sight
A raging dog, foaming out wrath and spite:
The word to his device, Impartial all I bite.
53
Mad laughter. Eccles. 2.2.
Geloios next ensued, a merry Greek,
Whose life was laughter vain, and mirth misplac't;
His speeches broad, to shame the modest cheek;
Ne cared he whom, or when, or how disgraced.
Salt round about he flung upon the sand;
If in his way his friend or father stand,
His father and his friend he spreads with careless hand.
54
His foul jests steeped and drowned in laughter vain,
And rotten speech, (ah!) was not mirth, but madness:
His armor crackling thorns all flaming stain
With golden fires, (emblem of foppish gladness)
Upon his shield two laughing fools you see,
(In number he the third, first in degree)
At which himself would laugh, and fleer: his word, We three.
55
And after, Rusticitie, or feritie.
Agrios, a sullen swain,
All mirth that in himself and others hated;
Dull, dead, and leaden was his cheerlesse vein:
His weary sense he never recreated;
And now he marched as if he somewhat dreamed:
All honest joy but madness he esteemed,
Refreshings idleness, but sport he folly deemed.
56
In's arms his mind the workman fit expressed,
Which all with quenched lamps, but smoking yet,
And foully stinking, were full queintly dressed;
To blind, not light the eyes, to choke, not heat:
Upon his shield an heap of fennie mire
In flagges and turfs (with suns yet never drier)
Did smoth'ring lie, not burn: his word, Smoke without fire.
57
Last Impudence, whose never-changing face
Knew but one color; with some brasse-brow'd lie*
And laughing loud she drowns her just disgrace:
About her all the fiends in armies fly:
Her feathered beaver sidelong cockt, in guise
Of roaring boys; set look with fixed eyes
Out-looks all shamefac't forms, all modesty defies.
58
And as her thoughts, so arms all black as hell:
Her brazen shield two sable dogs adorn,
Who each at other stare, and snarle, and swell:
Beneath the word was set, All change I scorn.
But if I all this rout and foul array
Should muster up, and place in battle ray,
Too long your selves and flocks my tedious song would stay.
59
The aged day grows dim, and homeward calls:
The parting Sun (man's state describing well)
Falls when he rises, rises when he falls:
So we by falling rose, by rising fell.
The shadie cloud of night 'gins softly creep,
And all our world with sable tincture steep:
Home now ye shepherd-swains; home now my loved sheep.
CANT. IX.
THe Bridegroom Sun, who late the Earth had spous'd,
Leaves his star chamber; early in the East
He shook his sparkling locks, head lively roused,
While Morn his couch with blushing roses dressed;
His shines the Earth soon latcht to gild her flowers:
Phosphor his gold-fleec't drove folds in their bowers,
Which all the night had grazed about the Olympic towers.
2
The cheerful Lark, mounting from early bed,
With sweet salutes awakes the drowsy light;
The earth she left, and up to heaven is fled;
There chants her Makers praises out of sight:
Earth seems a molehill, men but ants to be;
Teaching proud men, that soar to high degree,
The farther up they climb, the less they seem, and see.
3
The shepherds met, and Thomalin began;
Young Thomalin, whose notes and silver string
Silence the rising Lark, and falling Swan:
Come Thirsil, end thy lay, and cheerly sing:
Hear'st how the Larks give welcome to the day,
Temp'ring their sweetest notes unto thy lay?
Up then, thou loved swain; why do thou longer stay?
4
Well sett'st thou (friend) the Lark before mine eyes,
Much easier to hear then imitate:
Her wings lift up her notes to lofty skies;
But me a leaden sleep, and earthly state
Down to the center ties with captive string:
Well might I follow here her note and wing;
Singing she lofty mounts: ah! mounting should I sing.
5
Oh thou dread King of that heroic band,
Which by thy power beats back these hellish sprites,
Rescuing this State from death and base command;
Tell me, (dread King) what are those warlike Knights?
What force? what arms? where lies their strengths increase,
That though so few in number, never cease
To keep this sieged town against numbers numberless?
6
The first Commanders in this holy train,
Leaders to all the rest, an ancient pair;
Long since sure linkt in wedlocks sweetest chain;
His name Spiritto, she Heaven.
Urania fair:
Fair had she been, and full of heavenly grace,
And he in youth a mighty warrier was,
Both now more fair, and strong; which proved their heavenly race.
7
His arms with flaming tongues all sparkled bright,
Bright flaming tongues, in diverse sections parted;
His piercing sword, edged with their fiery light,
'Twixt bones and marrow, soul and spirit disparted:
Upon his shield was drawn a glorious Dove,
Against whom the proudest Eagle dares not move;
Glittering in beams: his word, Conquering by peace and love.
8
But she Amazon-like in azure arms,
Silvered with stars, and gilt with sunnie rays,
Her mighty Spouse in fight and fierce alarms
Attends, and equals in these bloody frayes;
And on her shield an heavenly globe (displaying
The constellations lower bodies swaying,
Swayed by the higher) she bore: her word, I rule obeying.
9
About them swarmed their fruitful progeny;
An heavenly offspring of an heavenly bed:
Well might you in their looks his stoutnesse see
With her sweet graces lovely tempered.
Fit youth they seemed to play in Princes hall,
(But ah long since they thence were banished all)
Or shine in glittering arms, when need fierce war does call.
10
The first in order (nor in worth the last)
Is Knowledge, drawn from peace and Muses spring;
Where shaded in fair Sinaies groves, his taste
He feasts with words and works of heavenly King;
But now to bloody field is fully bent:
Yet still he seemed to study as he went:
His arms cut all in books; strong shield slight papers lent.
11
His glittering armor shined like burning day,
Garnisht with golden Suns, and radiant flowers;
Which turn their bending heads to Phoebus ray,
And when he falls, shut up their leavie bowers:
Upon his shield the silver Moon did bend
Her horned bow, and round her arrows spend:
His word in silver wrote, I borrow what I lend.
12
All that he saw, all that he heard, were books,
In which he read and learned his Makers will:
Most on his word, but much on heaven he looks,
And thence admires with praise the workmans skill.
Close to him went still-musing Contemplation,
That made good use of its by meditation;
So to him ill it self was good by strange mutation.
13
And Care, who never from his sides would part,
Of knowledge often the ways and means enquiring,
To practice what he learnt from holy art;
And often with tears, and often with sighs desiring
Aid from that Sovereign Guide, whose ways so steep,
Though fain he would, yet weak he could not keep:
But when he could not go, yet forward would he creep.
14
Next Humility.
Tapinus, whose sweet, though lowly grace
All other higher then himself esteemed;
He in himself prized things as mean and base,
Which yet in others great and glorious seemed:
All ill due debt, good undeserved he thought;
His heart a low-rooft house, but sweetly wrought,
Where God himself would dwell, though he it dearly bought.
15
Honor he shunnes, yet is the way unto him;
As hell, he hates advancement won with bribes;
But public place and charge are forced to woo him;
He good to grace, ill to desert ascribes:
Him (as his Lord) contents a lowly room,
Whose first house was the blessed Virgins womb,
The next a cratch, the third a cross, the fourth a tomb.
16
So choicest drugs in meanest shrubs are found;
So precious gold in deepest center dwells:
So sweetest violets trail on lowly ground;
So richest pearls ly closed in vilest shells:
So lowest dales we let at highest rates;
So creeping strawberries yield daintiest cates.
The Highest highly loves the low, the lofty hates.
17
Upon his shield was drawn that Shepherd lad,
Who with a sling threw down faint Isreal's fears;
And in his hand his spoils, and trophies glad,
The Monsters sword and head, he bravely bears:
Plain in his lovely face you might behold
A blushing meekness met with courage bold:
Little, not little worth, was fairly wrote in gold.
18
With him his kinsman both in birth and name,
Obedience, taught by many bitter showers
In humble bonds his passions proud to tame,
And low submit unto the higher powers:
But yet no servile yoke his forehead brands;
For ti'd in such an holy service bands,
In this obedience rules, and serving thus commands.
19
By them went Faith.
Fido, Marshal of the field:
Weak was his mother, when she gave him day;
And he at first a sick and weakly child,
As e're with tears welcomed the sunnie ray:
Yet when more years afford more growth, and might,
A champion stout he was, and puissant Knight,
As ever came in field, or shone in armor bright.
20
So may we see a little lionet,
When newly whelpt, a weak and tender thing,
Despised by every beast; but waxen great,
When fuller times full strength and courage bring,
The beasts all crouching low, their King adore,
And dare not see what they contemned before:
The trembling forest quakes at his affrighting roar.
21
Mountains he flings in seas with mighty hand;
Stops, and turns back the Suns impetuous course;
Nature breaks natures laws at his command;
No force of hell or heaven withstands his force:
Events to come yet many ages hence
He present makes, by wondrous prescience;
Proving the senses blind, by being blind to sense.
22
His sky-like arms, di'd all in blue and white,
And set with golden stars that flamed wide;
His shield invisible to mortal sight,
Yet he upon it easily descri'd
The lively semblance of his dying Lord;
Whose bleeding side with wicked steel was gored,
Which to his fainting spirits new courage would afford.
23
Strange was the force of that enchanted shield,
Which highest powers to it from heaven impart;
For who could bear it well, and rightly wield,
It saved from sword, and spear, and poisoned dart:
Well might he slip, but yet not wholly fall:
No final loss his courage might appall;
Growing more sound by wounds, and rising by his fall.
24
So some have feigned that Tellus giant son
Drew many newborn lives from his dead mother;
Another rose as soon as one was done,
And twenty lost, yet still remained another:
For when he fell, and kissed the barren heath,
His parent straight inspired successive breath;
And though her self was dead, yet ransomed him from death.
25
With him his Nurse went, careful Hearing.
Acoe;
Whose hands first from his mothers womb did take him,
And ever since have fostered tenderly:
She never might, she never would forsake him;
And he her loved again with mutual band:
For by her needful help he often did stand,
When else he soon would fail, and fall in foemens hand.
26
With both sweet Meditation ever pac't,
His Nurses daughter, and his Foster-sister:
Dear as his soul he in his soul her placed,
And often embraced, and often by stealth he kissed her:
For she had taught him by her silent talk
To tread the safe, and dangerous ways to balk;
And brought his God with him, him with his God to walk.
27
Behind him Penitence did sadly go,
Whose cloudie dropping eyes were ever raining;
Her swelling tears, which even in ebbing flow,
Furrow her cheek, the sinful puddles draining:
Much seemed she in her pensive thought molested,
And much the mocking world her soul infested;
More she the hateful world, and most her self detested.
28
She was the object of lewd men's disgrace,
The squint-eyed, wrie-mouth'd scoff of carnal hearts;
Yet smiling heaven delights to kiss her face,
And with his blood God bathes her painful smarts:
Afflictions iron flail her soul had thrasht;
Sharp Circumcisions knife her heart had slasht;
Yet was it angels wine, which in her eyes was masht.
29
With her a troop of mournful grooms abiding,
Help with their sullen blacks their Mistress woe;
Amendment still (but still his own faults) chiding,
And Penance armed with smarting whips did go:
Then sad Remorse came sighing all the way;
Last Satisfaction, giving all away:
Much surely did he owe, much more he would repay.
30
Next went Hope.
Elpinus, clad in skie-like blue;
And through his arms few stars did seem to peep,
Which there the workmans hand so finely drew,
That rockt in clouds they softly seemed to sleep:
His rugged shield was like a rockie mold,
On which an anchour bit with surest hold:
I hold by being held, was written round in gold.
31
Nothing so cheerful was his thoughtfull face,
As was his brother Fido's: Fear seemed dwell
Close by his heart; his color changed apace,
And went, and came, that sure all was not well:
Therefore a comely Maid did often sustain
His fainting steps, and fleeting life maintain:
Promise.
Pollicita she hight, which never could lie or feign.
32
Next to Elpinus marched his brother Love;
Not that great Love which clothed his Godhead bright
With rags of flesh, and now again above
Has dressed his flesh in heavens eternal light;
Much less the brat of that false Cyprian dame,
Begot by froth, and fire in bed of shame,
And now burns idle hearts swelt'ring in lustful flame:
33
But this from heaven brings his immortal race,
And nursed by Gratitude; whose careful arms
Long held, and hold him still in kind embrace:
But trained to daily wars, and fierce alarms,
He grew to wondrous strength, and beauty rare:
Next that God-Love, from whom his offsprings are,
No match in earth or heaven may with this Love compare.
34
His Page, who from his side might never move,
Remembrance, on him waits; in books reciting
The famous passions of that highest Love,
His burning zeal to greater flames exciting:
Deep would he sigh, and seem empassion'd sore,
And often with tears his backward heart deplore,
That loving all he could, he loved that Love no more.
35
Yet sure he truly loved, and honored dear
That glorious name; for when, or where he spied
Wronged, or in hellish speech blasphemed did hear,
Boldly the rash blasphemer he defied,
And forced him eat the words he foully spoke:
But if for him he grief or death did take,
That grief he counted joy, and death life for his sake.
36
His glittering arms, dressed all with fiery hearts,
Seemed burn in chaste desire, and heavenly flame*
And on his shield kind Jonathan imparts
To his souls friend his robes, and princely name,
And kingly throne, which mortals so adore:
And round about was writ in golden ore,
Well might he give him all, that gave his life before.
37
These led the Vantguard; and an hundred more
Filled up the empty ranks with ord'red train:
But first in middle ward did justly go
In goodly arms a fresh and lovely Swain,
Vaunting himself Loves twin, but younger brother:
Well might it be; for even their very mother
With pleasing error often mistook the one for the other.
38
As when fair Paris gave that golden ball,
A thousand doubts ran in his stagg'ring breast:
All liked him well, fain would he give it all;
Each better seems, and still the last seems best:
Doubts ever new his reaching hand deferred;
The more he looks, the more his judgment erred:
So she first this, then that, then none, then both preferred
39
Like them, their armor seemed full near of kin:
In this they only differ; the elder bent
His higher soul to heaven, the younger Twinne
Among mortals here his love and kindness spent;
Teaching strange alchymie, to get a living
By selling land, and to grow rich by giving;
By emptying filling bags, so heaven by earth atchieving.
40
About him troop the poor with numerous trains,
Whom he with tender care, and large expense,
With kindest words, and succor entertains;
Ne looks for thanks, or thinks of recompense:
His wardrobe serves to cloth the naked side,
And shameful parts of bared bodies hide;
If other clothes he lackt, his own he would divide.
41
To rogues his gate was shut; but open lay,
Kindly the weary traveller inviting:
Often therefore Angels, hid in mortal clay,
And God himself in his free roofs delighting,
Lowly to visit him would not disdain,
And in his narrow cabin often remain,
Whom heaven, and earth, and all the world cannot contain.
42
His table still was filled with wholesome meat,
Not to provoke, but quiet appetite;
And round about the hungry freely eat,
With plenteous cates cheering their feeble sprite:
Their earnest vows broke open heavens wide door,
That not in vain sweet Plenty evermore
With gracious eye looks down upon his blessed store.
43
Behind attend him in an uncouth wise
A troop with little caps, and shaved head;
Such whilome was infranched bondmens guise,
New freed from cruel masters servile dread:
These had he lately bought from captive chain;
Hence they his triumph sing with joyful strain,
And on his head due praise and thousand blessings rain.
44
He was a father to the fatherless,
To widows he supplied an husbands care;
Nor would he heap up woe to their distress,
Or by a Guardians name their state impair;
But rescue them from strong oppressors might:
Nor does he weigh the great man's heavy spite.
Who fears the highest Judge, needs fear no mortal wight.
45
Once every week he on his progress went,
The sick to visit, and those meager swains,
Which all their weary life in darkness spent,
Clogged with cold iron, pressed with heavy chains:
He hoords not wealth for his loose heir to spend it,
But with a willing hand does well expend it.
Good then is only good, when to our God we lend it.
46
And when the dead by cruel tyrants spite
Lie out to ravenous birds and beasts exposed,
His yearnfull heart pitying that wretched sight,
In seemly graves their weary flesh enclosed,
And strewn with dainty flowers the lowly hearse;
Then all alone the last words did rehearse,
Bidding them softly sleep in his sad sighing verse.
47
So once that royal Antigone, daughter of Oedipus, contrary to the edict of
Creon, buries Polynices.
Maid fierce Thebes beguiled,
Though wilful Creon proudly did forbid her;
Her brother, from his home and tomb exiled,
(While willing night in darkness safely hid her)
She lowly laid in earths all-covering shade:
Her dainty hands (not used to such a trade)
She with a mattock toils, and with a weary spade.
48
Yet feels she neither sweat, nor irksome pain,
Till now his grave was fully finished;
Then on his wounds her cloudy eyes 'gin rain,
To wash the guilt painted in bloody red:
And falling down upon his gored side,
With hundred varied plaints she often cried,
Oh had I di'd for thee, or with thee might have di'd!
49
Ay me! my ever wronged, and banished brother,
How can I fitly thy hard fate deplore,
Or in my breast so just complainings smother?
To thy sad chance what can be added more?
Exile thy home, thy home a tomb thee gave:
Oh no; such little room thou must not have,
But for thy banished bones I (wretch) must steal a grave.
50
But whither, woeful Maid, have thy complaints
With fellow passion drawn my feeling moan?
But thus this Love deals with those murd'red Saints;
Weeps with the sad, and sighs with those that groan.
But now in that beech grove we will safely play,
And in those shadows mock the boiling ray;
Which yet increases more with the decreasing day.
CANT. X.
THe Shepherds to the woodie mount withdrew,
Where the hillock seats, shades yield a canopie;
Whose tops with violets di'd all in blue
Might seem to make a little azure sky:
And that round hill, which their weak heads maintained,
A lesser Atlas seemed, whose neck sustained
The weight of all the heavens, which fore his shoulders pained.
2
And here and there sweet Primrose scattered,
Spangling the blue, fit constellations make:
Some broadly flaming their fair colors spread;
Some other winkt, as yet but half awake:
Fit were they placed, and set in order due:
Nature seemed work by art, so lively true
A little heaven on earth in narrow space she drew.
3
Upon this earthly heaven the shepherds play,
The time beguiling, and the parching light;
Till the declining Sun, and elder day
Abate their flaming heat, and youthful might:
The sheep had left the shades, to mind their meat;
Then all returning to their former seat,
Thirsil again began his weary song repeat.
4
Great power of Love! with what commanding fire
Do thou inflame the worlds wide Regiment,
And kindly heat in every heart inspire!
Nothing is free from thy sweet government:
Fish burn in seas; beasts, birds thy weapons prove;
By thee dead elements and heavens move,
Which void of sense it self, yet are not void of love.
5
But those twinne Loves, which from thy seas of light
To us on earth derive their lesser streams,
Though in their force they show thy wondrous might,
On thee reflecting back their glorious beams,
Yet here encountered with so mighty foe,
Had need both armed and surely guarded go:
But most thy help they need; do not thy help foreslow.
6
Next to the younger Love Peaceablenesse.
Irenus went,
Whose frostie head proclaimed his winter age:
His spring in many battles had he spent,
But now all weapons changed for counsel sage.
His heavy sword (the witness of his might)
Upon a lopped tree he idly pight;
There hid in quiet sheath, sleeps it in endless night.
7
Patience his shield had lent to ward his breast,
Whose golden plain three Olive-branches dress:
The word in letters large was fair expressed,
Thrice happy author of a happy peace.
Rich plenty yields him power, power stores his will;
Will ends in works, good works his treasures fill:
Earths slave, Matthew. 5.9.
heavens heir he is; as God, pays good for ill.
8
By him Fortitude.
Andreos pac't, of middle age,
His mind as far from rashness, as from fears;
Hating base thoughts as much as desperate rage:
The worlds loud thund'rings he unshaken hears;
Nor will he death or life or seek or fly,
Ready for both. He is as cowardly
That longer fears to live, as he that fears to die.
9
Worst was his civil war, where deadly fought
He with himself, till Passion yields, or dies:
All heart and hand, no tongue; not grimme, but stout:
His flame had counsel in it, his fury eyes;
His rage well tempered is: no fear can dant
His reason; but cold blood is valiant:
Well may he strength in death, but never courage want.
10
But like a mighty rock, whose unmoved sides
The hostile sea assaults with furious wave,
And against his head the boisterous North-winde rides;
Both fight, and storm, and swell, and roar, and rave;
Hoarse surges drum, loud blasts their trumpets strain:
The heroic cliffe laughs at their frustrate pain:
Waves scattered drop in tears, winds broken whining plain:
11
Such was this Knights undanted constancy;
No mischief weakens his resolved mind:
None fiercer to a stubborn enemy,
But to the yielding none more sweetly kind.
His shield an even-ballast ship embraves,
Which dances light, while Neptune wildely raves:
His word was this, I fear but heaven, nor winds, nor waves.
12
And next, Long-suffering.
Macrothumus, whose quiet face
No cloud of passion ever shadowed;
Nor could hot anger Reasons rule displace,
Purpling the scarlet cheek with fiery red:
Nor could revenge, clad in a deadly white,
With hidden malice eat his vexed sprite:
For ill he good repaid, and love exchanged for spite.
13
Was never yet a more undanted spirit;
Yet most him deemed a base and timorous swain:
But he well weighing his own strength and merit,
The greatest wrong could wisely entertain.
Nothing resisted his commanding spear:
Yielding it self to him a winning were;
And though he di'd, yet dead he rose a conqueror.
14
His natural force beyond all nature stretched:
Most strong he is, because he will be weak;
And happy most, because he can be wretched.
Then whole and sound, when he himself does break;
Rejoicing most when most he is tormented:
In greatest discontents he rests contented:
By conquering himself all conquests he prevented.
15
His rockie arms of massy adamant
Safely could back rebutt the hardest blade:
His skin it self could any weapon dant,
Of such strange mold and temper was he made:
Upon his shield a Palm Tree still increased,
Though many weights his rising arms depressed:
His word was, Rising most, by being most oppressed.
16
Next him Gentleness or courtesy.
Androphilus, whose sweetest mind
'Twixt mildness tempered, and low courtesy,
Could leave as soon to be, as not be kind:
Churlish despite never looked from his calm eye,
Much less commanded in his gentle heart:
To baser men fair looks he would impart;
Nor could he cloak ill thoughts in complementall art.
17
His enemies knew not how to discommend him,
All others dearly loved; fell ranc'rous Spite,
And vile Detraction fain would reprehend him;
And often in vain his name they closely bite,
As popular, and flatterer accusing:
But he such slavish office much refusing,
Can easily quit his name from their false tongues abusing.
18
His arms were framed into a glittering night,
Whose sable gown with stars all spangled wide
Affords the weary traveller cheerful light,
And to his home his erring footsteps guide:
Upon his ancient shield the workman fine
Had drawn the Sun, whose eye did never repine
To look on good, and ill: his word, To all I shine.
19
Fair Virtue, where stay'st thou in poor exile,
Leaving the Court from whence thou took'st thy name?
While in thy place is stepped Disdaining vile,
And Flattery, base son of Need and Shame;
And with them surly Scorn, and hateful Pride;
Whose artificial face false colors di'd,
Which more display her shame, then loathsome foulness hide.
20
Late there thou livedst with a gentle Swain,
(As gentle Swain as ever lived there)
Who lodged thee in his heart, and all thy train,
Where hundred other Graces quartered were:
But he (alas!) untimely dead and gone,
Leaves us to rue his death, and thee to moan,
That few were ever such, and now those few are none.
21
By him the stout Temperance.
Encrates boldly went,
Assailed often by mighty enemies,
Which all on him alone their spite misspent;
For he whole armies single bold defies:
With him nor might, nor cunning slights prevail;
All force on him they try, all forces fail:
Yet still assail him fresh, yet vainly still assail.
22
His body full of vigor, full of health;
His table feeds not lust, but strength, and need:
Full stored with plenty, not by heaping wealth,
But topping rank desires, which vain exceed:
On's shield an hand from heaven an orchyard dressing,
Pruning superfluous boughs the trees oppressing,
So adding fruit: his word, By lessening increasing.
23
His settled mind was written in his face:
For on his forehead cheerful gravitie
False joys and apish vanities does chase;
And watchful care did wake in either eye:
His heritance he would not lavish sell,
Nor yet his treasure hide by neighboring hell:
But well he ever spent, what he had gotten well.
24
A lovely pair of twins closed either side:
Not those in heaven, the flowrie Geminies,
Are half so lovely bright; the one his Bride,
Chastity in the married.
Agnia chaste, was joined in Hymen's ties,
And love, as pure as heavens conjunction:
Thus she was his, and he her flesh and bone:
So were they two in sight, in truth entirely one.
25
Upon her arched brow unarmed Love
Triumphing sat in peaceful victory;
And in her eyes thousand chaste Graces move,
Checking vain thoughts with awful majesty:
Ten thousand more her fairer breast contains;
Where quiet meekness every ill restrains,
And humbly subject spirit by willing service reigns.
26
Her skie-like arms glittered in golden beams,
And brightly seemed to flame with burning hearts:
The scalding ray with his reflected streams
Fire to their flames, but heavenly fire, imparts:
Upon her shield a pair of Turtles shone;
A loving pair, still coupled, never alone:
Her word, Though one when two, yet either two, or none.
27
With her, her sister went, a warlike Maid,
Chastity in the single.
Parthenia, all in steel, and gilded arms;
In needles stead a mighty spear she swayd,
With which in bloody fields and fierce alarms
The boldest champion she down would bear,
And like a thunderbolt wide passage tear,
Flinging all to the earth with her enchanted spear.
28
Her goodly armor seemed a garden green,
Where thousand spotless lilies freshly blew;
And on her shield the 'lone bird might be seen,
The Arabian bird, shining in colors new:
It self unto it self was only mate;
Ever the same, but new in newer date:
And underneath was writ, Such is chaste single state.
29
Thus hid in arms, she seemed a goodly Knight,
And fit for any warlike exercise:
But when she list lay down her armor bright,
And back resume her peaceful Maidens guise;
The fairest Maid she was, that ever yet
Imprisoned her locks within a golden net,
Or let them waving hang, with roses fair beset.
30
Choice Nymph, the crown of chaste Diana's train,
Thou beauties lilie, set in heavenly earth;
Thy fairs unpattern'd all perfections stain:
Sure heaven with curious pencil, at thy birth,
In thy rare face her own full picture drew:
It is a strong verse here to write but true:
Hyperboles in others are but half thy due.
31
Upon her forehead Love his trophies fits,
A thousand spoils in silver arch displaying;
And in the midst himself full proudly sits,
Himself in awful majesty araying:
Upon her brows lies his bent Ebon bow,
And ready shafts: deadly those weapons show;
Yet sweet that death appeared, lovely that deadly blow.
32
And at the foot of this celestial frame
Two radiant stars, then stars yet better being,
Endu'd with living fire, and seeing flame;
Yet with heavens stars in this too near agreeing;
They timely warmth, themselves not warm, inspire;
These kindle thousand hearts with hot desire,
And burning all they see, feel in themselves no fire.
33
Ye matchless stars, (yet each the others match)
Heavens richest diamonds, set on Ammel white,
From whose bright spheres all grace the Graces catch,
And will not move but by your load-starres bright;
How have you stolen, and stored your armourie
With Loves and deaths strong shafts, and from your sky
Pour down thick showers of darts to force whole armies fly?
34
Above those Suns two Rainbows high aspire,
Not in light shows, but sadder liveries dressed;
Fair Iris seemed to mourn in sable tire;
Yet thus more sweet the greedy eye they feast:
And but that wondrous face it well allowed,
Wondrous it seemed, that two fair Rainbows showed
Above their sparkling Suns, without or rain, or cloud.
35
A bed of lilies flower upon her cheek,
And in the midst was set a circling rose;
Whose sweet aspect would force Narcissus seek
New liveries, and fresher colors choose
To deck his beauteous head in snowie tire;
But all in vain: for who can hope to aspire
To such a fair, which none attain, but all admire?
36
Her rubie lips lock up from gazing sight
A troop of pearls, which march in goodly row:
But when she deignes those precious bones undight,
Soon heavenly notes from those divisions flow,
And with rare music charm the ravished ears,
Danting bold thoughts, but cheering modest fears:
The spheres so only sing, so only charm the spheres.
37
Her dainty breasts, like to an April rose
From green-silk fillets yet not all unbound,
Began their little rising heads disclose,
And fairly spread their silver circlets round:
From those two bulwarks Love does safely fight;
Which swelling easily, may seem to sight
To be enwombed both of pleasure and delight.
38
Yet all these Stars which deck this beauteous sky,
By force of the inward Sun both shine and move:
Throned in her heart sits Loves high majesty;
In highest majesty the highest Love.
As when a taper shines in glassie frame,
The sparkling crystal burns in glittering flame:
So does that brightest Love brighten this lovely dame.
39
Thus, and much fairer, fair Parthenia
Glist'ring in arms, her self presents to sight;
As when the Amazon Queen, Hippolyta,
With Theseus entered lists in single fight,
With equal arms her mighty foe opposing;
Till now her bared head her face disclosing,
Conquered the conqueror, and wan the fight by losing.
40
A thousand Knights wooed her with busy pain,
To thousand she her virgin grant denied;
Although her deare-sought love to entertain
They all their wit and all their strength applied:
Yet in her heart Love close his scepter swayd,
That to an heavenly spouse her thoughts betrayed,
Where she a maiden wife might live, and wifely maid.
41
Upon her steps a virgin Page attended,
Fair Modesty.
Erythre, whose often-blushing face
Sweetly her in-born shame-fac't thoughts commended;
The faces change proved the hearts unchanged grace,
Which she a shrine to purity devotes:
So when clear ivorie vermeil fitly blots,
By stains it fairer grows, and lovelier by its spots.
42
Her golden hair, her silver forehead high,
Her teeth of solid, eyes of liquid pearl;
But neck and breast no man might bare descrie,
So sweetly modest was this bashful girl:
But that sweet paradise (ah!) could we see,
On these white mountlets daintier apples be,
Then those we bought so dear on Edens tempting tree.
43
These noble Knights this threatened fort defend;
These, and a thousand more heroic Swains,
That to this 'stressed State their service lend,
To free from force, and save from captive chains.
But now too late the battle to recite;
For Hesperus heavens tapers 'gins to light,
And warns each star to wait upon their Mistres Night.
CANT. XI.
THe early Morn lets out the peeping day,
And strewn his paths with golden Marygolds:
The Moon grows wanne, and stars fly all away,
Whom Lucifer locks up in wonted folds,
Till light is quenched, and heaven in seas has flung
The headlong day: to the hill the shepherds throng,
And Thirsil now began to end his task and song.
2
Who now (alas!) shall teach my humble vein,
That never yet durst peep from covert glade;
But softly learnt for fear to sigh and plain,
And vent her griefs to silent myrtils shade?
Who now shall teach to change my oaten quill
For trumpet 'larms, or humble verses fill
With graceful majesty, and lofty rising skill?
3
Ah thou dread Spirit, shed thy holy fire,
Thy holy flame into my frozen heart;
Teach thou my creeping measures to aspire,
And swell in bigger notes, and higher art:
Teach my low Muse thy fierce alarums ring,
And raise my soft strain to high thundering:
Tune thou my lofty song; thy battles must I sing.
4
Such as thou were within the sacred breast
Of that thrice famous Poet-Shepherd-King;
And taught'st his heart to frame his Canto's best
Of all that e're thy glorious works did sing:
Or as those holy Fishers once amongs
Thou flamedst bright with sparkling parted tongues,
And brought down heaven to earth in those all-conqu'ring songs.
5
These mighty Heroes, filled with justest rage
To be in narrow walls so closely pent,
Glittering in arms, and goodly equipage,
Stood at the Castles gate, now ready bent
To sally out, and meet the enemy:
A hot disdain sparkled in every eye,
Breathing out hateful war, and deadly enmity.
6
Thither repairs the careful Intellect,
With his fair Spouse Voletta, heavenly fair:
With both, their daughter; whose divine aspect,
Though now sad damps of sorrow much empair,
Yet through those clouds did shine so glorious bright,
That every eye did homage to the sight,
Yielding their captive hearts to that commanding light.
7
But who may hope to paint such majesty,
Or shadow well such beauty, such a face,
Such beauteous face, unseen to mortal eye?
Whose powerful looks, and more then mortal grace*
Loves self has loved, leaving his heavenly throne,
With amorous sighs, and many a lovely moan
(Whom all the world would woo) wooed her his only one.
8
Far be that boldness from thy humble swain,
Fairest Ectecta, to describe thy beauty,
And with unable skill thy glory stain,
Which ever he admires with humble duty:
But who to view such blaze of beauty longs,
Go he to Sinah, the holy groves amongs;
Where that wise Shepherd chants her in his Song of songs.
9
The Islands King with sober countenance
Aggrates the Knights, who thus his right defended;
And with grave speech, and comely amenance
Himself, his State, his Spouse, to them commended:
His lovely child, that by him pensive stands,
He last delivers to their valiant hands;
And her to thank the Knights, her Champions, he commands.
10
The God-like Maid a while all silent stood,
And down to the earth let fall her humble eyes;
While modest thoughts shot up the flaming blood,
Which fired her scarlet cheek with rosy dies:
But soon to quench the heat, that lordly reigns,
From her fair eye a shower of crystal rains,
Which with his silver streams o're-runs the beauteous plains.
11
As when the Sun in midst of summers heat
Draws up thin vapors with his potent ray,
Forcing dull waters from their native seat;
At length dim clouds shadow the burning day:
Till coldest air, soon melted into showers,
Upon the earth his welcome anger powers,
And heavens clear forehead now wipes off her former lowres.
12
At length a little lifting up her eyes,
A renting sigh way for her sorrow brake,
Which from her heart 'gan in her face to rise,
And first in the eye, then in the lip thus spoke;
Ah gentle Knights, how may a simple maid,
With justest grief and wrong so ill apaid,
Give due reward for such your pains, and friendly aid?
13
But if my Princely Spouse do not delay
His timely presence in my greatest need,
He will for me your friendly love repay,
And well requite this your so gentle deed:
Then let no fear your mighty hearts assail:
His word's himself; himself he cannot fail.
Long may he stay, yet sure he comes, and must prevail.
14
By this the long-shut gate was open laid;
Soon out they rush in order well arang'd:
And fastening in their eyes that heavenly Maid,
How often for fear her fairest color changed!
Her looks, her worth, her goodly grace, and state
Comparing with her present wretched fate,
Pity whets just revenge, and loves fire kindles hate.
15
Long at the gate the thoughtfull Intellect
Staid with his fearful Queen, and daughter fair;
But when the Knights were past their dim aspect,
They follow them with vows, and many a prayer:
At last they climb up to the Castles height;
From which they viewed the deeds of every Knight,
And marked the doubtful end of this intestine fight.
16
As when a youth, bound for the Belgic war,
Takes leave of friends upon the Kentish shore;
Now are they parted, and he sailed so far,
They see not now, and now are seen no more:
Yet far off viewing the white trembling sails,
The tender mother soon plucks off her veils,
And shaking them aloft, unto her son she hails.
17
Mean time these Champions march in fit array,
Till both the armies now were come in sight:
A while each other boldly viewing stay,
With short delays whetting fierce rage and spite.
Sound now ye trumpets, sound alarums loud;
Hark how their clamours whet their anger proud:
See, yonder are they met in midst of dustie cloud.
18
So often the South with civil enmity
Musters his watrie forces against the West;
The rolling clouds come tumbling up the sky,
In dark folds wrapping up their angry guest:
At length the flame breaks from the imprisoning cold,
With horrid noise tearing the limber mold;
While down in liquid tears the broken vapors rolled.
19
First did that warlike Maid her self advance;
And riding from amidst her company,
About her helmet waved her mighty lance,
Daring to fight the proudest enemy:
Porneios soon his ready spear addressed,
And kicking with his heel his hasty beast,
Bent his sharp-headed lance against her dainty breast.
20
In vain the broken staff sought entrance there,
Where Love himself often entrance sought in vain:
But much unlike the Martial Virgins spear,
Which low dismounts her foe on dustie plain,
Broaching with bloody point his breast before:
Down from the wound trickled the bubbling gore,
And bid pale death come in at that red gaping door.
21
There lies he covered now in lowly dust,
And foully wallowing in clutter'd blood,
Breathing together out his life and lust,
Which from his breast swamme in the steaming flood:
In maids his joy; now by a maid defied,
His life he lost, and all his former pride:
With women would he live, now by a woman di'd.
22
Aselges, struck with such a heavy sight,
Greedy to venge his brothers sad decay,
Spurred forth his flying steed with fell despite,
And met the virgin in the middle way:
His spear against her head he fiercely threw,
Which to that face performing homage due,
Kissing her helmet, thence in thousand shivers flew.
23
The wanton boy had dreamt that latest night,
That he had learnt the liquid air dispart,
And swim along the heavens with pineons light;
Now that fair maid taught him this nimble art:
For from his saddle far away she sent,
Flying along the empty element;
That hardly yet he knew whither his course was bent.
24
The rest that saw with fear the ill success
Of single fight, durst not like fortune try;
But round beset her with their numerous press:
Before, beside, behind they on her fly,
And every part with coward odds assail:
But she redoubling strokes as thick as hail,
Drove far their flying troops, and thresht with iron flail.
25
As when a gentle greyhound set around
With little curres, which dare his way molest,
Snapping behind; soon as the angry hound
Turning his course, has caught the busiest,
And shaking in his fangs has welnigh slain;
The rest feared with his crying, run amain;
And standing all aloof whine, houl, and bark in vain.
26
The subtle Dragon, that from far did view
The waste and spoil made by this maiden Knight,
Fell to his wonted guile; for well he knew
All force was vain against such wondrous might:
A crafty swain well taught to cunning harms,
Called false Delight, he changed with hellish charms;
That true Delight he seemed, the self-same shape and arms.
27
The watchfull'st sight no difference could descrie;
The same his face, his voice, his gate the same:
Thereto his words he feigned; and coming nigh
The Maid, that fierce pursues her martial game,
He whets her wrath with many a guilefull word,
Till she less careful did fit time afford:
Then up with both his hands he lifts his balefull sword.
28
You powerful heavens! and thou their Governor!
With what eyes can you view this doleful sight?
How can you see your fairest Conqueror
So nigh her end by so unmanly slight?
The dreadful weapon through the air does glide;
But sure you turned the harmfull edge aside:
Else must she there have fallen, and by that traitor di'd.
29
Yet in her side deep was the wound impight;
Her flowing life the shining armor stains:
From that wide spring long rivers took their flight,
With purple streams drowning the silver plains:
Her cheerful color now grows wanne and pale,
Which often she strives with courage to recall,
And rouse her fainting head, which down as often would fall.
30
All so a Lilie, pressed with heavy rain,
Which fills her cup with showers up to the brinks;
The weary stalk no longer can sustain
The head, but low beneath the burden sinks:
Or as a virgin Rose her leaves displayes,
Whom too hot scorching beams quite disarayes;
Down flags her double ruff, and all her sweet decays.
31
The undanted Maid, feeling her feet deny
Their wonted duty, to a tree retired;
Whom all the rout pursue with deadly cry:
As when a hunted Stag, now welnigh tired,
Shor'd by an oak, 'gins with his head to play;
The fearful hounds dare not his horns assay,
But running round about, with yelping voices bay.
32
And now perceiving all her strength was spent,
Lifting to listening heaven her trembling eyes,
Thus whispring soft, her soul to heaven she sent;
Thou chastest Love, that rul'st the wandering skies,
More pure then purest heavens by thee moved;
If thine own love in me thou sure have proved;
If ever thou my self, my vows, my love have loved.
33
Let not this Temple of thy spotless love
Be with foul hand and beastly rage defiled:
But when my spirit shall his camp remove,
And to his home return, too long exiled;
Do thou protect it from the ravenous spoil
Of ranc'rous enemies, that hourly toil
Thy humble votarie with loathsome spot to foil.
34
With this few drops fell from her fainting eyes,
To dew the fading roses of her cheek;
That much high Love seemed passion'd with those cries;
Much more those streams his heart and patience break:
Straight he the charge gives to a winged Swain,
Quickly to step down to that bloody plain,
And aid her weary arms, and rightful cause maintain.
35
Soon stoops the speedy Herald through the air,
Where chaste Agneia and Encrates fought:
See, see, he cries, where your Parthenia fair,
The flower of all your army, hemmed about
With thousand enemies, now fainting stands,
Ready to fall into their murdring hands:
Hie ye, oh hie ye fast; the highest Love commands.
36
They casting round about their angry eye,
The wounded Virgin almost sinking spied:
They prick their steeds, which straight like lightning fly:
Their brother Continence runs by their side;
Fair Continence, that truly long before
As his hearts liege, this Lady did adore:
And now his faithful love kindled his hate the more.
37
Encrates and his Spouse with flashing sword
Assail the scattered troops, that headlong fly;
While Continence a precious liquour poured
Into the wound, and suppled tenderly:
Then binding up the gaping orifice,
Revived the spirits, that now she 'gan to rise,
And with new life confront her heartlesse enemies.
38
So have I often seen a purple flower
Fainting through heat, hang down her drooping head;
But soon refreshed with a welcome shower,
Begins again her lively beauties spread,
And with new pride her silken leaves display;
And while the Sun does now more gently play,
Lay out her swelling bosom to the smiling day.
39
Now rush they all into the flying trains;
Blood fires their blood, and slaughter kindles fight:
The wretched vulgar on the purple plains
Fall down as thick, as when a rustic wight
From laden oaks the plenteous akorns poures,
Or when the blubbring air sadly lowres,
And melts his sullen brow, and weeps sweet April showers.
40
The greedy Dragon, that aloof did spy
So ill success of this renewed fray;
More vexed with loss of certain victory,
Deprived of so assured and wished prey,
Gnashed his iron teeth for grief and spite:
The burning sparks leap from his flaming sight,
And forth his smoking jaws steams out a smouldring night.
41
Straight thither sends he in a fresh supply,
The swelling band that drunken Methos led,
And all the rout his brother Gluttony
Commands, in lawless bands disordered:
So now they bold restore their broken fight,
And fiercely turn again from shameful flight;
While both with former loss sharpen their raging spite.
42
Freshly these Knights assault these fresher bands,
And with new battle all their strength renew:
Down fell Geloios by Encrates hands,
Agneia Moechus and Anagnus slew;
And spying Methos fenc't in's iron vine,
Pierced his swollen panch: there lies the grunting swine,
And spues his liquid soul out in his purple wine.
43
As when a greedy lion, long unfed,
Breaks in at length into the harmless folds;
(So hungry rage commands) with fearful dread
He drags the silly beasts: nothing controlls
The victour proud; he spoils, devours, and tears:
In vain the keeper calls his shepherd peers:
Mean while the simple flock gaze on with silent fears:
44
Such was the slaughter these three Champions made;
But most Encrates, whose unconquered hands
Sent thousand foes down to the infernal shade,
With useless limbs strewing the bloody sands:
Often were they succourd fresh with new supplies,
But fell as often: the Dragon grown more wise
By former loss, began another way devise.
45
Soon to their aid the Cyprian band he sent,
For easy skirmish clad in armor light:
Their golden bows in hand stood ready bent,
And painted quivers (furnished well for fight)
Stuck full of shafts, whose heads foul poison stains;
Which dipped in Phlegethon by hellish swains,
Bring thousand painful deaths, and thousand deadly pains.
46
Thereto of substance strange, so thin, and slight,
And wrought by subtle hand so cunningly,
That hardly were discerned by weaker fight;
Sooner the heart did feel, then eye could see:
Far off they stood, and flung their darts around,
Raining whole clouds of arrows on the ground;
So safely others hurt, and never wounded wound.
47
Much were the Knights encumbred with these foes;
For well they saw, and felt their enemies:
But when they back would turn the borrowed blows,
The light-foot troop away more swiftly flies,
Then do their winged arrows through the wind:
And in their course often would they turn behind,
And with their glancing darts their hot pursuers blind.
48
As when by Russian Volgha's frozen banks
The false-back Tartars fear with cunning feign,
And poasting fast away in flying ranks,
Often backward turn, and from their bows down rain
Whole storms of darts; so do they flying fight:
And what by force they lose, they win by slight;
Conquered by standing out, and conquerours by flight:
49
Such was the craft of this false Cyprian crew:
Yet often they seemed to slack their fearful pace,
And yield themselves to foes that fast pursue;
So would they deeper wound in nearer space:
In such a fight he winnes, that fastest flies.
Fly, fly, chaste Knights, such subtle enemies:
The vanquished cannot live, and conqu'rour surely dies.
50
The Knights oppressed with wounds and travel past,
Began retire, and now were near to fainting:
With that a winged Poast him speeded fast,
The General with these heavy news acquainting:
He soon refresht their hearts that 'gan to tire.
But let our weary Muse a while respire:
Shade we our scorched heads from Phoebus parching fire.
CANT. XII.
THe shepherds guarded from the sparkling heat
Of blazing air, upon the flowrie banks,
(Where various flowers damask the fragrant seat,
And all the grove perfume) in wonted ranks
Securely sit them down, and sweetly play:
At length thus Thirsil ends his broken lay,
Left that the stealing night his later song might stay.
2
Thrice, oh thrice happy shepherds life and state,
When Courts are happiness unhappie pawns!
His cottage low, and safely humble gate
Shuts out proud fortune, with her scorns, and fawns:
No feared treason breaks his quiet sleep:
Singing all day, his flocks he learns to keep;
Himself as innocent as are his simple sheep.
3
No Serian worms he knows, that with their thread
Draw out their silken lives; nor silken pride:
His lambs warm fleece well fits his little need,
Not in that proud Sidonian tincture di'd:
No empty hopes, no courtly fears him fright;
No begging wants his middle fortune bite:
But sweet content exiles both misery and spite.
4
In stead of music and base flattering tongues,
Which wait to first-salute my Lords uprise;
The cheerful lark wakes him with early songs,
And birds sweet whistling notes unlock his eyes:
In country plays is all the strife he uses,
Or sing, or dance unto the rural Muses;
And but in musicks sports, all difference refuses.
5
His certain life, that never can deceive him,
Is full of thousand sweets, and rich content:
The smooth-leav'd beeches in the field receive him
With coolest shades, till noon-tides rage is spent:
His life is neither tossed in boisterous seas
Of troublous world, nor lost in slothful ease:
Pleased and full blessed he lives, when he his God can please.
6
His bed of wool yields safe and quiet sleeps,
While by his side his faithful spouse has place:
His little son into his bosom creeps,
The lively picture of his fathers face:
Never his humble house or state torment him;
Less he could like, if less his God had sent him:
And when he dies, green turfs with grassie tomb content him.
7
The worlds great Light his lowly state has blessed,
And left his heaven to be a shepherd base:
Thousand sweet songs he to his pipe addressed:
Swift rivers stood; beasts, trees, stones ran apace,
And serpents flew to hear his softest strains:
He fed his flock, where rolling Jordan reigns;
There took our rags, gave us his robes, and bore our pains.
8
Then thou high Light, whom shepherds low adore,
Teach me, oh do thou teach thy humble swain
To raise my creeping song from earthly floor:
Fill thou my empty breast with lofty strain;
That singing of thy wars and dreadful fight,
My notes may thunder out thy conquering might,
And 'twixt the golden stars cut out her towering flight.
9
The mighty General moved with the news
Of those four famous Knights so near decay,
With hasty speed the conquering foe pursues;
At last he spies where they were led away,
Forced to obey the Victours proud commands:
Soon did he rush into the middle bands,
And cut the slavish cords from their captived hands.
10
And for the Knights were faint, he quickly sent
To Penitence, whom Phoebus taught his art;
Which she had eakt with long experiment:
For many a soul, and many a wounded heart
Had she restored, and brought to life again
The broken spirit, with grief and horror slain;
That often revived, yet di'd as often with smarting pain.
11
For she in several baths their wounds did steep;
The first of Rue which purged the foul infection,
And cured the deepest wound, by wounding deep:
Then would she make another strange confection,
And mix it with Nepenthe sovereign;
Wherewith she quickly swag'd the rankling pain:
Thus she the Knights recur'd, and washed from sinful stain.
12
Mean time the fight now fiercer grows then ever:
(For all his troops the Dragon hither drew)
The two Twin- Loves, whom no place might dissever,
And Knowledge with his train begins anew
To strike fresh summons up, and hot alarms:
In midst great Fido, clad in sunne-like arms,
With his unmatched force repairs all former harms.
13
So when the Sun shines in bright Taurus head,
Returning tempests all with winter fill;
And still successive storms fresh mustered
The timely year in his first springings kill:
And often it breathes a while, then straight again
Doubly powers out his spite in smoking rain:
The countries vows and hopes swim on the drowned plain.
14
The lovely Twins ride against the Cyprian bands,
Chasing their troops now with no feigned flight:
Their broken shafts lie scattered on the sands,
Themselves for fear quite vanished out of sight:
Against these conquerours Hypocrisy,
And Cosmo's hated bands, with Echthros sly,
And all that rout do march, and bold the Twins defy.
15
Elpinus mighty enemies assail;
But Doubt of all the other most infested;
That often his fainting courage 'gan to fail,
More by his craft then ods of force molested:
For often the treachour changed his weapon light,
And sudden altered his first kind of fight,
And often himself and shape transformed with cunning slight.
16
So that great river, with Alcides striving
In Oeneus court for the Aetolian Maid,
To diverse shapes his fluent limbs contriving,
From manly form in serpents frame he staid,
Sweeping with speckled breast the dustie land;
Then like a bull with horns did armed stand:
His hanging dewlap trail'd along the golden sand.
17
Such shapes and changing fashions much dismayed him,
That often he staggered with unwonted fright;
And but his brother Fido often did aid him,
There had he fell in unacquainted fight:
But he would still his wavering strength maintain,
And chase that Monster through the sandy plain;
Which from him fled apace, but often returned again.
18
Yet him more strong and cunning foes withstand,
Whom he with greater skill and strength defied:
Foul Ignorance, with all her owl-ey'd band;
Oft-starting Fear, Distrust never satisfied,
And fond Suspect, and thousand other foes;
Whom far he drives with his unequal blows,
And with his flaming sword their fainting army mows.
19
As when bloud-guilty earth for vengeance cries,
(If greatest things with less we may compare)
The mighty Thunderer through the air flies,
While snatching whirlwinds open ways prepare:
Dark clouds spread out their sable curtains over him;
And Angels on their flaming wings up bore him:
Mean time the guilty heavens for fear fly fast before him
20
There while he on the winds proud pineons rides,
Down with his fire some lofty mount he throws,
And fills the low vale with his ruined sides;
Or on some church his three-forkt dart bestows;
(Which yet his sacred worship foul mistakes)
Down falls the spire, the body fearful quakes;
Nor sure to fall, or stand, with doubtful trembling shakes.
21
With Fido Knowledge went, who ordered right
His mighty hands: so now his scattered troops
Make head again, filling their broken fight;
While with new change the Dragons army droops,
And from the following victours headlong run:
Yet still the Dragon frustrates what is done;
And easily makes them lose what they so hardly won
22
Out of his gorge a hellish smoke he drew,
That all the field with foggie mist enwraps;
As when Tiphoeus from his panch does spew
Black smothering flames, rolled in loud thunderclaps:
The pitchie vapors choke the shining ray,
And bring dull night upon the smiling day;
The wavering Aetna shakes, and fain would run away.
23
Yet could his bat-ey'd legions easily see
In this dark Chaos; they the seed of night:
But these not so, who night and darkness flee;
For they the sons of day, and joy in light:
But Knowledge soon began a way devise,
To bring again the day, and clear their eyes:
So opened Fido's shield, and golden veil unties.
24
Of one pure diamond, celestial fair,
That heavenly shield by cunning hand was made;
Whose light divine, spread through the mistie air,
To brightest morn would turn the Western shade,
And lightsome day beget before his time;
Framed in heaven without all earthly crime;
Dipped in the fiery Sun, which burnt the baser slime.
25
As when from fennie moors the lumpish clouds
With rising steams damp the bright mornings face;
At length the piercing Sun his team unshrouds,
And with his arrows the idle fogge does chase:
The broken mist lies melted all in tears:
So this bright shield the stinking darkness tears,
And giving back the day, dissolves their former fears.
26
Which when afar the fiery Dragon spies,
His slights deluded with so little pain;
To his last refuge now at length he flies:
Long time his poisonous gorge he seemed to strain;
At length with loathly sight he up does spue
From stinking panch a most deformed crew,
That heaven it self did fly from their most ugly view.
27
The first that crept from his detested maw,
Was Sin.
Hamartia, foul deformed wight;
More foul, deformed, the Sun yet never saw;
Therefore she hates the all-betraying light:
A woman seemed she in her upper part;
To which she could such lying gloss impart,
That thousands she had slain with her deceiving art.
28
The rest (though hid) in serpents form arayd,
With iron scales, like to a plaited mail:
Over her back her knotty tail displaid,
Along the empty air did lofty sail:
The end was pointed with a double sting,
Which with such dreaded might she wont to fling,
That naught could help the wound, but blood of heavenly King.
29
Of that first woman her the Dragon got,
(The foulest bastard of so fair a mother)
Whom when she saw so filled with monstrous spot,
She cast her hidden shame and birth to smother;
But she welnigh her mothers self had slain:
And all that dare her kindly entertain;
So some parts of her damme, more of her sire remain.
30
Her viperous locks hung loose about her ears;
Yet with a monstrous snake she them restrains,
Which like a border on her head she wears:
About her neck hang down long adder chains,
In thousand knots, and wreaths infolded round;
Which in her anger lightly she unbound,
And darting far away would sure and deadly wound.
31
Yet fair and lovely seems to fools dim eyes;
But hell more lovely, Pluto's self more fair
Appears, when her true form true light descries:
Her loathsome face, blancht skin, and snakie hair,
Her shapelesse shape, dead life, her carrion smell,
The devils dung, the child and damme of hell,
Is chaffer fit for fools their precious souls to sell.
32
The second in this rank was black Despair,
Bred in the dark womb of eternal Night:
His looks fast nailed to Sin, long sootie hair
Filled up his lank cheeks with wide-staring fright:
His leaden eyes, retired into his head,
Light, heaven, and earth, himself, and all things fled:
A breathing coarse he seemed, wrapped up in living lead.
33
His body all was framed of earthly paste,
And heavy mold; yet earth could not content him:
Heaven fast he flies, and heaven fled him as fast;
Though 'kin to hell, yet hell did much torment him:
His very soul was naught but ghastly fright:
With him went many a fiend, and ugly sprite,
Armed with ropes and knives, all instruments of spite.
34
In stead of feathers, on his dangling crest
A lucklesse Raven spread her blackest wings;
And to her croaking throat gave never rest,
But deathfull verses and sad dirges sings:
His hellish arms were all with fiends embost,
Who damned souls with endless torments roast,
And thousand ways devise to vex the tortured ghost.
35
Two weapons sharp as death he ever bore;
Strict Judgment, which from far he deadly darts;
Sin at his side, a two edged sword, he wore,
With which he soon appalls the stoutest hearts:
Upon his shield Alecto with a wreath
Of snakie whips the damned souls tortureth:
And round about was wrote, Reward of sin is death.
36
The last two brethren were far different,
Only in common name of death agreeing;
The first armed with a sith still mowing went;
Yet whom, and when he murdered, never seeing;
Born deaf, and blind: nothing might stop his way:
No prayers, no vows his keenest sith could stay;
Nor Beauties self his spite, nor Virtues self allay.
37
No state, no age, no sex may hope to move him;
Down falls the young, and old, the boy, and maid:
Nor beggar can entreat, nor King reprove him;
All are his slaves in's cloth of flesh araid:
The bride he snatches from the bridegrooms arms,
And horror brings, in midst of loves alarms:
Too well we know his power by long experienced harms.
38
A dead man's skull supplied his helmets place,
A bone his club, his armor sheets of lead:
Some more, some less fear his all-frighting face;
But most who sleep in downie pleasures bed:
But who in life have daily learnt to die,
And dead to this, live to a life more high;
Sweetly in death they sleep, and slumbring quiet lie.
39
The second far more foul in every part,
Burnt with blue fire, and bubbling sulphur streams;
Which creeping round about him, filled with smart
His cursed limbs, that direly he blasphemes:
Most strange it seems, that burning thus for ever,
No rest, no time, no place these flames may sever:
Yet death in thousand deaths without death dies never.
40
Soon as these hellish monsters came in sight,
The Sun his eye in jettie vapors drowned,
Scared at such hell hounds view; heavens 'mazed light
Sets in an early evening; earth astound,
Bids dogs with houls give warning: at which sound*
The fearful air starts, seas break their bound,
And frighted fled away; no sands might them impound.
41
The palsied troop first (like asps shaken) fare;
Till now their heart, congealed in icie blood,
Candied the ghastly face; locks stand and stare:
Thus charmed, in ranks of stone they marshalled stood:
Their useless swords fell idly on the plain,
And now the triumph sounds in lofty strain;
So conquering Dragon binds the Knights with slavish chain.
42
As when proud Phineus in his brothers feast
Filled all with tumult, and intestine broil;
Wise Perseus, with such multitudes oppressed,
Before him bore the snakie Gorgons spoil:
The vulgar rude stood all in marble changed,
And in vain ranks and rockie order ranged,
Were now more quiet guests, from former rage estranged.
43
The fair Eclecta, who with grief had stood,
Viewing the often changes of this doubtful fight,
Saw now the field swim in her Champions blood,
And from her heart, rent with deep passion, sighed;
Limming true sorrow in sad silent art.
Light grief floats on the tongue; but heavy smart
Sinks down, and deeply lies in center of the heart.
44
What Daedal art such griefs can truly show,
Broke heart, deep sighs, thick sobs, and burning prayers,
Baptizing ever limb in weeping dew?
Whose swollen eyes, pickled up in brinie tears,
Crystalline rocks, coral the lid appears,
Compast about with tides of grief and fears;
Where grief stores fear with sighs, and fear stores grief with tears.
45
At length sad Sorrow, mounted on the wings
Of loud-breath'd sighs, his leaden weight uprears;
And vents it self in softest whisperings,
Followed with deadly groans, ushered by tears:
While her fair hands, and watrie shining eyes
Were upward bent upon the mourning skies,
Which seemed with cloudie brow her grief to sympathize.
46
Long while the silent passion, wanting vent,
Made flowing tears her words, and eyes her tongue;
Till Faith, Experience, Hope assistance lent
To shut both floud-gates up with patience strong:
The streams well ebbed, new hopes some comforts borrow
From firmest truth; then glimpst the hopeful morrow:
So spring some dawns of joy, so sets the night of sorrow.
47
Ah dearest Lord, my hearts sole Sovereign,
Who sitt'st high mounted on thy burning throne;
Hark from thy heavens, where thou do safely reign,
Clothed with the golden Sun, and silver Moon:
Cast down a while thy sweet and gracious eye,
And low avail that flaming Majesty,
Deigning thy gentle sight on our sad misery.
48
To thee, dear Lord, I lift this watrie eye,
This eye which thou so often in love Cant. 1.15.
have praised;
This eye with which thou Cant. 4.9.
wounded often would die;
To thee (dear Lord) these suppliant hands are raised:
These to be lilies thou have often told me;
Which if but once again may ever hold thee,
Will never let thee loose, will never more unfold thee.
49
See how thy foes despitefull trophies rear,
Too confident in thy prolonged delays?
Come then, oh quickly come, my dearest dear:
When shall I see thee crowned with conquering bays,
And all thy foes trod down, and spread as clay?
When shall I see thy face, and glories ray?
Too long thou stay'st, my Love; come Love, no longer stay.
50
Have thou forgot thy former word and love,
Or locked thy sweetness up in fierce disdain?
In vain did thou those thousand mischiefs prove?
Are all those griefs, thy birth, life, death in vain?
Oh no; of ill thou only do repent thee,
And in thy dainty mercies most content thee:
Then why with stay so long so long do thou torment me?
51
Reviving Cordial of my dying sprite,
The best Elixar for souls drooping pain;
Ah now unshade thy face, uncloud thy sight;
See, every way's a trap, each path's a train:
Hells troops my soul beleaguer; bow thine ears,
And hear my cries pierce through my groans and fears:
Sweet Spouse, see not my sins, but through my plaints and tears.
52
Let frailty favor, sorrow succor move;
Anchour my life in thy calm streams of blood:
Be thou my rock, though I poor changeling rove,
Tossed up and down in waves of worldly flood:
Whilst I in vale of tears at anchour ride,
Where winds of earthly thoughts my sails misguide,
Harbor my fleshly bark safe in thy wounded side.
53
Take, take my contrite heart, thy sacrifice,
Washed in her eyes that swimmes and sinks in woes:
See, see, as seas with winds high working rise,
So storm, so rage, so gape thy boasting foes.
Dear Spouse, unless thy right hand even steers,
Oh if thou anchour not these threatening fears;
Thy ark will sail as deep in blood, as now in tears.
54
With that a thundering noise seemed shake the sky,
As when with iron wheels through stony plain
A thousand chariots to the battle fly;
Or when with boistrous rage the swelling main,
Puffed up with mighty winds, does hoarsly roar;
And beating with his waves the trembling shore,
His sandy girdle scorns, and breaks earths ramperd door
55
And straight Our late most learned Sovereign in his remonstrance and comment
on the Apocal.
an Angel full of heavenly might,
(Three several crowns circled his royal head)
From Northern coast heaving his blazing light,
Through all the earth his glorious beams dispread,
And open lays the Beasts and Dragons shame:
For to this end the Almighty did him frame,
And therefore from supplanting gave his ominous name
56
A silver trumpet often he loudly blew,
Frighting the guilty earth with thundering knell;
And often proclaimed, as through the world he flew,
Babel, great Babel lies as low as hell:
Let every Angel loud his trumpet sound,
Her heaven exalted towers in dust are drowned:
Babel, proud Babel's fallen, and lies as low as ground.
57
The broken heavens dispart with fearful noise,
And from the breach out shoots a sudden light;
Straight shrilling trumpets with loud sounding voice
Give echoing summons to new bloody fight:
Well knew the Dragon that all-quelling blast,
And soon perceived that day must be his last;
Which struck his frighted heart, and all his troops aghast.
58
Yet full of malice and of stubborn pride,
Though often had strove, and had been foild as often,
Boldly his death and certain fate defied:
And mounted on his flaggie sails aloft,
With boundless spite he longed to try again
A second loss, and new death; glad and fain
To show his poisonous hate, though ever showed in vain.
59
So up he rose upon his stretched fails,
Fearlesse expecting his approaching death:
So up he rose, that the air starts, and fails,
And over-pressed sinks his load beneath:
So up he rose, as does a thunder-cloud,
Which all the earth with shadows black does shroud:
So up he rose, and through the weary air rowed.
60
Now his Almighty foe far off he spies;
Whose Sun-like arms daz'd the eclipsed day,
Confounding with their beams lesse-glitt'ring skies,
Firing the air with more then heavenly ray;
Like thousand Suns in one: such is their light;
A subject only for immortal sprite,
Which never can be seen, but by immortal sight.
61
His threatening eyes shine like that dreadful flame,
With which the Thunderer arms his angry hand:
Himself had fairly wrote his wondrous name,
Which neither earth nor heaven could understand:
A hundred crowns, like towers, beset around
His conquering head: well may they there abound,
When all his limbs and troops with gold are richly crowned.
62
His armor all was died in purple blood;
(In purple blood of thousand rebel Kings)
In vain their stubborn powers his arm withstood:
Their proud necks chained he now in triumph brings,
And breaks their spears, and cracks their traitor swords
Upon whose arms and thigh, in golden words
Was fairly writ, The KING of Kings, and LORD of Lords.
63
His snow-white steed was born of heavenly kind,
Begot by Boreas on the Thracian hills;
More strong and speedy then his parent Wind:
And (which his foes with fear and horror fills)
Out from his mouth a two-edged sword he darts;
Whose sharpest steel the bone and marrow parts,
And with his keenest point unbreasts the naked hearts.
64
The Dragon, wounded with this flaming brand,
They take, and in strong bonds and fetters tie:
Short was the fight, nor could he long withstand
Him, whose appearance is his victory.
So now he is bound in adamantine chain;
He storms, he roars, he yells for high disdain:
His net is broke, the fowl go free, the fowler taken.
65
Thence by a mighty Swain he soon was led
Unto a thousand thousand torturings:
His tail, whose folds were wont the stars to shed,
Now stretched at length, close to his belly clings:
Soon as the pit he sees, he back retires,
And battle new, but all in vain, respires:
So there he deeply lies, flaming in icie fires.
66
As when Alcides from forced hell had drawn
The three-head dog, and mastered all his pride;
Basely the fiend did on his Victour fawn,
With serpent tail clapping his hollow side:
At length arrived upon the brink of light,
He shuts the day out of his dullard sight,
And swelling all in vain renews unhappie fight.
67
Soon at this sight the Knights revive again,
As fresh as when the flowers from winter tomb
(When now the Sun brings back his nearer wain)
Peep out again from their fresh mothers womb:
The primrose lighted new, her flame displayes,
And frights the neighbor hedge with fiery rays:
And all the world renew their mirth and sportive plays.
68
The Prince, who saw his long imprisonment
Now end in never-ending liberty;
To meet the Victour, from his castle went,
And falling down, clasping his royal knee,
Poures out deserved thanks in grateful praise:
But him the heavenly Savior soon does raise,
And bids him spend in joy his never spending days.
69
The fair Eclecta, that with widowed brow
Her absent Lord long mourned in sad array,
Now Revel. 19.8.
silken linen clothed like frozen snow,
Whose silver spanglets sparkle against the day:
This shining robe her Lord himself had wrought,
While he her love with hundred presents sought,
And it with many a wound, and many a torment bought.
70
And thus arayd, her heavenly beauties shined
(Drawing their beams from his most glorious face)
Like to a precious Revel 21.11.
Jasper, pure refined;
Which with a Crystal mixed, much mends his grace:
The golden stars a garland fair did frame,
To crown her locks; the Sun lay hid for shame,
And yielded all his beams to her more glorious flame.
71
Ah who that flame can tell? ah who can see?
Enough is me with silence to admire;
While bolder joy, and humbe majesty
In either cheek had kindled graceful fire:
Long silent stood she, while her former fears
And griefs ran all away in sliding tears;
That like a watrie Sun her gladsome face appears.
72
At length when joys had left her closer heart,
To seat themselves upon her thankful tongue;
First in her eyes they sudden flashes dart,
Then forth in the music of her voice they throng;
My Hope, my Love, my Joy, my Life, my Bliss,
(Whom to enjoy is heaven, but hell to miss)
What are the worlds false joys, what heavens true joys to this?
73
Ah dearest Lord! does my rapt soul behold thee?
Am I awake? and sure I do not dream?
Do these thrice blessed arms again infold thee?
Too much delight makes true things feigned seem.
Thee, thee I see; thou, thou thus folded art:
For deep thy stamp is printed in my heart,
And thousand ne're-felt joys stream in each melting part.
74
Thus with glad sorrow did she sweetly plain her,
Upon his neck a welcome load depending;
While he with equal joy did entertain her,
Her self, her Champions, highly all commending:
So all in triumph to his palace went,
Whose work in narrow words may not be pent;
For boundless thought is less then is that glorious tent.
75
There sweet delights, which know nor end, nor measure;
No chance is there, nor eating times succeeding:
No wastfull spending can empair their treasure;
Pleasure full grown, yet ever freshly breeding:
Fullness of sweets excludes not more receiving:
The soul still big of joy, yet still conceiving;
Beyond slow tongues report, beyond quick thoughts perceiving.
76
There are they gone, there will they ever bide;
Swimming in waves of joys, and heavenly loves:
He still a Bridegroom, she a gladsome Bride;
Their hearts in love, like spheres still constant moving:
No change, no grief, no age can them befall:
Their bridal bed is in that heavenly hall,
Where all days are but one, and only one is all.
77
And as in state they thus in triumph ride,
The boys and damsels their just praises chaunt;
The boys the Bridegroom sing, the maids the Bride,
While all the hills glad Hymen's loudly vaunt:
Heavens winged shoals, greeting this glorious spring,
Attune their higher notes, and Hymen's sing:
Each thought to pass, and each did pass thoughts loftiest wing.
78
Upon his lightning brow Love proudly sitting
Flames out in power, shines out in majesty;
There all his lofty spoils and trophies fitting,
Displayes the marks of highest Deity:
There full of strength in lordly arms he stands,
And every heart, and every soul commands:
No heart, no soul his strength and lordly force withstands.
79
Upon her forehead thousand cheerful Graces,
Seated in thrones of spotless ivorie;
There gentle Love his armed hand unbraces,
His bow unbent disclaims all tyranny:
There by his play a thousand souls beguiles,
Persuading more by simple modest smiles,
Then ever he could force by arms, or crafty wiles.
80
Upon her cheek does Beauties self implant
The freshest garden of her choicest flowers;
On which if Envy might but glance ascant,
Her eyes would swell, and burst, and melt in showers:
Thrice fairer both then ever fairest eyed.
Heaven never such a Bridegroom yet descri'd;
Nor ever earth so fair, so undefiled a Bride.
81
Full of his Father shines his glorious face,
As far the Sun surpassing in his light,
As does the Sun the earth with flaming blaze:
Sweet influence streams from his quickening sight:
His beams from naught did all this All display;
And when to less then naught they fell away,
He soon restored again by his new orient ray.
82
All heaven shines forth in her sweet faces frame:
Her seeing Stars (which we miscall bright eyes)
More bright then is the mornings brightest flame,
More fruitful then the May-time Geminies:
These back restore the timely summers fire;
Those springing thoughts in winter hearts inspire,
Inspiriting dead souls, and quickening warm desire.
83
These two fair Suns in heavenly sphere are placed,
Where in the center Joy triumphing sits:
Thus in all high perfections fully graced,
Her midday bliss no future night admits;
But in the mirrours of her Spouses eyes
Her fairest self she dresses; there where lies
All sweets, a glorious beauty to emparadize.
84
His locks like ravens plumes, or shining jet,
Fall down in curls along his ivory neck;
Within their circlets hundred Graces set,
And with love-knots their comely hangings deck:
His mighty shoulders, like that Giant Swain,
All heaven and earth, and all in both sustain;
Yet knows no weariness, nor feels oppressing pain.
85
Her amber hair, like to the sunnie ray,
With gold enamels fair the silver white;
There heavenly loves their pretty sportings play,
Firing their darts in that wide flaming light:
Her dainty neck, spread with that silver mold,
Where double beauty does it self unfold,
In th'own fair silver shines, and fairer borrowed gold.
86
His breast a rock of purest alabaster,
Where Loves self sailing shipwrackt often sits;
Hers a twinne-rock, unknown, but to the ship-master;
Which harbors him alone, all other splitteth.
Where better could her love then here have nested?
Or he his thoughts then here more sweetly feasted?
Then both their love and thoughts in each are ever rested.
87
Run now you shepherd-swains; ah run you thither,
Where this fair Bridegroom leads the blessed way:
And haste you lovely maids, haste you together
With this sweet Bride; while yet the sunshine day
Guides your blind steps, while yet loud summons call,
That every wood and hill resounds withal,
Come Hymen, Hymen come, dressed in thy golden pall.
88
The sounding Echo back the music flung,
While heavenly spheres unto the voices played.
But see, the day is ended with my song,
And sporting bathes with that fair Ocean Maid:
Stoop now thy wing, my Muse, now stoop thee low:
Hence may thou freely play, and rest thee now;
While here I hang my pipe upon the willow bough.
89
So up they rose, while all the shepherds throng
With their loud pipes a country triumph blew,
And led their Thirsil home with joyful song:
Mean time the lovely Nymphs with garlands new
His locks in Bay and honored Palm Tree bound,
With Lilies set, and Hyacinths around;
And Lord of all the year, and their May-sportings crowned.
FINIS.
PISCATORIE ECLOGS, AND OTHER POETICAL MISCELLANIES.

By P. F.

Printed by the Printers to the UNIVERSITIE of CAMBRIDGE. 1633.

Anag Edward Benlowes, Sun-warde beloved.
While Panses Sun=ward look; that glorious Light
With gentle Beams entering their purple Bowers
Shedds there his Love, and heat, and fair to sight
Prints his bright form within their golden flowers.
Look in their Leaves, and see begotten there
The Sun^es less Son^e glitring in acure sphere.
So when from Shades of superstitious night
Mine eye turned to the Sun, his heavenly powers
Stamped on my newborn spirit his Image bright
And Love, Light, Life, into my bosom Showers.
This difference; They in themselves have moving,
But his sweet Love me dead, and Sensles proving,
First Loves, and draws to Love,
Then Lover my Soul for Loving.
P. F:.

ALIEGTIKO'N, OR, PISCATORIE ECLOGUES.
ECLOG. I. AMYNTAS.
IT was the time faithful Halcyone,
Once more enjoying new-liv'd Ceyx bed,
Had left her young birds to the wavering sea,
Bidding him calm his proud white-curled head,
And change his mountains to a champian lea;
The time when gentle Flora's lover reigns,
Soft creeping all along green Neptunes smoothest plains;
2
When hapless Thelgon (a poor fisher-swain)
Came from his boat to tell the rocks his plaining:
In rocks he found, and the high-swelling main
More sense, more pity far, more love remaining,
Then in the great Amyntas fierce disdain:
Was not his peer for song among all the lads,
Whole shrilling pipe, or voice the sea-born maiden glads.
3
About his head a rocky canopie,
And craggy hangings round a shadow threw,
Rebutting Phoebus parching fervencie;
Into his bosom Zephyr softly flew;
Hard by his feet the sea came waving by;
The while to seas and rocks (poor swain!) he sang;
The while the seas and rocks answ'ring loud echoes-rang.
4
You goodly Nymphs, that in your marble cell
In spending never spend your sportfull days,
Or when you list in pearled boats of shell
Glide on the dancing wave, that leaping plays
About the wanton skiffe, and you that dwell
In Neptunes court, the Oceans plenteous throng,
Deigne you to gently hear sad Thelgons plaining song.
5
When the raw blossom of my youth was yet
In my first childhoods green enclosure bound,
Of Aquadune I learnt to fold my net,
And spread the sail, and beat the river round,
And withy labyrinths in straits to set,
And guide my boat, where Thames and Isis heir
By lowly Aeton slides, and Windsor proudly fair.
6
There while our thin nets dangling in the wind
Hung on our oars tops, I learnt to sing
Among my Peers, apt words to fitly bind
In numerous verse: witness thou crystal Spring,
Where all the lads were pebles wont to find;
And you thick hasles, that on Thamis brink
Did often with dallying boughs his silver waters drink.
7
But when my tender youth 'gan fairly blow,
I changed large Thames for Chamus narrower seas:
There as my years, so skill with years did grow;
And now my pipe the better sort did please;
So that with Limnus, and with Belgio
I durst to challenge all my fisher-peers,
That by learned Chamus banks did spend their youthful years.
8
And Ianus self, that often with me compared,
With his often losses raised my victory;
That afterward in song he never dared
Provoke my conquering pipe, but enviously
Deprave the songs which first his songs had marred;
And closely bite, when now he durst not bark,
Hating all others light, because himself was dark.
9
And whether nature, joined with art, had wrought me,
Or I too much believed the fishers praise;
Or whether Phoebus self, or Muses taught me,
Too much inclined to verse, and Music plays;
So far credulity, and youth had brought me,
I sang sad Telethusa's frustrate plaint,
And rustic Daphnis wrong, and magicks vain restraint:
10
And then appeased young Myrtilus, repining
At general contempt of shepherds life;
And raised my rhyme to sing of Richards climbing;
And taught our Chame to end the old-bred strife,
Mythicus claim to Nicias resigning:
The while his goodly Nymphs with song delighted,
My notes with choicest flowers, and garlands sweet requited.
11
From thence a Shepherd great, pleased with my song,
Drew me to Basilissa's Courtly place:
Fair Basilissa, fairest maid among
The Nymphs that white-cliffe Albions forests grace.
Her errand drove my slender bark along
The seas, which wash the fruitful Germans land,
And swelling Rhene, whose wines run swiftly over the sand.
12
But after bold'ned with my first success,
I durst assay the newfound paths, that led
To slavish Mosco's dullard sluggishnesse;
Whose slothful Sun all winter keeps his bed,
But never sleeps in summers wakefulnesse:
Yet all for naught: another took the gain:
Faitour, that reapt the pleasure of another pain!
13
And traveling along the Northern plains,
At her command I past the bounding Twead,
And lived a while with Caledonian swains:
My life with fair Amyntas there I led:
Amyntas fair, whom still my sore heart plains.
Yet seemed he then to love, as he was loved;
But (ah!) I fear, true love his high heart never proved.
14
And now he haunts the infamous woods and downs,
And on Napaean Nymphs does wholly dote:
What cares he for poor Thelgons plaintfull sounds?
Thelgon, poor master of a poorer boat.
Ianus is crept from his wont prison bounds,
And fits the Porter to his ear and mind:
What hope, Amyntas love a fisher-swain should find?
15
Yet once he said, (which I, then fool, believed)
(The woods of it, and Damon witness be)
When in fair Albions fields he first arrived,
When I forget true Thelgons love to me,
The love which never my certain hope deceived;
The wavering sea shall stand, and rocks remove:
He said, and I believed: so credulous is love.
16
You steady rocks, why still do you stand still?
You fleeting waves, why do you never stand?
Amyntas has forgot his Thelgons quill;
His promise, and his love are writ in sand:
But rocks are firm, though Neptune rage his fill;
When thou, Amyntas, like the fire-drake rangest:
The sea keeps on his course, when like the wind thou changest.
17
Yet as I swiftly sailed the other day,
The settled rock seemed from his seat remove,
And standing waves seemed doubtful of their way,
And by their stop thy wavering reprove:
Sure either this thou did but mocking say,
Or else the rock and sea had heard my plaining.
But thou (ay me!) art only constant in disdaining.
18
Ah! would thou knew'st how much it better were
To 'bide among the simple fisher-swains:
No shrieching owl, no night-crow lodges here;
Nor is our simple pleasure mixed with pains:
Our sports begin with the beginning year,
In calms to pull the leaping fish to land,
In roughs to sing, and dance along the golden sand.
19
I have a pipe, which once thou lovedst well,
(Was never pipe that gave a better sound)
Which often to hear fair Thetis from her cell,
Thetis the Queen of seas, attended round
With hundred Nymphs and many powers that dwell
In the Oceans rocky walls, came up to hear,
And gave me gifts, which still for thee lie hoarded here.
20
Here with sweet bays the lovely myrtils grow,
Where the Oceans fair-cheekt maidens often repair;
Here to my pipe they dancen on a row:
No other swain may come to note their fair;
Yet my Amyntas there with me shall go.
Proteus himself pipes to his flocks hereby,
Whom thou shall hear, never seen by any jealous eye.
21
But (ah!) both me, and fishers he disdains,
While I sit piping to the gadding wind,
Better that to the boisterous sea complains;
Sooner fierce waves are moved, then his hard mind:
I Will to some rock far from our common mains,
And in his bottom learn forget my smart,
And blot Amyntas name from Thelgons wretched heart.
22
So up he rose, and lancht into the deep;
Dividing with his oar the surging main,
Which dropping seemed with tears his case to weep;
The whistling winds joined with the seas to plain,
And over his boat in whines lamenting creep.
Naught feared he fierce Oceans watery ire,
Who in his heart of grief and love felt equal fire.
FINIS.
ECLOG. II. THIRSIL.
Dorus, Myrtilus, Thomalin, Thirsil. Dorus. MYrtil, why idle sit we on the
shore?
Since stormy winds, and waves intestine spite
Impatient rage of sail, or bending oar;
Sit we, and sing, while winds and waters fight;
And carol loud of love, and loves delight.

Myrtil. 2
Dorus, ah rather stormy seas require
With sadder song the tempests rage deplore:
In calms let us sing of love, and lovers fire.
Tell we how Thirsil late our seas forswore,
When forced he left our Chame, and desert shore.

Dorus. 3
Now as thou art a lad, repeat that lay;
Myrtil, his songs more please my ravished ear,
Then rumbling brooks that with the pebles play,
Then murmuring seas broke on the banks to hear,
Or winds on rocks their whistling voices tear.

Myrtil. 4
See thou that rock, which hanging over the main
Looks proudly down? there as I under lay,
Thirsil with Thomalin I heard complain,
Thomalin, (who now goes sighing all the day)
Who thus 'gan tempt his friend with Chamish boys to stay.

Thom. 5
Thirsil, what wicked chance, or lucklesse star
From Chamus streams removes thy boat and mind?
Far hence thy boat is bound, thy mind more far;
More sweet, or fruitful streams where can thou find?
Where fisher-lads, or Nymphs more fair, or kind?
The Muses selves sit with the sliding Chame:
Chame and the Muses selves do love thy name.
Where thou art loved so dear, so much to hate is shame.

Thirsil. 6
The Muses me forsake, not I the Muses;
Thomalin, thou know how I them honored ever:
Not I my Chame, but me proud Chame refuses:
His froward spites my strong affections sever;
Else, from his banks could I have parted never.
But like his Swannes, when now their fate is nigh,
Where singing sweet they lived, there dead they lie;
So would I gladly live, so would I gladly die.
7
His stubborn hands my net has broken quite:
My fish (the guerdon of my toil and pain)
He causeless seaz'd, and with ungrateful spite
Bestowed upon a less deserving swain:
The cost and labor mine, his all the gain.
My boat lies broke; my oars cracked, and gone:
Naught has he left me, but my pipe alone,
Which with his sadder notes may help his master moan.

Thom. 8
Ungrateful Chame! how often has Thirsil crowned
With songs and garlands thy obscurer head?
That now thy name through Albion loud does sound.
Ah foolish Chame! who now in Thirsils stead
Shall chant thy praise, since Thelgon's lately dead?
He whom thou love, can neither sing, nor play;
His dusty pipe, scorned, broke, is cast away:
Ah foolish Chame! who now shall grace thy holy day?

Thirsil. 9
Too fond my former hopes! I still expected
With my desert his love should grow the more:
Ill can he love, who Thelgons love rejected,
Thelgon, who more has graced his graceless shore,
Then any swain that ever sang before.
Yet Gripus he preferred, when Thelgon strove:
I wish no other curse he ever prove;
Who Thelgon causeless hates, still may he Gripus love.

Thom. 10
Thirsil, but that so long I know thee well,
I now should think thou speak of hate, or spite:
Can such a wrong with Chame, or Muses dwell,
That Thelgons worth and love with hate they'quite?

Thirsil. Thomalin, judge thou; and thou that judge right,
Great King of seas, (that grasp'st the Ocean) hear,
If ever thou thy Thelgon lovedst dear:
Though thou forbear a while, yet long thou can not bear.
11
When Thelgon here had spent his prentise-yeares,
Soon had he learnt to sing as sweet a note,
As ever struck the churlish Chamus ears:
To him the river gives a costly boat,
That on his waters he might safely float,
The songs reward, which often unto his shore
He sweetly tuned: Then armed with sail, and oar,
Dearly the gift he loved, but loved the giver more.
12
Scarce of the boat he yet was full possessed,
When, with a mind more changing then his wave,
Again bequeathed it to a wandering guest,
Whom then he only saw; to him he gave
The sails, and oars: in vain poor Thelgon strave,
The boat is under sail, no boot to plain:
Then banished him, the more to eke his pain,
As if himself were wronged, and did not wrong the swain.
13
From thence he furrowed many a churlish sea,
The viny Rhene, and Volgha's self did pass,
Who sleds does suffer on his watery lea,
And horses trampling on his ycie face:
Where Phoebus imprisoned in the frozen glass,
All winter cannot move his quenched light,
Nor in the heat will drench his chariot bright:
Thereby the tedious year is all one day and night.
14
Yet little thank, and less reward he got:
He never learned to sooth the itching ear:
One day (as chanced) he spies that painted boat,
Which once was his: though his of right it were,
He bought it now again, and bought it dear.
But Chame to Gripus gave it once again,
Gripus the basest and most dung-hil swain,
That ever drew a net, or fisht in fruitful main.
15
Go now, ye fisher-boyes, go learn to play,
To play, and sing along your Chamus shore:
Go watch, and toil, go spend the night and day,
While winds and waves, while storms and tempests roar;
And for your trade consume your life, and store:
Lo your reward; thus will your Chamus use you.
Why should you plain, that lozel swains refuse you?
Chamus good fishers hates, the Muses selves abuse you.

Thomal. 16
Ah Thelgon, poorest, but the worthiest swain,
That ever graced unworthy poverty!
How ever here thou liv'dst in joylesse pain,
Pressed down with grief, and patient misery;
Yet shall thou live when thy proud enemy
Shall rot, with scorn and base contempt oppressed.
Sure now in joy thou safe and glad do rest,
Smil'st at those eager foes, which here thee so molest.

Thirsil. 17
Thomalin, mourn not for him: he is sweetly sleeping
In Neptunes court, whom here he sought to please;
While humming rivers by his cabin creeping,
Rock soft his slumbering thoughts in quiet ease:
Mourn for thy self, here winds do never cease;
Our dying life will better fit thy crying:
He softly sleeps, and blessed is quiet lying.
Who ever living dies, he better lives by dying.

Thomal. 18
Can Thirsil then our Chame abandon ever?
And never will our fishers see again?

Thirsil. Who against a raging stream does vain endeavor
To drive his boat, gets labor for his pain:
When fates command to go, to lagge is vain.
As late upon the shore I chanced to play,
I heard a voice, like thunder, lowdly say,
Thirsil, why idle liv'st? Thirsil, away, away.
19
Thou God of seas, thy voice I gladly hear;
Thy voice (thy voice I know) I glad obey:
Only do thou my wandering whirry steer;
And when it erres, (as it will easily stray)
Upon the rock with hopeful anchour stay.
Then will I swim, where is either sea, or shore,
Where never swain, or boat was seen before:
My trunk shall be my boat, my arm shall be my oar.
20
Thomalin, me thinks I hear thy speaking eye
Woo me my posting journey to delay:
But let thy love yield to necessity:
With thee, my friend, too gladly would I stay,
And live, and die: were Thomalin away,
(Though now I half unwilling leave his stream)
How ever Chame does Thirsil lightly deem,
Yet would thy Thirsil less proud Chamus scorns esteem.

Thom. 21
Who now with Thomalin shall sit, and sing?
Who left to play in lovely myrtils shade?
Or tune sweet ditties to as sweet a string?
Who now those wounds shall 'swage in covert glade,
Sweet-bitter wounds, which cruel love has made?
You fisher-boyes, and sea-maids dainty crew,
Farewell; for Thomalin will seek a new,
And more respectfull stream: ungrateful Chame adieu.

Thirsil. 22
Thomalin, forsake not thou the fisher-swains,
Which hold thy stay and love at dearest rate:
Here may thou live among their sportfull trains,
Till better times afford thee better state:
Then may thou follow well thy guiding fate:
So live thou here with peace, and quiet blessed;
So let thy love afford thee ease and rest;
So let thy sweetest foe recure thy wounded breast.
23
But thou, proud Chame, which thus have wrought me spite,
Some greater river drown thy hateful name:
Let never myrtle on thy banks delight,
But willows pale, the badge of spite and blame,
Crown thy ungrateful shores with scorn and shame.
Let dirt and mud thy lazy waters seize,
Thy weeds still grow, thy waters still decrease:
Nor let thy wretched love to Gripus ever cease.
24
Farewell ye streams, which once I loved dear;
Farewell ye boys, which on your Chame do float;
Muses farewell, if there be Muses here;
Farewell my nets, farewell my little boat:
Come sadder pipe, farewell my merry note:
My Thomalin, with thee all sweetness dwell;
Think of thy Thirsil, Thirsil loves thee well.
Thomalin, my dearest dear, my Thomalin, farewell.

Dorus. 25
Ah hapless boy, the fishers joy and pride!
Ah woe is us we cannot help thy woe!
Our pity vain: ill may that swain betide,
Whose undeserved spite has wronged thee so.
Thirsil, with thee our joy, and wishes go.

Myrtil. 26
Dorus, some greater power prevents thy curse:
So vile, so basely lives that hateful swain;
So base, so vile, that none can wish him worse.
But Thirsil much a better state does gain,
For never will he find so thanklesse main.

FINIS.
ECLOG. III. MYRTILVS.
A Fisher-lad (no higher dares he look)
Myrtil, sat down by silver Medwayes shore:
His dangling nets (hung on the trembling oar
Had leave to play, so had his idle hook,
While madding winds the madder Ocean shook.
Of Chamus had he learnt to pipe, and sing,
And frame low dirties to his humble string.
2
There as his boat late in the river strayed,
A friendly fisher brought the boy to view
Coelia the fair, whose lovely beauties drew
His heart from him into that heavenly maid:
There all his wandering thoughts, there now they staid.
All other fairs, all other love defies,
In Coelia he lives, for Coelia dies.
3
Nor durst the coward woo his high desiring,
(For low he was, lower himself accounts;
And she the highest height in worth surmounts)
But sits alone in hell his heaven admiring,
And thinks with sighs to fan, but blows his firing.
Nor does he strive to cure his painful wound;
For till this sickness never was he sound.
4
His blubbered face was tempered to the day;
All sad he looked, that sure all was not well;
Deep in his heart was hid an heavenly hell;
Thick clouds upon his watrie eyebrows lay,
Which melting shower, and showring never stay:
So sitting down upon the sandy plain,
Thus 'gan he vent his grief, and hidden pain;
5
You sea-born maids, that in the Ocean reign,
(If in your courts is known Loves matchless power,
Kindling his fire in your cold watery bower)
Learn by your own to pity others pain.
Tryphon, that know a thousand herbs in vain,
But know not one to cure a lovesick heart,
See here a wound, that far outgoes thy art.
6
Your stately seas (perhaps with loves fire) glow,
And over-seeth their banks with springing tide,
Mustring their white-plum'd waves with lordly pride,
They soon retire, and lay their curled heads low;
So sinking in themselves they backward go:
But in my breast full seas of grief remain,
Which ever flow, and never ebb again.
7
How well, fair Thetis, in thy glass I see,
As in a crystal, all my raging pains!
Late thy green fields slept in their even plains,
While smiling heavens spread round a canopie:
Now tossed with blasts, and civil enmity,
While whistling winds blow trumpets to their fight,
And roaring waves, as drums, whet on their spite.
8
Such cruel storms my restles heart command:
Late thousand joys securely lodged there,
Ne feared I then to care, ne cared to fear;
But pulled the imprisoned fishes to the land,
Or (spite of winds) pip't on the golden sand:
But since love swayed my breast, these seas alarms
Are but dead pictures of my raging harms.
9
Love stirs desire; desire, like stormy wind,
Blows up high swelling waves of hope, and fear:
Hope on his top my trembling heart does bear
Up to my heaven, but straight my lofty mind
By fear sunk in despair deep drowned I find.
But (ah!) your tempests cannot last for ever;
But (ah!) my storms (I fear) will leave me never.
10
Haples, and fond! too fond, more haples swain,
Who love where thou art scorned, scorn'st where thou art loved:
Or learn to hate, where thou have hatred proved;
Or learn to love, where thou art loved again:
Ah cease to love, or cease to woo thy pain.
Thy love thus scorned is hell; do not so earn it;
At least learn by forgetting to unlearn it.
11
Ah fond, and haples swain! but much more fond,
How can unlearn by learning to forget it,
When thought of what thou should unlearn does whet it,
And surer ties thy mind in captive bond?
Can thou unlearn a ditty thou have con'd?
Can thou forget a song by often repeating?
Thus much more will thou learn by thy forgetting.
12
Hapless, and fond! most fond, more hapless swain!
Seeing thy rooted love will leave thee never,
(She hates thy love) love thou her hate for ever:
In vain thou hop'st, hope yet, though still in vain:
Joy in thy grief, and triumph in thy pain:
And though reward exceeds thy aspiring,
Live in her love, and die in her admiring.
13
Fair-cruel maid, most cruel, fairer ever,
How has foul rigor stolen into thy heart?
And on a comic stage has learnt thee art
To play a Tyrant-tragical deceiver?
To promise mercy, but perform it never?
To look more sweet, maskt in thy looks disguise,
Then Mercy self can look with Pities eyes?
14
Who taught thy honied tongue the cunning slight,
To melt the ravished ear with musicks strains?
And charm the sense with thousand pleasing pains?
And yet, like thunder rolled in flames, and night,
To break the rived heart with fear and fright?
How rules therein thy breast, so quiet state,
Spite leagued with mercy, love with lovelesse hate?
15
Ah no, fair Coelia, in thy sunne-like eye
Heaven sweetly smiles; those stars soft loving fire,
And living heat, not burning flames inspire:
Love's self enthroned in thy brows ivorie,
And every grace in heavens liverie:
My wants, not thine, me in despairing drown:
When hell presumes, no mar'l if heavens frown.
16
Those graceful tunes, issuing from glorious spheres,
Ravish the ear and soul with strange delight,
And with sweet Nectar fill the thirsty sprite;
Thy honied tongue, charming the melted ears,
Stills stormy hearts, and quiets frights and fears:
My daring heart provokes thee; and no wonder,
When earth so high aspires, if heavens thunder.
17
See, see, fair Coelia, seas are calmly laid,
And end their boisterous threats in quiet peace;
The waves their drums, the winds their trumpets cease:
But my sick love (ah love full ill apayd!)
Never can hope his storms may be allayd;
But giving to his rage no end, or leisure,
Still restles rests: Love knows no mean or measure.
18
Fond boy, she justly scorns thy proud desire,
While thou with singing would forget thy pain:
Go strive to empty the still-flowing main:
Go fuel seek to quench thy growing fire:
Ah foolish boy! scorn is thy musicks hire.
Drown then these flames in seas: but (ah!) I fear
To fire the main, and to want water there.
19
There first thy heaven I saw, there felt my hell;
There smooth-calm seas raised storms of fierce desires;
There cooling waters kindled burning fires,
Nor can the Ocean quench them: in thy cell
Full stored with pleasures, all my pleasures fell.
Die then, fond lad: ah, well my death may please thee:
But love, (thy love) not life, not death, must ease me.
20
So down he swowning sinks; nor can remove,
Till fisher-boyes (fond fisher-boyes) revive him,
And back again his life and loving give him:
But he such woeful gift does much reprove:
Hopeless his life; for hopeless is his love.
Go then, most loving, but most doleful swain:
Well may I pity; she must cure thy pain.
FINIS.
ECLOG. IIII. CHROMIS.
Thelgon. Chromis. Thel. CHromis my joy, why drop thy rainie eyes?
And sullen clouds hang on thy heavy brow?
Seems that thy net is rent, and idle lies;
Thy merry pipe hangs broken on a bough:
But late thy time in hundred joys thou spent'st;
Now time spends thee, while thou in vain lament'st.

Chrom. 2
Thelgon, my pipe is whole, and nets are new:
But nets and pipe contemned, and idle lie:
My little reed, that late so merry blew,
Tunes sad notes to his masters misery:
Time is my foe, and hates my rugged rimes:
And I as much hate both that hate, and times.

Thel. 3
What is it then that causes thy unrest?
Or wicked charms? or loves new-kindled fire?
Ah! much I fear love eats thy tender breast;
Too well I know his never quenched ire,
Since I Amyntas loved, who me disdains,
And loves in me naught but my grief and pains.

Chrom. 4
No lack of love did ever breed my smart:
I only learned to pity others pain,
And ward my breast from his deceiving art:
But one I love, and he loves me again;
In love this only is my greatest sore,
He loves so much, and I can love no more.
5
But when the fishers trade, once highly prized,
And justly honored in those better times,
By every lozel-groom I see despised;
No marvel if I hate my jocond rimes,
And hang my pipe upon a willow bough:
Might I grieve ever, if I grieve not now.

Thel. 6
Ah foolish boy! why should thou so lament
To be like him, whom thou do like so well?
The Prince of fishers thousand tortures rent.
To heaven, lad, thou art bound: the way by hell.
Would thou adored, and great and merry be,
When he was mocked, debased, and dead for thee?
7
Men's scorns should rather joy, then sorrow move;
For then thou highest art, when thou art down.
Their storms of hate should more blow up my love;
Their laughters my applause, their mocks my crown.
Sorrow for him, and shame let me betide,
Who for me wretch in shame and sorrow died.

Chrom. 8
Thelgon, it is not my self for whom I plain,
My private loss full easy could I bear,
If private loss might help the public gain:
But who can blame my grief, or chide my fear,
Since now the fishers trade, and honored name
Is made the common badge of scorn and shame?
9
Little know they the fishers toilsome pain,
Whose labor with his age, still growing, spends not:
His care and watchings (often misspent in vain)
The early morn begins, dark evening ends not.
Too foolish men, that think all labor stands
In travel of the feet, and tired hands!
10
Ah wretched fishers! born to hate and strife;
To others good, but to your rape and spoil.
This is the briefest sum of fishers life,
To sweat, to freeze, to watch, to fast, to toil,
Hated to love, to live despised, forlorn,
A sorrow to himself, all others scorn.

Thel. 11
Too well I know the fishers thanklesse pain,
Yet bear it cheerfully, nor dare repine.
To grudge at loss is fond, (too fond and vain)
When highest causes justly it assign.
Who bites the stone, and yet the dog condemns,
Much worse is then the beast he so contemnes.
12
Chromis, how many fishers do thou know,
That rule their boats, and use their nets aright?
That neither wind, nor time, nor tide foreslow?
Such some have been; but (ah!) by tempests spite
Their boats are lost; while we may sit and moan,
That few were such, and now those few are none.

Chrom. 13
Ah cruel spite, and spiteful cruelty,
That thus has robbed our joy, and desert shore!
No more our seas shall hear your melody;
Your songs and shrilling pipes shall sound no more:
Silent our shores, our seas are vacant quite.
Ah spiteful cruelty, and cruel spite!

Thel. 14
In stead of these a crew of idle grooms,
Idle, and bold, that never saw the seas,
Fearlesse succeed, and fill their empty rooms:
Some lazy live, bathing in wealth and ease:
Their floating boats with waves have leave to play,
Their rusty hooks all year keep holy day.
15
Here stray their skiffes, themselves are never here,
Never saw their boats: ill might they fishers be:
Mean time some wanton boy the boat does steer,
(Poor boat the while!) that cares as much as he:
Who in a brook a whirry cannot row,
Now backs the seas, before the seas he know.

Chrom. 16
Ah foolish lads, that think with waves to play,
And rule rough seas, which never knew command!
First in some river thy new skill assay,
Till time and practice teach thy weakly hand:
A thin, thin plank keeps in thy vital breath:
Death ready waits. Fond boys, to play with death!

Thel. 17
Some stretching in their boats supinely sleep,
Seasons in vain recalled, and winds neglecting:
Other their hooks and baits in poison steep,
Neptune himself with deathfull drugges infecting:
The fish their life and death together drink,
And dead pollute the seas with venomed stink.
18
Some teach to work, but have no hands to row:
Some will be eyes, but have no light to see:
Some will be guides, but have no feet to go:
Some deaf, yet ears; some dumb, yet tongues will be:
Dumb, deaf, lame, blind, and maimed; yet fishers all:
Fit for no use, but store an hospital.
19
Some greater, scorning now their narrow boat,
In mighty hulks and ships (like courts) do dwell;
Slaving the skiffes that in their seas do float;
Their silken sails with winds do proudly swell;
Their narrow bottomes stretch they large and wide,
And make full room for luxury and pride.
20
Self did I see a swain not long ago,
Whose lordly ship kept all the rest in aw:
About him thousand boats do waiting row;
His frowns are death, his word is firmest law;
While all the fisher-boyes their bonnets vail,
And far adore their lord with stricken sail.
21
His ear is shut to simple fisher-swain.
For Gemma's self (a sea-nymph great and high)
Upon his boat attended long in vain:
What hope, poor fisher-boy may come him nigh?
His speech to her, and presence he denied.
Had Neptune come, Neptune he had defied.
22
Where Tybers swelling waves his banks overflow,
There princely fishers dwell in courtly halls:
The trade they scorn, their hands forget to row;
Their trade, to plot their rising, others falls;
Into their seas to draw the lesser brooks,
And fish for steeples high with golden hooks.

Chrom. 23
Thelgon, how can thou well that fisher blame,
Who in his art so highly does excel,
That with himself can raise the fishers name?
Well may he thrive, that spends his art so well.
Ah, little needs their honor to depresse:
Little it is; yet most would have it less.

Thel. 24
Alas poor boy! thy shallow-swimming sight
Can never dive into their deepest art;
Those silken shows so dim thy dazel'd sight.
Could thou unmask their pomp, unbreast their heart,
How would thou laugh at this rich beggerie!
And learn to hate such happy misery!
25
Panting ambition spurs their tired breast:
Hope chained to doubt, fear linkt to pride and threat,
(Too ill yok't pairs) give them no time to rest;
Tyrants to lesser boats, slaves to the great.
That man I rather pity, then adore,
Who feared by others much, fears others more.
26
Most cursed town, where but one tyrant reigns:
(Though less his single rage on many spent)
But much more misery that soul remains,
When many tyrants in one heart are pent:
When thus thou serv'st, the comfort thou can have
From greatness is, thou art a greater slave.

Chrom. 27
Ah wretched swains, that live in fishers trade;
With inward griefs, and outward wants distressed;
While every day does more your sorrow lade;
By others scorned, and by your selves oppressed!
The great the greater serve, the lesser these:
And all their art is how to rise and please.

Algon. 28
Those fisher-swains, from whom our trade does flow,
That by the King of seas their skill were taught;
As they their boats on Jordan wave did row,
And catching fish, were by a Fisher caught;
(Ah blessed chance! much better was the trade,
That being fishers, thus were fishes made)
29
Those happy swains, in outward show unblest,
Were scourged, were scorned, yet was this loss their gain:
By land, by sea, in life, in death, distressed;
But now with King of seas securely reign:
For that short woe in this base earthly dwelling,
Enjoying joy all excellence excelling.
30
Then do not thou, my boy, cast down thy mind,
But seek to please with all thy busy care
The King of seas; so shall thou surely find
Rest, quiet, joy, in all this troublous fare.
Let not thy net, thy hook, thy singing cease:
And pray these tempests may be turned to peace.
31
Oh Prince of waters, Sovereign of seas,
Whom storms and calms, whom winds and waves obey;
If ever that great Fisher did thee please,
Chide thou the winds, and furious waves allay:
So on thy shore the fisher-boys shall sing
Sweet songs of peace to our sweet peaces King.

FINIS.
ECLOG. V. NICAEA.
Damon, Algon, Nicaea. THe well known fisher-boy, that late his name,
And place, and (ah for pity!) mirth had changed;
Which from the Muses spring, and churlish Chame
Was fled, (his glory late, but now his shame:
For he with spite the gentle boy estranged)
Now 'long the Trent with his new fellows ranged:
There Damon (friendly Damon) met the boy,
Where lordly Trent kisses the Darwin coy,
Bathing his liquid streams in lovers melting joy*
Damon. 2
Algon, what lucklesse star thy mirth has blasted?
My joy in thee, and thou in sorrow drowned.
The year with winter storms all rent and wasted
Has now fresh youth and gentler seasons tasted:
The warmer sun his bride has newly gown'd,
With fiery arms clipping the wanton ground,
And gets an heaven on earth: that primrose there,
Which amongst those violets sheds his golden hair,
Seems the suns little son, fixed in his azure sphere.
3
See how the dancing lambs on flowrie banks
Forget their food, to mind their sweeter play?
See how they skip, and in their wanton pranks
Bound over the hillocks, set in sportfull ranks?
They skip, they vault; full little caren they
To make their milkie mothers bleating stay.
See how the salmons (waters colder nation)
Lately arrived from their sea-navigation,
How joy leaps in their heart, show by their leaping fashion?
4
What witch enchants thy mind with fullen madness?
When all things smile, thou only fitt'st complaining.

Algon. Damon, I, only I, have cause of sadness:
The more my woe, to weep in common gladness:
When all eyes shine, mine only must be raining;
No winter now, but in my breast, remaining:
Yet feels this breast a summers burning fever:
And yet (alas!) my winter thaweth never:
And yet (alas!) this fire eats and consumes me ever.

Damon. 5
Within our Darwin, in her rockie cell
A Nymph there lives, which thousand boys has harmed;
All as she gliding rides in boats of shell,
Darting her eye, (where spite and beauty dwell:
Ay me, that spite with beauty should be armed!)
Her witching eye the boy, and boat has charmed.
No sooner drinks he down that poisonous eye,
But mourns and pines: (ah piteous cruelty!)
With her he longs to live; for her he longs to die.

Algon. 6
Damon, what Tryphon taught thine eye the art
By these few signs to search so soon, so well,
A wound deep hid, deep in my fester'd heart,
Pierced by her eye, Loves, and deaths pleasing dart?
Ah, she it is, an earthly heaven, and hell,
Who thus has charmed my heart with sugared spell.
Ease thou my wound: but (ah!) what hand can ease,
Or give a medicine that such wound may please;
When she my sole Physician is my souls disease?

Damon. 7
Poor boy! the wounds which spite and Love impart,
There is no ward to fence, no herb to ease.
Heavens circling folds lie open to his dart:
Hells Lethe's self cools not his burning smart:
The fishes cold flame with this strong disease,
And want their water in the midst of seas:
All are his slaves, hell, earth, and heaven above:
Strive not in the net, in vain thy force to prove.
Give, woo, sigh, weep, and pray: Love's only cured by love.

Algon. 8
If for thy love no other cure there be,
Love, thou art cureles: gifts, prayers, vows, and art,
She scorns both you and me: nay Love, even thee:
Thou sigh'st her prisoner, while she laughs as free.
What ever charms might move a gentle heart,
I often have tried, and showed the earnfull smart,
Which eats my breast: she laughs at all my pain:
Art, prayers, vows, gifts, love, grief, she does disdain:
Grief, love, gifts, vows, prayers, art; ye all are spent in vain.

Damon. 9
Algon, often have thou fisht, but sped not straight;
With hook and net thou beat'st the water round:
Oft-times the place thou changest, often the bait;
And catching nothing, still, and still do wait:
Learn by thy trade to cure thee: time has found
In desperate cures a salve for every wound.
The fish long playing with the baited hook,
At last is caught: Thus many a Nymph is took;
Mocking the strokes of Love, is with her striking struck.

Algon. 10
The marbles self is pierced with drops of rain:
Fires soften steel, and hardest metals try:
But she more hard then both: such her disdain,
That seas of tears, Aetna's of love are vain.
In her strange heart (weep I, burn, pine, or die)
Still reigns a cold, coy, careless apathie.
The rock that bears her name, breeds that hard stone
With goats blood only softened, she with none:
More precious she, and (ah!) more hard then diamond.
11
That rock I think her mother: thence she took
Her name and nature. Damon, Damon, see,
See where she comes, armed with a line and hook:
Tell me, perhaps thou think, in that sweet look,
The white is beauties native tapestrie;
It Is crystal, (friend) yc'd in the frozen sea:
The red is rubies; these two joined in one,
Make up that beauteous frame: the difference none
But this; she is a precious, living, speaking stone.

Damon. 12
No gemme so costly, but with cost is bought:
The hardest stone is cut, and framed by art:
A diamond hid in rocks is found, if sought:
Be she a diamond, a diamond's wrought.
Thy fear congeales, thy fainting steels her heart.
I Will be thy Captain, boy, and take thy part:
Alcides self would never combat two.
Take courage, Algon; I will teach thee woo.
Cold beggars freez our gifts: thy faint suit breeds her no.
13
Speak to her, boy.

Al. Love is more deaf then blind.


Damon. She must be wooed.


Al. Love's tongue is in the eyes.


Damon. Speech is Love's dart.


Al. Silence best speaks the mind.


Damon. Her eye invites.


Al. Thence love and death I find.


Damon. Her smiles speak peace.


Al. Storms breed in smiling skies


Damon. Who silent loves?


Al. Whom speech all hope denies.


Damon. Why should thou fear?


Al. To Love Fear's near akinne.


Damon. Well, if my cunning fail not, by a gin
(Spite of her scorn, thy fear) I Will make thee woo, and win.
14
What, ho, thou fairest maid, turn back thine oar,
And gently deigne to help a fishers smart.

Nicaea. Are thy lines broke? or are thy trammels tore?
If thou desir'st my help, unhide the sore.
Ah gentlest Nymph, often have I heard, thy art
Can sovereign herbs to every grief impart:
So may thou live the fishers song, and joy,
As thou will deigne to cure this sickly boy.
Unworthy they of art, who of their art are coy.
15
His inward grief in outward change appears;
His cheeks with sudden fires bright-flaming glow;
Which quenched, end all in ashes: storms of tears
Becloud his eyes, which soon forced smiling cleares:
Thick tides of passions ever ebb, and flow:
And as his flesh still wastes, his griefs still grow.

Nicaea. Damon, the wounds deep rankling in the mind
What herb could ever cure? what art could find?
Blind are mine eyes to see wounds in the soul most blind.

Algon. 16
Hard maid, it is worse to mock, then make a wound:
Why should thou then (fair-cruel) scorn to see
What thou by seeing made? my sorrows ground
Was in thy eye, may by thy eye be found.
How can thy eye most sharp in wounding be,
In seeing dull? these two are one in thee,
To see, and wound by sight: thy eye the dart.
Fair-cruel maid, thou well have learned the art,
With the same eye to see, to wound, to cure my heart.

Nicaea. 17
What cures thy wounded heart?

Algon. Thy heart so wounded.


Nicaea. Is It love to wound thy love?


Algon. Loves wounds are pleasing.


Nicaea. Why plain'st thou then?


Al. Because thou art unwounded.
Thy wound my cure: on this my plaint is grounded.

Nicaea. Cures are diseases, when the wounds are easing:
Why would thou have me please thee by displeasing?

Algon. Scorned love is death; loves mutual wounds delighting:
Happy thy love, my love to thine uniting.
Love paying debts grows rich; requited in requiting.

Damon. 18
What lives alone, Nicaea? stars most chaste
Have their conjunctions, spheres their mixed embraces,
And mutual folds. Nothing can single last:
But die in living, in increasing waste.

Nicaea. Their joining perfects them, but us defaces.


Algon. That Is perfect which obtains his end: your graces
Receive their end in love. She that is alone
Dies as she lives: no number is in one:
Thus while she is but her self, she is not her self, she is none.

Nicaea. 19
Why blam'st thou then my stony hard confection,
Which nothing loves? thou single nothing art.

Algon. Love perfects what it loves; thus thy affection
Married to mine, makes mine and thy perfection.

Nicaea. Well then, to pass our Tryphon in his art,
And in a moment cure a wounded heart;
If fairest Darwin, whom I serve, approve
Thy suit, and thou will not thy heart remove;
I Will join my heart to thine, and answer thee in love.
20
The sun is set; adieu.

Algon. It Is set to me;
Thy parting is my even, thy presence light.

Nicaea. Farewell.


Algon. Thou giv'st thy wish; it is in thee:
Unless thou will, hapless I cannot be.

Damon. Come Algon, cheerly home; the theevish night
Steals on the world, and robs our eyes of sight.
The silver streams grow black: home let us coast:
There of loves conquest may we safely boast:
Soonest in love he winnes, that often in love has lost.

FINIS.
ECLOG. VI. THOMALIN.
Thirsil, Thomalin. A Fisher-boy that never knew his peer
In dainty songs, the gentle Thomalin,
With folded arms, deep sighs, and heavy cheer
Where hundred Nymphs, and hundred Muses inn,
Sunk down by Chamus brinks; with him his dear,
Dear Thirsil lay; often times would he begin
To cure his grief, and better way advise;
But still his words, when his sad friend he spies,
Forsook his silent tongue, to speak in watrie eyes.
2
Under a sprouting vine they careless lie,
Whose tender leaves bit with the Eastern blast,
But now were born, and now began to die;
The latter warned by the formers haste,
Thinly for fear salute the envious sky:
Thus as they sat, Thirsil embracing fast
His loved friend, feeling his panting heart
To give no rest to his increasing smart,
At length thus spoke, while sighs words to his grief impart:
Thirsil. 3
Thomalin, I see thy Thirsil thou neglect'st,
Some greater love holds down thy heart in fear;
Thy Thirsils love, and counsel thou reject'st;
Thy soul was wont to lodge within my ear:
But now that port no longer thou respect'st;
Yet has it still been safely harbored there.
My ear is not acquainted with my tongue,
That either tongue, or ear should do thee wrong:
Why then should thou conceal thy hidden grief so long?

Thom. 4
Thirsil, it is thy love that makes me hide
My smothered grief from thy known faithful ear:
May still my Thirsil safe, and merry 'bide;
Enough is me my hidden grief to bear:
For while thy breast in hav'n does safely ride,
My greater half with thee rides safely there.

Thirsil. So thou art well; but still my better part,
My Thomalin, sinks laden with his smart:
Thus thou my finger cur'st, and wound'st my bleeding heart.
5
How often has Thomalin to Thirsil vowed,
That as his heart, so he his love esteemed!
Where are those oaths? where is that heart bestowed,
Which hides it from that breast which dear it deemed,
And to that heart room in his heart allowed?
That love was never love, but only seemed.
Tell me, my Thomalin, what envious thief
Thus robs thy joy: tell me, my liefest lief:
Thou little love me, friend, if more thou love thy grief.

Thom. 6
Thirsil, my joyous spring is blasted quite,
And winter storms prevent the summers ray:
All as this vine, whose green the Eastern spite
Has di'd to black, his catching arms decay,
And letting go their hold for want of might,
Mar'l winter comes so soon, in first of May.

Thirsil. Yet see the leaves do freshly bud again:
Thou drooping still di'st in this heavy strain:
Nor can I see or end or cause of all thy pain.

Thom. 7
No marvel, Thirsil, if thou do not know
This grief, which in my heart lies deeply drowned:
My heart it self, though well it feels his woe,
Knows not the woe it feels: the worse my wound,
Which though I rankling find, I cannot show.
Thousand fond passions in my breast abound;
Fear leagued to joy, hope and despair together,
Sighs bound to smiles; my heart though prone to either,
While both it would obey, 'twixt both obeys neither
8
Often blushing flames leap up into my face;
My guiltless cheek such purple flash admires:
Often stealing tears slip from mine eyes apace,
As if they meant to quench those causeless fires.
My good I hate; my hurt I glad embrace:
My heart though grieved, his grief as joy desires:
I burn, yet know no fuel to my firing:
My wishes know no want, yet still desiring:
Hope knows not what to hope, yet still in hope aspiring.

Thirsil. 9
Too true my fears: alas, no wicked sprite,
No writhel'd witch, with spells or powerful charms,
Or hellish herbs dug in as hellish night,
Gives to thy heart these often and fierce alarms:
But Love, too hateful Love, with pleasing spite,
And spiteful pleasure, thus has bred thy harms,
And seeks thy mirth with pleasance to destroy.
It Is Love, my Thomalin, my liefest boy;
It Is Love robs me of thee, and thee of all thy joy.

Thomal. 10
Thirsil, I ken not what is hate, or Love,
Thee well I love, and thou love me as well;
Yet joy, no torment, in this passion prove:
But often have I heard the fishers tell,
He Is not inferior to the mighty Jove;
Jove heaven rules; Love Jove, heaven, earth, and hell:
Tell me, my friend, if thou do better know:
Men say, he goes armed with his shafts, and bow,
Two darts, one swift as fire, as lead the other slow.

Thirsil. 11
Ah heedlesse boy! Love is not such a lad,
As he is fancied by the idle swain;
With bow and shafts, and purple feathers clad;
Such as Diana (with her buskined train
Of armed Nymphs along the forests glade
With golden quivers) in Thessalian plain,
In level race outstrips the jumping Deer
With nimble feet; or with a mighty spear
Flings down a bristled bore, or else a squalid bear.
12
Love's sooner felt, then seen: his substance thin
Betwixt those snowy mounts in ambush lies:
Often in the eyes he spreads his subtle ginne;
He therefore soonest winnes, that fastest flies.
Fly thence my dear, fly fast, my Thomalin:
Who him encounters once, for ever dies:
But if he lurk between the ruddy lips,
Unhappie soul that thence his Nectar sips,
While down into his heart the sugared poison slips!
13
Often in a voice he creeps down through the ear:
Often from a blushing cheek he lights his fire:
Often shrouds his golden flame in likest hair:
Often in a soft-smooth skin does close retire:
Often in a smile; often in a silent tear:
And if all fail, yet Virtue's self he will hire:
Himself's a dart, when nothing else can move.
Who then the captive soul can well reprove,
When Love, and Virtue's self become the darts of Love?

Thom. 14
Sure, Love it is, which breeds this burning fever:
For late (yet all too soon) on Venus day,
I chanced (Oh cursed chance, yet blessed ever!)
As careless on the silent shores I stray,
Five Nymphs to see (five fairer saw I never)
Upon the golden sand to dance and play:
The rest among, yet far above the rest,
Sweet Melite, by whom my wounded breast,
Though rankling still in grief, yet joys in his unrest.
15
There to their sportings while I pipe, and sing,
Out from her eyes I felt a fiery beam,
And pleasing heat (such as in first of Spring
From Sol, inn'd in the Bull, do kindly stream)
To warm my heart, and with a gentle sting
Blow up desire: yet little did I dream
Such bitter fruits from such sweet roots could grow,
Or from so gentle eye such spite could flow:
For who could fire expect hid in an hill of snow?
16
But when those lips (those melting lips) I pressed,
I lost my heart, which sure she stole away:
For with a blush she soon her guilt confessed,
And sighs (which sweetest breath did soft convey)
Betrayed her theft: from thence my flaming breast
Like thundering Aetna burns both night and day:
All day she present is, and in the night
My wakefull fancy paints her full to sight:
Absence her presence makes, darkness presents her light.

Thirsil. 17
Thomalin, too well those bitter sweets I know,
Since fair Nicaea bred my pleasing smart:
But better times did better reason show,
And cured those burning wounds with heavenly art.
Those storms of looser fire are laid full low;
And higher love safe anchours in my heart:
So now a quiet calm does safely reign.
And if my friend think not my counsel vain;
Perhaps my art may cure, or much assuage thy pain.

Thom. 18
Thirsil, although this witching grief does please
My captive heart, and Love does more detest
The cure, and curer, then the sweet disease;
Yet if my Thirsil does the cure request,
This storm, which rocks my heart in slumbring ease,
Spite of it self, shall yield to thy behest.

Thirsil. Then hark how Tryphons self did salve my paining,
While in a rock I sat of love complaining;
My wounds with herbs, my grief with counsel sage restraining.
19
But tell me first; Why should thy partial mind
More Melite, then all the rest approve?

Thom. Thirsil, her beauty all the rest did blind,
That she alone seemed worthy of my love.
Delight upon her face, and sweetness shined:
Her eyes do spark as stars, as stars do move:
Like those twin-fires, which on our masts appear,
And promise calms. Ah that those flames so clear
To me alone should raise such storms of hope and fear!

Thirsil. 20
If that which to thy mind does worthiest seem,
By thy wel-temper'd soul is most affected;
Can thou a face worthy thy love esteem?
What in thy soul then love is more respected?
Those eyes which in their sphere thou, fond, do deem
Like living stars, with some disease infected,
Are dull as leaden dross: those beauteous rays,
So like a rose, when she her breast displayes,
Are like a rose indeed; as sweet, as soon decays.
21
Art thou in love with words? her words are wind,
As flit as is their matter, flittest air.
Her beauty moves? can colors move thy mind?
Colors in scorned weeds more sweet, and fair.
Some pleasing quality thy thoughts does bind?
Love then thy self. Perhaps her golden hair?
False metal, which to silver soon descends!
Is It pleasure then which so thy fancy bends?
Poor pleasure, that in pain begins, in sorrow ends!
22
What? is it her company so much contents thee?
How would she present stir up stormy weather,
When thus in absence present she torments thee?
Love thou not one, but all these joined together?
All Is but a woman. Is It her love that rents thee?
Light winds, light air; her love more light then either.
If then due worth thy true affection moves,
Here is no worth. Who some old hagge approves,
And scorns a beauteous spouse, he rather dotes, then loves.
23
Then let thy love mount from these baser things,
And to the highest love, and worth aspire:
Love's born of fire, fitted with mounting wings;
That at his highest he might wind him higher;
Base love, that to base earth so basely clings!
Look as the beams of that celestial fire
Put out these earthly flames with purer ray*
So shall that love this baser heat allay,
And quench these coals of earth with his more heavenly day.
24
Raise then thy prostrate love with towering thought;
And clog it not in chains, and prison here:
The God of fishers dear thy love has bought:
Most dear he loves: for shame, love thou as dear.
Next, love thou there, where best thy love is sought;
My self, or else some other fitting peer.
Ah might thy love with me forever dwell!
Why should thou hate thy heaven, and love thy hell?
She shall not more deserve, nor cannot love so well.
25
Thus Tryphon once did wean my fond affection;
Then fits a salve unto the infected place,
(A salve of sovereign and strange confection)
Nepenthe mixed with Rue, and Herb-de-grace:
So did he quickly heal this strong infection,
And to my self restored my self apace.
Yet did he not my love extinguish quite:
I love with sweeter love, and more delight:
But most I love that Love, which to my love has right.

Thom. 26
Thrice happy thou that could! my weaker mind
Can never learn to climb so lofty flight.

Thirsil. If from this love thy will thou can unbinde;
To will, is here to can: will gives thee might:
It Is done, if once thou will; it is done, I find.
Now let us home: for see, the creeping night
Steals from those further waves upon the land.
To morrow shall we feast; then hand in hand
Free will we sing, and dance along the golden sand.

FINIS.
ECLOG. VII. The PRIZE.
Thirsil, Daphnis, Thomalin. AVrora from old Tithons frosty bed
(Cold, wintry, withered Tithon) early creeps;
Her cheek with grief was pale, with angerred;
Out of her window close she blushing peeps;
Her weeping eyes in pearled dew she steeps,
Casting what sportlesse nights she ever led:
She dying lives, to think he is living dead.
Cursed be, and cursed is that wretched fire,
That yokes green youth with age, want with desire.
Who ties the sun to snow? or marries frost to fire?
2
The morn saluting, up I quickly rise,
And to the green I post; for on this day
Shepherd and fisher-boyes had set a prize,
Upon the shore to meet in gentle fray,
Which of the two should sing the choicest lay;
Daphnis the shepherds lad, whom Mira's eyes
Had killed; yet with such wound he gladly dies:
Thomalin the fisher, in whose heart did reign
Stella; whose love his life, and whose disdain
Seems worse then angry skies, or never quiet main.
3
There soon I view the merry shepherd-swains
March three by three, clad all in youthful green:
And while the sad recorder sweetly plains,
Three lovely Nymphs (each several row between,
More lovely Nymphs could no where else be seen,
Whose faces snow their snowy garments stains)
With sweeter voices fit their pleasing strains.
Their flocks flock round about; the horned rams,
And ewes go silent by, while wanton lambs
Dancing along the plains, forget their milky dammes.
4
Scarce were the shepherds set, but straight in sight
The fisher-boyes came driving up the stream;
Themselves in blue, and twenty sea-nymphs bright
In curious robes, that well the waves might seem:
All dark below, the top like frothy cream:
Their boats and masts with flowers, and garlands dight;
And round the swannes guard them with armies white:
Their skiffes by couples dance to sweetest sounds,
Which running corners breath to full plain grounds,
That strikes the rivers face, and thence more sweet rebounds.
5
And now the Nymphs and swains had took their place;
First those two boys; Thomalin the fishers pride,
Daphnis the shepherds: Nymphs their right hand grace;
And choicest swains shut up the other side:
So sit they down in order fit applied;
Thirsil betwixt them both, in middle space:
( Thirsil their judge, who now is a shepherd base,
But late a fisher-swain, till envious Chame
Had rent his nets, and sunk his boat with shame;
So robbed the boys of him, and him of all his game)
Thirsil. 6
So as they sit, thus Thirsil 'gins the lay;
You lovely boys, (the woods, and Oceans pride)
Since I am judge of this sweet peaceful fray,
First tell us, where, and when your Loves you spied:
And when in long discourse you well are tried,
Then in short verse by turns we will gently play:
In love begin, in love we will end the day.
Daphnis, thou first; to me you both are dear:
Ah, if I might, I would not judge, but hear:
Naught have I of a judge, but an impartial ear.

Daph. 7
Phoebus, if as thy words, thy oaths are true;
Give me that verse which to the honored bay
(That verse which by thy promise now is due)
To honored Daphne in a sweet tuned lay
( Daphne thy changed, thy love unchanged aye)
Thou sangest late, when she now better staid,
More humane when a tree, then when a maid,
Bending her head, thy love with gentle sign repaid.
8
What tongue, what thought can paint my Loves perfection?
So sweet has nature portrayed every part,
That art will prove that artists imperfection,
Who, when no eye dare view, dares limme her face,
Phoebus, in vain I call thy help to blaze
More light then thine, a light that never fell:
Thou tell what is done in heaven, in earth, and hell:
Her worth thou may admire; there are no words to tell.
9
She is like thee, or thou art like her, rather:
Such as her hair, thy beams; thy single light,
As her twin-sunnes: that creature then, I gather,
Twice heavenly is, where two suns shine so bright:
So thou, as she, confound'st the gazing sight:
Thy absence is my night; her absence hell.
Since then in all thy self she does excel,
What is beyond thy self, how can thou hope to tell?
10
First her I saw, when tired with hunting toil,
In shady grove spent with the weary chase,
Her naked breast lay open to the spoil;
The crystal humor trickling down apace,
Like ropes of pearl, her neck and breast enlace:
The air (my rival air) did coolly glide
Through every part: such when my Love I spied,
So soon I saw my Love, so soon I loved, and di'd.
11
Her face two colors paint; the first a flame,
(Yet she all cold) a flame in rosy die,
Which sweetly blushes like the mornings shame:
The second snow, such as on Alps does lie,
And safely there the sun does bold defy:
Yet this cold snow can kindle hot desire.
Thou miracle; mar'l not, if I admire,
How flame should coldly freez, and snow should burn as fire.
12
Her slender waste, her hand, that dainty breast,
Her cheek, her forehead, eye, and flaming hair,
And those hid beauties; which must sure be best,
In vain to speak, when words will more impair:
Of all the fairs she is the fairest fair.
Cease then vain words; well may you show affection,
But not her worth: the mind her sweet perfection
Admires: how should it then give the lame tongue direction?

Thom. 13
Unless thy words be flitting as thy wave,
Proteus, that song into my breast inspire,
With which the seas (when loud they rore and rave)
Thou softly charm'st, and winds intestine ire
(When against heaven, earth, and seas they did conspire)
Thou quiet laid'st: Proteus, thy song to hear,
Seas listening stand, and winds to whistle fear;
The lively Delphins dance, and brisly Seals give ear.
14
Stella, my starre-like love, my lovely star:
Her hair a lovely brown, her forehead high,
And lovely fair; such her cheeks roses are:
Lovely her lip, most lovely is her eye:
And as in each of these all love does lie;
So thousand loves within her mind retiring,
Kindle ten thousand loves with gentle firing.
Ah let me love my Love, not live in loves admiring?
15
At Proteus feast, where many a goodly boy,
And many a lovely less did lately meet;
There first I found, there first I lost my joy:
Her face mine eye, her voice mine ear did greet;
While ear and eye strove which should be most sweet,
That face, or voice: but when my lips at last
Saluted hers, those senses strove as fast,
Which most those lips did please; the eye, ear, touch, or taste.
16
The eye swears, never fairer lip was eyed;
The ear with those sweet relishes delighted,
Thinks them the spheres; the taste that nearer tried
Their relish sweet, the soul to feast invited;
The touch, with pressure soft more close united,
Wished ever there to dwell; and never cloyed,
(While thus their joy too greedy they enjoyed)
Enjoyed not half their joy, by being overjoyed.
17
Her hair all dark more clear the white does show,
And with its night her faces morn commends:
Her eye-brow black, like to an ebon bow;
Which sporting Love upon her forehead bends,
And thence his never-missing arrow sends.
But most I wonder how that jetty ray,
Which those two blackest suns do fair display,
Should shine so bright, and night should make so sweet a day.
18
So is my love an heaven; her hair a night:
Her shining forehead Dian's silver light:
Her eyes the stars; their influence delight:
Her voice the spears; her cheek Aurora bright:
Her breast the globes, where heavens path milkie-white
Runs 'twixt those hills: her hand ( Arions touch)
As much delights the eye, the ear as much.
Such is my Love, that, but my Love, was never such.

Thirsil. 19
The earth her robe, the sea her swelling tide;
The trees their leaves, the moon her diverse face;
The stars their courses, flowers their springing pride;
Days change their length, the Sun his daily race:
Be constant when you love; Love loves not ranging:
Change when you sing; Muses delight in changing.

Daph. 20
Pan loves the pine tree; Jove the oak approves;
High populars Alcides temples crown:
Phoebus, though in a tree, still Daphne loves,
And hyacinths, though living now in ground:
Shepherds, if you your selves would victours see,
Girt then this head with Phoebus flower and tree.

Thom. 21
Alcinous pears, Pomona apples bore:
Bacchus the vine, the olive Pallas chose:
Venus loves myrtils, myrtils love the shore:
Venus Adonis loves, who freshly blows,
Yet breathes no more: weave, lads, with myrtils roses
And bay, and hyacinth the garland loses.

Daph. 22
Mira, thine eyes are those twin-heav'nly powers,
Which to the widowed earth new offspring bring:
No marvel then, if still thy face so flowers,
And cheeks with beauteous blossoms freshly spring:
So is thy face a never-fading May:
So is thine eye a never-falling day.

Thom. 23
Stella, thine eyes are those twin-brothers fair,
Which tempests slake, and promise quiet seas:
No marvel then if thy brown shadie hair,
Like night, por tend sweet rest and gentle ease.
Thus is thine eye an ever-calming light:
Thus is thy hair a lovers ne'r-spent night.

Daph. 24
If sleepy poppies yield to lilies white;
If black to snowy lambs; if night to day;
If Western shades to fair Aurora's light;
Stella must yield to Mira's shining ray.
In day we sport, in day we shepherds toy:
The night, for wolves; the light, the shepherds joy.

Thom. 25
Who white-thorn equals with the violet?
What workman rest compares with painful light?
Who wears the glaring glass, and scorns the jet?
Day yield to her, that is both day and night.
In night the fishers thrive, the workmen play;
Love loves the night; night's lovers holy day.

Daph. 26
Fly thou the seas, fly far the dangerous shore:
Mira, if thee the king of seas should spy,
He Will think Medusa (sweeter then before)
With fairer hair, and double fairer eye,
Is changed again; and with thee ebbing low,
In his deep courts again will never flow.

Thom. 27
Stella, avoid both Phoebus ear, and eye:
His music he will scorn, if thee he hear:
Thee Daphne, (if thy face by chance he spy)
Daphne now fairer changed, he will rashly swear:
And viewing thee, will later rise and fall;
Or viewing thee, will never rise at all.

Daph. 28
Phoebus and Pan both strive my love to gain,
And seek by gifts to win my careless heart;
Pan vows with lambs to fill the fruitful plain;
Apollo offers skill, and pleasing art:
But Stella, if thou grant my suit, a kiss;
Phoebus and Pan their suit, my love, shall miss.

Thom. 29
Proteus himself, and Glaucus seek unto me;
And twenty gifts to please my mind devise:
Proteus with songs, Glaucus with fish does woo me:
Both strive to win, but I them both despise:
For if my Love my love will entertain,
Proteus himself, and Glaucus seek in vain.

Daph. 30
Two twin, two spotted lambs, (my songs reward)
With them a cup I got, where Jove assumed
New shapes, to mock his wives too jealous guard;
Full of Joves fires it burns still unconsumed:
But Mira, if thou gently deigne to shine,
Thine be the cup, the spotted lambs be thine.

Thom. 31
A pair of swannes are mine, and all their train;
With them a cup, which Thetis self bestowed,
As she of love did hear me sadly plain;
A pearled cup, where Nectar often has flowed:
But if my Love will love the gift, and giver;
Thine be the cup, thine be the swannes for ever.

Daph. 32
Thrice happy swains! thrice happy shepherds fate!

Thom. Ah blessed life! ah blessed fishers state!
Your pipes assuage your love; your nets maintain you.

Daph. Your lambkins clothe you warm; your flocks sustain you:
Your fear no stormy seas, nor tempests roaring.

Thom. You sit not rots or burning stars deploring:
In calms you fish; in roughs use songs and dances.

Daph. More do you fear your Loves sweet-bitter glances,
Then certain fate, or fortune ever changing.

Thom. Ah that the life in seas so safely ranging,
Should with loves weeping eye be sunk, and drowned!

Daph. The shepherds life Phoebus a shepherd crowned,
His snowy flocks by stately Peneus leading.

Thom. What herb was that, on which old Glaucus feeding,
Grows never old, but now the gods augmenteth?

Daph. Delia her self her rigor hard relenteth:
To play with shepherds boy she is not ashamed.

Thom. Venus, of frothy seas thou first wast framed;
The waves thy cradle: now Love's Queen art named.

Daph. 33
Thou gentle boy, what prize may well reward thee?
So slender gift as this not half requites thee.
May prosperous stars, and quiet seas regard thee;
But most, that pleasing star that most delights thee:
May Proteus still and Glaucus dearest hold thee;
But most, her influence all safe infold thee:
May she with gentle beams from her fair sphere behold thee.

Thom. 34
As whistling winds against rocks their voices tearing;
As rivers through the valleys softly gliding;
As haven after cruel tempests fearing;
Such, fairest boy, such is thy verses sliding.
Thine be the prize: may Pan and Phoebus grace thee;
Most, whom thou most admir'st, may she embrace thee;
And flaming in thy love, with snowy arms enlace thee.

Thirsil. 35
You lovely boys, full well your art you guided;
That with your striving songs your strife is ended:
So you your selves the cause have well decided;
And by no judge can your award be mended.
Then since the prize for only one intended
You both refuse, we justly may reserve it,
And as your offering in Love's temple serve it;
Since none of both deserve, when both so well deserve it.
36
Yet, for such songs should ever be rewarded;
Daphnis, take thou this hook of ivory clearest,
Given me by Pan, when Pan my verse regarded:
This fears the wolf, when most the wolf thou fear.
But thou, my Thomalin, my love, my dearest,
Take thou this pipe, which often proud storms restrained;
Which, spite of Chamus spite, I still retained:
Was never little pipe more soft, more sweetly plained.
37
And you, fair troop, if Thirsil you disdain not,
Vouch safe with me to take some short refection:
Excess, or daints my lowly roofs maintain not;
Pears, apples, plummes, no sugared made confection.
So up they rose, and by Love's sweet direction
Sea-nymphs with shepherds sort: sea-boyes complain not
That wood-nymphs with like love them entertain not.
And all the day to songs and dances lending,
Too swift it runs, and spends too fast in spending.
With day their sports began, with day they take their ending.

FINIS.
POETICAL MISCELLANIES.
An Hymen at the Marriage of my most dear Cousins Mr. W. and M. R.
CHamus, that with thy yellow-sanded stream
Slid'st softly down where thousand Muses dwell,
Gracing their bowres, but thou more graced by them;
Hark Chamus, from thy low-built greeny cell;
Hark, how our Kentish woods with Hymen ring,
While all the Nymphs, and all the shepherds sing,
Hymen, oh Hymen, here thy saffron garment bring.
With him a shoal of goodly shepherd-swains;
Yet he more goodly then the goodliest swain:
With her a troop of fairest wood-nymphs trains;
Yet the more fair then fairest of the train:
And all in course their voice attempering,
While the woods back their bounding Echo fling,
Hymen, come holy Hymen; Hymen loud they sing.
His high-built forehead almost maiden fair,
Has made an hundred Nymphs her chance envying:
Her more then silver skin, and golden hair,
Cause of a thousand shepherds forced dying.
Where better could her love then here have nested?
Or he his thoughts more daintily have feasted?
Hymen, come Hymen; here thy saffron coat is rested.
His looks resembling humble Majesty,
Rightly his fairest mothers grace besitteth:
In her face blushing, fearful modesty,
The Queens of chastity and beauty, sits:
There cheerfulness all sadness far exileth:
Here love with bow unbent all gently smileth.
Hymen come, Hymen come; no spot thy garment 'fileth.
Love's bow in his bent eyebrows bended lies,
And in his eyes a thousand darts of loving:
Her shining stars, which (fools) we often call eyes,
As quick as heaven it self in speedy moving;
And this in both the only difference being,
Other stars blind, these stars indu'd with seeing.
Hymen, come Hymen; all is for thy rites agreeing.
His breast a shelf of purest alabaster,
Where Love's self sailing often shipwrackt sits:
Hers a twin-rock, unknown but to th'ship-master;
Which though him safe receives, all other splitteth:
Both Love's highway, yet by Love's self unbeaten,
Most like the milky path which crosses heaven.
Hymen, come Hymen; all their marriage joys are even.
And yet all these but as gilt covers be;
Within, a book more fair we written find:
For Nature, framing the Alls epitome,
Set in the face the Index of the mind.
Their bodies are but Temples, built for state,
To shrine the Graces in their silver plate:
Come Hymen, Hymen come, these Temples consecrate.
Hymen, the tier of hearts already tied;
Hymen, the end of lovers never ending;
Hymen, the cause of joys, joys never tried;
Joys never to be spent, yet ever spending:
Hymen, that sow'st with men the desert sands;
Come, bring with thee, come bring thy sacred bands:
Hymen, come Hymen, the hearts are joined, join thou the hands.
Warrant of lovers, the true seal of loving,
Signed with the face of joy; the holy knot,
That binds two hearts, and holds from slippery moving;
A gainful loss, a stain without a blot;
That make one soul as two, and two as one;
Yoke lightning burdens; love's foundation:
Hymen, come Hymen, now untie the maiden zone.
Thou that made Man a brief of all thou made,
A little living world, and made him twain,
Dividing him whom first thou one creat'st,
And by this bond made one of two again,
Bidding her cleave to him, and him to her,
And leave their parents, when no parents were:
Hymen, send Hymen from thy sacred bosom here.
See where he goes, how all the troop he cheereth,
Clad with a saffron coat, in's hand a light;
In all his brow not one sad cloud appears:
His coat all pure, his torch all burning bright.
Now chant we Hymen, shepherds; Hymen sing:
See where he goes, as fresh as is the Spring.
Hymen, oh Hymen, Hymen, all the valleys ring.
Oh happy pair, where nothing wants to either,
Both having to content, and be contented;
Fortune and nature being spare to neither!
Never may this bond of holy love be rented,
But like two parallels, run a level race,
In just proportion, and in even space.
Hymen, thus Hymen will their spotless marriage grace.
Live each of other firmly loved, and loving;
As far from hate, as self-ill, jealousy:
Moving like heaven still in the self same moving;
In motion never forgetting constancy.
Be all your days as this; no cause to plain:
Free from satiety, or (but lovers) pain.
Hymen, so Hymen still their present joys maintain.
To my beloved Cousin W. R. Esquire. Calend. Ianuar.
COusin, day-birds are silenc't, and those fowl
Yet only sing, which hate warm Phoebus light;
The unlucky *Parra, and death-boding Owl,
Which ush'ring in to heaven their mistress Night,
Hollow their mates, triumphing over the quick-spent light.
The wronged Philomel has left to plain
Tereus constraint and cruel ravishment:
Seems the poor bird has lost her tongue again.
Progne long since is gone to banishment;
And the loud-tuned Thrush leaves all her merriment.
All so my frozen Muse, hid in my breast,
To come into the open air refuses;
And dragged at length from hence, does often protest,
This is no time for Phoebus-loving Muses;
When the farre-distant sun our frozen coast disuses.
Then till the sun, which yet in fishes hasks,
Or watery urn, impounds his fainting head,
'Twixt Taurus horns his warmer beam unmasks,
And sooner rises, later goes to bed;
Calling back all the flowers, now to their mother fled:
Till Philomel resumes her tongue again,
And Progne fierce returns from long exiling;
Till the shrill Blackbird chants his merry vein;
And the day-birds the long-lived sun beguiling,
Renew their mirth, and the years pleasant smiling:
Here must I stay, in sullen study pent,
Among our Cambridge fennes my time misspending;
But then revisit our long-long'd-for Kent.
Till then live happy, the time ever mending:
Happy the first of the year, thrice happy be the ending.
To Master W. C.
WIlly my dear, that late by Haddam sitting,
By little Haddam, in those private shades,
Unto thy fancy thousand pleasures fitting,
With dainty Nymphs in those retired glades,
Did spend thy time; (time that too quickly fades)
Ah! much I fear, that those so pleasing toys
Have too much lulled thy sense and mind in slumbring joys.
Now art thou come to nearer Maddingly,
Which with fresh sport and pleasure does enthrall thee;
There new delights withdraw thy ear, thy eye;
Too much I fear, left some ill chance befall thee:
Hark, how the Cambridge Muses thence recall thee;
Willy our dear, Willy his time abuses:
But sure thou have forgot our Chame, and Cambridge Muses.
Return now, Willy; now at length return thee:
Here thou and I, under the sprouting vine,
By yellow Chame, where no hot ray shall burn thee,
Will fit, and sing among the Muses nine;
And safely covered from the scalding shine,
We Will read that Mantuan shepherds sweet complaining
Whom fair Alexis grieved with his unjust disdaining:
And when we list to lower notes descend,
Hear Thirsil's moan, and Fusca's cruelty:
He cares not now his ragged flock to tend,
Fusca his care, but careless enemy:
Hope often he sees shine in her humble eye;
But soon her angry words of hope deprives him:
So often dies with love, but love as often revives him.
To my ever honored Cousin W. R. Esquire.
STrange power of home, with how strong-twisted arms
And Gordian-twined knot do thou enchain me!
Never might fair Calisto's doubled charms,
Nor powerful Circe's whispring so detain me,
Though all her art she spent to entertain me;
Their presence could not force a weak desire:
But (oh!) thy powerful absence breeds still-growing fire.
By night thou try'st with strong imagination
To force my sense against reason to belie it:
Me thinks I see the fast-imprinted fashion
Of every place, and now I fully eye it;
And though with fear, yet cannot well deny it,
Till the morn bell awakes me; then for spite
I shut mine eyes again, and wish back such a night.
But in the day, my never-slak't desire
Will cast to prove by welcome forgerie,
That for my absence I am much the nigher;
Seeking to please with soothing flattery.
Love's wing is thought; and thought will soonest fly,
Where it finds want: then as our love is dearer,
Absence yields presence; distance makes us nearer.
Ah! might I in some humble Kentish dale
For ever easily spend my slow-pac't hours;
Much should I scorn fair Aeton's pleasant vale,
Or Windsor Tempe's self, and proudest towers:
There would I sit safe from the stormy showers,
And laugh the troublous winds, and angry sky.
Piping (ah!) might I live, and piping might I die!
And would my luckie fortune so much grace me,
As in low Cranebrook, or high Brenchly's hill,
Or in some cabin near thy dwelling place me,
There would I gladly sport, and sing my fill,
And teach my tender Muse to raise her quill;
And that high Mantuan shepherd self to dare;
If ought with that high Mantuan shepherd might compare.
There would I chant either thy Gemma's praise,
Or else my Fusca; (fairest shepherdess)
Or when me list my slender pipe to raise,
Sing of Eliza's fixed mournfulnesse,
And much bewail such woeful heaviness;
Whilst she a dear-lov'd Heart (ah lucklesse!) slew:
Whose fall she all too late, too soon, too much, did rue.
But seeing now I am not as I would,
But here among th'unhonour'd willows shade,
The muddy Chame does me enforced hold;
Here I forswear my merry piping trade:
My little pipe of seven reeds ymade
(Ah pleasing pipe!) I Will hang upon this bough.
Thou Chame, and Chamish Nymphs, bear witness of my vow.
To E. C. in Cambridge, my son by the University.
WHen first my mind called it self in to think,
There fell a strife not easy for to end;
Which name should first crown the white papers brink,
An awing father, or an equal friend:
Fortune gives choice of either to my mind;
Both bonds to tie the soul, it never move;
That of commanding, this of easy love.
The lines of love, which from a fathers heart
Are draw'n down to the son; and from the son
Ascend to th'father, draw'n from every part,
Each other cut, and from the first transition
Still further wander with more wide partition:
But friends, like parallels, run a level race,
In just proportion, and most even space.
Then since a double choice, double affection
Has placed it self in my twice-loving breast;
No title then can add to this perfection,
Nor better that, which is already best:
So naming one, I must implie the rest;
The same a father, and a friend; or rather,
Both one; a father-friend, and a friend-father.
No marvel then the difference of the place
Makes in my mind at all no difference:
For love is not produced or penned in space,
Having in the soul his only residence.
Love's fire is thought; and thought is never thence,
Where it feels want: then where a love is dear,
The mind in farthest distance is most near.
Me Kent holds fast with thousand sweet embraces;
(There might I die with thee, there with thee live!)
All in the shades, the Nymphs and naked Graces
Fresh joys and still-succeeding pleasures give;
So much we sport, we have no time to grieve:
Here do we sit, and laugh white-headed caring;
And know no sorrow simple pleasures marring.
A crown of wood-nymphs spread in the graffie plain
Sit round about, no niggards of their faces;
Nor do they cloud their fair with black disdain;
All to my self will they impart their graces:
Ah! not such joys find I in other places:
To them I often pipe, and often sing,
Sweet notes to sweeter voices tempering.
And now but late I sang the Hymen toys
Of two fair lovers, (fairer were there never)
That in one bed coupled their spousall joys;
Fortune and Nature being scant to neither:
What other dare not wish, was full in either.
Thrice happy bed, thrice happy lovers firing,
Where present blessings have out-stript desiring!
And when me list to sadder tunes apply me,
Pasilia's dirge, and Eupathus complaining;
And often while my pipe lies idle by me,
Read Fusca's deep disdain, and Thirsil's plaining;
Yet in that face is no room for disdaining;
Where cheerful kindness smiles in either eye,
And beauty still kisses humility.
Then do not marvel Kentish strong delights
Stealing the time, do here so long detain me:
Not powerful Circe with her Hecate rites,
Nor pleasing Lotos thus could entertain me,
As Kentish powerful pleasures here enchain me.
Mean time, the Nymphs that in our Brenchly use,
Kindly salute your busy Cambridge Muse.
To my beloved Thenot in answer of his verse.
THenot my dear, how can a lofty hill
To lowly shepherds thoughts be rightly fitting?
An humble dale well fits with humble quill:
There may I safely sing, all fearlesse sitting,
My Fusca's eyes, my Fusca's beauty dittying;
My loved lonenesse, and hid Muse enjoying:
Yet should thou come, and see our simple toying,
Well would fair Thenot like our sweet retired joying.
But if my Thenot love my humble vein,
(Too lowly vein) never let him Colin call me;
He, while he was, was (ah!) the choicest swain,
That ever graced a reed: what e're befall me,
Or Myrtil, (so'fore Fusca fair did thrall me,
Most was I known) or now poor Thirsil name me,
Thirsil, for so my Fusca pleases frame me:
But never mounting Colin; Colin's high style will shame me.
Two shepherds I adore with humble love;
The high-towring swain, that by slow Mincius waves
His well-grown wings at first did lowly prove,
Where Corydon's sick love full sweetly raves;
But after sung bold Turnus daring braves:
And next our nearer Colin's sweetest strain;
Most, where he most his Rosalind does plain.
Well may I after look, but follow all in vain.
Why then speaks Thenot of the honored Bay?
Apollo's self, though fain, could not obtain her;
She at his melting songs would scorn to stay,
Though all his art he spent to entertain her:
Wild beasts he tamed, yet never could detain her.
Then sit we here within this willow glade:
Here for my Thenot I a garland made
With purple violets, and lovely myrtil shade.
Upon the picture of Achmat the Turkish tyrant.
SUch Achmat is, the Turks great Emperor,
Third son to Mahomet, whose youthly spring
But now with blossomed cheek begins to flower;
Out of his face you well may read a King:
Which who will thoroughly view, will easily find
A perfect Index to his haughty mind.
Within his breast, as in a palace, lie
Wakefull ambition leagued with hasty pride;
Fierceness allied with Turkish Majesty;
Rests hate, in which his father living died:
Deep in his heart such Turkish virtue lies,
And thus looks through the window of his eyes.
His pleasure (far from pleasure) is to see
His navy spread her wings unto the wind:
In stead of gold, arms fill his treasury,
Which (numberless) fill not his greedy mind.
The sad Hungarian fears his tried might;
And waning Persia trembles at his sight.
His greener youth, most with the heathen spent,
Gives Christian Princes justest cause to fear
His riper age, whose childhood thus is bent,
A thousand trophies will he shortly rear,
Unless that God, who gave him first this rage,
Bind his proud head in humble vassalage.
To Mr. Jo. Tomkins.
THomalin my lief, thy music strains to hear,
More raps my soul, then when the swelling winds
On craggie rocks their whistling voices tear;
Or when the sea, if stopped his course he finds,
With broken murmures thinks weak shores to fear,
Scorning such sandy cords his proud head binds:
More then where rivers in the summers ray
(Through covert glades cutting their shadie way)
Run tumbling down the lawns, and with the pebles play.
Thy strains to hear, old Chamus from his cell
Comes guarded with an hundred Nymphs around;
An hundred Nymphs, that in his rivers dwell,
About him flock with water-lilies crowned:
For thee the Muses leave their silver well,
And marvel where thou all their art have found:
There sitting they admire thy dainty strains,
And while thy sadder accent sweetly plains,
Feel thousand sugared joys creep in their melting veins.
How often have I, the Muses bower frequenting,
Missed them at home, and found them all with thee!
Whether thou sing'st sad Eupathus lamenting,
Or tunest notes to sacred harmony,
The ravished soul, with thy sweet songs consenting,
Scorning the earth, in heavenly ecstasy
Transcends the stars, and with the angels train
Those courts survaies; and now come back again,
Finds yet another heaven in thy delightful strain.
Ah! could thou here thy humble mind content
Lowly with me to live in country cell,
And learn suspect the courts proud blandishment;
Here might we safe, here might we sweetly dwell.
Live Pallas in her towers and marble tent;
But (ah!) the country bowers please me as well:
There with my Thomalin I safe would sing,
And frame sweet ditties to thy sweeter string:
There would we laugh at spite and fortunes thundering.
No flattery, hate, or envy lodges there;
There no suspicion walled in proved steel,
Yet fearful of the arms her self does wear:
Pride is not there; no tyrant there we feel;
No clamorous laws shall deaf thy music ear:
They know no change, nor wanton fortunes wheel:
Thousand fresh sports grow in those dainty places:
Light Fawns and Nymphs dance in the woodie spaces,
And little Love himself plays with the naked Graces.
But seeing fate my happy wish refuses,
Let me alone enjoy my low estate.
Of all the gifts that fair Parnassus uses,
Only scorned poverty, and fortunes hate
Common I find to me, and to the Muses:
But with the Muses welcome poorest fate.
Safe in my humble cottage will I rest;
And lifting up from my untainted breast
A quiet spirit to heaven, securely live, and blessed.
To thee I here bequeath the courtly joys,
Seeing to court my Thomalin is bent:
Take from thy Thirsil these his idle toys;
Here I will end my looser merriment:
And when thou sing'st them to the wanton boys,
Among the courtly lasses blandishment,
Think of thy Thirsil's love that never spends;
And softly say, his love still better mends:
Ah too unlike the love of court, or courtly friends!
Go little pipe; for ever I must leave thee,
My little little pipe, but sweetest ever:
Go, go; for I have vowed to see thee never,
Never, (ah!) never must I more receive thee;
But he in better love will still persever:
Go little pipe, for I must have a new:
Farewell ye Norfolk maids, and Ida crew:
Thirsil will play no more; for ever now adieu.
To Thomalin.
THomalin, since Thirsil nothing has to leave thee,
And leave thee must; pardon me (gentle friend)
If nothing but my love I only give thee;
Yet see how great this Nothing is, I send:
For though this love of thine I sweetest prove,
Nothing's more sweet then is this sweetest love.
The soldier Nothing like his prey esteems;
Nothing tossed sailers equal with the shore:
Nothing before his health the sick man deems;
The pilgrim hugges his country; Nothing more:
The miser hoording up his golden wares,
This Nothing with his precious wealth compares.
Our thoughts ambition only Nothing ends;
Nothing fills up the golden-dropsied mind:
The prodigal, that all so lavish spends,
Yet Nothing cannot; Nothing stays behind:
The King, that with his life a kingdom buys,
Then life or crown does Nothing higher prize.
Who all enjoyes, yet Nothing now desires;
Nothing is greater then the highest Jove:
Who dwells in heaven, (then) Nothing more requires;
Love, more then honey; Nothing more sweet then love:
Nothing is only better then the best;
Nothing is sure: Nothing is ever blessed.
I love my health, my life, my books, my friends,
Thee; (dearest Thomalin) Nothing above thee:
For when my books, friends, health, life, fainting ends,
When thy love fails, yet Nothing still will love me:
When heaven, and air, the earth, and floating mains
Are gone, yet Nothing still untoucht remains.
Since then to other streams I must betake me,
And spiteful Chame of all has quite bereft me;
Since Muses selves (false Muses) will forsake me,
And but this Nothing, nothing else is left me;
Take thou my love, and keep it still in store:
That given, Nothing now remains more.
Against a rich man despising poverty.
IF well thou view'st us with no squinted eye,
No partial judgment, thou will quickly rate
Thy wealth no richer then my poverty;
My want no poorer then thy rich estate:
Our ends and births alike; in this, as I;
Poor thou were born, and poor again shall die.
My little fills my little-wishing mind;
Thou having more then much, yet seek more:
Who seeks, still wishes what he seeks, to find;
Who wishes, wants; and who so wants, is poor:
Then this must follow of necessity;
Poor are thy riches, rich my poverty.
Though still thou gett'st, yet is thy want not spent,
But as thy wealth, so grows thy wealthy itch:
But with my little I have much content;
Content has all; and who has all, is rich:
Then this in reason thou must needs confess,
If I have little, yet that thou have less.
What ever man possesses, God has lent,
And to his audit liable is ever,
To reckon, how, and where, and when he spent:
Then this thou bragg'st, thou art a great receiver:
Little my debt, when little is my store:
The more thou have, thy debt still grows the more.
But seeing God himself descended down
TO enrich the poor by his rich poverty;
His meat, his house, his grave, were not his own,
Yet all is his from all eternity:
Let me be like my Head, whom I adore:
Be thou great, wealthy, I still base and poor.
Contemnenti.
Continual burning, yet no fire or fuel,
Chill icie frosts in midst of summers frying,
A hell most pleasing, and a heaven most cruel,
A death still living, and a life still dying,
And whatsoever pains poor hearts can prove,
I feel, and utter in one word, I LOVE.
Two fires, of love and grief, each upon either,
And both upon one poor heart ever feeding;
Chill cold despair, most cold, yet cooling neither,
In midst of fires his ycie frosts is breeding:
So fires and frosts, to make a perfect hell,
Meet in one breast, in one house friendly dwell.
Tired in this toylsome way (my deep affection)
I ever forward run, and never ease me:
I dare not swerve, her eye is my direction:
A heavy grief, and weighty love oppress me.
Desire and hope, two spurs, that forth compelled me;
But awful fear, abridle, still withheld me.
Twice have I plunged, and flung, and strove to cast
This double burden from my weary heart:
Fast though I run, and stop, they sit as fast:
Her looks my bait, which she does seld' impart.
Thus fainting, still some inn I wish and crave;
Either her maiden bosom, or my grave.
A vow.
BY hope and fear, by grief and joy oppressed,
With deadly hate, more deadly love infected;
Without, within, in body, soul, distressed;
Little by all, least by my self respected,
But most, most there, where most I loved, neglected;
Hated, and hating life, to death I call;
Who scorns to take what is refused by all.
Whither, ah, whither then will thou betake thee,
Despised wretch, of friends, of all forlorn,
Since hope, and love, and life, and death forsake thee?
Poor soul, thy own tormenter, others scorn!
Whither, poor soul, ah, whither will thou turn?
What inn, what host (scorned wretch) will thou now choose thee?
The common host, and inn, death, grave, refuse thee.
To thee, great Love, to thee I prostrate fall,
That right'st in love the heart in false love swerved:
On thee, true Love, on thee I weeping call;
I, who am scorned, where with all truth I served,
On thee, so wronged, where thou have so deserved:
Disdained, where most I loved, to thee I plain me,
Who truly love those, who (fools) disdain thee.
Thou never-erring Way, in thee direct me;
Thou Death of death, oh, in thy death engrave me:
Thou hated Love, with thy firm love respect me;
Thou freest Servant, from this yoke unslave me:
Glorious Salvation, for thy glory save me.
So neither love, nor hate, scorn, death, shall move me;
But with thy love, great Love, I still shall love thee.
On women's lightness.
Who sowes the sand? or ploughs the easy shore?
Or strives in nets to prison in the wind?
Yet I, (fond I) more fond, and senseless more,
Thought in sure love a woman's thoughts to bind.
Fond, too fond thoughts, that thought in love to tie
One more inconstant then inconstancy!
Look as it is with some true April day,
Whose various weather stores the world with flowers;
The sun his glorious beams does fair display,
Then rains, and shines again, and straight it lowres,
And twenty changes in one hour does prove;
So, and more changing is a woman's love.
Or as the hairs which deck their wanton heads,
Which loosely fly, and play with every wind,
And with each blast turn round their golden threads;
Such as their hair, such is their looser mind:
The difference this, their hair is often bound;
But never bonds a woman might impound.
False is their flattering color, false and fading;
False is their flattering tongue; false every part:
Their hair is forged, their silver foreheads shading;
False are their eyes, but falsest is their heart:
Then this in consequence must needs ensue;
All must be false, when every part's untrue.
Fond then my thoughts, which thought a thing so vain!
Fond hopes, that anchour on so false a ground!
Fond love, to love what could not love again!
Fond heart, thus fired with love, in hope thus drowned!
Fond thoughts, fond heart, fond hope; but fondest I,
To grasp the wind, and love inconstancy!
A reply upon the fair M. S.
A Dainty maid, that draws her double name
From bitter sweetness, (with sweet bitterness)
Did late my skill and faulty verses blame,
And to her loving friend did plain confess,
That I my former credit foul did shame,
And might no more a poets name profess:
The cause that with my verse she was offended,
For women's levitie I discommended.
Too true you said, that poet I was never,
And I confess it (fair) if that content ye,
That then I played the poet less then ever;
Not, for of such a verse I now repent me,
(Poets to feign, and make fine lies endeavor)
But I the truth, truth (ah!) too certain sent ye:
Then that I am no poet I deny not;
For when their lightness I condemn, I ly not.
But if my verse had ly'd against my mind,
And praised that which truth cannot approve,
And falsely said, they were as fair as kind,
As true as sweet, their faith could never move,
But sure is linkt where constant love they find,
That with sweet braving they vie truth and love;
If thus I write, it cannot be denied
But I a poet were, so foul I ly'd.
But give me leave to write as I have found:
Like ruddy apples are their outsides bright,
Whose skin is fair, the core or heart unsound;
Whose cherry-cheek the eye does much delight,
But inward rottenness the taste does wound:
Ah! were the taste so good as is the sight,
To pluck such apples (lost with self same price)
Would back restore us part of paradise.
But truth has said it, (truth who dare deny?)
Men seldom are, more seldom women sure:
But if (fair-sweet) thy truth and constancy
To better faith thy thoughts and mind procure,
If thy firm truth could give firm truth the lie,
If thy first love will first and last endure;
Thou more then woman art, if time so proves thee,
And he more then a man, that loved loves thee.
An Apology for the premises to the Lady Culpepper.
WHo with a bridle strives to curb the waves?
Or in a cypress chest locks flaming fires?
So when love angered in thy bosom raves,
And grief with love a double flame inspires,
By silence thou may add, but never less it:
The way is by expressing to repress it.
Who then will blame affection not respected,
To vent in grief the grief that so torments him?
Passion will speak in passion, if neglected:
Love that so soon will chide, as soon repents him;
And therefore boyish Love's too like a boy,
With a toy pleased, displeased with a toy.
Have you not seen, when you have chid or fought,
That lively picture of your lovely beauty,
Your pretty child, at first to lowre or pout,
But soon again reclaimed to love and duty;
Forgets the rod, and all her anger ends,
Plays on your lap, or on your neck depends:
Too like that pretty child is childish Love,
That when in anger he is wronged, or beat,
Will rave and chide, and every passion prove,
But soon to smiles and fawns turns all his heat,
And prays, and swears he never more will do it;
Such one is Love: alas that women know it!
But if so just excuse will not content ye,
But still you blame the words of angry Love;
Here I recant, and of those words repent me:
In sign hereof I offer now to prove,
That changing women's love is constant ever,
And men, though ever firm, are constant never.
For men that to one fair their passions bind,
Must ever change, as do those changing fairs;
So as she alters, alters still their mind,
And with their fading Loves their love impairs:
Therefore still moving, as the fair they loved,
Most do they move, by being most unmoved.
But women, when their lovers change their graces,
What first in them they loved, love now in others,
Affecting still the same in diverse places;
So never change their love, but change their lovers:
Therefore their mind is firm and constant proved,
Seeing they ever love what first they loved.
Their love tied to some virtue, cannot stray,
Shifting the outside often, the inside never:
But men (when now their Loves dissolved to clay
Indeed are nothing) still in love persever:
How then can such fond men be constant made,
That nothing love, or but (a nothing) shade?
What fool commends a stone for never moving?
Or blames the speedy heavens for ever ranging?
Cease then, fond men, to blaze your constant loving;
Love's fiery, winged, light, and therefore changing:
Fond man, that thinks such fire and air to fetter!
All change; men for the worse, women for better.
To my only chosen Valentine and wife, Anagram. MAYSTRESS ELISABETH VINCENT IS
MY BREASTS CHASTE VALENTINE.
THink not (fair love) that Chance my hand directed
To make my choice my chance; blind Chance and hands
Could never see what most my mind affected;
But heaven (that ever with chaste true love stands)
Lent eyes to see what most my heart respected:
Then do not thou resist what heaven commands;
But yield thee his, who must be ever thine:
My heart thy altar is, my breast thy shrine;
Thy name for ever is, My breasts chaste Valentine.
A translation of Boethius, the third book and last verse.
Happy man, whose perfect sight
Views the overflowing light!
Happy man, that can unbinde
The earth-barres pounding up the mind!
Once his wives quick fate lamenting
Orpheus sat, his hair all renting,
While the speedy woods came running,
And rivers stood to hear his cunning;
And the lion with the heart
Joined side to side to hear his art:
Hares ran with the dogs along,
Not from dogs, but to his song.
But when all his verses turning
Only fanned his poor hearts burning,
And his grief came but the faster,
(His verse all easing, but his master)
Of the higher powers complaining,
Down he went to hell disdaining:
There his silver lute-strings hitting,
And his potent verses fitting,
All the sweets that e're he took
From his sacred mothers brook,
What his double sorrow gives him,
And love, that doubly-double grieves him,
There he spends to move deaf hell,
Charming devils with his spell,
And with sweetest asking leave
Does the lords of ghosts deceive.
The dog, whose never quiet yell
Affrights sad souls in night that dwell,
Pricks up now his thrice two ears;
To howl, or bark, or whine he fears:
Struck with dumb wonder at those songs,
He wished more ears, and fewer tongues.
Charon amazed his oar foreslowes,
While the boat the sculler rows.
Tantal might have eaten now
The fruit as still as is the bough;
But he (fool!) no hunger fearing,
Starved his taste, to feed his hearing.
Ixion, though his wheel stood still,
Still was rapt with musicks skill.
At length the Judge of souls with pity
Yields, as conquered with his dittie;
Let Us give back his spouses hearse,
Purchased with so pleasing verse:
Yet this law shall bind our gift,
He turn not, till has Tartar left.
Who to laws can lovers draw?
Love in love is only law:
Now almost he left the night,
When he first turned back his sight;
And at once, while her he eyed,
His Love he saw, and lost, and died.
So, who strives out of the night
To bring his soul to joy in light,
Yet again turns back his eye
To view left hells deformity;
Though he seems enlightened more,
Yet is blacker then before.
A translation of Boethius, book 2 verse 7.
WHo only honor seeks with prone affection,
And thinks that glory is his greatest bliss;
First let him view the heavens wide-stretched section,
Then in some map the earths short narrowness:
Well may he blush to see his name not able
To fill one quarter of so brief a table.
Why then should high-grow'n minds so much rejoice
To draw their stubborn necks from man's subjection?
For though loud fame stretch high her prattling voice
To blaze abroad their virtues great pefection;
Though goodly titles of their house adorn them
With ancient Heraldrie, yet death does scorn them:
The high and base lie in the self same grave;
No difference there between a King and slave.
Where now are true Fabricius bones remaining?
Who knows where Brutus, or rough Cato lives?
Only a weak report, their names sustaining,
In records old a slender knowledge gives:
Yet when we read the deeds of men inhumed,
Can we by that know them, long since consumed?
Now therefore lie you buried and forgotten;
Nor can report frustrate encroaching death:
Or if you think when you are dead, and rotten,
You live again by fame, and vulgar breath;
When with times shadows this false glory wanes,
You die again: but this your glory gains.
Upon my brother, Mr G. F. his book entitled Christ's Victory and Triumph.
FOnd lads, that spend so fast your posting time,
(Too posting time, that spends your time as fast)
To chant light toys, or frame some wanton rhyme,
Where idle boys may glut their lustful taste;
Or else with praise to clothe some fleshly slime
With virgin roses, and fair lilies chaste:
While itching bloods, and youthful ears adore it;
But wiser men, and once your selves will most abhor it.
But thou, (most near, most dear) in this of thine
Have proved the Muses not to Venus bound;
Such as thy matter, such thy Muse, divine:
Or thou such grace with Mercie's self have found,
That she her self deignes in thy leaves to shine;
Or stoll'n from heaven, thou brought this verse to ground,
Which frights the nummed soul with fearful thunder,
And soon with honeyed dews thawes it'twixt joy and wonder.
Then do not thou malicious tongues esteem;
(The glass, through which an envious eye does gaze,
Can easily make a molehill mountain seem)
His praise dispraises; his dispraises praise;
Enough, if best men best thy labors deem,
And to the highest pitch thy merit raise;
While all the Muses to thy song decree
Victorious Triumph, Triumphant Victory.
Upon the B. of Exon. Doct. Hall his Meditations.
MOst wretched soul, that here carowsing pleasure,
Has all his heaven on earth; and never distressed
Enjoyes these fond delights without all measure,
And freely living thus, is thus deceased!
Ah greatest curse, so to be ever blessed!
For where to live is heaven, it is hell to die.
Ah wretch, that here begins hells misery!
Most bessed soul, that lifted up with wings
Of faith and love, leaves this base habitation,
And scorning sluggish earth, to heaven up springs;
On earth, yet still in heaven by meditation;
With the souls eye foreseeing the heavenly station:
Then 'gins his life, when he is of life bereaven.
Ah blessed soul, that here begins his heaven!
Upon the Contemplations of the B. of Excester, given to the Lady E. W. at
New-yeares-tide.
THis little worlds two little stars are eyes;
And he that all eyes framed, framed all others
Downward to fall, but these to climb the skies,
There to acquaint them with their starrie brothers;
Planets fixed in the head (their sphere of sense)
Yet wandering still through heavens circumference,
The Intellect being their Intelligence.
Dull then that heavy soul, which ever bent
On earth and earthly toys, his heaven neglects;
Content with that which cannot give content:
What thy foot scorning kicks, thy soul respects.
Fond soul! thy eye will up to heaven erect thee;
Thou it direct'st, and must it now direct thee?
Dull, heavy soul! thy scholar must correct thee.
Thrice happy soul, that guided by thine eyes,
Art mounted up unto that starrie nation;
And leaving there thy sense, entrest the skies,
Enshrined and sainted there by contemplation!
Heaven thou enjoy'st on earth, and now bereaven
Of life, a new life to thy soul is given.
Thrice happy soul, that have a double heaven!
That sacred hand, which to this year has brought you
Perfect your years, and with your years, his graces;
And when his will unto his will has wrought you,
Conduct your soul unto those happy places,
Where thousand joys, and pleasures ever new,
And blessings thicker then the morning dew
With endless sweets rain on that heavenly crew.
These Asclepiads of Mr. H. S. translated and enlarged.
Ne Verbum mihi sit mortua Litera,
Nec Christi Meritum Gratia vanida;
Sed Verbum fatuo sola Scientia,
Et Christus misero sola Redemptio.
Unlettered Word, which never ear could hear;
Unwritten Word* which never eye could see,
Yet syllabled in flesh-spell'd character,
That so to senses thou might subject be;
Since thou in bread art stamped, in print art read,
Let not thy print-stampt Word to me be dead.
Thou all-contriving, all-deserving Spirit,
Made flesh to die, that so thou might be mine,
That thou in us, and we in thee might merit,
We thine, thou ours; thou humane, we divine;
Let not my dead life's merit, my dead heart
Forfeit so dear a purchased deaths desert.
Thou Sun of wisdom, knowledge infinite,
Made folly to the wise, night to profane;
Be I thy Moon, oh let thy sacred light
Increase to the full, and never, never wane:
Wise folly set in me, fond wisdom rise,
Make me renounce my wisdom, to be wise.
Thou Life eternal, purest blessedness,
Made mortal, wretched, sin it self for me;
Show me my death, my sin, my wretchedness,
That I may flourish, shine, and live in thee:
So I with praise shall sing thy life, deaths story,
O thou my Merit, Life, my Wisdom, Glory.
Certain of the royal Prophets Psalms metaphrased.
Psalm 42. which agrees with the tune of Like the Hermit poor.
LOok as an heart with sweat and blood embrued,
Chased and embost, thirsts in the soil to be;
So my poor soul with eager foes pursued,
Looks, longs, O Lord, pines, pants, and faints for thee:
When, O my God, when shall I come in place
To see thy light, and view thy glorious face?
I dine and sup with sighs, with groans and tears,
While all thy foes mine ears with taunting load;
Who now thy cries, who now thy prayer hears?
Where is, say they, where is thy boasted God?
My molten heart deep plunged in sad despairs
Runs forth to thee in streams of tears and prayers.
With grief I think on those sweet now past days,
When to thy house my troops with joy I led:
We sang, we danced, we chanted sacred lays;
No men so haste to wine, no bride to bed.
Why droop'st, my soul? why faint'st thou in my breast?
Wait still with praise; his presence is thy rest.
My famisht soul driven from thy sweetest word,
(From Hermon hill, and Jordans swelling brook)
To thee laments, sighs deep to thee, O Lord,
To thee sends back her hungry longing look:
Floods of thy wrath breed floods of grief and fears;
And floods of griefbreed floods of plaints and tears.
His early light with morn these clouds shall clear,
These drearie clouds, and storms of sad despairs:
Sure am I in the night his songs to hear,
Sweet songs of joy, as well as he my prayers.
I Will say, My God, why slight'st thou my distress,
While all my foes my weary soul oppress?
My cruel foes both thee and me upbraid;
They cut my heart, they vant that bitter word,
Where is thy trust? where is thy hope? they said;
Where is thy God? where is thy boasted Lord?
Why droop'st, my soul? why faint'st thou in my breast?
Wait still with praise; his presence is thy rest.
Psalm. 63. which may be sung, as The widow, or mock-widow.
O Lord, before the morning
Gives heaven warning
To let out the day,
My wakefull eyes
Look for thy rise,
And wait to let in thy joyful ray.
Lank hunger here peoples the desert cells,
Here thirst fills up the empty wells:
How longs my flesh for that bread without leaven!
How thirsts my soul for that wine of heaven!
Such (oh!) to taste thy ravishing grace!
Such in thy house to view thy glorious face!
Thy love, thy light, thy faces
Bright-shining graces,
(Whose unchanged ray
Knows nor morns dawn,
Nor evenings wane)
How far surmount they life's winter day!
My heart to thy glory tunes all his strings;
My tongue thy praises cheerly sings:
And till I slumber, and death shall undresse me,
Thus will I sing, thus will I bless thee.
Fill me with love, oh fill me with praise;
So shall I vent due thanks in joyful lays.
When night all eyes has quenched,
And thoughts lie drenched
In silence and rest;
Then will I all
Thy ways recall,
And look on thy light in darkness best.
When my poor soul wounded had lost the field,
Thou wast my fort, thou wast my shield.
Safe in thy trenches I boldly will vant me,
There will I sing, there will I chant thee;
There I Will triumph in thy banner of grace,
My conquering arms shall be thy arms embrace.
My foes from deeps ascending,
In rage transcending,
Assaulting me sore,
Into their hell
Are headlong fell;
There shall they lie, there howl, and roar:
There let deserved torments their spirits tear;
Feel they worst ills, and worse yet fear.
But with his spouse thine anointed in pleasure
Shall reign, and joy past time or measure:
There new delights, new pleasures still spring:
Haste there, oh haste, my soul, to dance and sing.
PSALM. 127.
To the tune of that Psalm.
IF God build not the house, and lay
The groundwork sure; who ever build,
It cannot stand one stormy day:
If God be not the cities shield,
If he be not their bars and wall;
In vain is watchtower, men, and all.
Though then thou wak'st when others rest,
Though rising thou prevent'st the Sun;
Though with lean care thou daily feast,
Thy labor's lost, and thou undone:
But God his child will feed and keep,
And draw the curtains to his sleep.
Though thou have a wife fir, young, and fair,
An heritage heirs to advance;
Yet can thou not command an heir;
For heirs are Gods inheritance*
He gives the seed, the bud, the bloom;
He gives the harvest to the womb.
And look as arrows, by strong arm
In a strong bow drawn to the head,
Where they are meant, will surely harm,
And if they hit, wound deep and dead;
Children of youth are even so;
As harmfull, deadly, to a foe.
That man shall live in bliss and peace,
Who fills his quiver with such shot:
Whose garners swell with such increase,
Terror and shame assail him not;
And though his foes deep hatred bear,
Thus armed, he shall not need to fear.
PSALM. 137. To be sung as, See the building.
WHere Perah's flowers
Perfume proud Babels bowers,
And paint her wall;
There we laid asteeping
Our eyes in endless weeping,
For Sions fall.
Our feasts and songs we laid aside;
On forlorn willows
(By Perah's billows)
We hung our harps, and mirth and joy defied,
That Sions ruins should build foul Babels pride.
Our conqu'rours vaunting
With bitter scoffs and taunting,
Thus proudly jest;
Take down your harps, and string them,
Recall your songs, and sing them,
For Sions feast.
Were our harps well tuned in every string,
Our heart strings broken,
Throats drowned, and soken
With tears and sighs, how can we praise and sing
The King of heaven under an heathen king?
In all my mourning,
Jerusalem, thy burning
If I forget;
Forget thy running,
My hand, and all thy cunning
To the harp to set:
Let thy mouth, my tongue, be still thy grave;
Lie there asleeping,
For Sion weeping:
Oh let mine eyes in tears thy office have;
Nor rise, nor set, but in their brinie wave.
Proud Edoms raging,
Their hate with blood asswaging,
And vengefull sword,
Their cursed joying
In Sions walls destroying
Remember, Lord:
Forget not, Lord, their spightfull cry,
Fire and deface it,
Destroy and raze it;
Oh let the name of Sion ever die:
Thus did they roar, and us and thee defy.
So shall thy towers
And all thy princely bowers,
Proud Babel, fall:
Him ever blessed,
Who the oppressor has oppressed,
Shall all men call:
Thrice blessed, that turns thy mirth to groans;
That burns to ashes
Thy towers, and dashes
Thy brats against rocks, to wash thy bloody stones
With thine own blood, and pave thee with thy bones.
PSALM. I.
BLessed, who walk'st not in the worldlings way;
Blessed, who with foul sinners wilt not stand:
Blessed, who with proud mockers dare not stay;
Nor sit thee down amongst that scornful band.
Thrice blessed man, who in that heavenly light
Walk'st, stand'st, and sitt'st, rejoicing day and night.
Look as a thirsty Palm full Jordan drinks,
(Whose leaf and fruit still live, when winter dies)
With conquering branches crowns the rivers brinks;
And summers fires, and winters frosts defies:
All so the soul, whom that clear light revives,
Still springs, buds, grows, and dying time survives.
But as the dust of chafe, cast in the air,
Sinks in the dirt, and turns to dung and mire;
So sinners driven to hell by fierce despair,
Shall fry in ice, and freez in hellish fire:
For he, whose flaming eyes all actions turn,
Sees both; to light the one, the other burn.
PSALM. 130.
FRom the deeps of grief and fear,
O Lord, to thee my soul repairs:
From thy heaven bow down thine ear;
Let thy mercy meet my prayers.
Oh if thou mark'st
what is done amiss,
What soul so pure,
can see thy bliss?
But with thee sweet mercy stands,
Sealing pardons, working fear:
Wait my soul, wait on his hands;
Wait mine eye, oh wait mine ear:
If he his eye
or tongue affords,
Watch all his looks,
catch all his words.
As a watchman waits for day,
And looks for light, and looks again;
When the night grows old and gray,
To be relieved he calls amain:
So look, so wait,
so long mine eyes,
To see my Lord,
my Sun, arise.
Wait ye saints, wait on our Lord;
For from his tongue sweet mercy flows:
Wait on his cross, wait on his word;
Upon that tree redemption grows:
He will redeem
his Israel
From sin and wrath,
from death and hell.
AN HYMN.
WAke, O my soul; awake, and raise
Up every part to sing his praise,
Who from his sphere of glory fell,
To raise thee up from death and hell:
See how his soul, vexed for thy sin,
Weeps blood without, feels hell within:
See where he hangs:
hark how he cries:
Oh bitter pangs!
Now, now he dies.
Wake, O mine eyes; awake, and view
Those two twin-lights, whence heavens drew
Their glorious beams, whose gracious sight
Fills you with joy, with life, and light:
See how with clouds of sorrow drowned,
They wash with tears thy sinful wound:
See how with streams
of spit the are drencht;
See how their beams
with death are quenched.
Wake, O mine ear; awake, and hear
That powerful voice, which stills thy fear,
And brings from heaven those joyful news,
Which heaven commands, which hell subdues*
Hark how his ears (heavens mercie-seat)
Foul slanders with reproaches beat:
Hark how the knocks
our ears resound;
Hark how their mocks
his hearing wound.
Wake O my heart; tune every string:
Wake O my tongue; awake, and sing:
Think not a thought in all thy lays,
Speak not a word, but of his praise:
Tell how his sweetest tongue they drowned
With gall; think how his heart they wound:
That bloody spout
gagged for thy sin,
His life lets out,
thy death lets in.
AN HYMN.
DRop, drop, slow tears,
and bathe those beauteous feet,
Which brought from heaven
the news and Prince of peace:
Cease not, wet eyes,
his mercies to entreat;
To cry for vengeance
sin does never cease:
In your deep floods
drown all my faults and fears;
Nor let his eye
see sin, but through my tears.
On my friends picture, who died in travel.
THough now to heaven thy travels are confined,
Thy wealth, friends, life, and country, all are lost;
Yet in this picture we thee living find;
And thou with lesser travel, lesser cost,
Have found new life, friends, wealth, and better coast:
So by thy death thou liv'st, by loss thou gain'st,
And in thy absence present still remain'st.
Upon Doctor Playser.
WHo lives with death, by death in death is lying;
But he who living dies, best lives by dying:
Who life to truth, who death to error gives,
In life may die, by death more surely lives.
My soul in heaven breathes, in schools my fame:
Then on my tomb write nothing but my name.
Upon my brothers book called, The grounds, labor, and reward of faith.
THis lamp filled up, and fired by that blessed Spirit,
Spent his last oil in this pure heavenly flame;
Laying the grounds, walls, roof of faith: this frame
With life he ends; and now does there inherit
What here he built, crowned with his laurel merit:
Whose palms and triumphs once he loudly rang,
There now enjoyes what here he sweetly sang.
This is his monument, on which he drew
His spirits image, that can never die;
But breathes in these 'live words, and speaks to the eye:
In these his winding-sheets he dead does show
To buried souls the way to live anew,
And in his grave more powerfully now preaches.
Who will not learn, when that a dead man teaches?
Upon Mr. Perkins his printed sermons.
PErkins (our wonder) living, though long dead,
In this white paper, as a winding sheet,
And in this velome lies enveloped:
Yet still he lives, guiding the erring feet,
Speaking now to our eyes, though buried.
If once so well, much better now he teaches.
Who will not hear, when a live-dead man preaches?
FINIS.
ELISA, OR AN ELEGY UPON THE UNRIPE DECEASE OF Sr. ANTONIE IRBY:

Composed at the request (and for a monument) of his surviving Lady.

Anagramma Antonius Irbeus An virtus obiens?

Esto mei mortisque memor.

Funus virtuti foenus.

Printed by the printers to the University of Cambridge. 1633.

To the right worthy Knight, Sr. ANTONIE IRBY.
SIR, I am altogether (I think) unknown to you, (as having never seen you since
your infancy) neither do I now desire to be known by this trifle. But I cannot
rule these few lines composed presently after your fathers decease; They are
broken from me, and will see more light then they deserve. I wish there were
any thing in them worthy of your vacant hours: Such as they are, yours they
are by inheritance. As an Vrn therefore of your fathers ashes (I beseech you)
receive them, for his sake, and from him, who desires in some better employment
to be

Your servant, P. F.

ELISA.
LOok as a stagge, pierced with a fatal bow,
(As by a wood he walks securely feeding)
In coverts thick conceales his deadly blow,
And feeling death swim in his endless bleeding,
(His heavy head his fainting strength exceeding)
Bids woods adieu, so sinks into his grave;
Green brakes and primrose sweet his seemly hearse embrave:
2
So lay a gentle Knight now full of death,
With clowdie eyes his latest hour expecting;
And by his side, sucking his fleeting breath,
His weeping Spouse Elisa; life neglecting,
And all her beauteous faires with grief infecting:
Her cheek as pale as his; 't were hard to scanne,
If death or sorrows face did look more pale or wanne.
3
Close by, her sister, fair Alicia, sits;
Fairest Alicia, to whose sweetest graces
His tears and sighs a fellow passion fits:
Upon her eye (his throne) Love sorrow places;
There Comfort Sadness, Beauty Grief embraces:
Pity might seem a while that face to borrow,
And thither now was come to comfort death and sorrow.
4
At length loud Grief thus with a fearful shriek
(His trumpet) sounds a battle, joy defying;
Spreading his colors in Elisa's cheek,
And from her eyes (his watchtower) far espying
With Hope Delight, and Joy, and Comfort flying,
Thus with her tongue their coward flight pursues,
While sighs, shrieks, tears give chase with never fainting crues:
5
Thou traitor Joy, that in prosperity
So lowdly vaunt'st; whither, ah, whither fliest?
And thou that bragg'st never from life to fly,
False Hope, ah whither now so speedy hiest?
In vain thy winged feet so fast thou pliest:
Hope, thou art dead, and Joy in Hope relying
Bleeds in his hopeless wounds, and in his death lies dying.
6
But then Alicia (in whose cheerful eye
Comfort with Grief, Hope with Compassion lived)
Renews the fight; If Joy and Comfort die,
The fault is yours: so much (too much) you grieved,
That Hope could never hope to be relieved.
If all your hopes to one poor hope you bind,
No marvel if one fled, not one remains behind.
7
Fond hopes on life, so weak a thread, depending!
Weak, as the thread such knots so weakly tying:
But heavenly joys are circular, never ending,
Sure as the rock on which they grow; and lying
In heaven, increase by loss, live best by dying.
Then let your hope on those sure joys depend,
Which live and grow by death, and waste not when they spend.
8
Then she; Great Lord, thy judgments righteous be,
To make good ill, when to our ill we use it:
Good leads us to the greatest good, to Thee;
But we to other ends most fond abuse it;
A common fault, yet cannot that excuse it:
We love thy gifts, and take them gladly ever:
We love them (ah too much!) more then we love the giver.
9
So falling low upon her humbled knees,
And all her heart within her eye expressing;
It Is true, great Mercy, only miseries
Teach us our selves, and thee: oh, if confessing
Our faults to thee be all our faults releasing,
But in thine ear, I never sought to hide them:
Ah! thou have heard them often, as often as thou have eyed them.
10
I know the heart knows more then tongue can tell;
But thou perceiv'st the heart his foulness telling:
Yet knows the heart not half, so wide an hell,
Such seas of sin in such scant banks are swelling:
Who sees all faults within his bosom dwelling?
Many my tenants are, and I not know them.
Most dangerous the wounds thou feel'st, and can not show them.
11
Some hidden fault, my Father, and my God,
Some fault I know not yet, nor yet amended,
Has forced thee frown, and use thy smarting rod;
Some grievous fault thee grievously offended:
But let thy wrath, (ah!) let it now be ended.
Father, this childish plea (if once I know it)
Let stay thy threatening hand, I never more will do it.
12
If to my heart thou show this hidden sore,
Spare me; no more, no more I will offend thee;
I dare not say I will, I would no more:
Say thou I shall, and soon I will amend me.
Then smooth thy brow, and now some comfort lend me;
Oh let thy softest mercies rest contented:
Though late, I most repent, that I so late repented.
13
Lay down thy rod, and stay thy smarting hand;
These raining eyes into thy bottle gather:
Oh see thy bleeding Son betwixt us stand;
Remember me a child, thy self a father:
Or if thou may not stay, oh punish rather
The part offending, this rebellious heart.
Why pardon'st thou the worse, and plagu'st my better part?
14
Was It not thy hand, that tied the sacred knot?
Was It not thy hand, that to my hand did give him?
Have thou not made us one? command'st thou not,
None loose what thou have bound? if then thou reave him,
How without me by halves do thou receive him!
Take thou the head, and leave the heart behind?
Ay me! in me alone can thou such monster find?
15
Oh why do thou so strong me weak assail?
Woman of all thy creatures is the weakest,
And in her greatest strength did weakly fail:
Thou who the weak and bruised never breakest,
Who never triumph in the yielding seek;
Pity my weak estate, and leave me never:
I ever yet was weak, and now more weak then ever.
16
With that her fainting spouse lifts up his head,
And with some joy his inward griefs refraining,
Thus with a feeble voice, yet cheerful, s'ed;
Spend not in tears this little time remaining;
Thy grief does add to mine, not ease my paining:
My death is life; such is the scourge of God:
Ah, if his rods be such, who would not kiss his rod?
17
My dear, (once all my joy, now all my care)
To these my words (these my last words) apply thee:
Give me thy hand; these my last greetings are:
Show me thy face, I never more shall eye thee.
Ah would our boys, our lesser selves, were by thee!
Those my 'live pictures to the world I give:
So single only die, in them twice-two I live.
18
Your little souls, your sweetest times enjoy,
And softly spend among your mothers kisses;
And with your pretty sports and hurtlesse joy
Supply your weeping mothers grievous misses:
Ah, while you may, enjoy your little blisses,
While yet you nothing know: when back you view,
Sweet will this knowledge seem, when yet you nothing knew.
19
For when to riper times your years arrive,
No more (ah then no more) may you go play you:
Lancht in the deep far from the wished hive,
Change of worlds tepests through blind seas will sway you,
Till to the long-long'd haven they convey you:
Through many a wave this brittle life must pass,
And cut the churlish seas, shipped in a bark of glass.
20
How many ships in quicksands swallowed been!
What gaping waves, whales, monsters there expect you!
How many rocks, much sooner felt then seen!
Yet let no fear, no coward fright affect you:
He holds the stern, and he will safe direct you,
Who to my sails thus long so gently blew,
That now I touch the shore, before the seas I knew.
21
I touch the shore, and see my rest preparing.
Oh blessed God! how infinite a blessing
Is in this thought, that through this troubled faring,
Through all the faults this guilty age depressing
I guiltless past, no helpless man oppressing;
And coming now to thee, lift to the skies
Unbribed hands, cleans'd heart, and never tainted eyes!
22
Life, life! how many Sylla's do thou hide
In thy calm streams, which sooner kill then threaten!
Gold, honor, greatness, and their daughter, pride!
More quiet lives, and less with tempests beaten,
Whose middle state content does richly sweeten:
He knows not strife, or brabling lawyers brawls;
His love and wish live pleased within his private walls.
23
The King he never sees, nor fears, nor prays;
Nor sits court-promise and false hopes lamenting:
Within that house he spends and ends his days,
Where day he viewed first: his hearts contenting,
His wife, and babes; nor sits new joys inventing:
Unspotted there, and quiet he remains;
And among his duteous sons most loved and fearlesse reigns.
24
Thou God of peace, with what a gentle tide
Through this worlds raging tempest have thou brought me!
Thou, thou my open soul did safely hide,
When thousand crafty foes so nearely sought me;
Else had the endless pit too quickly caught me;
That endless pit, where it is easier never
To fall, then being fallen to cease from falling ever.
25
I never knew or want or luxury,
Much less their followers; or cares tormenting,
Or ranging lust, or base-bred flattery:
I loved, and was beloved with like consenting:
My hate was hers, her joy my sole contenting:
Thus long I lived, and yet have never proved
Whether I loved her more, or more by her was loved.
26
Four babes (the fifth with thee I soon shall find)
With equal grace in soul and body framed:
And left these goods might swell my bladder'd mind,
(Which last I name, but should not last be named)
A sickness long my stubborn heart has tamed,
And taught me pleasing goods are not the best;
But most unblest he lives, that lives here ever blessed.
27
Ah life, once virtues spring, now sink of evil!
Thou change of pleasing pain, and painful pleasure;
Thou brittle painted bubble, shop of the devil;
How do thou bribe us with false gilded treasure,
That in thy joys we find no mean or measure!
How do thou witch! I know thou do deceive me:
I know I should, I must, and yet I would not leave thee.
28
Ah death! once greatest ill, now only blessing,
Untroubled sleep, short travel, ever resting,
All sickness cure, thou end of all distressing,
Thou one meals fast, usher to endless feasting;
Though hopeless griefs cry out thy aid requesting,
Though thou art sweetened by a life most hateful;
How is it, that when thou come, thy coming is ungrateful?
29
Frail flesh, why would thou keep a hated guest,
And him refuse whom thou have often invited?
Life thy tormenter, death thy sleep and rest.
And thou (poor soul) why at his sight art frighted,
Who clears thine eyes, and makes thee eagle-sighted?
Mount now my soul, and seat thee in thy throne:
Thou shall be one with him, by whom thou first wast one.
30
Why should thou love this star, this borrowed light,
And not that Sun, at which thou often have guessed,
But guessed in vain? which dares thy piercing sight,
Which never was, which cannot be expressed?
Why love thy load, and joy'st to be oppressed?
See thou those joys? those thousand thousand graces?
Mount now my soul, and leap to those outstretcht embraces.
31
Dear country, I must leave thee; and in thee
No benefit, which most does pierce and grieve me:
Yet had not hasty death prevented me,
I would repay my life, and somewhat give thee:
My sons for that I leave; and so I leave thee:
Thus heaven commands; the lord outrides the page,
And is arrived before: death has prevented age.
32
My dearest Bettie, my more loved heart,
I leave thee now; with thee all earthly joying:
Heaven knows, with thee alone I sadly part:
All other earthly sweets have had their cloying;
Yet never full of thy sweet loves enjoying,
Thy constant loves, next heaven I did refer them:
Had not much grace prevailed, before heaven I should prefer them.
33
I leave them, now the trumpet calls away;
In vain thine eyes beg for some times reprieving;
Yet in my children here immortal stay:
In one I die, in many ones am living:
In them, and for them stay thy too much grieving:
Look but on them, in them thou still wilt see
Married with thee again thy twice-two Antonie.
34
And when with little hands they stroke thy face,
As in thy lap they sit (ah careless) playing,
And stammering ask a kiss, give them a brace;
The last from me: and then a little staying,
And in their face some part of me survaying,
In them give me a third, and with a tear
Show thy dear love to him, who loved thee ever dear.
35
And now our falling house leans all on thee;
This little nation to thy care commend them:
In thee it lies that hence they want not me;
Themselves yet cannot, thou the more defend them;
And when green age permits, to goodness bend them:
A mother were you once, now both you are:
Then with this double style double your love and care.
36
Turn their unwarie steps into the way:
What first the vessel drinks, it long retains;
No bars will hold, when they have used to stray:
And when for me one asks, and weeping plaineth,
Point thou to heaven, and say, he there remains:
And if they live in grace, grow, and persever,
There shall they live with me: else shall they see me never.
37
My God, oh in thy fear here let them live;
Thy wards they are, take them to thy protection:
Thou gav'st them first, now back to thee I give;
Direct them thou, and help her weak direction;
That reunited by thy strong election;
Thou now in them, they then may live in thee,
And seeing here thy will, may there thy glory see.
38
Bettie, let these last words long with thee dwell:
If yet a second Hymen do expect thee,
Though well he love thee, once I loved as well:
Yet if his presence make thee less respect me,
Ah do not in my childrens good neglect me:
Let me this faithful hope departing have;
More easy shall I die, and sleep in careless grave.
39
Farewell, farewell; I feel my long long rest,
And iron sleep my leaden heart oppressing:
Night after day, sleep after labor's best;
Port after storms, joy after long distressing:
So weep thy loss, as knowing it is my blessing:
Both as a widow and a Christian grieve:
Still live I in thy thoughts, but as in heaven I live.
40
Death, end of old joys, entrance into new,
I follow thee, I know I am thy debtour;
Not unexpect thou come to claim thy due:
Take here thine own, my souls too heavy fetter;
Not life, life's place I change, but for a better:
Take thou my soul, that bought'st it: cease your tears:
Who sighing leaves the earth, himself and heaven fears.
41
Thus said, and while the body slumbring lay,
(As Theseus Ariadne's bed forsaking)
His quiet soul stole from her house of clay;
And glorious Angels on their wings it taking,
Swifter then lightning flew, for heaven making:
There happy goes he, heavenly fires admiring,
Whose motion is their bait; whose rest is restless giring:
42
And now the courts of that thrice blessed King
It enters, and his presence sits enjoying;
While in it self it finds an endless spring
Of pleasures new, and never weary joying,
Never spent in spending; feeding, never cloying:
Weak pen to write! for thought can never feign them:
The mind that all can hold, yet cannot half contain the^.
43
There does it blessed sit, and looking down,
Laughs at our busy care, and idle paining;
And fitting to it self that glorious crown,
Scorns earth; where even Kings most serve by reigning;
Where men get wealth, and hell; so loose by gaining.
Ah blessed soul! there sit thou still delighted,
Till we at length to him with thee shall be united.
44
But when at last his Lady sad espies
His flesh of life, her self of him deprived;
Too full of grief, closing his quenched eyes,
As if in him, by him, for him she lived,
Fell dead with him; and once again revived,
Fell once again: pain weary of his paining,
And grief with too much grief felt now no grief remaining.
45
Again relieved, all silent sat she long;
No word to name such grief durst first adventer:
Grief is but light that floats upon the tongue,
But weighty sorrow presses to the center,
And never rests till the heavy heart it enter;
And in life's house was married to life:
Grief made life grievous seem, and life enlivens grief:
46
And from their bed proceeds a numerous press,
First shrieks, then tears and sighs the hearts ground renting:
In vain poor Muse would thou such dole express;
For thou thy self lamenting her lamenting,
And with like grief transformed to like tormenting,
With heavy pace bring'st forth thy lagging verse,
Which clothed with blackest lines attends the mournful hearse.
47
The cunning hand which that Greek Princess drew
Ready in holy fires to be consumed,
Pity and sorrow paints in diverse hue;
One wept, he prayed, this sighed, that chafed and fumed;
But not to limme her fathers look presumed:
For well he knew his skillful hand had failed:
Best was his sorrow seen, when with a cloth 't was veiled.
48
Look as a nightingale, whose callow young
Some boy has marked, and now half naked has taken,
Which long she closely kept, and fostered long,
But all in vain; she now poor bird forsaken
Flies up and down, but grief no place can slaken:
All day, and night her loss she fresh does rue,
And where she ends her plaints, there soon begins anew:
49
Thus sat she desolate, so short a good,
Such gift so soon exacted sore complaining:
Sleep could not pass, but almost sunk in the flood;
So high her eye-banks swelled with endless raining:
Surfeit of grief had bred all meats disdaining:
A thousand times my Antonie, she cried,
Irby a thousand times; and in that name she died.
50
Thus circling in her grief it never ends,
But moving round back to it self enclineth;
Both day and night alike in grief she spends:
Day shows her day is gone, no sun there shines:
Black night her fellow mourner she defines:
Light shows his want, and shades his picture draw:
Him (nothing) best she sees, when nothing now she saw.
THou blacker Muse, whose rude uncombed hairs
With fatal eugh and cypress still are shaded;
Bring hither all thy sighs, hither thy tears:
As sweet a plant, as fair a flower is faded,
As ever in the Muses garden bladed;
While th'owner (hapless owner) sits lamenting,
And but in discontent and grief, finds no contenting.
2
The sweet (now sad) Elisa weeping lies,
While fair Alicia's words in vain relieve her;
In vain those wells of grief she often dries:
What her so long, now doubled sorrows give her,
What both their loves (which doubly double grieve her)
She careless spends without or end or measure;
Yet as it spends, it grows: poor grief can tell his treasure.
3
All as a turtle on a bared bough
(A widow turtle) joy and life despises,
Whose trusty mate (to pay his holy vow)
Some watchful eye late in his roost surprises,
And to his God for error sacrifices;
She joylesse bird sits mourning all alone,
And being one when two, would now be two, or none:
4
So sat she gentle Lady weeping sore,
Her desert self and now cold lord lamenting;
So sat she careless on the dusty floor,
As if her tears were all her souls contenting:
So sat she, as when speechless griefs tormenting
Locks up the heart, the captive tongue enchaining:
So sat she joylesse down in wordlesse grief complaining.
5
Her cheerful eye (which once the crystal was,
Where Love and Beauty dressed their fairest faces,
And fairer seemed by looking in that glass)
Had now in tears drowned all their former graces:
Her snow-white arms, whose warm and sweet embraces
Could quicken death, their now dead lord infold,
And seemed as cold and dead as was the flesh they hold.
6
The roses in her cheek grow pale and wan;
As if his pale cheeks livery they affected:
Her head, like fainting flowers oppressed with rain,
On her left shoulder leaned his weight neglected:
Her dark-gold locks hung loosly unrespected;
As if those fairs, which he alone deserved,
With him had lost their use, and now for nothing served.
7
Her Lady sister sat close by her side,
Alicia, in whose face Love proudly lorded;
Where Beauties self and Mildness sweet reside,
Where every Grace her naked sight afforded,
And Majesty with Love sat well accorded:
A little map of heaven, sweet influence giving;
More perfect yet in this, it was a heaven living.
8
Yet now this heaven with melting clouds was stained:
Her starry eyes with sister grief infected
Might seem the Pleiades, so fast they rained:
And though her tongue to comfort she directed,
Sighs waiting on each word like grief detected;
That in her face you now might plainly see
Sorrow to sit for Love, Pity for Majesty.
9
At length when now those storms she had allayed,
A league with grief for some short time indenting;
She 'gan to speak, and sister only said:
The sad Elisa soon her words preventing,
El. In vain you think to ease my hearts tormenting;
Words, comforts, hope, all medicine is in vain:
My heart most hates his cure, and loves his pleasing pain.

Al. 10
As vain to weep, since fate cannot reprieve.

El. Tears are most due, when there is no reprieving.


Al. When doom is past, weak hearts that fondly grieve.


El. A helpless griefs sole joy is joylesse grieving.


Al. To losses old new loss is no relieving:
You lose your tears.

El. When that I only fear
For ever now is lost, poor loss to lose a tear.

Al. 11
Nature can teach, that who is born must die.

El. And Nature teaches tears in griefs tormenting.


Al. Passions are slaves to Reasons monarchy.


El. Reason best shows her reason in lamenting.


Al. Religion blames impatient discontenting.


El. Not passion, but excess Religion branded;
Nor ever countermands what Natures self commanded

Al. 12
That hand which gave him first into your hand,
To his own hand does now again receive him:
Impious and fond, to grudge at his command,
Who once by death from death does ever reave him!
He lives by leaving life, which soon would leave him:
Thus God and him you wrong by too much crying.
Who living died to life, much better lives by dying.

El. 13
Not him I plain; ill would it fit our loves,
In his best state to show my hearts repining;
To mourn at others good, fond envy proves:
I know his soul is now more brightly shining
Then all the stars their light in one combining:
No, dearest soul; (so lifting up her eyes,
Which showed like watery suns quenched in the moister skies)
14
My dear, my dearest Irby, (at that name,
As at a well-known watchword, forth there pressed
Whole floods of tears, and straight a sudden quame
Seizing her heart, her tongue with weight oppressed,
And locked her grief within her soul distressed;
There all in vain he close and hidden lies:
Silence is sorrows speech; his tongue speaks in her eyes:
15
Till grief new mounted on uneven wings
Of loud-breath'd sighs, his leaden weight up sending,
Back to the tongue his heavy presence brings,
His usher tears, deep groans behind attending,
And in his name her breath most gladly spending,
As if he gone, his name were all her joying)
Irby, I never grudged thee heaven, and heavens enjoying.
16
It Is not thy happiness that breeds my smart,
It is my loss, and cause that made me lose thee;
Which hatching first this tempest in my heart,
Thus justly rages; he that lately chose thee
To live with him, where thou might safe repose thee,
Has found some cause out of my little caring,
By spoiling thine to spare, and spoil my life by sparing.
17
Whither, ah whither shall I turn my head,
Since thou my God so sore my heart have beaten?
Thy rods yet with my blood are warm and red:
Thy scourge my soul has drunk, my flesh has eaten.
Who helps, when thou my Father so do threaten?
Thou hid'st thy eyes; or if thou do not hide them,
So do thou frown, that best I hidden may abide them.
18
I weeping grant, what ever may be dreaded,
All ill thou can inflict, I have deserved;
Thy mercy I, I mercy only pleaded.
Most wretched men, if all that from thee swerved,
By merit only in just weight were served!
If naught thou giv'st, but what desert does get me,
Oh give me nothing then; for nothing I entreat thee.
19
Ah wherefore are thy mercies infinite,
If thou do hourd them up, and never spend them?
Mercy's no mercy hid in envious night:
The rich man's goods, while in his chest he penned them,
Were then no goods; much better to misspend them.
Why make thou such a rod? so fierce do threat me?
Thy frowns to me were rods; thy forehead would have beat me.
20
Thou seized my joy; ah he is dead and gone,
That might have dressed my wounds, when thus they smarted:
To all my griefs I now am left alone;
Comfort's in vain to hopeless grief imparted:
Hope, comfort, joy with him are all departed.
Comfort, hope, joy, life's flatterers, most I fly you,
And would not deigne to name, but naming to defy you.

Al. 21
Sister, too far your passions violent heat
And griefs too headlong in your plaint convay you:
You feel your stripes, but mark not who does beat;
It Is he that takes away, who can repay you:
This grief to other rods does open lay you:
He binds your grief to patience, not dejection.
Who bears the first not well, provokes a new correction.

El. 22
I know it is true; but sorrows blubbered eye
Fain would not see, and cannot well behold it:
My heart surround with grief is swollen so high,
It will not sink, till I alone unfold it;
But grows more strong, the more you do withhold it:
Leave me a while alone; griefs tide grows low,
And ebs, when private tears the eye-banks overflow.
23
She quickly rose, and ready now to go,
Remember measure in your griefs complaining;
His last, his dying words command you so:
So left her; and Elisa sole remaining,
Now every grief more boldly entertaining,
They flock about her round; so one was gone,
And twenty fresh arrived. 'Lone grief is least alone.
24
Thus as she sat with fixed and settled eye,
Thousand fond thoughts their wandering shapes depainted:
Now seemed she mounted to the crystal sky,
And one with him, and with him fellow-sainted;
Straight pulled from heaven: and then again she fainted:
Thus while their numerous thoughts each fancy brought,
The mind all idle sat: much thinking lost her thought.
25
And fancy, finding now the dulled sight
Idle with business, to her soul presented
(While the heavy mind obscured his shaded light)
Her woeful body from her head absented;
And sudden starting, with that thought tormented,
A thing impossible too true she found:
The head was gone, and yet the headless body sound.
26
Nor yet awake she cries; ah this is wrong,
To part what Natures hand so near has tied;
Stay oh my head, and take thy trunk along:
But then her mind (recalled) her error spied;
And sighed to see how true the fancy lied,
Which made the eye his instrument to see
That true, which being true it self must nothing be.
27
Vile trunk (says she) thy head is ever gone;
Vile headless trunk, why art thou not engraved?
One wast thou once with him, now art thou none;
Or if thou art, or were, how art thou saved?
And live still, when he to death is slaved?
But (ah) when well I think, I plainly see,
That death to him was life, and life is death to me.
28
Vile trunk, if yet he live; ah then again
Why seek'st thou not with him to be combined?
But oh since he in heaven does living reign,
Death were to him in such knots to be twined;
And life to me with him to be confined:
So while I better think, I easily see
My life to him were death, his death were life to me.
29
Then die with him, vile trunk, and dying live;
Or rather with him live, his life applying;
Where thou shall never die, nor ever grieve:
But ah, though death thou feel'st within thee lying,
Thou never art dead, though still in sorrow dying:
Most wretched soul, which have thy seat and being,
Where life with death is one, and death with life agreeing!
30
He lives and joys; death life to him has bred:
Why is he living then in earth enwombed?
But I, a walking coarse, in life am dead:
It Is I, my friends, it is I must be entombed;
Whose joy with grief, whose life with death's benumbed:
Thou coffin art not his, nor he is thine;
Mine art thou: thou the dead, and not the livings shrine.
31
You few thin boards, how in so scanted room
So quiet such great enemies contain ye?
All joy, all grief lies in this narrow tomb:
You contraries, how thus in peace remain ye,
That one small cabin so should entertain ye?
But joy is dead, and here entombed does lie,
While grief is come to moan his dead-lov'd enemy.
32
How many virtues in this little space
(This little little space) lie buried ever!
In him they lived, and with them every grace:
In him they lived, and di'd, and rise will never.
Fond men! go now, in virtues steps persever;
Go sweat, and toil; thus you inglorious lie:
In this old frozen age virtue it self can die.
33
Those petty Northern stars do never fall;
The unwasht Bear the Ocean wave despises;
Ever unmoved it moves, and ever shall:
The Sun, which often his head in night disguises,
So often as he falls, so often rises;
And stealing backward by some hidden way,
With self same light begins and ends the year and day.
34
The flowers, which in the absence of the Sun
Sleep in their winter-houses all disarmed,
And backward to their mothers womb do run;
Soon as the earth by Taurus horns is warmed,
Muster their colored troops; and freshly armed,
Spreading their braving colors to the sky,
Winter and winters spite, bold little elves, defy.
35
But Virtues heavenly and more glorious light,
Though seeming ever sure, yet often dismounteth;
And sinking low, sleeps in eternal night,
Nor ever more his broken sphere remounteth:
Her sweetest flower, which other flowers surmounteth
As far as roses nettles, soonest fades:
Down falls her glorious leaf, and never more it bladeth.
36
And as that dainty flower, the maiden rofe,
Her swelling bosom to the Sun discloses;
Soon as her lover hot and fiery grows,
Straight all her sweets unto his heat exposes,
Then soon disrobed her sweet and beauty loses;
While hurtful weeds, hemlocks, and nettles stinking
Soon from the earth ascend, late to their graves are sinking.
37
All so the virtuous bud in blooming falls,
While vice long flourishing late sees her ending:
Virtue once dead no gentle spring recalls;
But vice springs of it self; and soon ascending,
Long views the day, late to his night descending.
Vain men, that in this life set up your rest,
Which to the ill is long, and short unto the best!
38
And as a dream, where th'idle fancy plays,
One thinks that fortune high his head advances;
Another spends in woe his weary days;
A third seems sport in love, and courtly dances;
A fourth to find some glittering treasure chances;
Soon as they wake, they see their thoughts were vain,
And either quite forget, or laugh their idle brain:
39
Such is the world, and such life's quick-spent play:
This base, and scorned; that great, in high esteeming;
This poor, and patched seems; that rich, and gay;
This sick, that sound; yet all is but a seeming:
So like that waking often we fear we are dreaming;
And think we wake often, when we dreaming play.
Dreams are as living nights; life as a dreaming day.
40
Go then, vain life; for I will trust no more
Thy flattering dreams: death, to thy resting take me:
Thou sleep without all dreams, life's quiet shore,
When will thou come? when will thou overtake me?
Enough I now have lived; loathed life forsake me:
Thou good men's endless fight, thou ill men's feast;
That at the best art bad, and worst art to the best.
41
Thus as in tears she drowns her swollen eyes,
A sudden noise recalls them; backward bending
Her weary head, there all in black she spies
Six mournful bearers, the sad hearse attending,
Their feet and hands to that last duty lending:
All silent stood she, trembling, pale, and wan;
The first grief left his stage, a new his part began.
42
And now the coffin in their arms they take,
While she with weight of grief sat still amazed;
As do sear leaves in March, so did she quake,
And with intended eyes upon them gazed:
But when from ground the doleful hearse they raised,
Down on the beer half dead she careless fell;
While tears did talk apace, and sighs her sorrows tell.
43
At last, Fond men (said she) you are deceived;
It is not he, it is I must be interred:
Not he, but I of life and soul bereaved;
He lives in heaven, among the saints referred:
This trunk, this headless body must be buried.
But while by force some hold her, up they rear him,
And weeping at her tears, away they softly bear him.
44
But then impatient grief all passion proves,
She prays and weeps; with tears she does entreat them:
But when this only fellow passion moves,
She storms and raves, and now as fast does threat them;
And as she only could, with words does beat them;
Ah cruel men, ah men most cruel, stay:
It is my heart, my life, my soul, you bear away.
45
And now no sooner was he out of sight,
As if she would make good what she had spoken,
First from her hearts deep center deep she sighed;
Then, (as if heart, and life, and soul were broken)
Down dead she fell; and once again awoken,
Fell once again; so to her bed they bore her:
While friends (no friends) hard love to life and grief restore her.
46
Unfriendly friends, (says she) why do ye strive
To bar wished death from his so just ingression?
Your pity kills me; it is my death to live,
And life to die: it is as great oppression
To force out death, as life from due possession;
It Is much more great: better that quickly spills
A loathed life, then he that with long torture kills.
47
And then, as if her guiltless bed offended;
Thou traitorous bed, when first thou did receive me,
Not single to thy rest I then ascended:
Double I came, why should I single leave thee?
Why of my better part do thou bereave me?
Two pressed thee first: why should but one depart?
Restore, thou traitorous bed, restore that better part.
48
Thus while one grief another place inherits,
And one yet hardly spent, a new complained:
Griefs leaden vapor dulls the heavy spirits,
And sleep too long from so wished seat restrained,
Now of her eyes un'wares possession gained;
And that she might him better welcome give,
Her lord he new presents, and makes him fresh to live.
49
She thinks he lives, and with her goes along;
And often she kissed his cheek, and often embraced;
And sweetly asked him where he staid so long,
While he again her in his arms enlaced;
Till strong delight her dream and joy defaced:
But then she willing sleeps; sleep glad receives her;
And she as glad of sleep, that with such shapes deceives her.
50
Sleep widowed eyes, and cease so fierce lamenting;
Sleep grieved heart, and now a little rest thee:
Sleep sighing words, stop all your discontenting;
Sleep beaten breast; no blows shall now molest thee:
Sleep happy lips; in mutual kisses nest ye:
Sleep weary Muse, and do not now disease her:
Fancy, do thou with dreams and his sweet presence please her.

FINIS.
To my dear friend, the SPENCER of this age.
Dear friend,
NO more a Stranger now: I lately past
Thy curious Building; called; but then my haste
Denied me a full draught; I did but taste.
Thy Wine was rich and pleasing; did appear
No common grape: My haste could not forbear
A second sippe; I hung a Garland there:
Past on my way; I lasht through thick and thin,
Dispatched my business, and returned again;
I called the second time; unhors'd, went in:
Viewed every Room; each Room was beautified
With new Invention, carved on every side,
To please the common and the curious eyed:
Viewed every Office; every Office lay
Like a rich Magazen; and did bewray
'Thy Treasure, opened with thy golden key:
Viewed every Orchyard; every Orchyard did
Appear a Paradise, whose fruits were hid
(Perchance) with shadowing Leaves, but none forbid.
Viewed every Plot; spent some delightful hours
In every Garden, full of newborn flowers,
Delicious banks, and delectable bowers.
Thus having stepped and traveled every staire
Within, and tasted every fruit that is rare
Without; I made thy house my thorough-fare.
Then give me leave, rare Fletcher, (as before
I left a Garland at thy Gates) once more
To hang this Ivy at thy Postern-doore.
FRANCIS QUARLES.

FINIS.

