A BRIEF AND FAMILIAR EPISTLE SHEVVING HIS MAJESTY'S MOST LAWFVLL, HONORABLE
AND JUST TITLE TO ALL HIS KINGDOMS. With an Epitaph or brief lamentation for
the late Majesty Royal of most famous, godly, and honorable memory: With a
rejoicing after sorrow for the same. And lastly a prayer for his Majesty's most
happy succession, and for the Queen and their children.

By Robert Fletcher.



Imprinted at London for John Harrison, dwelling in Paternoster row, at the
sign of the Anchor. 1603.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL HIS EVER good friend Marmaduke Darell Esquier, Clarke
Comptrouler of the late Queens Majesty's household, and victuler of her Navy
Royal, etc. Robert Fletcher, Yeoman Purueyor of Cariages for remooues of our
said late Sovereign Lady the Queen, wishes a long life with continuance of
those virtues which God has endued him with.
SIR although my senses were soaked and over drowned with sorrow, for the death
of our late dread Sovereign, under whose Table I have had (for the most part)
my nourishment almost forty years of my life past: and in my travels, hearing
some to dispute of his Majesty's just and most lawful Title: others to mourn
with me, others to rejoice with Songs, Ballads, etc. And lastly, a Soldiers
wish, Entitled to his Majesty, and patronized by all the Lords, etc. I could
not choose but imitate, and therefore have written a brief Epistle to the
vulgar, touching his Majesty's Title. Secondly a mean Epitaph for her late
Majesty. Thirdly a few verses of rejoicing after sorrow: And lastly, a prayer
for the King, the Queen, and their children: With a thanksgiving to God for
sending their Majesty's to us, with such hope of happy succession: all which I
beseech you to patronize, with my self also, as your place and occasion may
affoorde, and as Justice and equity according to your wisdom shall direct
you. At my lodging near Charing Cross, the xxiii. of April. 1603.

Your worships to be commanded as abouesaid ever, Robert Fletcher.

A brief and familiar Epistle showing his Majesty's most Lawful, Honorable,
and just Title to all his Kingdoms, etc.
IF any will be so desperate impudent, to affirm that our Sacred and most
excellent Sovereign now deceassed, was not to be naturally sorrowed for. I am
persuaded that every good Christian will condemn that person: even so every
one that now after our mourning and bootlesse sorrow, will not confess, that
our most excellent Sovereign Lord and King, is not the true lineall, most
honorable heir and lawful successor, he has not read any of our own
histories or Chronicles: nor does he understand ought, but may be reckoned
among the vulgar to be void of common sense, for as the first proclamation was
excellently penned touching his Majesty's most lawful right and lineall
succession, so it is not yet much above fifty years since a coniunct union was
sought to have knit both the Realms of England and Scotland together. Not
withstanding the near proximitie of blood between the two young Princes of
England, Edward; of Scotland, Mary; King Henry the eight and our last of that
name, sought it first by all good and honorable means after his decease. The
like course was holden, as who will read the Epistle exertatory written by the
Duke of Sommerset and the whole Counsel of England, unto the nobles and
commons then of Scotland, may perceive, and conceive what blessed happiness, and
happy blessedness was therein promised to both the nations: but it may serve,
and that to all men of any reasonable foreseeing capacity, that the al-seeing
spirit of the eternal Majesty, did see what then was most meetest to confirm
his glory and our comforts: for look into the propagation of the Gospel of
peace, and you shall perceive, that the almighty had his ocult judgment in the
several reigns of King Henry's children, viz. King Edward to begin to build
the Temple of the Lord, so much as six years and od months could give him
leave, amongst many rebellions and perturbacions, moved by his people both
abroad in the Realm, and among his very domesticalls at home; Queen Mary to
pull all down again and to plant Popery, having to aid her therein, the
help of Spain, etc. this was no doubt for the trial of Gods children in
England, and confirmation of the faithful, v. years, odd months was her
Reign, little to her own comfort, and less to her subjects.

Then came the mirror of the world, our late dread sovereign Elizabeth, the
pattern and patronisse of many, yea almost of all the religious and godly
Princes of Christendom; and she planted religion, suppressed, though not
clean supplanted superstition and idolatry, and reigned full xliiii. years od
months: and howsoever her Majesty might seem to conseale from us her heir
apparent, by her grave, wise, and honorable foreseeing Counsel, yet you may
see that her most prudent Counsel suruiuing her most gracious Majesty did
presently proclaim this royal Gentleman to be our King and blessed substitute
sent of God.

Who being the graund son of the eldest daughters son of King Henry the vii.
and Queen Elizabeth his wife, as then the very heir to the imperial Crown
of this land, he is also the entire and most dear son of the same eldest
sisters daughters son, a most Godly, goodly, and noble young gentleman, borne
hear in England amongst us, whose very princely presence, my self have seen
and spoken with, at Saint James house near Charing Cross: so that he is our
lawful, and true undoubted King of Scotland by mother and father: of England
by father and mother: of whose Majesty, Magnanimity, Princely power, most
excellent government we are assured, by a book written by himself to the
Prince his son and heir apparent: and according to the Counsel contained in
the said book, and directed to the most mighty and excelent young Prince now
in Europe living, both for parents and for patrimony. I do most humbly
beseech almighty God, that all the subjects in these his Majesty's dominions
may mediate, imitate, and teach it to posterity.

For thereby such government must needs ensue, both generally abroad in the
common wealth, and domestical at home in every man's particular, that virtue
will be advanced, vice utterly suppressed, the almighty served, our Kingobeied,
the honorable honored, the Clergy reverenced, the poor relieved, and every
degree so settled: the King rejoicing in his subjects, the subjects glorying in
their King, which the King of eternal glory grant us all to be pertakers of.

AMEN.
An Epitaph or brief Lamentation for the late Majesty Royal of most famous,
godly, and honorable memory, our gracious Queen Elizabeth.
Bewail our greatest and most grievous loss,
all mortal wights that on the earth do tread:
Your honor, glory, beauty, turnde to dross,
your wealth, your peace, your plenty, lapt in Lead.
Lies mortifide, and in her Palace placed,
Whom erst, late erst, all earthly Princes graced,
Gone is she now, that was a Flower in youth,
a Juno, Pallas, Venus, in her age:
A future hope, for to maintain the truth,
oh want of breath has turned her from the Stage
And Kingly throne, wherein on earth was placed,
Her Majesty, whom all the world late graced.
Bewail her death ye Muses, and all men,
Apollo weep, Minerua likewise mourn,
All Poets now, bring each a golden Pen,
and beautify her hearce, each in his turn.
Let it be known t'all Princes farthest placed,
That our Eliza was before them graced.
And I poor soul, that mourn with all my heart,
For my good Queen, and Sovereign mistress dear:
Will set my Pen and study now apart,
it to the world for ever shall appear.
That while the Lord on earth does let me live,
I for the dead no line or word will give.
But this last service to my peerless Prince:
ah wretch, and is it even the last indeed:
It is the last, (and does my Muse convince)
so has our God, and Nature both decreed.
That this should be the last year of her life:
Doubtful (to some) to have begun our strife.
Yet see, the Lord did harbor in her breast,
which she kept secret more then forty year:
Who should succeed her, and continue rest,
amongst her subjects whom she held most dear.
A King by birth, and nearest to her blood:
(Ordained of God) Englands aye lasting good.
O mirror then of Majesty and power,
of wisdom and of woman-hood the best:
That could conceal until her latest hour,
that we in her succession should be blessed.
O Jewel rare, O Iem of greatest price,
Thy soul (with God) possesses Paradise.
FINIS.
Our late sorrow, and our present joy.
SVch mirth from moan, such joy from care,
in Britain soil was never seen:
True English hearts did all prepare,
to mourn the loss of their good Queen.
But now rejoice with hearts content,
For this good King which God has sent.
Our earthly Paragon has past:
her glorious days, and happy reign:
No state or sex can longer last,
then power divine did preordaine.
The Sun by course, does set at night,
And in the morning rise more bright.
Our Cynthia in the evening set, The Queen.

or after midnight took her rest:
Dan Phoebus straight did not forget, The King.

to think his mansion must be blessed.
With glorious beams sent from above,
Descending down with ardent love.
View then the works of power divine,
whose hests are just, and never fail:
Maintaining true descent and line,
which none can cross or counteruaile,
Then sing, lament, rejoice, complain,
First Englands loss, next Englands gain.
First England has a Lady lost,
a mirror to the worlds of men:
Now found a King, and with no cost,
Just cause therefore to joy again.
Now King, and Queen, with daughter, son:
Have Englands joy, and reign begun,
You trembling hearts that quakte for fear;
with watch and ward to doubt the worst,
Now here proclaimed every where:
the joyful news of James the first,
Undoubted King, by just descent,
whose right no title can prevent.
Most worthy Prince in Europe bred,
is now our sovereign Lord and King:
Who by Gods wisdom will be led,
to work our weal in every thing.
Religious, wise, of valiant mind,
Who to such subjects will be kind.
Of Britain I Will in brief to speak,
that now one Monarch must maintain:
Conioyning hearts must malice break,
be reconciled and friends again.
Let every former foughten field,
Like sons unto their fathers yield.
Like Lancaster and York in love, ^enry ^arle of ^ichmond, and Eliza^^th the
^aughter (...) Edward the ^^urth.

must England now and Scotland join:
Such unity God grant may prove,
no foreign power dare then purloyne
One foot of ground from Britains peace,
But Britains may their ground increase,
For this good King then let us pray,
that Nestors years among us he reign,
His Queen and Princes, also they,
in like felicity maintain,
O gracious God, defend from those,
All foreign and domesticke foes.
FINIS.
A Prayer for the King, the Queen, and their Children, with a thanksgiving to
God, for sending to us their Majesty's, with such hope of happy succession.
O Eternal God most holy and blessed father in Jesus Christ, which have
created all things, who wilt also be the Judge of all men, we thy most and
unworthy creatures (in the due regard of our sins) do most humbly beseech
thee to be merciful unto our most dread Sovereign Lord James the first: Thy
most honorable servant our King and governor, that as thou did first in
great mercy send unto this realm a Deborah to defend us from Sissera: a most
blessed woman to redeem us from Room and Romish religion, and the tyranny
thereof formerly inflicted upon this Church of England, and the true professors
of thy most glorious Gospel: and more, having Sanctified her soul, and made
it meet for thy most glorious and blessed presence, we do laud and magnify
thy holy name therefore, humbly beseeching the same, to inspire the heart of our
King to look into the ruins of the Church and commonweal of England, that
as her late Majesty like David had conceived to build the Temple, etc. So his
Majesty like Solomon, may fully finish and effect the same, that the Queen may
be like Bersheba to give counsel, like Hester to preserve, like Iudeth to
confound Holophernus, etc. And that their seed and prosperity may be as
Josiah, Hezechia, and all other good and Godly Kings in the Israel of God.

And hereto O Lord we do give thy divine Majesty most humble and hearty
thanks, in that it has pleased thee to send us a Prince of our English Tribe
extracted from the loins of our most famous Kings and Queens, not divided
from us by seas, not alienated from us by nature, nor much by the very
Elimologi of our vulgar speech, but principally and before all things, O
gracious God: not differing from us in religion and the truth of thy blessed
word, unless it be in greater measure of zeal, to his much greater glory and
our just condemnation: these great mercies O Lord, we do confess to have
received of thy mercy, grace, compassion, love, and providence: without any
merits, or desert of ours. Nay we do much rather O Lord confess to thy
farther glory and to our own shame: that in regard of our wilfulnes in sinning
against thee after xliiii. years taught in thee and in the School of thy
divine will and commandments, for our wants in well doing: repentance,
contrision, confession, and a general reformation of our selves, to have been
given over of thee and exposed to all the dangers and miseries of this mortal
life: which having prevented O Lord, we do further praise thee, and pray thee,
in the name and mediation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, as he in mercy
has taught us saying: Our father, etc.

FINIS.

