A Discourse of that which happened in the battle fought between the two
Nauies of Spain and Portugal, at the Islands of Azores.

Anno Dom. 1582.



Imprinted at London by Thomas Purfoote, and are to be sold at his shop
ouer-against Saint Sepulchers Church without Newgate.

The success which did happen unto the Navy of the king of Spain, whereof
was general Captain the Marquis of Santa Cruse, in the battle which was
fought with the Navy that Don Antonie brought to the Islands of Asores.
The Lord Marquess went out of the river of Lishborne, the tenth day of Julie
1582* with 28. ships, and with five small pinnesses, (for that other three
ships which should have gone with him, could not come forth till the next
day,) because he had order from his Majesty, to depart with the said Navy,
without tarying for the 19 ships, 2. galians, 12* galleys, and 2. pinesses,
which were prepared in And^l^zia. And following his voyage, had three days of
ill weather, at the end whereof he found himself 55* leagues from Lishborne,
about the height of the Cape of Saint Vincent, 50. leagues from him. And so the
foul weather was the cause that he fell from the height of his pretended
course. From whence returned one ship being an Aragoze, in the which were three
companies of old soldiers of Flanders, and the Physicians, Surgians, and other
officers of the Hospital, with their provision of all things necessary for
that purpose: which ship returned without any order, they alleging that she
was in a leeke. In the 13. day it pleased God to send fair weather, by means
whereof they got in one day and night that which they had before lost. And
being in it, and the fair weather continuing still, he did follow his voyage,
till the 21. at which time they had the sight of the I Will of S. Michaeel. And
the 22. day being Sunday, they approached near unto Villa Franca, which is a
town of the said Island, containing about 500. households.

The day before they arrived at the Island, the Marquis dispatched two Pinesses,
under the charge of Captain Aguirrei, who was captain over the five
aforesaid, and did send in every one six soldiers with Caleuers, giving them
warning to go warily, and if they should chance to meet with their enemies
Navy, that they should not come abord any of their ships* neither suffer
any of them to come aborde of their pinesses. And by the said Captain the
Marquis did write unto Ambrose Aguier governor of the said Island, certifying
him how his Majesty's Navy which he brought was very strong, containing 5500.
soldiers, in which number was Don Lopus de Figueroa, with a 1800 of them of
Flanders, over and above 200. Gentlemen and particular persons entertained with
their advantages, who came to serve his Majesty. And that the Navy which was
made ready in Calis, (for the which they did look every hour) was of the
number and quantity aforesaid, with other 5000. soldiers, whereof was five
ensigns of old Tersua of Flaunders. And the Marquis did desire the said
Ambrosio de Aguier to send him such news as he had of the French Navy, and
whether they had passed by that ways or not, and the number of their ships:
because he was determined to go seek them, and fight with them. And that he
should say unto Peter Pishoto, if he should chance to be there, that he
should make himself ready to follow him with the ships of his charge.

Whiles the Marquis was at an anchor in the road of Villa Franca, there did
ariue unto the Admirals ship, one Caruaile of the three which were left in
Lishborne, for to bring the horses, who gave them to understand, that the day
before were arrived to the said Villa Franca, the three ships which were left
in Lishborne, who departed from thence the next day after the Marquis, in
company with the said three Carnailes. They reported likewise, that the three
ships, after they had fallen with Villa Franca, were forced back again to the
sea, and that the two carueils were taken by the enemy, the other with the
horses belonging to the general of the field, and others, went to the sea,
being chased by a French ship.

The Marquis did send some particular men to understand somewhat of them of the
Island, who would not suffer them to come aland, but discharged their pieces at
them. And there was a Priest that told them that the Island was for his
Majesty, and that he knew nothing of the french Army, others willed them to
go to the City. The Marquess understanding what had passed, and perceiving
by one of the two Pinesses which he had sent with Captain Aguirre, that the
other Pinasse with Captain Aguirre was taken prisoner by a French Ship and
other Barks that came from the land, he did then suspect that the Island had
rebelled, and having sent for Don Lopo de Figueroa General of the Feeld, to
confer with him about the landing of some quantity of men to have spech with
them of Villa Franca, and likewise to take fresh water, and having sent to the
Captains Michel de Oquendo and Rodrigo de Vargas, to take notice in what place
they were best to anchor: in the mean time they that were in the top of the
Admiral Gallion espied certain ships near unto Ponta Delgaaa, about which
place is the principal place of the Island and the Castle: and seeming to the
Marquis that those ships should be of the enemies, he altered his
determination and went straightway near unto Ponta Delgada, and by and by they
discovered ^o ships, and then they perceived that it was the army of Don
Anthonio. So our army approaching unto the enemy, and having now certain
knowledge of them, for that they prepared them selves toward the sea, and
perceiving them to be above 60. ships of small and great, the Marquis called a
council, and with the advice of Don Pedro de Tolledo, the Master general of
the Camp, the Marquis de la Fauora, Don Pedro de Tassis general Comptroler,
Don Francisco de Bouadilla master of the Camp, and other Capteins and Knights
being called thereunto, they determined to present the battle, and to fight
with the enemy: who did the like, and put themselves in order, and so they
discharged a piece of ordinance toward us in token of battle. With that the
Marquis commanded to put forth a baner of defiance, and shot off one piece of
ordinance, and sent Captain Maroline, and captain Rodrigo de Vergas, to
advertise the whole army to set them selves in order of battle, which was
done in this manner: In the forefront was a row of ships and galions, and of
the right hand of the Admiral was placed the galion Saint Mattheo, wherein was
the master General of the field, and the general Comptroller: and of the left
hand was the ship, wherein went Don Francisco de Bouadilla great master of the
field, and four ships more to be assistants: the ten Biscains, with the other
ships, wherein was the capteines Michel de Ouando, and Vilia Visiosa, were
placed in the rereward. And by reason the ship wherein Don Christopher de Erasso
went, had strained the head of her maine mast, by means whereof she could not
bear her top sail, she was forced to stay behind, and could not therefore
take her place accordingly. Which was a great grief to the Marquis, to want
the company of Don Christopher in such a time of occasion. The Marquis him
self went in the galian Saint Marten, which was Admerall of the same Navy.
He gave this order for the battle, that in the uppermost sight upon the poope
should be 20. gentlemen and pistolets, and 20. caleuers: and below the
Portiugal gentlemen (except Sir James de Castro, which was upon the poope) and
20. pistolets, and 6. caliuers: and lowest of all should be for help and
succor Sir Anthony Pessoua, Sir Jews Osorio, Sir Goston Ronkelio, the
coronell Mondonario, captain Quessatha, and other four pistolets: and upon
the hatches of the galion 40. pistolets upon either side, under the charge of
captain Gamboa: near to the chamber of the poope, was the body of the guard,
with 40. soldiers, most of them particular men, which had been in office
before, under the charge of captain Augustine Deherrara, for to help and
succor where should be most need. In the starne of the ship was John Baptist
Sauffone gentleman of Milan, with the serieants of the capteines Augustine
Deherrera, and Gamboa, with 15. pistolets, and 10. caliuers: in the great top
was the serieant Sir Frances Galeio with 8. caliuers, and in the top of the
Trinket six, besides those that were in the small tops. Under the hatches
where the great ordinance does lie, were the capteins Sir Christopher
Deaccouia, and Scouetho, and John Alter, and the serieant Tauste, and Esquiuel,
and with every piece of ordinance one gunner, and six men to help him. And
every one had an instrument called hanspiks. With the munition which was upon
the hatches, was Marcelus Carraceolus: and like service was underneath. And in
keeping of the gunne powder was captain Grimaldo, with four mariners. He
commanded also, that there should stand hard by the stern of the galion, the
great bote called the Salua, and four small ones, for to carry directions,
and fill tubbes of water and hogsheads in diverse places of the said galion, and
divide in their places diverse pikes, and that the Mariners should be in the
ships apparel, and the capteines Marolin and Roger Deuargas (as seamen and of
great experience) should attend unto the ordinance and other necessaries. All
this was executed very shortly, and with a great good will. For all this was
provided before they approached unto the Island.

This being done, with great noise of wifflers and drums, and their baners
open, went our navy for to invade the enemies: the which made the like in good
order. But because the wind was calm, they could not fight that day, but went
seaward. And yet the Marquis could not understand of the state of the Island.
Afterward four owers within night arrived unto the admiral Galion, in a
Pinesse, wherein was Domingo de Adurriaga, master of a ship called the Cateline,
with other five mariners Biscaines, and brought a letter from Don John de
Castilio, containing as follows.

In the army of Don Anthonio there is 58. ships, whereof 28. be great ships, and
the rest small, and in them is 6000. Frenchmen. If our army be not strong
enough to fight with them, then it may draw nigh the Castle, which is for the
king. And I would wish you to have a great regard to it, for if you should
loose the victory, great inconvenience would ensue. Furthermore the Master and
his company declared, that Don Anthonio with his army came to the Island of S.
Michael the 15. day of Julie, and the 16. he set 3000. men a land, with whom
Don Lorenco Noguera with iiii. ensigens of footmen did meet, being in number
about 500. men, and with 150. Harquebushiers taken out of the Byskaine ships,
who a little from the city did skirmish with the french army, but being
ouerpressed with number, were forced to retire to the Castle to Peter Pisoto,
with the loss of 10. Castellions, and 12. Byscaynes, Don Lorenco being hurt,
whereof after he dyed: and in the Castle with Peter Pisoto is the son of the
governor Ambrosio de Aguiar, and the Bishop, the Corigedor, and other two or
three Gentlemen, and all the rest went out of the city, calling some of Don
Anthonio, and the soldiers of the French army sacked the City: and that
Don Anthonio sent to the Captain Don John de Castillio, willing him to yield
unto him the castle, knowing it to be his, and that he would give him free
passage for him and his company: the which thing if he refused, that then he
would bring aland 7. pieces of Ordinance from the ships, and would batter the
Castle: and moreover he gave him to understand that the army of Spain would
not come this year. To whom Don John, the governors son, the Bishop, and
the Corigedor made answer, that the Castle was the king of Spaines, and that
they would not yield it to him. The Marquis did likewise understand by the
said Master, that the French men the next day (having knowledge of the
approaching of our army) did imbarke themselves in all have, and that the 2.
Gallions and 3. great Caruelles of Peter Pisoto, were overthrown near unto
the Castle, and the 4. Byskaine ships the French men took, after that the men
were gone aland and withdrawn themselves into the Castle. The Marquis being
informed of all things, wrote unto the Captain and Governor, and others in
the Castle, by the said Master, encouraging them, and certifying them of the
force of the kings army, not doubting but the next day to give battle, and to
have the victory, and that therewith they should hold them selves contented,
as he him self was much joyful of the service which they had already done to
the king, which he knew should not remain vnrecompensed. And with this answer
they returned with the Pinasse to the Island.

The next day being Monday, and the 23. of Julie, ye two Armies came to present
battle: the french Army having both the vantage of the wind and also of the
Sun, came to assalt our Army being divided in three quadrons, and made three
several attempts, and yet could put nothing in execution. And toward night the
Spanish Army making toward the sea, the french Army placed ten ships
along the Island, thinking that night to have got the wind of us: but by
reason it was calm, they could not prevail.

The 24. day of July the Marquis returned, approaching nerer the French army,
who having the vantage of the wind, gave two several attempts, and yet put
neither in execution. Then the Marquis perceiving that the course toward the
land was not convenient for him, he caused the army to take the course
toward the Sea, thinking with himself that whiles his ships were trimming
of their sails, that the enemy would assault him having the wind for their
purpose: which fell out accordingly. For one of the French Captains with 7.
Galleons came to assault the Captain of the Spaniardes, and the Galleon Saint
Matteo, but approaching near unto them, did not board them, but discharged
great quantitiae of Ordinance against them, and likewise did the rest of the
ships against ours: of whom they were received accordingly, in so much that our
Captain did shoot of at them above 40. pieces, and also the Galleon Saint
Matteo shot of many pieces, also the ship of Don Christopher de Erasso (who
was now joined with the army) and also the ship of Don Francisco de
Bouadilla, and Myguell de Oquendo, and others, which was a pleasant sight to
behold what Ordenance was shot off, they did hit our Captain with 4.
shot, one in the foresaile, another in the shrouds, another upon an Anchor,
and the fourth in the ships side, without doing any harm: they hit the
Galleon Saint Matteo with 3 shot, without doing any harm, no more did many
their pieces which did hit many of our ships. And in the Galleons of the
Frenchmen we might perceive many shot to light, but specially 4. out of our
Captain, which made them to retire, whereby it appeared they received some
harm.

There came in the French army two Captains and two Admirals, and there was
a small Galleon like a Patacha, being excellent good of sail, wherein it
should seem Don Anthonio was, carrying a standarde in the Poope, which did not
approach the fight, but kept a far off to behold what passed. There came to
the number of 40, great ships, and amongst them some very fine Galleons, the
rest were small ships, but fit for the army in respect of the lightness, and
there came diverse other small Pinesses all about the army about 2. or 3.
leagues of to discover and understand of all things, and also 2. Saities of
Mercelles, very good ships of sail, and many other light Boats with owres,
wherewith they did put in order the battle, and direct things as time served.
The same day at night the two armies did separate themselves. The Marquis
determined that at the going down of the Moon to procure to get the wind of
the French army, and in the morning to assault them again, which he did, so
that the 25. day of July he found him self to windward of the enemy, and so
sought to board them, but because his ships were great and heavy of sail,
he could not put in effect that which he purposed, but was forced to return to
the rescue of Don Christopher de Erasso, who was in some distress in following
the enemy, and by defaulte of his maine mast, gave him a toe with his
Captain. This day there was discried a great ship of the enemies which
wanted her foremast, and other 2. ships which did help her, and they being not
able to help her, she was forced to sink: it is judged she had some harm
with some shot the day before.

Of the 10. Hulkes of the Spanish army there did want two which carried
Almaines, and there wanted likewise the three ships that departed from
Lishborne after the army departed, so that ye Marquis had in his Navy no more
but 25. ships with the two gallions.

The 26 of Julie the French army came again to assault the Spanish army, in
very good order and with a favorable wind. The Marquis did cause his ships to
be placed in order, although the galleon Saint Matteo was somewhat asterne,
which was some grief to the Marquis, doubting that the enemy might board her,
before she could conveniently be rescued: and so it fell out, for she was
borded by two galleons, a captain and an admiral, against whom she did defend
her self very valiantly, being likewise assalted by other two ships, who
after they had discharged certain ordinance at her, passed forwards. At the
same time came other two French ships upon the Captain, who beginning to
fight with her, she gave them two such welcomes with her ordinance and
arquebushe shot, that the one of them was evil to pass and almost sonke:
and so they retired, having shot many pieces at the Captain, and the Captain
at them. At which time came the ship of Don Francisco de Bouadilla, who was
nere the Captain, who did likewise annoie the Frenchmen greatly with her shot.

All this while did the Admiral, and the Viceadmirall of the French army fight
with the galion Saint Mattheo, who did defend her self, and offend the others
valiantly: the general master of the Camp, Don Lopo de Figueroa, Don Pedro
de Tassis ouerseer general, with the rest of the gentlemen and soldiers that
were in her, valiantly shooting at the enemies bath with great shot,
arquebushot, and musket shot. The Marquis perceiving that the Spanish navy was
to the windward of the French navy, and seeing the distress that the galleon
S. Mattheo was in by reason of the two French men, he commanded the Captain
to turn toward the enemy, and so did Don Christopher de Erasso, and the rest
of the ships of the Spanish army: and the ships of Michael de Oquendo,
Vilia Viciosa, and another Biskain, which were before the sternemost, by
changing the wind were then the foremost, who came and borded the Admiral of
the French navy, who fought with the galeon Saint Mattheo, and afterward came
the ship, wherein went Michael de Venesa, who fought with the captain of
France like a good Captain, and so in like sort did the soldiers that were
with him, and because his ship was between, the Marquis could not at that time
board the Captain of France, but passed forward. In this mean time the
Admiral of France was in sight with the galeon Saint Mattheo, and three ships
more, who borded her, Villia Viciosa being one of the three, and having borded
the French Admiral at the prowe, was slain, with many of his company, as
shall be declared. The ship of Oquendo did board her asterne, and did enter his
men into her, and began to sack, and took four prisoners and the ensigns.
The battle began now to increase: with that came two other French ships to
reskew their Captain, and putting aboard her above 300. fresh men, she got
from them.

In this mean while the Marquis gave an other assault upon the enemy with
much shot, and at the last borded with the French Captain prowe to prowe, and
so grapened together, where was a cruel fight of both sides, shooting the one
at the other both with great shot and small, for the space of an hour, till she
yielded, where was beheaded above 300. Frenchmen, and the Gentlemen and
soldiers that were in the two fights, did defend them selves valiantly: so
likewise did the two capteins Augustine Deherrara, and Gamboa, and their
Lieuetenants. The Marquis like a general went through the fights, encouraging
the people to the assaulting of the enemy, foreseeing and ordering all things
needful to be done. The artilterie both below and aloft did great good,
through the great diligence of those capteins that had charge thereof. The
battle between the other ships did proceed, giving and receiving great
chargings one upon an other. The battle continued five hours, and at the last
the enemy fled.

Don Anthonio was departed in a small Pinesse, with another ship the night
before the battle. Some ships were sonke, and some spoiled, having beheaded
the men that were found in them, and some fled to other ships. And for that we
could not toe their ships, the Marquis commanded that we should burn them, and
sink such as we could, as we had begun to do. The Caruaile with the horses
which they had taken, was recovered.

It is thought that there is of the enemies above 1200. slain, drowned, and
beheaded, besides many that be hurt, of them that escaped in the ships which
fled. There might have been taken many of their ships more, if we had had time
and mariners sufficient for to have towed them, but they were suffered to
depart without men and spoiled: and it is certain, that the Admiral which was
left for half drowned, and other four or sieve ships more, were overthrown in
the I Will of Saint Michael, and it it thought others have done the like in other
places.

The number of those that were slain in the Navy of the Spaniards, was 224
men: and of those that were hurt 553. which is in all 777. Besides some that
were scalded with artificial fire, amongst whom was the general Comptroller
Sir Peter de Tassis in the face.

The names of the principal men that came with Don Anthonio, of whom some were
prisoners, some died, and some did run away.
Philip Strozzi Captain general was prisoner, and hurt with a shot of an
harquebush, of the which shot he died so soon as he came in the presence of
the Marquis.

The Earl Devimioso was prisoner, and hurt with an harquebush, and a thrust
with a sword, whereof he died in the generals ship the day after the battle.

The County Brisak liefetenant, some say that he escaped in a boat of his
ship: others say, that he was slain with a shot, the truth is not known.

Mounsir de Piamount general master of the Camp, was slain in the battle.

Of the eight principal capteins of the eight regiments that came in the army,
which was 6800 soldiers, accounting the aduenterers, some were slain, and
some fled away.

The Lords of Towns and Castles, that were taken alive.
Mounsir de Bocamaior Lord of Rousola. Mounsir John Delatus Lord of Heria.
William de Sanclear Lord of Sanclear. Jews de Clen Lord of Bronnes. Peter de
Oube Lord of Queen's. Gilbert de Louel Lord of Vuell. Peter de Bean. Mounsir de
Gal Lord de Gal. Mounsir de Gifford Lord of Giffordel. Mounsir de la Onet
eldest son unto the Lord of Gresoul. Edward de Langert Lord of Piel. Fabio
Gansete son to the lord of Gansete. Mounsir de Vda Lord of Vda. Mounsir
Fransoius Lord of Montilla. Mounsir Laquesbai eldest son of the Lord of
Biapolis. Mounsir Robert Debella eldest son of the Lord of Veosola. Mounsir
Guillam Mason lord of Falla. Mounsir Bigart de Piloart lord of Manterie.
Mounsir Beltram de Amigat lord of Stituias. Mounsir Petro Iailato lord of Sans.
Mounsir Philip Mentado lord of Sabrussa. Mounsir John de Bocamaior lord of
Rosilla. Claudio de Pomoline Lord of Popalin. Iacobo Laserean Lord of
Lasserian. Mounsir Demondoc Lord of Mondoc.
The Gentlemen prisoners which were no Lords of Towns nor Castles, were in
number 51. And of Mariners and common soldiers 303.

The Marquis seeing that there was peace and amity between the king his
Master, and the French king, and knowing that these adventurers came only in
the favor of Don Anthonio Prior de Crato, and with mind to rob and spoil
his Majesty's Fleet of both his Indians, and to make them selves lords of his
Islands and dominions, as they had begun in the I Will of Saint Michael, and that
their meaning was to make other spoils and piracies: In punishing of their
fault, and the common offense committed by them against the public peace,
sworn, maintained, and kept between these two Crowns, and their subjects,
did declare all the prisoners to be enemies of the quietness and common good,
troublers of the intercourses, favorers of his Majesty's rebels: and as to such
ones, and public thieves, rouers and pirates, the chief Justice of the Fleet
did ordeine, that for the punishment of those, and ensample to others in like
cases, that the noble men should be beheaded, and that the rest should be
hanged from 17. years upwards.

And this sentence being given, it was put in execution the first day of
August, of this present year 1582.

This relation was sent by the Lord Marquis de Sainta-cruse unto his Majesty,
by Sir Peter Poncei of Lion, his nephew: who departed from Villa Franca which
is in the I Will of Saint Michael, the fourth day of the month of August, and
arrived at Lishborne the 24. day of the same, being S. Bartholmews day, in the
morning.


