News from Flanders and Ostend.

A TRVE DECLARAtion how that the Lords States of the united Provinces, under
the conduct of his Excellency, have set forth a princelike Navy of ships from
Zeland, the 15. day of April 1604:

Which went to the Island of Casant, where the foresaid Lords States have taken
in the Sconce of Coxie, S. Catherine, S. Philip, and Isendiick with other small
sconces and holds.

Translated out of Dutch into English.

LONDON Printed by Arnold Hatfield for John Bill.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader,
Notwithstanding the long (almost this three years) besieging of the Town of
Ostend; the Lords States of the united Provinces, have thought it good, to land
an Army in Flanders, hoping by that means to withdraw the siege from Ostend:
and perceiving that the Enemy for all that leaves not the siege, but daily
gets near unto the same, hoping likewise to get it in, and so persuading
himself, that nothing shall be able to withstand his might, but all to be
under his power; to that end they of Flanders have employed all their forces
to bring under the said Town of Ostende, thinking by that means to have all
that Country so sure unto them, that none were able to set any more footing in
that land, to win any thing from them; not thinking so much on the Lords
strong hand (the other means) as of late he has showed, and is like to come
to pass; when always the Enemy thought (if Ostend were won) not so much as a
window would be left open through which any man might by any means prejudice
them. God notwithstanding has opened a door to his Excellency, to let him
in; as we may see in reading of this brief and true declaration, for which we
are highly to praise God, and to pray moreover that his Excellency (under the
Lords protection) may have a good proceeding in his godly purpose; and that it
would please God to open the eyes of the inhabitants of the land of Flanders,
and others, which are under the Spaniards yoke, that we all may live together
in one true belief peace and love, to Gods glory and our souls salvation.

Amen.
A true declaration how that the Lords States of the united Provinces, under
the conduct of his Excellency, has set forth a Princelike navy of ships from
Zeland, the 15. of April 1604. which went to the Island of Casant, where the
foresaid Lords States, have taken in the Sconce of Coxie, S. Katherine, S.
Philippe, and Isendiicke, with other Sconces and holds.
BY the wise government of the Lords States in general of the untied Provinces
in Netherland, and his Princelike Excellency Maurice of Nassaw, there were
stayed and taken up al about in the foresaid vntted Provinces, a very great
number of ships: and so furnished with all manner of warlike munition, to set
forward toward the Enemies country; and having shipped all their horse and
foot, they came the 13. of April 1604. before Zeland.

The 14. his Excellency and the Lords States came before the Castle of
Ramekins, where the foresaid Navy gathered themselves together: Yet none of
the Lords States, nor his Excellency, nor any other Lord, or principal man
landed there, but remained all a shipboord; only certain Soldiers went a
shore to Middleborrow, and other places in the Island to bay such things as
they had need of: which had warning in the evening toward eight of the clock
by the sound of the drum, that all Soldiers upon pain of death, should come
a shipboord, and for that purpose were two of the gates of the said city all
night left open to let them pass out. As the Soldiers were come aboard, you
might hear about twelve of the clock at night, three great pieces of
Ordinances to be shot of, when the ships set sail together, with fair
weather, and a southeast wind, so that the foresaid ships and Soldiers came
by break of day before Swarte-gate and Kerken-gate, in the Island of Casant,
and there landed their men the 15. of the month aforesaid without the loss of
any one man.

They that lay about and in the Sconce called Swarte-gate, with other little
holds thereabouts, ran al away: whereupon his Excellency marched forward
toward the forte of Hofsteede, the which he also took in, and went forward to
the Sconce Lippenen, so named of the Captain that held the same, whom his
Excellency commanded to deliver up the said Sconce; whose ansu ere was, that
first he must see his Canon: whereupon his Excellency sent him word, that if
he should but shoot one shot thereat, he would take none of them to mercy, and
forthwith he placed two pieces, whereupon they within presently delivered it
up, going out thereof with their weapons.

The enemy hearing of his Excellencies approach, drew out forthwith some part
of their army that lay before Ostend, and came the 15. day of the said April
on the west side of Sluis haven.

The 16. day the Enemy there began to entrench himself with a halfe-moone, to
stop the coming over of his Excellency, who the 17. and the 18. of the same
month stirred not, till he had fortified himself in the Island of Casant, as
the Enemy did on the West side thereof: yet notwithstanding his Excellency
brought one of his Batteries under the Castle of Sluis, where he caused
certain shot to be made on the Galleys there, whereupon the Enemy caused them
presently to be brought up higher to the Town of Sluis.

They of Sluis shot but little: His Excellency would loose no time, but
thought good to find out another way to make his entrance into the maine-land
of Flanders, and is therefore in the night, the 18. of April aforesaid, gone
by land, but the next day returned to his Quarter.

The night following, his Excellency with a greater power goes forward, and
takes in the Sconce of Coxie, and remained there the 20. day. Then his horse
and foot make toward S. Catherines, and S. Phillip, where his Excellency
brought all his power, and upon their May day, stilo nouo (being Philip and
Jacobs day) made more than an hundred great shot at the Sconce of S. Philip and
S. Catherine, before eight of the clock in the Evening, and the whole Leaguer
the whole night so bestirred themselves, that they within fearing some general
storm, ran all away, and so his Excellency took in both the Sconces, to his
great joy and all his company.

Having now set firm footing in Flanders, he goes presently to the Sconce of
Isendijcke, about which he entrencheth himself, and lodges his Army so about
it, shutting them so up, that no man might either come forth or go in unto
them.

The Enemy lies on the West side of Sluis haven, and causes great stoore of
Shallops from Bridges and Sluis to be brought, with two thousand men in them,
meaning to take in Casant again. Our men suffered the Enemy to land to the
number of some thousand, and so fell on them, and drove them to flight, which
were the greatest part of them Spaniards and Italians, crying out, A la barea,
A la barca. Five of their shallops run a ground and were drowned, with the
men in them, the rest slain, except seventeen that were taken, whereof three
were brought to his Excellency. Besides, our men got eight of the enemies
Shallops.

His Excellency goes forward with Isendijke, and in the night took one that
salied out of the Sconce, who being examined, gave to understand, That there
was want of all things, except shot and fresh water.

His Exceliencie the 29. of April, sent his Trumpet called Hans, to summon
them to yield up the Sconce; who at the second sound of the Trumpet, was shot
in the head, of which he falls dead in the place. His, Excellency hereat
being very angry, sent forthwith a drum to demand him that had shot his
Trumpet, to be delivered out unto him, otherwise he would receive none of them
to mercy: whereupon they sent out two Captains, making excuse that they by no
means could learn who had done the same: yet notwithstanding his Excellency
instantly demands that he be delivered before he will give them any hearing,
whereupon they returned to their Sconce; and in the Evening came to his
Excellency to parle about the delivery up of the said Scance, which gives
them no hearing. At last they come again bringing with them him that had shot
his Trumpetter, (which was an Italian) Then his Excellency gives them the
hearing, and are agreed on such conditions as follow.

The Conditions.
FIrst, that they shall go out of the said Sconce, with their arms, without
found of drum, and without their matches light.

Secondly, that they shall leave in the said Sconce all their great Ordmance
and Munition.

Thirdly, that in 4. months next following, they shall not bear Arms against
his Excellency in Flanders.

Fourthly, that his Excellency will lend them shipping to carry their sick
and hurt men with their baggage to Sas, and for that shall two Captains
remain in hostage with his Excellency, till the foresaid ships come again.

After this agreement, the Soldiers went out of the Sconce, the last of April,
1604. about five of the clock in the afternoon, being in number 600. men.

Since, it is credibly reported by sundry passengers, that the 2. of May, and
the 3. his Princely Excellency marched up toward the ruinated walled towns,
Ardenborgh and Middleborgh, and took them, and so marched up toward the Town
of Dam, distant a league from Bridges. Other Passengers coming from Flushing
the 4. of May, say, that there were arrived more Soldiers out of Frieseland:
likewise Switsers to be sent to his Princely Excellency in Flanders.

Also that the County or Earl Lodowicke of Nassow, with other Captains, with
some 14. Corronets of Horsemen, accompanied with the mutined Soldiers, called
the Esquadron, (strong 1500. horsemen, and 800. footmen Musketeers) conducted
by their Eletto, and directed by Captain Du Boys, for the States, are entered
Brabant, with some Ordinance, and past up by Brussel, to Mons in Henault, and
as is reported, as far as Buist, spotling all that they find, saccaging all
Abbeies, Towns, and Villages, Gentlemen's houses, that had no money to ransom
them, Wouere, Flerus and other towns burnt, seeking to bring al under their
contributions: but it is thought, they pretend to take and fortify some Town
or place upon the Moose, to stop all passage from Germany and Italy.

Passengers coming from Flushing the fourth day of May, and others coming by
the seacoast of Flanders and Ostend, heard and saw on Saturday the fifth of
this present Month, great shouting on all sides at Ostend, for the space of
seven hours upon the Seas, peradventure to force them, before Prince Maurice
camp came nearer. Great accusations being made by Marquis Spinola, the
General before Ostend, unto the Archduke at Gant, of the Spanish Soldiers
untowardness in fight, envying the honor of the Italians and Walons, being
maintained as is thought of Don Loys de Valasco, and they use these words; Que
non quieren mourir por un Marquis Spinola, mas ben por en Rey: which is, that
they will not die for Marquis Spinola, but will for their king: envying him the
honor.

It is like that they of the Country of Flanders, having contributed hitherto
some ninety thousand Guldens monthly, which is 9000. pounds sterling, for the
maintenance of this siege, will now not be able to continue, being spoiled, and
charged with three camps, the besieging camp, and the Archdukes camp, and
the Prince Maurice camp. Hitherto is all related what is past: besee ching God
to send a delivery to those Provinces, of Spanish and foreign government,
whereby all Christendom might come to a good peace, which God grant.

Amen:
FINIS.

