OF THE RVSSE Common Wealth. OR MANNER OF Government by the Russe Emperor,
(commonly called the Emperor of Moskouia) with the manners, and fashions of
the people of that Country.

The Contents are noted in the Table, set down before the beginning of the
Book.

AT LONDON Printed by T. D. for Thomas Charde. 1591*

To the Queens most excellent Majesty.
MOst gracious Sovereign, being employed in your Majesty's service to the
Emperor of Russia, I observed the State, and manners of that Country. And
having reduced the same into some order, by the way as I returned, I have
presumed to offer it in this small Book to your most excellent Majesty. My
meaning was to note things for mine own experience, of more importance then
delight, and rather true then strange. In their manner of government, your
Highness may see both: A true and strange face of a Tyrannical state, (most
unlike to your own) without true knowledge of GOD, without written Law,
without common justice: save that which proceeds from their Speaking Law, to
wit, the Magistrate who has most need of a Law, to restrain his own
injustice. The practice hereof as it is heavy, and grievous to the poor
oppressed people, that live within those Countries: so it may give just cause
to my self, and other your Majesty's faithful subjects, to acknowledge our
happiness on this behalf, and to give God thanks for your Majesty's most
Princelike, and gracious government: as also to your Highness more joy, and
contentment in your royal estate, in that you are a Prince of subjects, not
of slaves, that are kept within duty by love, not by fear. The Almighty
still bless your Highness with a most long, and happy reign in this life, and
with Christ Jesus in the life to come.

Your Majesty's most humble subject, and servant G. Fletcher.

The sum of this discourse containing the 1. Cosmographie of the Country. 1.
The breadth and length of the Country, with the names of the Shires. 2. The
Soil and Clymate. 3. The native commodities of the Country. 4. The chief
cities of Russia.
2. Policy. 1. The ordering of their State. 5. The house or stock of the
Russe Emperor. 6. The manner of inauguration of the Russe Emperors. 7. The
form or manner of their public government. 8. Their Parliamentes and manner
of holding them. 9. The Russe Nobility, and means whereby it is kept in an
under proportion agreeable to that State. 10. The manner of governing their
Provinces, or Shires. 11. The Emperors privy Counsel. 12. The Emperors
Customs and other Revenues, and what they amount unto, with the Sophismus
practiced for the increase of them. 13. The Russe communaltie and their
condition.
2. Their judicial procecding 14. Their public Justice and manner of
proceeding therein.
3. Their warlike provisions. 15. The Emperors forces for his wars, with the
officers and their Salaries. 16. Their manner of mustering, armor, provision
for vittaile, encamping, etc. 17. Their order in marching, charging, and their
martial discipline. 18. Their colonies and policy in mainteyning their
purchases by conquest. 19. Their borderers, with whom they have 20. most to do
in war and peace.
4. Their Ecclesiastical State. 21. Their Church offices, and degrees. 22.
Their Leiturgie or form of Church service, with their manner of administering
the Sacraments. 23. The doctrine of the Russe Church. 24. Their manner of
solemnizing marriages. 25. The other Ceremonies of the Russe Church.

3. Oeconomie or private behavior. 26. The Emperors domestique or private
behavior. 27. The Emperors household, and offices of his house. 28. The
private behavior, and manners of the Russe people.


The description of the Country of Rus^ia, with the breadth, length, and names
of the Shires.
The I. Chapter.
THe country of Russia was sometimes called Sarmatia. It changed the name (as
some do suppose) for that it was parted into diverse small, and yet absolute
governments, not depending, nor being subject the one to the other. For Russe
in that tongue does signify as much as to part, or divide. The Russe reports
that four brethren, Trubor, Rurico, Sinees, and Variuus, divided among them
the North parts of the country. Likewise that the Southpartes were possessed
by four other, Kio, Scieko, Choranus, and their sister Libeda: each calling
his territory after his own name. Of this partition it was called Russia,
about the year from Christ 860. As for the conjecture which I find in some
Cosmographers, that the Russe nation borrowed the name of the people called
Roxellani, and were the very same nation with them, it is without all good
probability: both in respect of the etymology of the word (which is very far
fet) and especially for the seat and dwelling of that people, Strabo in his 7.
book of ^^ogr.
which was betwixt the two rivers of Tanais and Boristhenes, (as Strabo
reports) quite an other way from the country of Russia.

When it bare the name of Sarmatia, it was divided into two chief parts: the
White, and the Black. The White Sarmatia was all that part that lies toward
the North, and on the side of Liestand: as the Provinces now called Duyna,
Vagha, Vstick, Vologda, Cargapolia, Nouogradia, etc: whereof Nouograd velica
was the Metropolite, or chief city. Black Sarmatia was all that country
that lies Southward, toward the Euxin, or Black Sea: as the dukedom of
Volodemer of Mosko, Rezan, etc. Some have thought that the name of Sarmatia was
first taken, Genesis 10. Joseph. l. 1. cap. 14.
from one Sarmates, whom Moses and Josephus call Asarmathes, son to Ioktan,
and nephew to Heber, of the posterity of Sem. But this seems to be nothing
but a conjecture taken out of the likeness of the name Asarmathes. For the
dwelling of all Ioktans posterity is described by Moses, to have been betwixt
Mescha or Masius (an hill of the Amonites) and Sephace, near to the river
Euphrates. Which makes it very unlikely, that Asarmathes should plant any
colonies so far off in the North and Northwest countries. The borders of Russia.
It is bounded Northward by the Lappes and the North Ocean. On the Southside by
the Tartars, called Chrimes. Eastward they have the Nagaian Tartar, that
possesses all the country on the East side of Volgha, toward the Caspian
sea. On the West and Southwest border lie Lituania, Liuonia and Polonia.

The whole country being now reduced under the government of one, The shires of
Russia.
co^teyneth these chief Provinces or Shires. Volodemer, (which bears the
first place in the Emperors style, because their house came of the Dukes of
that country) Mosko, Nisnouogrod, Plesko, Smolensko, Nouogrod velica (or
Nouogrod of the low country) Rostoue, Yaruslaue, Bealozera, Bezan, Duyna,
Cargapolia, Meschora, Vagha, Vstuga, Ghaletsa. These are the natural shires
preteyning to Russia. but far greater and larger then the shires of England,
though not so well peopled. The other countries or provinces which the Russe
Emperors have gotten perforce added of late to their other dominion, The
Provinces or countries got by conquest.
are these which follow Twerra, Youghoria, Permia, Vadska, Boulghoria,
Chernigo, Oudoria, Obdoria, Condora, with a great part of Siberia: where the
people though they be not natural Russes, yet obey the Emperor of Russia, and
are ruled by the laws of his country, paying customs and taxes, as his own
people do. Besides these he has under him the kingdoms of Cazan and
Astracan, gotten by conquest not long since. As for all his possession in
Lituania (to the number of 30. great towns and more,) with Narue and Drop in
Liuonia, they are quite gone, being surprised of late years by the kings of
Poland and Sweden. These Shires and Provinces are reduced all into four
Jurisdictions, which they call Chetfyrds (that is) Tetrarchies, or Fourthparts.
Whereof we are to speak in the title or chapter, concerning the Provinces, and
their manner of government.

The whole country is of great length and breadth. The breadth and length of
the country.
From the North to the South (if you measure from Cola to Astracan which
bends somewhat Eastwarde) it reaches in length about 4260. verst, or miles.
Notwithstanding the Emperor of Russia has more territory Northward, far
beyond Cola unto the river of Tromschua, that runs a 1000. verst, welnie
beyond Pechinga, near to Wardbouse, but not entire nor clearly limited, by
reason of the kings of Sweden and Denmark, that have diverse towns there,
as well as the Russe, plotted together the one with the other: every one of them
claiming the whole of those North parts as his own right. The breadth (if you
go from that part of his territory that lies farthest Westwarde on the Narue
side, to the parts of Siberia eastward, where the Emperor has his garrisons)
is 4400. verst or thereabouts. A verst (by their reckoning) is a 1000. pases,
yet less by one quarter then an English mile. If the whole dominion of the
Russe Emperor were all habitable, and peopled in all places, as it is in some,
he would either hardly hold it all within one regiment, or be over mighty for
all his neighbor Princes.

Of the Soil and Climate.
The 2. Chapter.
THe soil of the country for the most part is of a slight sandy moulde, yet
very much different one place from another, for the yield of such things as
grow out of the earth. The country Northwards toward the parts of S. Nicolas
and Cola, and Northeast toward Siberia, is all very barren, and full of desert
woods by reason of the clymat, and extremity of the cold in winter time. So
likewise along the river Volgha betwixt the countries of Cazan, and Astracan:
where (notwithstanding the soil is very fruitful) it is all uninhabited,
saving that upon the river Volgha on the west side, the Emperor has some few
castles with garrisons in them. This happens by means of the Chrim Tartar, that
will neither himself plant towns to dwell there, (living a wild and vagrant
life) nor suffer the Russe (that is far off with the strength of his
country) to people those parts. From Vologda (which lies almost 1700. verst
from the port of S. Nicholas) down toward Mosko, and so toward the south
part that bordereth upon the Chrim, (which contains the like space of 1700.
verst or there abouts) is a very fruitful and pleasant country, yielding
pasture, and corn, with woods and waters in very great plenty. The like is
betwixt Rezan (that lies southeast from Mosko) to Nouograd and Vobsko, that
reach farthest toward the northwest. So betwixt Mosko, and Smolensko (that
lies southwest toward Lituania) is a very fruitful and pleasant soil.

The whole country differs very much from it self, by reason of the year:
so that a man would marvel to see the great alteration and difference
betwixt the winter, and the summer Russia. The whole country in the winter
lies under snow, which falls continually, and is sometime of a yard or two
thick, but greater toward the north. The rivers and other waters are all
frosen up a varde or more thick, how swifte or broad so ever they be. And
this continues commonly five months, vz, from the beginning of November till
toward the end of March, what time the snow begins to melte. So that it
would breed a frost in a man to look abroad at that time, and see the winter
face of that country. The cold of Russia.
The sharpness of the air you may judge of by this: for that water dropped
down or cast up into the air, congealeth into Ise before it come to the
ground. In the extremity of winter, if you hold a pewter dishe or pot in your
hand, or any other metal (except in some chamber where their warm stoaues
be) your fingers will friese fast unto it, and draw of the skin at the
parting. When you pass out of a warm room into a cold, you shall sensibly
feel your breath to wax stark, and even stifeling with the cold, as you
draw it in and out* Diverse not only that travel abroad, but in the very
markets, and streats of their towns, are mortally pinched and killed withal:
so that you shall see many drop down in the streates, many travelers brought
into the towns sitting dead and stiff in their sleddes. Diverse lose their
noses, the tippes of their ears, and the bals of their cheeks, their toes,
feet, etc. Many times when (the winter is very hard and extreme) the bears
and woolfes issue by troops out of the woods driven by hunger, and enter the
villages, tearing and ravening all they can find: so that the inhabitants are
feign to fly for safeguard of their lives. And yet in the Summer time you shall
see such a new hew and face of a country, the woods (for the most part which
are all of fir and birch) so fresh and so sweet, the pastures and meadows so
green and well grown, (and that upon the sudden) such variety of flowers,
such noise of birds (especially of Nightingales, that seem to be more loud
and of a more variable note then in other countries) that a man shall not
lightly travel in a more pleasant country.

And this fresh and speedy grouth of the spring there, seems to proceed from
the benefit of the snow: which all the winter time being spread over the whole
country as a white robe, and keeping it warm from the rigor of the frost, in
the spring time (when the sun waxes warm, and dissolueth it into water)
does so thoroughly drench and soake the ground, that is somewhat of a slight
and sandy mould, and then shines so hotely upon it again, that it draws the
herbs and plants forth in great plenty and variety, in a very short time. As
the winter exceeds in cold, so the summer inclines to over much heat,
specially in the months of June, July, and August, being much warmer then the
summer air in England.

The country throughout is very well watered with springs, rivers, and ozeraes,
or lakes. Wherein the providence of God is to be noted, for that much of the
country being so far inland, as that some part lies a 1000. miles and more
every way from any sea, yet it is served with fair rivers, and that in very
great number, that emptiyng themselves one into an other, run all into the
sea. Their lakes are many and large, some of 60. 80. 100. and 200. miles long,
with breadth proportionate.

The chief rivers are these 1. Volgha, The chief rivers of Russia.
that has his head or spring at the root of an Aldertree, about 200. verst
above Yaruslaue, and grows so big by the increase of other rivers by that
time it comes thither, that it is broad an English mile and more, and so
runs into the Caspian sea, about 2800. verst or miles of length.

The next is Boristhenes (now called Neper) that divides the country from
Lituania, and falls into the Euxin sea.

The third Tanais or Don, (the ancient bounder betwixt Europe and Asia) that
takes his head out of Rezan Ozera, and so running through the country of the
Chrim Tartar, falls into the great sea lake, or meare, (called Maeotis) by
the City of Azou. By this river (as the Russe reports) you may pass from
their city Mosko to Constantinople, and so into all those parts of the world
by water, drawing your boat (as their manner is) over a little Isthmus or
narrow slip of land, a few versts overthwart. Which was proved not long
since by an Ambassador sent to Constantinople, who passed the river of Moskua
and so into an other called Ocka, whence he drew his boat over into Tanais,
and thence passed the whole way by water.

The fourth is called Duyna, many hundred miles long, that falls Northward
into the Baye of Saint Nicholas, and has great Alabaster rocks on the banks
toward the sea side.

The fifth Duna, that emptieth into the Baltic sea by the town Riga.

The sixth Onega, that falls into the Bay at Solouetsko 90. verst from the
port of Saint Nicholas. This river below the town Cargapolia meets with the
river Volock, that falls into the Finland sea by the town Yama. So that from
the port of S. Nicholas into the Finland sea, and so into the Sound, you may
pass all by water, as has been tried by the Russe.

The seventh Suchana, that flows into Duyna, and so into the North sea.

The eight Ocka, that fetches his head from the borders of the Chrim, and
streameth into Volgha.

The ninth Moskua, that runs thorough the city Mosko, and gives it the
name.

There is Wichida also a very large and long river that rises out of Permia,
and falls into Volgha. All these are rivers of very large streams, the least
to be compared to the Thames in bigness, and in length far more, besides
diverse other. The Pole at Mosko is 55. degrees 10. minutes. At the port of S.
Nicholas toward the North 63. degrees and 50 minutes.

The native commodities of the Country.
The 3. Chapter.
FOr kinds of fruits, The fruits and grain of Russia.
they have Appels, Pears, plummes, cheries, read and black, (but the black
wild) a deene like a musk, millian, but more sweet and pleasant, cucumbers
and goords (which they call Arbouse) rasps, strawberies, and hurtilberies, with
many other bearies in great quantity in every wood and hedge. Their kinds of
grain are wheat, rye, barley, oats, pease, buckway, psnytha, that in taste is
somewhat like to rice. Of all these graynes the country yields very
sufficient with an overplus quantity, so that wheat is sold sometime for two
alteens or ten pence starling the Chetfird, which makes almost three English
bushels.

Their rye is sowed before the winter, all their other grain in the spring
time, and for the most part in May. The Permians and some other that dwell far
north, and in desert places, are served from the parts that lie more
Southward, and are forced to make bread sometimes of a kind of root (called
Vaghnoy) and of the middle rine of the fur tree. If there be any dearth (as
they accounted this last year, An. 1588. wheat and rye being at 13. alteens,
or 5. shillings 5. pence starling the Chetfird) the fault is rather in the
practice of their Nobility that use to engrosse it, then in the country it
self.

The native commodities of the country (wherewith they serve both their own
turns, The chief commodities of the country.
and send much abroad to the great enriching of the Emperor, and his people)
are many and substantial. 1. Furs.
First, furs of all sorts. Wherein the providence of God is to be noted,
that provides a natural remedy for them, to help the natural inconvenience
of their country by the cold of the Clymat. Their chief furs are these,
Black fox, Sables, Lusernes, Dunne fox, Martrones, Gurnestalles or Armins,
Lasets or Miniuer, Beuer, Wuluerins, the skin of a great water Ratte that
smells naturally like musk, Calaber or Gray squirrell, red squirrell, red,
and white Fox. Besides the great quantity spent within the country (the
people being clad all in furs the whole winter) there are transported out of
the country some years by the merchants of Turkey, Persia, Bougharia,
Georgia, Armenia, and some other of Christendom to the value of four or five
hundred thousand rubbels, as I have heard of the Merchants. The best Sable
furre grows in the country of Pechora, Momgosorskoy and Obdorskoy, the
worser sort in Siberia, Perm, and other places. The black fox and read come
out of Siberia, white and dun from Pechora, whence also come the white wolf,
and white Bear skin. The best Wuluerin also thence and from Perm. The best
Martrons are from Syberia, Cadam, Morum, Perm, and Cazan. Lyserns, Mineuer, and
Armins the best ar out of Gallets, and Ouglites, many from Nouogrod, and Perm.
The Beauer of the best sort breeds in Murmonskey by Cola. Other common
furs, and most of these kinds grow in many, and some in all parts of the
country.

The second commodity is of Wax, 2. Wax.
whereof has been shipped into foreign countries (as I have heard it reported
by those that best know it) the sum of 50000. pood yearlie, every pood
containing 40. pound, but now about 10000. pood a year.

The third is their Honey, 3. Honey.
whereof besides an exceeding great quantity spent in their ordinary drinks
(which is mead of al sorts) and their other uses, some good quantity is
carried out of the country. The chief increase of honey is in Mordua and
Cadam near to the Cheremissen Tartar: much out of Seuerskoy, Rezan, Morum,
Cazan, Dorogobose, and Vasma.

Fourthly, 4. Tallow.
of Tallow they afoord a great weight for transportation: not only for that
their country has very much good ground apt for pasturage of cattaile, but
also by reason of their many Lents and other fastes: and partly because their
greater men use much wax for their lights, the poorer and meaner sort
birch dried in their stoaues, and cut into long shiuers, which they call
Luchineos. Of tallow there has been shipped out of the realm a few years
since about a 100000. pood yearly, now not past 30000. or thereabonts. The
best yield of tallow is in the parts and territories of Smolensko, Yaruslaue,
Ouglits, Nouogrod, and Vologda, Otfer, and Gorodetskey.

An other principal commodity is their Losh and Cow hide. 5. Hide.
Their Losh or Buffe hide is very fair and large. Their bull and cow hide
(for oxen they make none, neither yet weather) is of a small sise. There has
been transported by Merchants strangers some years, a 100000. hydes. Now it is
decreased to a 30000. or thereabouts. Besides great store of goats skins,
whereof great numbers are shipped out of the country. The largest kind of Losh
or Buffe breeds about Rostoue, Wichida, Nouogrod, Morum, and Perm. The lesser
sort within the kingdom of Cazan.

An other very great and principal commodity is their Trane oil, 6. Trane
oil.
drawn out of the seal fish. The manner of hunting the Seal fish.
Where it will not be impertinent to show the manner of their hunting the
seal, which they make this oil of: which is in this sort. Toward the end of
summer (before the frost begin) they go down with their boats into the Bay of
S. Nicholas, to a cape called Cusconesse or Foxnose, where they leave their
boats till the next spring tide. When the sun waxes warm toward the
spring, and yet the yse not melted within the Bay, they return thither again.
Then drawing their boats over the sea yse, they use them for houses to rest
and lodge in. There are commonly about 17. or 18. fleet of them, of great
large boats, which divide themselves into diverse companies, five or six boats
in a consort.

They that first find the haunt, fire a beacon, which they carry with them for
the nonce. Which being espied by the other companies, by such among them as are
appointed of purpose, they come altogether and compass the seals round about
in a ring, that lie sunning themselves together upon the yse, commonly four or
five thousand in a shoale, and so they invade them every man with his clubbe in
his hand. If they hit them on the nose, they are soon killed. If on the sides
or back they bear out the blow, and many times so catch and hold down the
club with their teeth by main force, that the party is forced to call for help
to his fellows.

The manner of the Seals is, when they see themselves beset, to gather all
close together in a throng or plumpe, to sway down the yse, and to break it
(if they can) which so bends the yse that many times it takes the sea water
upon it, and makes the hunters to wade a foot or more deep. After the
slaughter, when they have killed what they can they fall to sharing every boat
his part in equal portions: and so they flay them taking from the body the
skin, and the lard or fat withal that cleaves to the skin. This they take
with them, leaving the bodies behind, and so go to shore. Where they dig
pits in the ground of a fadome and an half deep, or there about, and so
taking the fat or larde off from the skin they throw it into the pit, and
cast in among it hot burning stones to melt it withal. The uppermost and
purest is sold and used to oil wool for cloth, the grosser (that is of a red
color) they sell to make soap.

Likewise of Ickary or Cauery, a great quantity is made upon the river of
Volgha out of the fish called Bellougina, Ickary. 9,
the Sturgeon, the Seueriga and the Sterledey. Whereof the most part is shipped
by French and Netherlandish merchants for Italy and Spain, some by English
merchants.

The next is of Flax and Hemp, 8. Hemp and flax.
whereof there has bin shipped (as I have heard merchants say) at the port of
Narue a great part of a 100. ships small and great yearly. Now, not past five.
The reason of this abating and decrease of this and other commodities, that
were wont to be transported in a greater quantity, is the shutting up of the
port of the Narue toward the Finland sea, which now is in the hands and
possession of the Sweaden. Likewise the stopping of the passage ouerland by the
way of Smolensko, and Plotsko, by reason of their wars with the Polonian,
which causes the people to be less prouide^t in mainteining and gathering
these and like commodities, for that they lack sales. Partly also for that the
marcha^ts and Mousicks (for so they call the common sort of people) are very
much discouraged by many heavy and intolerable exactions, that of late time
have bin imposed upon them: no man accounting that which he has to be sure his
own. And therefore regard not to lay up any thing, or to have it before hand,
for that it causes the^ many times to be fleesed and spoiled not only of their
goods, but also of their lives. For the grouth of flax the province of Vobsko
and the country about is the chief and only place. For hemp Smolensko,
Dorogobose and Vasma.

The country besides makes great store of salt. 9. Salt.
Their best salt is made at Stararouse in very great quantity, where they have
great store of salt wels, about 250. verst from the sea. At Astracan salt is
made naturally by the sea water, that casts it up into great hills, and so it
is dug down, and carried away by the merchants and other that will fetch it
from thence. They pay to the Emperor for acknowledgement or custom 3. d. Russe
upon every hundred weight. Besides these two, they make salt in many other
places of the Realm, as in Perm, Wichida, Totma, Kenitsma, Solouetske, Ocona,
Bo^basey, and Nonocks, al out of salt pits, save at Solouetskey, which lies
near to the sea.

Likewise of tar they make a great quantity out of their fur trees in the
country of Duyna and Smolensko, 10. Tar.
whereof much is sent abroad. 11. Ribazuba.
Besides these (which are all good and substantial commodities) they have
diverse other of smaller account, that are natural and proper to that country:
as the fish tooth (which they call Ribazuba which is used both among themselves
and the Persians and Bougharia^s that fetched it from thence for beads, knives,
and sword hafts of Noblemen, and gentlemen, and for diverse other uses. Some use
the powder of it against poison, as the Unicorns horn. The fish that wears
it is called a Morse, and is caught about Pechora. These fish teeth some of
them, are almost two foot of length, and weigh eleven or twelve pound apiece.

In the province of Corelia, 12. Slude.
and about the river Duyna toward the North sea, there grows a soft rock
which they call Slude. This they cut into pieces, and so tear it into thin
flakes, which naturally it is apt for and so use it for glasse-lanthorns and
such like. It gives both inwards and outward a clearer light then glass, and
for this respect is better then either glass or horn: for that it neither
breaks like glass, 13. Saltpee^^r and brimstone.
nor yet will burn like the lantern. Saltpeter they make in many places, as
at Ouglites, Yaruslaue and Vstug, and some small store of brimstone upon the
river Volgha, but want skill to refine it. Their iron is somewhat brittle, 4.
Iron.
but a great weight of it is made in Corelia, Cargapolia, and Vstug Thelesna.
Other mine they have none growing within the Realm.

Their beasts of strange kinds are the Losh, The strange ^^^sts, fish, fo^le,
etc. that breed in Russia.
the Ollen, the wild Horse, the Bear, the Woluering, or wood dog, the
Lyserne, the Beauer, the Sable, the Martron, the black and dunne Fox, the
white Bear toward the Sea coast of Pechora, the Gurnstale, the Laset or
Mineuer. They have a kind of Squirrel that has growing on the pinion of the
shoulder bone, a long tuft of hair, much like unto feathers, with a far
broader tail then have any other squirrels, which they move and shake as they
leap from tree to tree, much like unto a wing. They skise a large space, and
seem for to fly withal, and therefore they call them Letach Vechshe, that
is, the flying squirrels. Their hares and squirrels in Summer are of the same
color with ours, in winter the Hare changes her coat into milk white, the
squirrell into gray, whereof comes the Calaber.

They have fallow Dear, the roe Bucke, and goats very great store. Their
horses are but small, but very swift and hard, they travel them unshod both
winter and Summer, without all regard of pace. Their sheep are but small and
bear coorse, and harsh wool. Of foul, they have diverse of the principal
kinds: First, great store of Hawks, the Eagle, the Gerfaulcon, the
Slightfaulcon, the Goshawke, the Tassel, the Sparhawk, etc. But the principal
hawke that breeds in the country, is counted the Gerfaulcon.

Of other fowls their principal kinds are the swanne tame and wild, (where
of they have great store) the Storke, the Crane, the Tedder, of the color of a
Feasant, but far bigger and lives in the fur woods. Of Feasant and
Partridge they have very great plenty. An owl there is of a very great
bigness, more ugly to behold then the owls of this country, with a broad
face, and ears much like unto a man.

For fresh water fish besides the common sorts (as Carpe Pikes Perch, Tench,
Roach, etc.) they have diverse kinds very good and delicate: as the Bellouga, or
Bellougina of 4. or 5. elnes long, the Ositrina or Sturgeo^, the Seueriga, and
Sterledy somewhat in fashion and taste like to the Sturgeon, but not so thick
nor long. These 4. kinds of fish breed in the volgha, and are catched in great
plenty, and served thence into the whole Realm for a great food. Of the Roes
of these four kinds they make very great store of Icary or Caueary as was said
before.

They have besides these that breed in the volgha a fish called the Riba bela,
or white salmon which they account more delicate the^ they do the red salmon
whereof also they have exceeding great plenty in the rivers northward, as in
Duyna the river of Cola, etc. In the Ozera or lake near a town called
Perislaue, not far from the Mosko, they have a small fish which they call the
fresh herring, of the fashion, and somewhat of the taste of a Sea-hearing.
Their chief towns for fish are, Yaruslaue, Bealozera, Nouogrod, Astracan, and
Cazan: which all yield a large custom to the Emperor every year for their
trades of fishing, which they practice in Summer, but send it frozen in the
Winter time into all parts of the Realm.

The chief Cities of Russia.
The 4. Chapter.
THE chief Cities of Russia are, Mosko, Nouograd, Rostoue, Volodomer, Plesko,
Smolensko, Iaruslaue, Perislaue, Nisnouograd, vologda, Vstiuck, Golmigroe,
Cazan, Astracan, Cargapolia, Columna.

The city of Mosko is supposed to be of great antiquity, Mosko.
though the first founder be unknown to the Russe. It seems to have taken
the name from the river that runeth on the one side of the town. Berosus the
Chaldean in his 5. book tells that Nimrod (whom other profane stories call
Saturn) sent Assyrius, Medus, Moscus, and Magog into Asia to plant Colonies
there, and that Moscus planted both in Asia and Europe. Which may make some
probability, that the city, or rather the river whereon it is built, took the
denomination from this Moscus: the rather because of the climate or situation,
which is in the very farthest part and list of Europe, bordering upon Asia. The
city was much enlarged by one Euan or John, son to Daniel, that first
changed his title of Duke into King: though that honor continued not to his
posterity: the rather because he was invested into it by the Popes Legate, who
at that time was Innocentius the fourth about the year 1246. which was very
much misliked by the Russe people, being then a part of the Eastern or Greek
Church, Since that time the name of this city has grown more famous, and
better known to the world: insomuch that not only the province, but the
whole country of Russia is termed by some by the name of Moscouia the
Metropolite city. The form of this city is in manner round with three strong
walls, circuling the one within the other, and streets lying between, whereof
the inmost wall, and the buildings closed within it (lying safest as the heart
within the body, fenced and watered with the river Moskua, that runs close
by it) is all accounted the Emperors castle. The number of houses (as I have
heard) through the whole city (being reckoned by the Emperor a little before
it was fired by the Chrim) was 41500, in all. Since the Tartar besieged and
fired the town (which was in the year 1571.) there lies waste of it a great
breadth of ground, which before was well set and planted with buildings,
specially that part on the south side of Moskua, built not long before by
Basilius the Emperor for his garrison of soldiers, to whom he gave
privilege to drink Mead, and Beer at the dry or prohibited times, when other
Russes may drink nothing but water, and for that cause called this new city
by the name of Naloi, that is, skinck or pour in. So that now the City of
Mosko is not much bigger then then the city of London. Nouograde.
The next in greatness, and in a manner as large, is the city Nouograde: where
was committed (as the Russe says) the memorable war so much spoke of in
stories of the Scythian servants, that took arms against their masters:
which they report in this sort: vz. That the Boiarens or Gentlemen of Nouograde
and the territory about (which only are soldiers after the discipline of
those countries) had war with the Tartars. Which being well performed and
ended by the^, they returned homewards. Where they understood by the way that
their Cholopey or bondslaues whom they left at home, had in their absence
possessed their towns, lands, houses, wives, and all. At which news being
somewhat amassed, and yet disdayning the villainy of their servants, they made
the more speed home: and so not far from Nouograd met them in warlike manner
marching against them. Whereupon aduising what was best to be done, they
agreed all to set upon them with no other show of weapon but with their horse
whips (which as their manner is every man rides withal) to put them in
remembrance of their servile condition, thereby to terrify them, and abate
their courage. And so marching on and lashing altogether with their whips in
their hands they gave the onset. Which seemed so terrible in the ears of their
villains, and stroke such a sense into them of the smart of the whip which
they had felt before, that they fled altogether like sheep before the driuers.
In memory of this victory the Nouogradia^s ever since have sta^ped their coin
(which they call a dingoe Nouogrodskoy curra^t through al Russia) with the
figure of a horseman shaking a whip a loft in his hand. These two cities exceed
the rest in greatness. For strength their chief towns are Vobsko, Smolensko,
Cazan and Astracan, as liyng upon the borders. But for situation Iaruslaue.
far exceeds the rest. Iaruslaue.
For besides the commodities that the soil yields of pasture and corn, it
lies upon the famous river Volgha, and looks over it from a high bank very
fair and stately to behold: whereof the town takes the name. For Iaruslaue in
that tongue signifies as much as a fair or famous ba^ke. In this town (as
may be ghessed by the name) dwelt the Russe king vlademir surnamed Iaruslaue,
that married the daughter of Harald king of England, by mediation of Sueno the
Dane, as is noted in the Danish story about the year 1067.

The other towns have nothing that is greatly memorable, save many ruins
within their walls. Which shows the decrease of the Russe people, under this
government. The streates of their cities and towns in steed of pauing, are
planked with fur trees, plained and laid even close the one to the other.
The manner of Russe buylding.
Their houses are of wood without any lime or stone, built very close and warm
with sirre trees plained and piled one upon an other. They are fastened
together with dentes or notches at every corner, and so clasped fast together.
Betwixt the trees or timber they thrust in moss (whereof they gather plenty
in their woods) to keep out the air. Every house has a pair of staiers that
lead up into the chambers out of the yard or streat after the Scottish manner.
This building seems far better for their country, then that of stone and
brick: as being colder and more dampish then their wooden houses, specially
of fur, that is a dry and warm wood. Whereof the providence of God has
given them such store, as that you may build a fair house for twenty or
thirty rubbels or little more, where wood is most scant. The greatest
inconvenience of their wooden building is the aptnes for firing, which
happens very often and in very fearful sort, by reason of the dryness and
fatness of the fur, that being once fired, burns like a torch, and is
hardly quenched till all be burnt up.

Of the house or stock of the Russe Emperors.
The 5. Chapter.
THe syrname of the imperial house of Russia, is called Beala. It took the
original (as is supposed) from the Kings of Hungary. Which may seem the
more probable for that the Hungarian Kings many years ago have borne that
name: as appears by Bonfinius and other stories written of that country. For
about the year 1059 mention is made of one Beaela that succeeded his brother
Andreas, who reduced the Hungarians to the Christian faith from whence they
were fallen by atheism and Turkish persuasion before. The second of that name
was called Beala the blind, after whom succeeded diverse of the same name.

That their auncestrie came not of the Russe nation, The house Beala not
natural Russe.
Iuan vasilowich father to this Emperor would many times boast, disdaining (as
should seem) to have his progeny derived from the Russe blood. As namely to
an Englishman his goldsmith, that had received bullion of him to make certain
plate: whom the Emperor commanded to look well to his weight. For my Russes
(said he) are thieves all. Whereat the workman looking upon the Emperor,
began to smile. The Emperor being of quick conceit, charged him to tell him
what he smiled at. If your Majesty will pardon me (quoth the goldsmith) I will
tell you. Your highness said that the Russes were all thieves, and forgot in
the mean while that your self was a Russe. I thought so (quoth the Emperor)
but thou art deceived. For I am no Russe, my ancestors were Germans (for so
they account of the Hungarians to be part of the Germane nation though in deed
they come of the Hunnes. That invaded those countries and rested in those parts
of Pannonia, now called Hungary.

How they aspired to the Dukedom of Volodemer (which was their first degree,
and ingrafting into Russia) and whether it were by conquest, or by marriage, or
by what other means, I could not learn any certentie among them. The
aduoncement of the house of Beala.
That from these beginnings of a small Dukedom (that bare notwithstanding an
absolute government with it, as at that time did also the other Shires or
Provinces of Russia) this house of Beala spread it self forth, and aspired by
degrees to the monarchy of the whole country, is a thing well known, and of
very late memory. The chief of that house that advanced the stock, and
enlarged their dominions, were the three last that reigned before this
Emperor, to wit. Iuan Basileus, and Iuan father to the other that reigns at
this time. Whereof the first that took unto him the name and title of Emperor,
was Basileus father to Iuan, and grandfather to this man. For before that time
they were contented to be called great Dukes of Mosko. What has been done by
either of these three, and how much they have added to their first estate by
conquest or otherwise, may be seen in the chapter of their colonies, or
purchases perforce. For the continuance of the race, this house of Beala at
this present is in like case as are many of the greatest houses of Christendom
vz. the whole stock and race concluded in one, two or some few of the blood.
For besides the Emperor that now is, who has no child (neither is like ever
to have for ought that may be coniectured by the constitution of his body, and
the barennesse of his wife after so many years marriage) there is but one more
vz. a child of six or seven years old, in whom rests all the hope of the
succession, and the posterity of that house. As for the other brother that was
eldest of the three, and of the best towardness, he died of a blow given him
by his father upon the head in his fury with his walking staff, or (as some
say) of a thrust with the prong of it driven deep into his head. That he meant
him no such mortal harm when he gave him the blow, may appear by his
mourning and passion after his sons death, which never left him till it
brought him to the grave. Wherein may be marked the justice of God, that
punished his delight in shedding of blood with this murder of his son by his
own hand, and so ended his days and tyranny together, with the murdering of
himself by extreme grief, for this his unhappy and unnatural fact.

The Emperors younger brother of six or seven years old (as was said before)
is kept in a remote place from the Mosko, under the tuition of his mother and
her kindred of the house of the Nagaies: yet not safe (as I have heard) from
attempts of making away by practice of some that aspire to the succession, if
this Emperor die without any issue. The nurse that tasted before him of
certain meat (as I have heard) died presently. That he is natural son to
Joan Vasilowich, the Russe people warrant it, by the Fathers quality that
begins to appear already in his tender years. He is delighted (they say)
to see sheep and other cattle killed, and to look on their throtes while they
are bleeding (which commonly children are afraid to behold) and to beat geese
and hens with a staff till he see them lie dead. Besides these of the male
kind, there is a widow, that has right in the succession, sister to the old
Emperor, and aunt to this man, sometime wife to Magnus Duke of Holst, brother
to the king of Denmark, by whom she had one daughter. This woman since the
death of her husband has been allured again into Russia by some that love the
succession better then her self, which appears by the sequel. For her self
with her daughter so soon as they were returned into Russia were thrust into a
Nunnerie, where her daughter died this last year while I was in the country,
of no natural disease as was supposed. The mother remains still in the
Nunnerie, where (as I have heard) she bewayleth her self, and curses the
time when she returned into Russia, entised with the hope of marriage, and
other fair promises in the Emperors name* Thus it stands with the imperial
stock of Russia of the house of Beala, which is like to determine in those that
now are, and to make a conversion of the Russe estate. If it be into a
government of some better temper, and milder constitution, it will be happy for
the poor people that are now oppressed with intolerable servitude.

Of the manner of crowning or inauguration of the Russe Emperors.
The 6. Chapter.
THe solemnities used at the Russe Emperors coronatio^, are on this manner. In
the great Church of Precheste (or our Lady) within the Emperors castle is
erected a stage, whereon stands a scrine that bears upon it the Imperial
cappe and robe of very rich stuff. When the day of the Inauguration is come,
there resort thither, first the Patriarch with the Metropolitanes,
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and Priors, all richly clad in their
Pontisicalibus. Then enter the Deacons with the quier of singers. Who so soon
as the Emperor sets foot into the Church, begin to sing: Many years may
live noble Theodore Iuanowich etc: Whereunto the Patriarch and Metropolite with
the rest of the Clergy, answer with a certain Hymn, inform of a prayer,
singing it all together with a greatnoyse. The hymn being ended, the Patriarch
with the Emperor mount up the stage, where stands a seat ready for the
Emperor. Whereupon the Patriarch wills him to sit down, and then placing
himself by him upon an other seat provided for that purpose, boweth down his
head toward the ground, and says this prayer: Oh Lord God King of Kings,
Lord of Lords, which by thy prophet Samuel did choose thy servant David,
and anoint him for King over thy people Israel, hear now our prayers, and
look from thy sanctuary upon this thy servant Theodore, whom thou have
chosen and exalted for King over these thy holy Nations, anoint him with the
oil of gladness, protect him by thy power, put upon his head a crown of
gold and precious stones, give him length of days, place him in the seat of
Justice, strengthen his arm, make subject unto him all the barbarous nations.
Let thy fear be in his whole heart, turn him from an evil faith, and from
all error, and show him the salvation of thy holy and universal Church, that
he may judge thy people with Justice, and protect the children of the poor,
and finally atteyne everlasting life. This prayer he speaks with a low
voice, and then pronounces a loud: All praise and power to God the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost. The prayer being ended, he commands certain
Abbots to reach the imperial roabe and cappe: which is done very decently,
and with great solemnity, the Patriarch withal pronouncing alowde: Peace be
unto all. And so he begins an other prayer to this effect: Bow your selves
together with us, and pray to him that reigns over all. Preserve him (oh
Lord) under thy holy protection, keep him that he may do good and holy
things, let justice shine forth in his days, that we may live quietly
without strife and malice. This is pronounced somewhat softly by the Patriarch,
whereto he adds again alowd: Thou art the King of the whole world, and the
savior of our souls, to thee the Father, Son and Holy ghost, be all praise
for ever, and ever, Amen. Then putting on the roabe and the cappe, he blesses
the Emperor with the sign of the cross: saying withal, in the name of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy ghost. The like is done by the Metropolites,
Archbishops, and Bishops: who all in their order come to the chair, and one
after an other bless the Emperor with their two forefingers. Then is said by
the Patriarch an other prayer, that begins: O most holy virgin mother of
God, etc. After which a Deacon pronounces with an high loud voice: Many
years to Noble Theodore, good, honorable, beloved of God, great Duke of
Volodemer of Mosko, Emperor, and Monarch of all Russia, etc. Whereto the other
Priests and Deacons that stand somewhat far of by the altar or table,
answer singing: Many years, many years, to the noble Theodore. The same not
is taken up by the Priests and Deacons, that are placed at the right and left
side of the Church, and then all together, they chaunt and thunder out,
singing: Many years to the noble Theodore, good, honaurable, beloved of God,
great Duke of Volodemer, Mosko, Emperor of all Russia, etc. These solemnities
being ended, first comes the Patriarch with the Metropolites. Archbishops,
and Bishops, then the Nobility, and the whole company in their order, to do
homage to the Emperor, bending down their heads and knocking them at his
feet to the very ground.

The style wherewith he is invested at his Coronation, runs after this
manner.
THeodore Iuanowich, by the grace of God great Lord and Emperor of all Russia,
great Duke of Volodemer, Mosko, and Nouograd, King of Cazan, King of Astracan,
Lord of Plesko, and great duke of Smolensko, of Twerria, Ioughoria, Permia,
Vadska, Bulghoria, and others, Lord and great duke of Nouograd of the Low
country, of Chernigo, Rezan, Polotskoy, Rostoue, Yaruflaueley, Bealozera,
Liefland, Oudoria, Obdoria, and Condensa, Commander of all Siberia, and of the
North parts, and Lord of many other Countries, etc.

This style conteyneth in it all the Emperors Provinces, and sets forth
his greatness. And therefore they have a great delight and pride in it,
forcing not only there own people but also strangers (that have any matter
to deliver to the Emperor by speech or writing) to repeat the whole form
from the beginning to the end, Which breeds much cavil, and sometimes
quarrel betwixt them and the Tartar, and Poland Ambassadors: who refuse to
call him Czar, that is Emperor, and to repeat the other parts of his long
style. My self when I had audience of the Emperor, thought good to salute him
only with thus much vz. Emperor of all Russia, great Duke of Volodemer, Mosko
and Nouograd, King of Cazan, King of Astracan. The rest I omitted of purpose,
because I knew they gloried, to have their style appear to be of a larger
volume then the Queens of England. But this was taken in so ill part, that the
Chauncellor (who then attended the Emperor, with the rest of the Nobility)
with a loud chafing voice called still upon me to say out the rest. Whereto I
answered, that the Emperors style was very long, and could not so well be
remembered by strangers, that I had repeated so much of it, as might show that
I gave honor to the rest etc: But all would not serve till I commanded my
Interpreter to say it all out.

The State or form of their Government.
The 7. Chapter.
THe manner of their government is much after the Turkish fashion: which they
seem to imitate as near as the country, and reach of their capacities in
pollitique affairs will give them leave to do.

The State and form of their government is plain tyrannical, The Russe
government tyrannical.
as applying all to the behoof of the Prince, and that after a most open and
barbarous manner: as may appear by the Sophismata or secrets of their
government afterward set down, as well for the keeping of the Nobility and
Commons in an under proportion, and far uneven balance in their several
degrees, as also in their impositions and exactions, wherein they exceed all
just measure without any regard of Nobility or people: farther then it gives
the Nobility a kind of iniust and unmeasured liberty, to command and exact
upon the commons and baser sort of people in all parts of the realm where
soever they come, specially in the place where their lands lie, or where they
are appointed by the Emperonr to govern under him. Also to the Commons some
small contentment, in that they pass over their lands by descent of
inheritance to whither son they will: which commonly they do after our
Gauillkinde, and dispose of their goods by gift or Testament without any
controlment. Wherein notwithstanding both Nobility and Commons are but
stoarers for the Prince, all running in the end into the Emperors coffers: as
may appear by the practice of enriching his treasury, and the manner of
exactions set down in the title of his customs, and revenues.

Concerning the principal points and matters of State, wherein the
Soueraintie consists (as the making and annulling of public Laws, the
making of Magistrates, power to make war or league with any foreign State,
to execute or to pardon life, with the right of appeal in all matters, both
civil and criminal) they do so wholly and absolutely pertain to the
Emperor, and his Counsel under him, as that he may be said to be both the
Sovereign commander, and the executioner of all these. For as touching any
Law or public order of the Realm, it is ever determined of before any
public assembly or Parliament be summoned. Where besides his Council, he
has none other to consult with him of such matters as are concluded before
hand, but only a few Bishops, Abbots, and Friars: to no other end then to
make advantage of the peoples superstitions, even against themselves, which
think all to be holy and just, that passes with consent of their Bishops and
Clergy men, whatsoever it be. For which purpose the Emperors are content to
make much of the corrupt state of the Church, as now it is among them, and to
nourish the same by extraordinary favors, and immunities to the Bishops seas,
Abbeies and Frieries: as knowing superstition and false religion best to agree
with a tyrannical state, and to be a special means to uphold and mainteyne
the same.

Secondly, as touching the public offices and magistracies of the realm,
there is none hereditarie, neither any so great nor so little in that country,
but the bestowing of it is done immediately by the Emperor himself. Insomuch
that the very Diacks or clearkes in every head town, are for the most part
assigned by himself. Notwithstanding, the Emperor that now is (the better to
entend his devotions) refers al such matters perteyning to the State, wholly
to the ordering of his wives brother, the L. Borris Federowich Godonoe.

Thirdly, the like is to be said of the jurisdiction concerning matters
judicial, specially such as concern life and death. Wherein there is none
that has any authority or public jurisdiction that goes by descent, or is
held by charter, but all at the appointment and pleasure of the Emperor, and
the same practiced by the judges with such awe and restraint, as that they dare
not determine upon any special matter, but must refer the same wholly, up
to the Mosko to the Emperors Council. To show his Soueraintie over the lives
of his subjects, the late Emperor Iuan Vasilowich in his walks or progresses,
if he had misliked the face or person of any man who^ he met by the way, or
that looked upon him, would command his head to be struck off. Which was
presently done, and the head cast before him.

Fourthly, for the sovereign appeal, and giving of pardons in criminal
matters to such as are convicted, it is wholly at the pleasure and grace of the
Emperor. Wherein also the Empress that now is, being a woman of great
clemency, and withal delighting to deal in public affairs of the Realm,
(the rather to supply the defect of her husband) does behave her self after
an absolute manner, giving out pardon (specially on her birth, day and other
solemn times) in her own name, by open proclamation, without any mention at
all of the Emperor. Some there have been of late of the ancient Nobility,
that have held diverse provinces by right of inheritance, with an absolute
authority and jurisdiction over them, to order and determine all matters
within their own precinct without all appeal, or controlment of the Emperor.
But this was all annulled and wrung clean from them by Iuan Vasilowich father
to this Emperor.

The manner of holding their Parliaments.
The 8. Chapter.
THeir highest Court of public consultation for matter of State, The States of
Parliament.
is called the Zabore, that is, the Public Assembly. The states and degrees of
persons that are present at their Parliaments, are these in order. 1. The
Emperor himself. 2. Some of his Nobility about the number of twenty being
all of his Council. 3. Certain of the clergy men, etc. about the same number.
As for Burghers or other to represent the co^munaltie, they have no place
there: the people being of no better account with them then as servants or bond
slaves that are to obey, not to make laws, nor to know any thing of public
matters before they are concluded.

The Court of Parliament (called Zabore) is held in this manner. The order of
the summons or assembling.
The Emperor causes to be summoned such of his Nobility as himself thinks
meet, being (as was said) all of his Council: together with the Patriarch,
who calls his Clergy, to wit, the two Metropolites, the two Archbishops,
with such Bishops, Abbots, and Friars as are of best account and reputation
among the^. When they are all assembled at the Emperors court, the day is
intimated when the session shall begin. Which commonly is upon some friday, for
the religion of that day.

When the day is come, the clergy men assemble before at the time and place
appointed, which is called the Stollie. And when the Emperor comes attended
by his Nobility, they arise all, and meet him in an out room, following
their Patriarch, who blesses the Emperor with his two forefingers, laying them
on his forehead, and the sides of his face, and then kisseth him on the right
side of his breast. So they pass on into their Parliament house, where they sit
in this order. The Emperor is enthronized on the one side of the chamber. In
the next place not far from him at a small square table (that gives room to
twelve persons or thereabouts) sits the Patriarche with the Metropolites and
Bishops, and certain of the principal Nobility of the Emperors Council,
together with two Diacks or Secretaries (called Dumnoy dyakey) that enact that
which passes. The rest place themselves on benches round about the room,
every man in his rank after his degree. Then is there propounded by one of the
Secretaries (who represents the speaker) the cause of their assembly, and
the principal matters that they are to consider of. For to propund bills what
every man thinks good for the public benefit (as the manner is in England)
the Russe Parliament allows no such custom, nor liberty to subjects.

The points being opened, Their discourse at Parliament.
the Patriarch with his Clergy men have the prerogative to be first asked
their vote, or opinion, what they think of the points propounded by the
Secretary. Whereto they answer in order, according to their degrees, but al
in one form without any discourse: as having learned their lesson before, that
serves their turns at all Parliaments alike, whatsoever is propounded.
Commonly it is to this effect. That the Emperor and his Council are of great
wisdom, and experience, touching the policies and public affairs of the
Realm, and far better able to judge what is profitable for the common
wealth, then they are, which attend upon the service of God only, and matters
of religion. And therefore it may please them to proceed. That insteede of
their advise, they will aid them with their prayers, as their duties and
vocations do require, etc. To this or like effect having made their answers
every man in his course, up stands some Abbot or Friar more bold then the
rest (yet appointed before hand as a matter of form) and desires the Emperor
it would please his Majesty, to command to be delivered unto them what his
Majesty's own judgment, and determinate pleasure is, as touching those
matters propounded by his Deiake.

Whereto is replied by the said Secretary in the Emperors name. That his
Highness with those of his noble Council, upon good and sound advise have
found the matters proposed to be very good and necessary for the common
wealth of his Realm. Notwithstanding, for as much as they as religious men, and
know what is right, his Majesty requires their godiie opinions, yea and their
censures too, for the approving or correcting of the said propositions. And
therefore desires them again to speak their minds freely. And if they shall
like to give their consents, that then the matters may pass to a full
conclusion.

Hereunto when the Clergy men have given their consents (which they use to do
without any great pausing) they take their leaves with blessing of the
Emperor: who brings the Patriarch on his way so far as the next room, and
so returns to his seat, till all be made ready for his return homeward. The
acts that thus are passed by the Zabore or Parliament, the Deiakeis or
Secretaries draw into a form of proclamation, which they send abroad into
every Province, and head town of the Realm, to be published there by the
Dukes and Diakeis, or Secretaries of those places. The session of Parliament
being fully ended, the Emperor inuiteth the Clergy men to a solemn dinner.
And so they depart every man to his home.

Of the Nobility, and by what means it is kept in an under proportion
agreeable to to that State.
The 9. Chapter.
THe degrees of persons or estates of Russia, The Vdelney Knazey chief of the
Nobility,
besides the sovereign State or Emperor himself) are these in their order.
1. The Nobility which is of four sorts. Whereof the chief for birth,
authority, and revenue are called the Vdelney Knazey, that is, the exempt or
privileged Dukes. These held sometime a several jurisdiction, and absolute
authorite within their precincts, much like unto the States or Nobles of
Germany. But afterward (reserving their rights upon composition) they yielded
themselves to this house of Beala, when it began to wax mighty, and to
enlarge it self by ouermatching their neighbors. Only they were bound to
serve the Emperor in his wars with a certain number of horse. But the late
Emperor Iuan Vasilowich father to this prince, being a man of high spirit, and
subtle in his kind meaning to reduce his government into a more strickt form
began by degrees to clip of their greatness, and to bring it down to a lesser
proportion: till in the end he made them not only his vassals, but his
Kolophey, that is, his very villains or bo^dslaues. For so they term and write
themselves in any public instrument or private petition which they make to
the Emperor. So that now they hold their authorities, lands, lives and all
at the Emperors pleasure, as the rest do.

The means and practice whereby he wrought this to effect against those, and
other of the Nobility (so well as I could note out of the report of his doings)
were these, and such like. First, he cast private emulations among them about
preroragatiue of their titles, and dignities. Wherein he used to set on the
inferiors, to prefer or equal themselves to those that were accounted to
be of the nobler houses. Where he made his aduanntage of their malice and
contentions, the one against the other, by receiving devised matter, and
accusations of secret practice and conspiracies to be intended against his
person, and state. And so having singled out the greatest of them, and cut them
off with the good liking of the rest, he fell at last to open practice, by
forcing of the other to yield their rights unto him.

2 He divided his subjects into two parts or factions by a general schism.
The faction of Oppressini and Zempskey devised by the Emperor.
The one part he called the Oppressini or Select men. These were such of the
Nobility and Gentry as he took to his own part to protect and mainteyne
them as his faithful subjects. The other he called Zemskey, or the Commons.
The Zemskey contained the base and vulgar sort, with such Noblemen and
Gentlemen as he meant to cut off, as suspected to mislike his government, and
to have a meaning to practice against him. Wherein he provided that the
Oppressini for number and quality of valor, money, armor, etc: far
exceeded the other of the Zempskey side, whom he put (as it were) from under
his protection: so that if any of them were spoiled or killed by those of the
Oppressini (which he accounted of his own part) there was no amends to be
sought for by way of public justice, or by complaint to the Emperor.

The whole number of both parts was orderly registered and kept in a book: so
that every man knew who was a Zempskey man, and who of the Oppressini. And
this liberty of the one part to spoil and kill the other without any help
of Magistrate, or law (that continued seven years) enriched that side, and
the Emperors treasury, and wrought that withal which he intended by this
practice, viz. to take out of the way such of the Nobility, as himself
misliked: whereof were slain within one week to the number of three hundred
within the city of Mosko. This tyrannical practice of making a general
Schism, and public division among the subjects of his whole Realm, proceeded
(as should seem) from an extreme doubt, and desperate fear, which he had
conceived of most of his Nobility, and Gentlemen of his Realm, in his wars
with the Polonian and Chrim Tartar. What time he grew into a vehement
suspicion (conceived of the ill success of his affairs) that they practiced
treason with the Polonian and Chrim. Whereupon he executed some, and devised
this way to be rid of the rest.

And this wicked policy and tyrannous practice (though now it be ceased) has
so troubled that country, and filled it so full of grudge and mortal hatred
ever since, that it will not be quenched (as it seems now) till it burn
again into a civil flame.

3 Having thus pulled them and seized all their inheritance, lands,
privileges, etc. save some very small part which he left to their name, he
gave them other lands of the tenor of Pomestnay (as they call it) that are
held at the Emperors pleasure, lying far of in an other country, and so
removed them into other of his Provinces, where they might have neither favor,
nor authority, not being native nor well known there. So that now these of
the chief Nobility (called Vdelney Knazey) are equalled with the rest: save
that in the opinion and favor of the people they are of more account, and
keep still the prerogative of their place in all their public meetings.

Their practice to keep down these houses from rising again and recovering
their dignities are these, and such like. First, many of their heirs are kept
unmarried perforce that the stock may die with the^ Some are sent into Siberia,
Cazan and Astracan, under pretense of service, and there either made away, or
else fast clapped up. Some are put into Abbeyes, and shire themselves Friars by
pretense of a vow to be made voluntary, and of their own accord, but indeed
forced unto it by fear, upon some pretensed crime objected against them. Where
they are so guarded by some of special trust, and the Covent it self (upon
whose head it stands that they make no escape) as that they have no hope but
to end their lives there. Of this kind there are many of very great
Nobility. These and such like ways begun by the Emperor Iuan Vasilowich
are still practiced by the Godonoes, who being advanced by the marriage of the
Empress their kinsewoman, rule both the Emperor, and his Realm, (specially
Borris Federowich Godonoe, brother to the Empress) and endeavor by all means
to cut of, or keep down all of the best and auncientest Nobility. Whereof
diverse already they have taken away, whom they thought likeliest to make head
against them and to hinder their purpose, as Knez Andreas Guraken Bulgatkoue, a
man of great birth and authority in the Country. The like they have done with
Peeter Gollanni (whom they put into a dungeon where he ended his life) with
Knez Vasilie Vrywich Golloohen, with Andrieu luanowich Suskoy accounted among
them for a man of a great wisdom. So this last year was killed in a
Monastery, (whither they had thrust him) on Knez Iuan Petrowich Suskoy a man
of great valor, and service in that Country: who about five or six years
since, bare out the siege of the City Vobsko made by Stepan Batore King of
Polonia, with a 100000. men, and repulsed him very valiantly, with great
honor to himself, and his country, and disgrace to the Polonian. Also
Mitheta Romanowich uncle to the Emperor by the mothers side, was supposed to
have dyed of poison, or some like practice.

The names of these families of greatest Nobility are these in their order.
Names of the greatest houses of the Russe Nobility.
The first is of Knez Volodemer, which rests at this time in one daughter a
widow, and without children (mentioned before) sometime wife to Hartock Magnus
brother to the king of Denmark, now closed within a tru^nery. The 2. knez
Metheloskey thrust into a Friery, and his only son kept from marriage, to
decay the house. The 3. Glimskoy. But one left of his house, and he without
children save one daughter. The 4. Suskoy, whereof there are 4. brethren young
men, and unmarried al. The 5. Hubetskoy. Of this house are 4. living. The 6.
Bulgaloy now called Guletchey house, whereof are five living, but youths al.
The 7. Vorallinskoy. Two left of that stock. The 8. Odgoskey. Two. The 9.
Telletskoy. One. The 10. Taytoue, three. These are the names of the chief
families called Vdelney Knazey: that in effect have lost all now, save the very
name it self, and favor of the people, which is like one day to restore them
again, if any be left.

The 2. degree of Nobility is of the Boiarens. The 2. degree of Nobility.
These are such as the Emperor honors (besides their nobility) with the
title of counselors. The revenue of these 2. sorts of their Nobles that rises
out of their lands assigned the^ by the Emperor, and held at his pleasure (for
of their own inheritance there is little left them as was said before) is
about a thousand marks a year: besides pension which they receive of the
Emperor for their service in his wars, to the sum of 700. rubbels a year,
and none above that sum.

But in this number the lord Borris Federowich Godenoe is not to be reckoned,
that is like a Transendent, and in no such predicament with the rest, being the
Emperors brother in law, his protector for direction, for command and
authority Emperor of Russia. His yearly revenue in land and pension, amounts
to the sum of 93700. rubbels and more, as appears by the particulars. He
has of inheritance (which himself has augmente^ted in Vasma Dorogobose six
thousand rubbels a year. For his office of Connick, or Master of the Horse
12000. rubbels, or marks, raised out of the Conaslue Sloboday, or the
liberties pertaining to that Office, which are certain Lands and Towns near
about the Mosko. Besides, all the meddowe and pasture ground on both sides the
bank of the river Mosko, thirty verst up the stream, aod forty verst
downwards. For his pension of the Emperor (besides the other for his office)
15000. rubbels. Out of the Province or Shire of Vagha, there is given him for a
peculiar exempted out of the Chetfird of Posolskoy 32000. rubbels, besides a
tent of furs. Out of Rezan and Sever, (an other peculiar) 30000. rubbels. Out
of Otfer and Turiock an other exempt place 8000. rubbels. For rent of
Bathstoaues and Bathing houses without the walls of Mosko 1500. rubbels.
Besides his pomest, or lands which he holds at the Emperors pleasure, which
far exceeds the proportion of land allotted to the rest of the Nobility.

One other there is of the house of Glinskoy that dispendeth in land and
pension about 40000. rubbels yearly. Which he is suffered to enjoy because
he has married Borris his wives sister, being himself very simple, and
almost a natural. The ordering of him and his lands are committed to Borris.

In the third rank are the Voyauodey or such Nobles as are, The 3. sort of
Nobility.
or have bin generals in the Emperors wars. Which deliver the honor of
their title to their posterities also: who take their place above the other
Dukes and Nobles that are not of the two former sort, vz. of the Vdelney
knazey, nor of the Boiarens.

These three degrees of their Nobility (to wit) the Vdelney knazey, the
Boiarens, and the Voiaudey have the addition of vich, put unto their surname as
Borris Federowich, etc: which is a note of honor that the rest may not usurp.
And in case it be not added in the naming of them, they may sue the Bestchest
or penalty of dishonor upon them, that otherwise shall term them.

The fourth and lowest degree of Nobility with them, is of such as bear the
name of Knazey or Dukes, but come of the younger brothers of those chief
houses, through many discents, and have no inheritance of their own, save the
bare name or title of Duke only. For their order is to deliver their names and
titles of their dignities over to all their children alike, what soever else
they leave them. So that the sons of a Voiauodey or General in the field,
are called Voiauodey though they never saw the field, and the sons of a Knez or
Duke are called Knazey though they have not one groat of inheritance or
liuelyhood to maintain themselves withal. Of this sort there are so many that
the plenty makes them cheap: so that you shall see Dukes glad to serve a
mean man for five or six rubbels or marks a year, and yet they will stand
highly upon their Bestchest or reputation of their Honors. And these are their
several degrees of Nobility.

The second degree of persons is of their Sina Boiarskey, The second degree of
persons.
or the sons of Gentlemen: which all are preferred, and hold that name by
their service in the Emperors wars, being soldiers by their very stock and
birth. To which order are referred their Dyacks or Secretaries, that serve the
Emperor in every head town, being joined in Commission with the Dukes of that
place

The last are their Commons, The third degree.
whom they call Mousicks. In which number they reckon their Merchants, and
their common artificers. The very lowest and basest sort of this kind (which
are held in no degree) are their country people whom they call Christianeis.
Of the Sina boiarskey (which are all soldiers) we are to see in the
description of their forces, and military provisions. Concerning their
Mousicks, what their condition and behavior is, in the title or chapter Of the
common people.

Of the government of their Provinces and Shires.
The 10. Chapter.
THe whole country of Russia (as was said before) is divided into four parts,
which they call Chetfirds, or Tetrarchies. Every Chetfird co^teineth diverse
shires, and is annexed to a several office, whereof it takes the name. The
first Chetfird or Tetrarchie bears the name of Pososkoy Chetfird, The four
Chetfirds.
or the Jurisdiction of the office of Ambassages, and at this time is under the
chief Secretary and officer of the Ambassages called Andreas Shalcaloue. The
standing fee or stipend that he receives yearly of the Emperor for this
service, is 100. rubbels or marks.

The second is called the Roseradney Chetfird, because it is proper to the
Roserade or high Constable. At this time it pertains by virtue of office to
Basilie Shalcaloue, brother to the Chancellor, but it is executed by one Zapon
Abramoue. His pension is an hundred rubbels yearly.

The third is the Chetfird of Pomestnoy, as perteining to that office. This
keeps a Register of all lands given by the Emperor for service to his
Nobleme^, Gentlemen, and others, gives out and takes in all assurances for
the^. The officer at this time is called Eleazar wellusgine. His stipend is
500. rubbels a year.

The fourth is called Cassanskoy dworets, as being appropriat to the office
that has the jurisdiction of the kingdoms of Cazan and Astracan, with the
other towns lying upon the Volgha, now ordered by one Druzhine Penteleoue, a
man of very special account among them, for his wisdom, and promptnes in
matters of policy. His pension is 150. rubbels a year.

From these Chetfirds or Tetarchies is exempted the Emperors inheritance or
Vochin (as they call it) for that it perteined from ancient time to the house
of Beala, which is the surname of the imperial blood. This stands of 36.
towns with their bounds or territories. Besides diverse peculiar jurisdictions,
which at likewise deducted out of those Chetfirds, as the Shire of Vagha
(belonging to the Lord Borrise Federowich Godonoe) and such like.

These are the chief governors or officers of the Provinces, not resident at
their charge abroad, but attending the Emperor whether soever he goes, and
carrying their offices about with them, which for the most part they hold at
Mosko, as the Emperors chief seat.

The parts and practice of these four offices, is to receive all complaints
and actions what soever, that are brought out of their several Chetfirds, and
quarters, and to inform them to the Emperors counsel. Likewise to send
direction again to those that are under them in their said Provinces, for all
matters given in charge by the Emperor and his Counsel, to be done or put in
execution within their precincts.

For the ordering of every particular Province of these four Chetfirds, there
is appointed one of these Dukes, which were reckoned before in the lowest
degree of their Nobility, which are resident in the head towns of the said
Provinces. Whereof every one has joined with him in Commission a Dyack or
Secretary to assist him, or rather to direct him. For in the executing of
their commission, the Dyack does all.

The parts of their Commission are these in effect. The Commission of the Dukes
or Presidents of Shires.
First to hear and determine in all civil matters within their precinct To
which purpose they have under them certain officers, as Gubnoy Starets or
Coroners, who besides the trial of self murders, are to attach fellons: and
the Souldiae or under Justices, who themselves also may hear and determine in
all matters of the same nature, among the country people of their own wards
or bayliwicks: but so that in case either party dissent, they may appeal, and
go farther to the Duke and Dyack that reside within the head town. From whom
also they may remove the matter to the higher court at Mosko of the Emperors
Counsel, where lie all appeals. They have under them also Sotskoy Starets,
that is Aldermen, or Baliues of the hundreds.

Secondly in all criminal matters, as theft, murder, treason, etc. they have
authority to apprehend, to examine and to emprison the malefactor, and so
having received perfect evidence and information of the cause, they are to send
it ready drawn and orderly digested up to the Mosko, to the officer of the
Chetfird, whereunto that Province is annexed: by whom it is referred and
propounded to the Emperors Counsel. But to determine in any matter criminal,
or to do execution upon the party offending, is more then their commission
will allow them to do.

Thirdly, if there be any public service to be done within that Province, (as
the publishing of any Law, or common order, by way of proclamation, collecting
of taxes and impositions for the Emperor, moistering of Soldiers, and sending
them forth at the day and to the place assigned by the Emperor or his
Counsel) all these and such like perteyne to their charge.

These Dukes and Dyacks are appointed to their place by the Emperor himself
and are changed ordinarily at every years end, except upon some special
liking or suit, the time be proroged for a year or two more. They are men of
themselves of no credit, nor favor with the people, where they govern, being
neither borne, nor brought up among them, not yet having inheritance of their
own there, or else where. Only of the Emperor they have for that service an
100. marks a year, he that has most, some fifty, some but thirty. Which
makes them more suspected and odious to the people, because being so bare, and
coming fresh and hungry upon them lightly every year, they rack and spoil
them without all regard of justice, or conscience. Which is easily tolerated
by the chief officers of the Chetfirds, to the end they may rob them again
and have a better booty when they call them to account: which commonly they
do at the end of their service, making an advantage of their injustice and
oppression over the poor people. There are few of them but they come to the
Pudkey or whip when their time is ended, which themselves for the most part
do make account of. And therefore they furnish themselves with all the spoil
they can for the time of their government, that they may have for both turns,
as well for the Emperor, and Lord of the Chetfird, as to reserve some good part
for themselves.

They that are appointed to govern abroad, are men of this quality: save that
in the four border towns that are of greatest importance, are set men of more
special valor and trust two in every town. Whereof one is ever of the
Emperors privy counsel. These four border towns are Smolensko, Vobsko,
Nouogrod, and Cazan, whereof three lie toward the Polonian and Sweden, one
bordereth far of upon the Chrim Tartar. These have larger commission then the
other Dukes of the Provinces that I spoke of before, and may do execution in
criminal matters. Which is thought behoofull for the Commonwelth: for incident
occasions that may happen upon the borders* that are far of, and may not stay
for direction, about every occurrent and particular matter from the Emperor
and his Counsel. They are changed every year (except as before) and have for
their stipend 700. rubbels a year he that has most: some have but 400* Many
of these places that are of greatest importance, and almost the whole country
is managed at this time, by the Godonoes and their clients.

The city of Mosko (that is the Emperors seat) is governed altogether by the
Emperors Counsel. All matters there both civil and criminal, are heard and
determined in the several courts, held by some of the said Counsel, that
reside there all the year long.

Only for their ordinary matters (as buildings, The Government of Mosko.
reparations, keeping of their streates decent and clean, collections, leuying
of taxes, impositions and such like) are appointed, two Gentlemen, and two
Dyacks or Secretaries, who hold a court together for the ordering of such
matters. This is called the Zempskey house. If any towns man suspect his
servant of theft or like matter, hither he may bring him to have him examined
upon the Pudkey, or other torture. Besides these two Gentlemen, and Secretaries
that order the whole City, there are Starusts or Aldermen for every several
company. The Alderman has his Sotskey or Constable, and the Constable has
certain Decetskeis or Decurions under him, which have the oversight of ten
households a piece, whereby every disorder is sooner spide, and the common
service has the quicker dispach. The whole number of Citizens poor and rich
are reduced into companies. The chief officers (as the Dyacks and Gentlemen)
are appointed by the Emperor himself, the Starust by the Gentlemen and
Dyacks, the Sotskoy by the Starust or Alderman, and the Decetskoies by the
Constables.

This manner of government of their Provinces and towns, if it were as well set
for the giving of justice indifferently to al sorts, as it is to prevent
innouations, by keeping of the Nobility within order, and the commons in
subjection, it might seem in that kind to be no bad nor vnpollitique way,
for the containing of so large a Commonwealth, of that breadth and length as
is the kingdom of Russia. But the oppression and slavery is so open, and so
great, that a man would marvel how the Nobility and people should suffer
themselves to be brought under it, while they had any means to avoid and
repulse it or being so strengthened as it is at this present, how the Emperors
themselves can be content to practice the same, with so open injustice and
oppression of their subjects, being themselves of a Christian profession.

By this it appears how hard a matter it were to alter the state of the
Russe government, An hard matter to alter the State of Russia.
as now it stands. First, because they have none of the Nobility able to
make head. As for the Lords of the four Chetfirds or Tetrarchies they are men
of no Nobility, but Dyacks advanced by the Emperor, depending on his favor,
and attending only about his own person. And for the Dukes that are appointed
to govern under them, they are but men of a titular dignity (as was said
before) of no power, authority, nor credit, save that which they have out of
the office, for the time they enjoy it. Which does purchase the^ no favor, but
rather hatred of the people, for as much as they see that they are set over
the^, not so much for any care to do them right and justice as to keep them
under in a miserable subjection, and to take the fliece from them, not once in
the year (as the owner from his sheep) but to poule and clip them all the
year long. Besides the authority and rule which they bear, is rent and
divided into many small pieces, being diverse of them in every great Shire,
limited besides with a very short time: which gives them no scope to make any
strength, nor to contriue such an enterprise, if happily they intended any
matter of innovation. As for the common people (as may better appear in the
description of their state and quality afterward set down) besides their
want of armor and practice of war (which they are kept from of purpose) they
are robbed continually both of their hearts and money, (besides other means)
sometimes by pretense of some service to be done for the common defense,
sometimes without any show at all of any necessity of Commonwealth or
Prince. So that there is no means either for Nobility, or people to attempt
any innovation, so long as the military forces of the Emperor which are the
number of 8000. at the least in continual pay) hold themselves fast and sure
unto him, and to the present state. Which needs they must do being of the
quality of Soldiers, and enjoying withal that free liberty of wronging and
spoiling of the commons at their pleasure, which is permitted them of purpose,
to make them have a liking of the present state. As for the agreement of the
Soldiers and commons, it is a thing not to be feared, being of so opposite and
contrary practice much one to the other. This desperate state of things at
home, makes the people for the most part to wish for some foreign invasion,
which they suppose to be the only means, to rid them of the heavy yoke of
this tyrannous government.

Of the Emperors Counsel.
The 11. Chapter.
THE Emperors of Russia give the name of cou^sellour to diverse of their chief
Nobility, rather for honors sake, then for any use they make of the^ about
their matters of state. These are called Boiarens without any addition, and may
be called Counselors at large. For they are seldom or never called to any
public consultation. They which are of his special and privy Counsel
indeed (whom he uses daily and ordinarily for all public matters perteining
to the State) have the addition of Dumnoy, and are named Dumnoy boiaren, or
Lords of the Counsel, their office or sitting Boarstua dumna.

Their names at this present are these in their order. The number and names of
the Cou^sellours of State.
First, Knez Feoder Ioanowich Methisloskey. 2. Knez Iuan Michailowich Glinskoy.
3. Knez Vasilie Iuanowich Suskoy Scopin. ( These three are accounted to be of
greater birth then wisdom taken in (as may seem) for that end, rather to
furnish the place with their honors and presence, then with their advise or
counsel.) 4. Knez Vasilie Iuanowich Suskoy, thought to be more wise then the
other of his name. 5. Knez Feoder Michailowich. 6. Knez Micheta Romanowich
Trowbetskoy. 7. Knez Timophey Romanowich Trowbetskoy. 8. Knez Andriew
Gregoriwich Curakine. 9. Knez Demetrie Iuanowich Forestine. 10. Knez Feoder
Iuanowich Forestine. 11. Bodan Iuanowich Sabaroue. 12. Knez Iuan Vasilowich.
13. Knez Feoder Demetriwich Shestinoue. 14. Knez Feoder Michailowich
Troyconioue. 15. Iuan Buterlyney. 16. Demetrie Iuanowich Godonoe. 17. Borrise
Federowich Godonoe, brother to the Empress. 18. Stephan Vasilowich Godonoe.
19. Gregory Vasilowich Godonoe. 20. Iuan Vasilowich Godonoe. 21. Feoder
Sheremitoue. 22. Andriew Petrowich Cleshenina. 23. Ignatie Petrowich Tatisloue.
24. Romain Michailowich Peua. 25. Demenshoy Iuanowich Cheremissen. 26. Romain
Vasilowich Alferioue. 27. Andriew Shalcaloue. 28. Vasilie Shalcaloue. 29.
Eleazar Wellusgin. 30. Drezheen Penteleoue. 31. Zapon Abramoue.

The four last of these are called Dumnoy deiakey or Lord Secretaries. Four
Secretaries.
These are all of the Emperors privy counsel though but few of them are
called to any consultation, for that all matters are advised and determined
upon by Borris Federowich Godonoe brother to the Empress, with some five or
six more whom it pleases him to call. If they come, they are rather to hear,
then to give counsel, and do so demean themselves. The matters occurrent
which are of state done within the Realm, are infourmed them at their sittings
by the Lords of the four Chetfirds, or Tetrarchies. Whereof mention is made
in the Chapter concerning the Government of their Provinces. Who bring in all
such letters as they receive from the Dukes, Dyacks, Captains, and other
officers of the Cities, and Castles, perteyning to their several quarter or
Chetfird, with other aduertisements, and inform the Counsel of them.

The like is done by the chief officer of every several office of Record: who
may come into the Counsel chamber, and inform them, as occasion incident to
his office does require. Besides matters of State, they consider of many
private causes, informed by way of supplication in very great numbers. Whereof
some they intertaine and determine, as the cause or means can procure favor.
Some they send to the offices whereto they perteyne by common course of Law.
Their ordinary days for their sitting, are mondaies, wensdaies, and fridayes.
Their time of meeting is commonly seven a clock in the morning. If there be any
extraordinary occasion that requires consultation on some other day, they have
warning by the Clarke of the counsel called Dorofcy Bushew, who receives
order from the Roserad or high Constable of the realm, to call them together
at the time appointed.

The Emperors customs Of the Emperors customs and other Revenues.
The 12. Chapter.
FOR the receiving of customs, The offices of receipt.
and other rentes belonging to the Crown, there are appointed diverse under
officers, which deliver over the same into the head treasury. The first is the
office of Dwoertsoua or Steward of the household. The second is the office of
the Chetfirds: which I comprehend under one, though it be divided into four
several parts, as was said before. The third is called Bulsha prechode, or
the great Income.

As touching the first, The Steward receiver of the crown la^d rentes.
which is the office of the Steward, it receives all the rents of the
Emperors inheritance, or Crown land, which they call Vochin. The Vochin or
Crown land conteyneth in it 36. towns with the territories or hundreds
belonging unto them. Whereof the chief that yield the greatest rents are
these: Alexandrisca, Corelska, Otfer, Sloboder, Danielska, Moisalskoy, Chara,
Sametska, Strararouse, ^ransoue, etc. The inhabitants or tenants of these and
the other towns, pay some rent money, some other rent duties (called Obrokey)
as certain Chetfirds, or measures of grain, wheat, rye, barley, oats, etc.
or of other victual, as Oxen, Sheep, Swannes, Geese, Hares, Hens, wild
foul, Fish, Hay, Wood, Honey, etc. Some are bound to sow for the Emperors
provision certain Akers of ground, and to make the corn ready for his use:
having for it an allowance of certain akers of ground for their own proper
use.

This provision for the household, specially of grain served in by the Tenants,
is a great deal more then is spent in his house, or in other allowance served
out in liuerie, or for the Emperors honor, called Schalouaney: for which use
there is bestowed very much both in grain, and other victual. This surplus of
provision is sold by the Steward to the best hand, and runs into the
Emperors treasury.

In the time of Iuan Vasilowich, father to this Emperor (who kept a more
Princely and bountiful house then the Emperor now does) this overplus of
grain, and other incomes into the Stewardes office, yielded to his treasury
not past 60. thousand rubbels yearly, but rises now by good husbanding of the
Steward Gregory Vasilowich Godonoe, to 230. thousand rubbels a year. And this
by the means of the Empress, and her kindred, specially ( Borris Fedorowich
Godonoe) that account it al their own that runs into the Emperors treasure.
Much of this surplusage that rises out of the rent provision, is employed to
the paime^t of the wages of his household officers, which are very many
attending at home, and purueying abroad.

The second office of receipt called the Chetfirds, The office of Chetfird.
(being divided into four several parts, as before was said) has four
head officers: which besides the ordering and government of the shires
contained within their several Chedfirds, have this also as a part of their
office, Tagla and Podat.
to receive the Tagla and Podat belonging to the Emperor, that rises out of
the four Chetfirds or Quarters. The Tagla is a yearly rent or imposition
raised upon every Wite or measure of grain, that grows within the land,
gathered by sworn men, and brought into the office. The Wite conteyneth sixty
Chetfirds. Every Chetfird is three bushelles English, or little less. The
Podat is an ordinary rent of money imposed upon every soake, or Hundred
within the whole Realm.

This Tagla and Podat bring in yearly to the Offices of the Chetfirdes a
great sum of money: as may appear by the particulars here set down. The
town and Province of Vobsko, pay yearly for Tagla and Podat about 18000.
rubbels. Nouogrod 35000. rubbels. Torshocke and Otfer 8000. rubbels. Razan
30000. rubbels. Morum 12000. rubbels. Colmigroe and Duyna 8000. rubbels.
Vologda 12000. rubbels. Cazan 18000 rubb. Vstiug 30000. rubbels. Rostoue 50000.
The city of Mosko 40000. rubbels. Sibierskoy 20000. rubbels. Castrome 12000.
rubbels. The total amounts to 400000. rubbels, or markr a year, which is
brought in yearly the first day of September, that is reckoned by them the
first day of the year.

The third (that is called the Bulsha Prechod, The office of Bulcha Prechod or
great income.
or great Income) receives all the customs that are gathered out of all the
priucipall towns and Cities within the whole Realm. Besides, the fees and
other duties which rise out of diverse smaller Offices, which are all brought
into this office of Bulsha Prechod. The towns of most trade that do yield
greatest custom, are these here set down. Mosko, Smolensko, Vobsko,
Nouogrod Velica, Strararouse, Torshocke, Otfer, Yaruslaue, Castrome, Nesna
Nouogrod, Cazan, Vologda. This custom out of the great towns is therefore
more certain, and easy to be reckoned, because it is set and rated precisely
what they shall pay for the custom of the year Which needs must be paid
into the said office, though they receive not so much. If it fall out to be
more, it runs al into the Emperors advantage.

The custom at Mosko for every year, The Emperors custom.
is 12000. rubbels. The custom of Smolensko, 8000. Vobsko 12000. rubbels.
Nouogrod velica 6000. rubbels. Stararouse by salt and other commodities 18000.
rubbels. Torshock 800. rubbels. Otfer 700. rubbels. Yarusslaue 1200 rubbels.
Castrome 1800. rubbels. Nesna Nouogrod 7000. rubbels. Cazan 11000. rubbels.
Vologda 2000. rubbels. The custom of the rest that are towns of trade, is
sometimes more, sometimes less as their traffike, and dealings with
commodities too and fro, falls out for the year.

This may be said for certain, The whole receipt of the Bulsha Prechod or
great income.
that the three tables of receipts belonging to this office of Bulsha Prechod,
when they receive lest, account for thus much, vz. The first table 160000.
rubbels. The second table 90000. rubbels. The third 70000. rubbels. So that
there comes into the office of Bulsha Prechod, at the least reckoning (as
appears by their books of customs) out of these and other towns, and makes
the sum of 340000. rubbles a year. Besides this custom out of the towns of
trade, there is received by this office of Bulsha Prechod, the yearly rent of
the common Bathstoaues, and Cabacks or drinking houses, which pertein to the
Emperor, Which (though it be uncertain for the just sum, yet because it is
certain and an ordinary matter, that the Russe will bath himself as well within
as without) yields a large rent to the Emperors treasury.

There is besides, Rents out of the judicial offices.
a certain mulct or penalty that grows to the Emperor out of every
judgment, or sentence that passes in any of his courts of Record in all
civil matters. This penalty, or mulct is 20. Dingoes or pence upon every
rubble or mark, and so ten in the hundred. Which is paid by the party that
is convict by law. He has besides for every name contained in the writs that
pass out of these courts, five Alteens. An Alteen is five pence sterling, or
there abouts. This is made good out of the office, whence the writ is taken
forth. Thence it goes to the office that keeps the lesser seal, where it
pays as much more to the Emperors use. This rises commonly to 3000. rubbels
a year, or thereabouts. Farther also out of the office of Roisbonia, where all
fellonies are tried, is received for the Emperor the half part of fellons
goods the other half goes the one part to the informer, the other to the
officers.

All this is brought into the office of Bulsha Prechod, or great income.
Besides the overplus or remainder that is saved out of the land rents, allotted
to diverse other offices: as namely to the office called Roserade, which has
lands and rentes assigned unto it to pay the yearly salaries of the
soldiers, or horsemen, that are kept still in pay. Which in time of peace when
they rest at home not employed in any service, is commonly cut off and paid
them by halfes, sometimes not the half: so that the remainder out of the
Roserade Office that is laid into the Emperors treasury, comes for the
most part every year to 250000. rubbels.

In like sort (though not so much) is brought in the surplus out of the
Strelletskoy offices which has proper lands for the payment of the Strelsey
men or gunners, as well those at Mosko, that are of the Emperors guard (12000. in
ordinary) as on the borders, and other garrison towns and castles. Likewise
out of the office of Prechase, Shisiuoy Nemshoy which has set allowance of
lands to maintain the forreyne mercenarie soldiers, as Poles, Sweadens,
Doutches, Scots, etc. So out of the office of Pusharskoy, (which has lands and
rents allowed for the provision of munition, great Ordinance, powder, Shot,
Salpeeper, Brimstone, Led, and such like) there is left somewhat at the years
end, that runs into the treasury. All these bring into the office of
Bulsha Prechod that which remains in their hand at the years end. Whence it
is delivered into the Emperors treasury. So that the whole sum that grows
to this office of Bulsha Prechod, or the great income (as appears by the
books of the said office) amounts to 800000. rubbels a year, or thereabouts.

All these offices, The Emperors treasure house within his castle of Mosko.
to wit, the office of the Steward, the four Chetfirds, and the Bulsha Prechod
deliver in their receiptes to the head treasury, that lies within the
Emperors house or castle at the Mosko. Where lie all his moneys, jewels,
crowns, scepters, plate, and such like, the chests, hutches, and bags being
signed by the Emperonrs themselves with their own seal. Though at this time
the L^ Borris Federowich Godonoe his seal and oversight supplieth for the
Emperor, as in all other things. The under officer at this time is one Stepan
Vasilowich Godonoe, Coosin germane to the said Borris, who has two Clearkes
allowed to serve under him in the office.

The su^me that grows to the Emperoures treasury in money only, for every
year. 1 Out of the Stewards office above the expense of his house 23000.
rubbels. The sum of the Emperors re^t money.
2 Out of the four Chetfirds for soake and head money 400000 rubbels. 3 Out of
the Bulsha Precod Office, or great incoome, for custom and other rents. 800000
rubbels. Sum 1430000 rubbles clear, besides all charges for his house, and
ordinary saleries of his soldiers otherwise discharged.


But besides this revenue that is paid all in money to the Emperors treasury
he receives yearly in furs, and other duties to a great value out of
Siberia, Pechora, Permia, and other places, which are sold or bartred away for
other foreign commodities to the Turkish Persian, Armenian, Georgian and
Bougharian Merchants that trade within his countries, besides others of
Christendom. What it makes in the whole (though the value can not be set
down precisely, as being a thing casual as the commodity may be got) it may be
gessed by that which was gathered the last year out of Siberia for the
Emperors custom, vz. 466. timber of Sables, five timber of Martrones, 180.
black Foxes, besides other commodities.

To these may be added their seazures, and confiscations upon such as are in
displeasure, which rises to a great sum Besides other their extraordinary
impositions, and exactions done upon their officers, Monasteries, etc. not for
any apparent necessity or use of the Prince, or common wealth, but of will and
custom: yet with some pretense of a Scythian, that is, gross and barbarous
policy (as may appear) by these few Sophismata, or counterfeit policies,
put in practice by the Emperors of Russia, all tending to this end to rob
their people, and to enrich their treasury. To this purpose this byword was
used by the late Emperor Iuan Vasilowich: That his people were like to his
beard. The oftener shaven, the thicker it would grow. Or like sheep, that must
needs be shorn once a year at the leasst: to keep them from being over
laden with their wool.

Means used to draw the wealth of the land into the Emperors Treasury.
TO prevent no extortions exactions, or briberies whatsoever, done upon the
commons by their Dukes, Diacks, or other officers in their Provinces: but to
suffer them to go on till their time be expired, and to suck themselves full.
Then to call them to the Praueush (or whippe) for their behavior, and to beat
out of them all, or the most part of the booty, (as the honey from the Be)
which they have wrung from the commons, and to turn it into the Emperors
treasury, but never any thing back again to the right owners, how great or
evident soever the injury be. To this end the needy Dukes, and Diacks, that
are sent into their provinces, serve the turn very well, being changed so
often (to wit) once a year: where in respect of their own, and the quality
of the people (as before was said) they might be continued for some longer
time, without all fear of innovation. For coming still fresh upon the
commons, they suck more egerly: like Tiberius the Emperors flies, that came
new still upon all old sore. To whom he was wont to compare his Praetors,
and other provincial officers.

2
TO make of these officers (that have robbed their people) sometimes a public
example, if any be more notorious then the rest: that the Emperor may seem to
mislike the oppressions done to his people, and transfer the fault to his ill
officers.

As among diverse other, was done by the late Emperor Iuan Vasilowich to a
Diack in one of his Provinces: that (besides many other extortions, and
briberies) had taken a goose ready dressed full of money. The man was brought to
the market place in Mosko. The Emperor himself present made an Oration. These
good people are they that would eat you up like bread, etc. Then asked he his
Polachies or executioners, who could cut up a goose, and commanded one of them
first to cut off his legs about the mids of the shinne then his arms above
his elbowes (asking him still if goose flesh were good meat) in the end to
choppe off his head: that he might have the right fashion of a goose ready
dressed. This might seem to have been a tolerable piece of justice (as
justice goes in Russia) except his subtle end to cover his own oppressions.

3
TO make an open show of want, when any great tax, or imposition is toward.
As was done by this Emperor Theodore Iuanowich, by the advice of some about
him at the beginning of his reign: when being left very rich (as was thought)
by his father, he sold most of his plate, and stamped some into coin: that he
might seem to want money. Whereupon presently out came a taxation.

4
TO suffer their subjects to give freely to the Monasteries (which for their
superstition very many do, specially in their last wills) and to lay up their
money and substance in them, to keep it more safe. Which all is permitted the^
without any restraint or prouiso, as was and is in some countries of
christendom. Whereby their Monasteries grow to exceeding great wealth. This
they do to have the money of the Realm better stored together, and more ready
for their hand, when they list to take it. Which many times is done without
any noise: the Friars being content rather to part from somewhat (as the
increase grows) then to loose all at once. Which they were made to doubt of
in the other Emperors days.

To this end Iuan Vasilowich late Emperor used a very strange practice, A
strange practice to get money.
that few Princes would have done in their greatest extremities. He resigned
his kingdom to one Velica Knez Simeon, the Emperors son of Gazan: as though
he meant to draw himself from al public doings to aquiet private life.
Toward the end of the year, he caused this new King to call in all Charters
granted to Bishoprics and Monasteries, which they had enjoyed many hundred
years before. Which were all cancelled. This done (as in dislike of the fact
and of the misgouernment of the new King) he resumed his scepter, and so was
content as in favor to the Church and religious men) that they should renew
their charters, and take them of himself: reserving and annexing to the Crown
so much of their lands, as himself thought good.

By this practice he wrung from the Bishoprics, and Monasteries (besides the
lands which he annexed to the Crown) an huge mass of money. From some 40,
from some 50, from some an hundred thousand rubbels. And this as well for the
increase of his treasury, as to abate the ill opinion of his hard government,
by a show of worse in an other man. Wherein his strange spirit is to be
noted: that being hated of his subjects, (as himself knew well enough) yet
would venture such a practice, to set an other in his saddle, that might have
rid away with his horse, while himself walked by on foot.

5
TO send their messengers into the Provinces, or shires where the special
commodities of their country grow, as furs, wax, honey, etc. There to
forestall and ingrosse sometime one whole commodity, sometime two, or more,
taking the^ at small prices what themselves list, and selling them again at an
excessive rate to their own merchants, and to merchants strangers. If they
refuse to buy them, then to force them unto it.

The like is done when any commodity either native or foreign (as cloth of
gold, broad cloth, etc*) thus engrossed by the Emperor, and received into
his treasury, happens to decay, or mar by long lying, or some other
casualtie. Which is forced upon the Merchants to be bought by them at the
Emperors price, whether they will or no. This last year of 1589. was
engrossed all the wax of the country: so that none might deal with that
commodity, but the Emperor only.

6
TO take up and engrosse in like sort sometime foreign commodities (as silks,
cloth, led, pearl, etc. brought into his realm by Turkish merchants,
Armenians, Bougharians, Poles, English, and other. And then to force his
merchants to buy them of his officers at his own price.

7
TO make a Monopoly for the time of such commodities as are paid him for re^t,
or custom, and to inhanse the price of the^, as furs, corn, wood, etc. What
time none must sell of the same kind of commodity, til the Emperors be all
sold. By this means he makes of his rent, corn, and other provision of
victual (as before was said) about 200000. rubb. or marks a year. Of his rent
wood, hay, etc. 30000. rubbels, or thereabouts.

8
IN every great town of his Realm he has a Caback or drinking house, where
is sold aquavitae (which they call Russe wine) mead, beer, etc. Out of these
he receives rent that amounts to a great sum of money. Some yield 800,
some 900, some a 1000 some 2000 or 3000. rubbels a year. Wherein besides the
base, and dishonorable means to increase his treasury, many foul faults
are committed. The poor laboring man, and artificer, many times spends all
from his wife, and children. Some use to lay in twenty, thirty, forty
rubbels, or more into the Caback, and vow themselves to the pot, till all that
be spent. And this (as he will say) for the honor of Hospodare, or the
Emperor. You shall have many there that have drunk all away to the very
skin, and so walk naked (whom they call Naga.) While they are in the Caback,
none may call them forth whatsoever cause there be, because he hinders the
Emperors revenue.

9
TO cause some of his Boiarens, or Nobles of his court, (whom he uses upon
trust) that have houses in the Mosko, to feign them selves robbed. Then to send
for the Zemsk^^ men, or Aldermen of the city, and to command them to find
out the robbery. In default of not finding it, to praue or seasse the city
for their misgouernment in 8000. 9000. or 10000. rubbels at a time. This is
many times practiced.

10
IN these exactions to show their sovereignty, sometime they use very plain,
and yet strange cauillations. As was that of Iuan Vasilowich, father to this
Emperor, after this sort. He sent into Permia fot certain loads of Cedar
wood, whereof he knew that none grew in that Country. The inhabitants
returned answer they could find none there. Whereupon he seassed their
Country in 12000. rubbels, as if they co^cealed the commodity of purpose.
Again he sent to the city of Mosko to provide for him a Colpack, or measure
full of live fleas for a medicine. They returned answer that the thing was
impossible. And if they could get them, yet they could not measure them, for
leaping out. Whereupon he praued, or beat out of their shinnes 7000. rubbels
for amulct.

By like cauillation he extorted from his Nobility 30000. rubbels, because he
missed of his game, when he went a hunting for the Hare: as if their hunting
and murdering of hares had bin the cause of it. Which the Nobility (as the
manner is) praued presently again upon the Mousicks, or common people of the
Country. This may seem a strange kind of extortion, by such pleasant cauils
to fliese his poor subjects in good sadness: but that it agrees with the
quality of those Emperors, and the miserable subjection of that poor
Country. These, and such like means are practiced by the Emperors of Russia,
to increase their Treasury.

Of the state of the Communaltie, or vulgar sort of people in the country of
Russia.
The 13. Chapter.
THE condition of the commons, and vulgar sort of people may partly be
understood by that which already has bin said concerning the manner of their
government, and the state of the Nobility, with the ordering of their
Provinces, and chief towns of the land. The servile and miserable estate of
the Russe people.
And first touching their liberty how it stands with them, it may appear by
this: that they are reckoned in no degree at all, nor have any suffrage nor
place in their Zabore, or high court of Parliament, where their laws and
public orders are concluded upon. Which commonly tend to the oppression of
the commons. For the other two degrees vz: of the Nobility, and Clergy,
which have a vote in the Parliaments (though far from that liberty that
ought to be in common consultations for the public benefit, according to
the measure and proportion of their degrees) are well contented that the whole
burden shall light upon the commons, so they may ease their own shoulders by
laying all upon them. Again into what servile condition their liberty is
brought, not only to the Prince, but to the Nobles, and Gentlemen of the
Country (who themselves also are but servile, specially of late years) it may
farther appear by their own acknowledgments in their supplications, and other
writings to any of the Nobles or chief officers of the Emperors. Wherein they
name and subscribe themselves Kolophey, that is, their villains, or
bondslaues: as they of the Nobility do unto the Emperor. This may truly be
said of them, that there is no servant nor bondslaue more awed by his Master,
nor kept down in a more servile subjection, then the poor people are, and
that universally, not only by the Emperor, but by his Nobility, chief
officers, and soldiers. So that when a poor Mousick meets with any of them
upon the high way, he must turn himself about, as not daring to look him on
the face, and fall down with knocking of his head to the very ground, as he
does unto his Idol.

Secondly concerning the lands, goods, and other possessions of the commons
they answer the name and lie common indeed without any fense against the
rapine, and spoil, not only of the highest, but of his Nobility, officers,
and soldiers. Besides the taxes, customs, seazures, and other public
exactions done upon them by the Emperor, they are so racked and pulled by the
Nobles, officers, and messengers sent abroad by the Emperor in his public
affairs, specially in the Yammes (as they call them) and thorough fair
towns, that you shall have many villages and towns of half a mile, and a
mile long, stand all uninhabited the people being fled all into other places by
reason of the extreme usage and exactions done upon them. So that in the way
toward Mosko, betwixt Vologda and Yaruslaueley (which is two nineties after
their reckoning, little more then an hundredth miles English) there are in sigt
fifty Darieunes or villages at the least, some half a mile, some a mile long
(that stand vacant) and desolate with out any inhabitant. The like is in all
other places of the realm (as is said by those that have better traveled the
country then my self had time, or occasion to do.

The great oppression over the poor Commons, makes the^ to have no courage in
following their trades: for that the more they have, the more danger they are
in, not only of their goods, but of their lives also. And if they have any
thing, they conceal it all they can, sometimes conueying it into Monasteries,
sometimes hiding it under the ground, and in woods, as men are wont to do
where they are in fear of foreign invasion. In so much that many times you
shall see them afraid to be known to any Boiuren or Gentleman of such
commodities as they have to sell. I have seen them sometimes when they have
said open their commodities for a liking (as their principal furs and such
like) to look still behind them, and toward every door: as men in some
fear, that looked to be set upon, and surprised by some enemy. Whereof asking
the cause, I found it to be this that they have doubted least some Noblema^ or
Sinaboiarskey of the Emperor had been in company, and so laid a train for
the^ to pray upon their commodities perforce.

This makes the people (though otherwise hardened to bear any toil) to give
themselves much to idleness and drinking* as passing for no more, then from hand
to mouth. And hereof it comes that the commodities of Russia (as was said
before) as wax, tallow, hydes, flax, hemp, etc.) grow and go abroad in far
less plenty then they were wont to do: because the people being oppressed
and spoiled of their gettings, are discouraged from their labors. Yet this
one thing is much to be noted, that in all this oppression there were three
brethren Merchants of late that traded together with one stock in common, that
were found to be worth 300000. rubbels in money, besides lands, cattels, and
other commodities. Which may partly be imputed to their dwellings far of from
the eye of the Court, vz. in Wichida, a 1000. miles from Mosko, and more. The
same are said by those that knew them to have set on work all the year long
ten thousand men in making of salt, carriages by cart, and boat, hewing of
wood, and such like: besides 5000 bondslaues at the least, to inhabit and till
their land.

They had also their physicians, surgeons, apothecaries, and all manner of
artificers of Doutches and others, belonging unto them. They are said to have
paid to the Emperor for custom to the sum of 23000. rubbles a year (for
which cause they were suffered to enjoy their trade) besides the mainteining of
certain garrisons on the borders of Siberia, which were near unto the^.
Wherein the Emperor was content to use their purse, till such time as they had
got ground in Siberia, and made it habitable, by burning, and cutting down
woods from Wichida to Perm, above a 1000. verse and then took it all away from
them perforce.

But this in the end being envied, and disdained, as a matter not standing with
their policy to have any so great, specially a Mousick, the Emperor began
first to to pull from them by pieces, sometimes 20000 rubbels at a time,
sometime more: till in the end their sons that now are, are well eased of
their stock, and have but small part of their fathers substance: the rest
being drawn all into the Emperors treasury. Their names were Iacoue,
Gregory, and Simon the sons of Onyka.

For the quality of their people otherwise, The tyranny and oppression over
their very minds and wits.
though there seems to be in them some aptness to receive any art (as
appears by the natural wits in the men, and very children) yet they excel
in no kind of common art, much less in any learning, or litterall kind of
knowledge: which they are kept from of purpose, as they are also from all
military practice: that they may be fitter for the servile condition, wherein
now they are, and have neither reason, nor valor to attempt innovation. For
this purpose also they are kept from traueling, that they may learn nothing,
nor see the fashions of other Countries abroad. You shall seldom see a Russe a
traveler, except he be with some Ambassador, or that he make a escape out of
his Country. Which hardly he can do, by reason of the borders that are
watched so narrowly, and the punishment for any such attempt, which is death if
he be taken, and all his goods confiscate. Only they learn to write, and to
read, and that very few of them. Neither do they suffer any stranger
willingly to come into their realm out of any civil Country, for the same
cause, farther then necessity of uttering their commodities, and taking in of
foreign does enforce them to do.

And therefore this year 1589. they consulted about the removing of all
Merchants strangers to the border towns, The jealousy of the Emperor
concerning his state.
to abide and have their residencie there, and to be more wary in admitting
other strangers hereafter into the Inland parts of the realm, for fear of
infection with better manners and qualities, then they have of their own. For
the same purpose also they are kept within the bounds of their degree by the
laws of their country: so that the son of a Mousick, artificer, or
husbandman, is ever a Mousick artificer, etc: and has no means to aspire any
higher: except having learned to write and read, he attain to the preferment
of a Priest, or Dyack. Their language is all one with the Slauonian, which is
thought to have been derived from the Russe tongue, rather then the Russe from
the Slauonian. For the people called Sclaui, are known to have had their
beginning out of Sarmatia, and to have termed themselves of their conquest
Sclauos, (that is) famous or glorious, of the word Sclaua, which in the Russe
and Slauonian tongue, signifies as much as Glory, or Fame. Though afterward
being subdued and trod upon by diverse nations, the Italians their neighbors
have turned the word to a contrary signification, and term every servant or
peasant by the name of Sclaue, as did the Romans by the Getes and Syrians, for
the same reason. The Russe character or letter is no other then the Greek,
somewhat distorted.

Concerning their trades, diet, apparel, and such like, it is to be noted in a
several chapter of their private behavior. This order that binds every man
to keep his rank, and several degree, wherein his forefathers lived before
him, is more meet to keep the subjects in a servile subjection* and so apt for
this and like Commonwealths, then to advance any virtue, or to breed any rare
or excellent quality in Nobility or Commons: as having no farther reward nor
preferment, whereunto they may bend their endeavors, and employ themselves to
advance their estate but rather procuring more danger to themselves, the more
they excel in any noble or principal quality.

Of their public Justice, and manner of proceeding in civil, and criminal
matters.
The 14. Chapter.
THeir courts of ciuiliustice for matters of contract, Courts of civil justice
three.
and other of like sort, are of three kinds, the one being subject unto the
other by way of appeal. The lowest Court (that seems to be appointed for
some ease to the subjects) is the office of the Gubnoy Starust, that signifies
an Alderman, and of the Sotskoy Starust, or Bailief of the soake or hundred,
whereof I spoke before in the ordering of the Provinces. These may end matters
among their neighbors within their soke, or several hundred, where they are
appointed under the Dukes and Diacks of the Provinces, to whom the parties may
remove their matter, if they cannot be agreed by the said ^abnoy, or Sotskoy
Starust.

The second is kept in the head towns of every Province or Shire, The Dukes
and Diacks Court.
by the said Dukes and Diacks, that are deputies to the four Lords of the
Chetfirds (as before was said) From these courts they may appeal, The high
Court of Mosko.
and remove their suites to the chief Court, that is kept at the Mosko, where
are resident the officers of the four Chetfirds. These are the chief Justices
or Judges, every of them in all civil matters that grow within their several
Chetfird or quarter, and may be either commenced originally before them, or
prosequuted out of the inferior Courts of the Shires by way of appeal.

Their commencing, Their manner of procedeing in Civil matters.
and proceeding in civil actions is on this manner. First, the plaintiff
puts up his supplication, wherein he declares the effect of his cause, or
wrong done unto him. Whereupon is granted unto him a Wepis, or warrant, which
he delivers to the Praestaue, or Sergeant, to do the arrest upon the party
whom he means to implead. Who upon the arrest, is to put in sureties to
answer the day appointed, or else stands at the Sergeants devotion, to be
kept safe by such means as he thinks good.

The Sergeants are many, and excel for their hard and cruel dealing toward
their prisoners, commonly they clappe irons upon them, as many as they can
bear, to wring out of them some larger fees. Though it be but for six pence,
you shall see them go with chains on their legs, arms, and neck. When
they come before the Judge, the plaintiff begins to declare his matter after
the content of his supplication. As for Attourneis Counselors, Procuratours
and Advocates to plead their cause for them, they have no such order, but every
man is to tell his own tale, and plead for himself, so well as he can.

If they have any witness, or other evidence, Ending of controversies by
kissing the Cross.
they produce it before the Judge. If they have none, or if the truth of the
cause cannot so well be decerned by the plea, or evidence on both parts: then
the Judge asks either party (which he thinks good plaintiff or defendant)
whether he will kiss the Cross, upon that which he avouches, or denies.
He that takes the Cross (being so offered by the Judge) is accounted clear,
and carries away the matter. This ceremony is not done within the Court or
office, but the party is carried to the Church by an officer, and there the
ceremony is done: the money in the mean while hanging upon a nail, or else
lying at the idols feet, ready to be delivered to the party, as soon as he
has kissed the Cross before the said Idol.

This kissing of the Cross (called Creustina chelouania) is as their corporal
oath. and accounted with them a very holy thing, Judgment by lotte.
which no man will dare to violate, or profane with a false allegation. If
both parties offer to kiss the Cross in a contradictorie matter, then they
draw lottes. The better lotte is supposed to have the right, and bears away
the matter. So the party convicted is adjudged to pay the debt or penalty
whatsoever, and withal to pay the Emperors fees, which is twenty pence upon
every mark, as before has been noted.

When the matter is thus ended, the party convicted is delivered to the
Sergeant, who has a writ for his warrant out of the office, to carry him to
the Praueush or Righter of Justice, if presently he pay not the money, or
content not the party. This Praueush or Righter, is a place near to the
office: where such as have sentence passed against them, and refuse to pay that
which is adjudged, are beaten with great cudgels on the shinnes, and calves of
their legs. Every forenoone from eight to eleven, they are set on the
Praueush, and beat in this sort till the money be paid. The afternoon and
night time, they are kept in chains by the Sergeant: except they put in
sufficient suerties for their appearance at the Praueush at the hour appointed.
You shall see forty or fifty stand together on the Praueush all on a row,
and their shinnes thus becudgelled, and bebasted every morning with a piteous
cry. If after a years standing on the Praueush, the party will not, or lack
wherewithal to satisfy his creditour, it is lawful for him to fell his wife,
and children, either out right, or for a certain term of years. And if the
price of them do not amount to the full payment, the creditour may take them
to be his bondslaues, for years or for ever, according as the value of the
debt requires.

Such kind of suites as lack direct evidence, or stand upon conjectures and
circumstances to be waighed by the Judge, draw of great length, and yield
great advantage to the Judge* and officers. If the suite be upon a bond, or
bill, they have for the most part good and speedy justice. Their bonds, or
bills are drawn in a very plain sort, The form of Russe bills or bonds.
after this tenor. I Iuan Vasileo have borrowed of Alphonasse Dementio, the
sum of one hundred rubbles of going money of Mosko. from the Kreshenea (or
hallowing of the water) until the Saburney voscreshenea (or Counsel Sunday)
without interest. And if this money rest unpaid after that day, then he shall
give interest upon the said money, after the common rate, as it goes among the
people, vz. for every five the sixth rubbell. Upon this there are witnesses,
Micheta Sydroueskoy, etc: Subscribed. This bill have I written Gabriell I
acouelesni, in the year 7096. The witnesses, and debtor (if he can write)
endorse their names on the back side of the bill. Other signing, or sealing
have they none.

When any is taken for a matter of crime (as treason, Proceeding in criminal
matters.
murder, theft, and such like) he is first brought to the Duke, and Diack,
that are for the Province where the party is attached, by whom he is
examined. The manner of examination in such cases, is all by torture, as
scourging with whips made of sinowes, or whitleather (called the Pudkey) as
big as a man's finger, which gives a sore lash, and enters into the flesh,
or by tying to a spit and rosting at the fire, sometimes by breaking and
wresting one of their ribs with a pavre of hot tongues, or cutting their
flesh under the nails, and such like.

The examination thus taken withal the proofs, and evidences that can be
alleged against the party, it is sent up to the Mosko to the Lord of the
Chetfird or Fourthparte, under whom the Province is, and by him is presented to
the Counsel table, to be read and sentenced there, where only judgment is
given in matter of life and death, and that by evidence upon information,
though they never saw nor heard the party, who is kept still in prison where
the fact was committed, and never sent up to the place where he is tried. If
they find the party guilty, they give sentence of death according to the
quality of the fact: which is sent down by the Lord of the Chetfird, to the
Duke and Diack to be put in execution. The prisoner is carried to the place of
execution with his hands bound, and a wax candle burning held betwixt his
fingers*

Their capital punishments are hanging, hedding, knocking on the head,
drowning, putting under the yse, setting on a stake, and such like. But for the
most part the prisoners that are condemned in Summer, are kept for the winter,
to be knocked in the head, and put under the yse. This is to be understood of
common persons. For theft, and murder, if they be committed upon a poor
Mousick by one of Nobility are not lightly punished, nor yet is he called to
any account for it. Their reason is, because they are accounted their Kolophey,
or bondslaues. If by some Sinaboiarskey, or Gentleman soldier, a murder or
theft be committed, peradventure he shall be imprisoned at the Emperors
pleasure. If the manner of the fact be very notorious, he is whipped
perchance, and this is commonly all the punishment that is inflicted upon them.

If a man kill his own servant little, or nothing is said unto him, for the
same reason: because he is accounted to be his Kolophey, or bondslaue, and so
to have right over his very head. The most is some small mulct to the
Emperor, if the party be rich: and so the quarrel is made rather against the
purse, then against the injustice. They have no written law, save only a small
book that contains the time, and manner of their sitting, order in
proceeding* and such other judicial forms and circumstances, but nothing to
direct the^ to give sentence upon right or wrong. Their only law is their
Speaking Law, that is, the pleasure of the Prince, and of his Magistrates and
officers. Which shows the miserable condition of this poor people, that are
forced to have them for their law, and direction of justice, against whose
injustice, and extreme oppression, they had need to be armed with many good,
and strong laws.

Their forces for the wars, with the chief officers and their salaries.
The 15. Chapter.
THe soldiers of Russia are called Sinaboiarskey, or the sons of Gentlemen:
because they are all of that degree, by virtue of their millitary profession.
For every soldier in Russia is a gentleman, and none are gentlemen, but only
the soldiers, that take it by descent from their ancestors: so that the son
of a gentleman (which is borne a soldier) is ever a gentleman, Soldiers by
birth and inheritance.
and a soldier withal* and professes nothing else but military matters. When
they are of years able to bear arms, they come to the office of Roserade, or
great Constable, and there present themselves: who enters their names, and
allotteth them certain lands to maintein their charges, for the most part the
same that their fathers enjoyed For the lands assigned to maintain the army,
are ever certain, annexed to this office without improuing, or detracting one
foot. But that if the Emperor have sufficient in wages, the rooms being full
so far as the land does extend already, they are many times deferred, and
have nothing allowed them, except some one portion of the land be divided into
two. Which is a cause of great disorder within that country: when a soldier
that has many children, shall have sometimes but one entertained in the
Emperors pay. So that the rest having nothing, are forced to live by unjust
and wicked shifts, that tend to the hurt and oppression of the Mousick, or
common sort of people. This inconvenience grows by mainteining his forces in
a continual succession. The whole number of his soldiers in continual pay, is
this. First, he has of his Dworaney, that is, Pensioners, or Guard of his
person, to the number of 15000. horsemen, with their captains, and other
officers, that are always in a readiness.

Of these 15000. horsemen, Degrees of horsemen.
there are three sorts or degrees, which differ as well in estimation, as in
wages, one degree from another. 1. Praetoriaenior such as attend the Emperors
person, 15000.
The first sort of them is, called Dworaney Bulshey, or the company of head
Pensioners, that have, some an hundred, some fourscore rubbels a year, and
none under 70. The second sort are called Seredney Dworaney, or the middle
rank of Pensioners. These have sixty, or fifty rubbels by the year, none
under forty. The third and lowest sort are the Dyta Boiarskey, that is, the
low Pensioners. Their salarie is thirty rubbels a year for him that has most,
some have but five and twenty, some twenty, none under twelve. Whereof the
half part is paid them at the Mosko, the other half in the field by the
general, when they have any wars, and are employed in service. When they
receive their whole pay, it amounts to 55000. rubbels by the year.

And this is their wages, besides lands allotted to every one of them, both to
the greater and the less, according to their degrees. Whereof he that has
least, has to yield him twenty rubbels, or marks by the year. Besides these
15000. horsemen* that are of better choice (as being the Emperors own guard when
himself goes to the wars, not unlike the Roman soldiers called
Praetoriani) are a 110. men of special account for their Nobility, and trust,
which are chosen by the Emperor, and have their names registered, Two other
troops to the number of 65000.
that find among them for the Emperors wars, to the number of 65000.
horsemen, with all necessaries meet for the wars after the Russe manner.

To this end they have yearly allowance made by the Emperor for themselves,
and their companies, to the sum of 40000. rubbels. And these 65000 are to
repair to the field every year on the borders toward the Chrim Tartar,
(except they be appointed for some other service) whether there be wars with
the Tartars, or not. This might seem peradventure somewhat dangerous for some
state, to have so great forces under the command of Noblemen to assemble every
year to one certain place. But the matter is so used, as that no danger can
grow to the Emperor, or his state by this means. 1. Because these noblemen
are many, to wit, an 110. in all, and changed by the Emperor so often as he
thinks good. 2. Because they have their livings of the Emperor, being
otherwise but of very small revenue, and receive this yearly pay of 40000.
rubbels, when it is presently to be paid forth again to the soldiers that
are under them. 3. Because for the most part they are about the Emperors
person, being of his Council either special, or at large. 4. They are rather
as paymasters, then Captains to their companies, themselves not going forth
ordinarily to the wars, save when some of them are appointed by special
order from the Emperor himself. Horsemen in continual pay 80000.
So the whole number of horsemen that are ever in a readiness, and in
continual pay, are 80000, a few more or less.

If he have need of a greater number (which seldom falls out) then he
interteineth of those Sinaboiarskey, that are out of pay, so many as he
needs: and if yet he want of his number, he gives charge to his Noblemen,
that hold lands of him, to bring into the field every man a proportionable
number of his servant (called Kolophey, such as till his lands) with their
furniture, according to the just number that he intends to make. Which the
service being done, presently lay in their weapons, and return to their
servile occupations again.

Of footmen that are in continual pay, Footmen in continual pay 12000.
he has to the number of 12000. all Gunners, called Strelsey. Whereof 5000.
are to attend about the City of Mosko, or any other place where the Emperor
shall abide, and 2000. (which are called Stremaney, Stresley, or Gunners at the
stirrup) about his own person at the very Court or house where himself
lodges. The rest are placed in his garrison Towns, till there be occasion to
have them in the field, and receive for their salarie or stipend every man
seven rubbels a year, besides twelve measures, a piece of Rye, and Oats. Of
mercenarie Soldiers, that are strangers (whom they call Nimschoy) they have at
this time 4300. Strangers mercenaries in pay 4300.
of Polonians: of Chirchasses (that are under the Polonians) about 4. thousand,
whereof 3500. are abroad in his garrisons: of Doutches and Scots about 150: of
Greeks, Turks, Danes and Sweadens, all in one band, an 100. or thereabouts.
But these they use only upon the Tartar side, and against the Siberians: as
they do the Tartar soldiers (whom they hire sometimes, but only for the
present) on the other side against the Polonian and Sweaden: thinking it best
policy so to use their service upon the contrary border.

The chief Captains or leaders of these forces, The chief captains or
leaders.
according to their names, and degrees, 1. The Voiauod or General.
are these which follow. First the Voyauodey Bulshaia, that is, the Great
Captain, or Lieftenant general under the Emperor. This commonly is one of
the four houses of the chief Nobility of the land: but so chosen otherwise,
as that he is of small valor, or practice in martial matters, being thought
to serve that turn so much the better, if he bring no other parts with him
save the countenance of his Nobility, to be liked of by the soldiers for
that, and nothing else. For in this point they are very wary that these two (to
wit) nobility, and power meet not both in one, specially if they see wisdom
with all, or aptness for policy.

Their great Voiauod or General at this present in their wars, is commonly
one of these four: Knez Feodor Iuanowich Methissoskey Knez Iuan Michailowich
Glinskoy, Cherechaskoy, and Trowbetskoy, all of great Nobility, but of very
simple quality otherwise: though in Glinskoy (as they say) there is somewhat
more then in the rest. To make up this defect in the Voiauod or General, 2.
Liefetenant general.
there is some other joined with him as Lieftenant General, of far less
nobility, but of more valor and experience in the wars then he, who
orders all things that the other countenanceth. At this time their principal
man, and most used in their wars, is one Knez Demetrie Iuanowich Forestine,
an ancient and expert captain, and one that has done great service (as they
say) against the Tartar, 3. Marshals of the field four.
and Polonian. Next under the Voiauod and his Lieftenant general are four
other that have the marshalling of the whole army divided among them, and may
be called the marshals of the field.

Every man has his quarter, or fourth part under him. Whereof the first is
called the Praua Polskoy, or right wing. The second is the Leuoy Polskoy, or
left wing. The third is Rusnoy Polskoy, or the broken ba^d* because out of this
there are chosen to send abroad upon any sudden exploit, or to make a rescue*
Four marshals deputies 8.
or supply, as occasion does require. The fourth Storeshouoy Polskoy, or the
warding band, Every one of these four Marshals have two other under them
(eight in all) that twice every week at the least must muster and train their
several wings or bands, and hold and give justice for all faults, and
disorders committed in the camp.

And these eight are commonly chosen out of the 110. (which I spoke of before)
that receive and deliver the pay to the soldiers. Under these eight are diverse
other Captains, Five Cotonels under Captains.
as the Gul auoy, Captains of thousands five hundreds and 100. The Petyde
Setskoy or Captains of fifties, and the Decetskies or Captains of tennes.

Besides the Voiauoda or General of the Army (spoken of before) they have two
other that bear the name of Voiauoda: whereof one is the Master of the great
Ordinance (called Naradna voiauoda) who has diverse under Officers, Six
Masters of the Artillery.
necessary for that service. The other is called the Voiauoda gulauoy, or the
walking Captain, The waking Captain.
that has allowed him 1000. good horsemen of principal choice, to range and
spy abroad, and has the charge of the running Castle, which we are to speak
of in the Chapter following. All these Captains, and men of charge must once
every day resort to the Bulsha voiauoda or General of the Army, to know his
pleasure, and to inform him, if there be any requisite matter perteining to
their office.

Of their mustering, and leuying of forces, manner of armor, and provision of
victual for the wars.
The 16. Chapter.
WHen wars are toward (which they fail not of lightly every year with the
Tartar, and many times with the Polonian and Sweden (the four Lords of the
Chetfirds send forth their summons in the Emperors name, Their order for
mustering.
to all the Dukes and Dyacks of the Provinces, to be proclaimed in the head
Towns of every Shire: that all the Sinaboiarskey, or sons of gentlemen make
their repair to such a border where the service is to be done, at such a
place, and by such a day, and there present them selves to such, and such
Captains. When they come to the place assigned them in the summons or
proclamation, their names are taken by certain Officers that have Commission
for that purpose from the Roserade, or high Constable, as Clerks of the
Bands.

If any make default and fail at the day, he is mulcted, and punished very
severely. As for the General and other chief Captains, they are sent thither
from the Emperors own hand, with such Commission and charge as he thinks
behoofull for the present service. When the soldiers are assembled, they are
reduced into their Bands, and companies, under their several Captains of
tennes, fifties, hundreds, thousands, etc. and these Bands into four Polskeis,
or Legions (but of far greater numbers then the Roman Legions were) under
their four great Leaders, which also have the authority of Marshals of the
field (as was said before.)

Concerning their armor they are but slightly appointed. The horsemans
furniture.
The common horseman has nothing else but his bow in his case under his right
arm, and his quiver and sword hanging on the left side: except some few that
bear a case of dagges, or a Iauelin, or short staff along their horse side.
The under captains will have commonly some piece of armor besides, as a shirt
of male, or such like. The General with the other chief Captains and men of
Nobility, will have their horse very richly furnished, their Saddles of cloth
of gold their Bridles fair bossed and tasselled with gold, and silk
frindge, bestudded with Pearl and precious stones, themselves in very fair
armor, which they call Bullatnoy, made of fair shining steel, yet covered
commonly with cloth of gold, and edged round with armin furre, his steel
helmet on his head of a very great price, his sword bow and arrows at his
side, his spear in his hand, with an other fair helmet, and his Shestapera,
or horsemans scepter carried before him. Their swords, bows, and arrows are
of the Turkish fashion. They practice like the Tartar to shoot forwards and
backwards, as they fly and retire.

The Strelsey or footeman has nothing but his piece in his hand, The
footemans furniture.
his striking hatchet at his back, and his sword by his side. The stock of
his piece is not made calieuer wise, but with a plain and strait stock
(somewhat like a fowling piece) the barrel is rudely and vnartificially made,
very heavy, yet shoots but a very small bullet. As for their provision of
victual, Provision of victual.
the Emperor allows none, either for Captain, or soldier, neither
provides any for them except peradventure some corn for their money. Every
man is to bring sufficient for him self, to serve his turn for four months,
and if need require to give order for more to be brought unto him to the
Camp from his tenant that tilleth his land, or some other place. One great
help they have, that for lodging and diet every Russe is prepared to be a
soldier beforehand. Though the chief Captains and other of account carry
tents with them after the fashion of ours, with some better provision of
victual then the rest. They bring with them commonly into the Camp for
victual a kind of dried bread, (which they call Sucharie) with some store of
meal, which they temper with water, and so make it into a ball, or small lump
of dowe, called Tollockno. And this they eat raw in stead of bread. Their
meat is bacon, or some other flesh or fish dried, after the Dutch manner. If
the Russe soldier were as hardy to execute an enterprise, as he is hard to
bear out toil and travail, or were otherwise as apt and well trained for the
wars, as he is indifferent for his lodging and diet, he would far exceed
the soldiers of our parts. Whereas now he is far meaner of courage and
execution in any warlike service. Which comes partly of his servile
condition, that will not suffer any great courage or valor to grow in him.
Partly for lack of due honor and reward, which he has no great hope of,
whatsoever service or execution he do.

Of their marching, charging, and other Martial discipline.
The 17. Chapter.
THE Russe trusts rather to his number, the^ to the valor of his soldiers,
or good ordering of his forces. Their marching or leading is without all order,
save that the four Polskey or Legions, (whereinto their army is divided)
keep themselves several under their ensigns, and so thrust all on together in
a hurrey, as they are directed by their General. Their Ensign is the image of
Saint George. The Bulsha Dworaney or chief horsemen, have every man a small
drum of brass at his saddle bow, Horsemens drums.
which he strikes when he gives the charge, or onset.

They have drums besides of a huge bigness, The horsemans manner of charging.
which they carry with them upon a board laid on four horses, that are
sparred together with chains, every drum having eight strikers, or drummers,
besides trumpets and shawmes, which they sound after a wild manner, much
different from ours. When they give any charge, or make any invasion, they make
a great hallowe or shoute altogether as loud as they can, which with the sound
of their trumpets, shawmes, and drums, makes a confused and horrible noise.
So they set on first discharging their arrows, then dealing with their
swords, which they use in a bravery to shake, and brandish over their heads,
before they come to strokes.

Their footmen (because otherwise they want order in leading) are commonly
placed in some ambush or place of advantage, The footemans charge.
where they may most annoy the enemy, with least hurt to themselves. If it be
a set battle, or if any great invasion be made upon the Russe borders by the
Tartar, they are set within the running or moving Castle (called Beza, The
walking Castle
or Gulay gorod) which is carried about with them by the Voiauoda gulauoy (or
the walking General) whom I spoke of before. This walking or moving Castle is
so framed, that it may be set up in length (as occasion does require) the
space of one, two, three, four, five, six, or seven miles: for so long it
will reach. It is nothing else but a double wall of wood to defend them on both
sides behind and before, with a space of three yardes or thereabouts betwixt
the two sides: so that they may stand within it, and have room enough to
charge and discharge their pieces, and to use their other weapons. It is closed
at both ends, and made with loope holes on either side, to lay out the nose of
their piece, or to push forth any other weapon. It is carried with the Army
wheresoever it goes, being taken into pieces, and so laid on carts sparred
together, and drawn by horse that are not seen, by reason that they are
covered with their carriage as with a shelfe or penthouse. When it is brought
to the place where it is to be used (which is devised and chosen out before by
the walking voiauod) it is planted so much as the present use requires,
sometime a mile long, sometimes two, sometimes three, or more: Which is soon
done without the help of any Carpenter, or instrument: because the timber is
so framed to claspe together one piece within an other: as is easily understood
by those that know the manner of the Russe building.

In this Castle stands their shot well fenced for advantage, specially
against the Tartar, that brings no ordinance, nor other weapon into the field
with him, save his sword, and bow and arrows. They have also within it diverse
field pieces, which they use as occasion does require. Of pieces for the field
they carry no great store, when they war against the Tartar: but when they
deal with the Polonian (of whose forces they make more account) they go
better furnished with all kind of munition, and other necessary provisions. It
is thought that no Prince of Christendom has better stoare of munition, then
the Russe Emperor. And it may partly appear by the Artillery house at Mosko,
where are of all sorts of great ordinance, all brass pieces, very fair, to
an exceeding great number.

The Russe soldier is thought to be better at his defense within some castle,
or town, then he is abroad at a set pitched field. Which is ever noted in the
practice of his wars, and namely at the siege of Vobsko, about eight years
since: where he repulsed the Polonian king Stepan Batore, with his whole army
of 100000. men, and forced him in the end to give over his siege, with the
loss of many of his best Captains and soldiers. But in a set field the Russe
is noted to have ever the worse of the Polonian, (...) Sweden.

If any behave himself more valiantly then the rest, or do any special piece
of service, the Emperor sends him a piece of gold, stamped with the Image
of Saint George on horseback. Reward for valor.
Which they hang on their sleeves, and set in their caps. And this is accounted
the greatest honor they can receive, for any service they do.

Of their Colonies, and mainteyning of their conquests, or purchases by force.
The 18. Chapter.
THE Russe Emperors of late years have very much enlarged their dominions,
and territories. Their first conquest after the Dukedom of Mosko (for before
that time they were but Dukes of Volodomer, as before was said) was the City,
and Dukedom of Nouograd on the West, and Northwest side: which was no small
enlargement of their dominion, and strengthening to them for the winning of the
rest. This was done by Iuan great grandfather to Theodore now Emperor, about
the year 1480. The same began likewise to encroach upon the countries of
Lituania, and Liuonia, but the conquest only intended, and attempted by him
upon some part of those countries, was pursued and performed by his son
Basileus, who first wan the city and dukedom of Plesko, afterward the city
and dukedom of Smolensko, and many other fair towns, with a large territory
belonging unto the^ about the year 1514. These victories against the Lettoes
or Lituanians in the time of Alexander their Duke, he atchiued rather by
advantage of civil dissentions, and treasons among themselves, then by any
great policy, or force of his own. But all this was lost again by his son
Iuan Vasilowich, about eight or nine years past, upon compositio^ with the
Polonian king Stepan Batore: whereunto he was forced by the advantages which
the Pole had then of him, by reason of the foil he had given him before, and
the disquietnes of his own state at home. Only the Russe Emperor, at this
time has left him on that side his country, the cities of Smolensko,
Vitobsko, Cheringo and Beala gorod in Lituania. In Liuonia, not a town, nor
one foot of ground.

When Basileus first conquered those countries, Lituania.
he suffered the natives to keep their possessions, and to inhabit all their
towns, only paying him a tribute, under the government of his Russe
Captains. But by their conspiracies and attempts not long after, he was taught
to deal more surely with them. And so coming upon them the second time, he
killed and carried away with him, three parts of four, which he gave or
sold to the Tartars that served him in those wars, and in steed of them
placed there his Russes, so many as might ouermatch the rest, with certain
garrisons of strength besides. Wherein notwithstanding this oversight was
committed, for that (taking away with him the vpland, or country people (that
should have tilled the ground, and might easily have been kept in order without
any danger, by other good policies) he was driven afterward many years
together, to vittaile the country (specially the great towns) out of his own
country of Russia, the soil lying there in the mean while wast, and untilled.

The like fell out at the port of Narue in Liefland, Narue.
where his son Iuan Vasilowich devised to build a town, and a castle on the
other side the river, (called Iuangorod) to keep the town, and country in
subjection. The Castle he caused to be so built, and fortified, that it was
thought to be invincible. And when it was finished, for reward to the Architect
(that was a Polonian) he put out both his eyes, to make him unable to build the
like again. But having left the natives all within their own country,
without abating their number or strength, the town and castle not long after
was betrayed, and surrendered again to the king of Sweden.

On the Southest side, they have got the kingdoms of Cazan, and Astracan.
These were won from the Tartar, by the late Emperor Iuan Vasilowich, father
to the Emperor that now is: the one about 35, the other about 33. years ago.
Northward out of the country of Siberia, he has laid unto his realm, a
great breadth and length of ground, from Wichida to the river of Obba, about a
1000. miles space: so that he is bold to write himself now, The great
Commander of Siberia.

The countries likewise of Permia, Permia and Pechora.
and Pechora* are a diverse people and language from the Russe, overcome not
long since, and that rather by threatening, and shaking of the sword, then by
any actual force: as being a weak and naked people, without means to resist.

That which the Russe has in his present possession, Means of holding his
chief towns.
he keeps on this sort. In his four chief border towns of Vobsko,
Smolensko, Astracan, and Cazan, he has certain of his Counsel not of
greatest nobility, but of greatest trust, which have more authority within
their precincts (for the countenauncing and strengthening of their government
there) then the other Dukes that are set to govern in other places, as was
noted before, in the manner of ordering their Provinces. These he changes
sometime every year, sometime every second or third year, but exceeds not
that time, except upon very special trust, and good liking of the party, and
his service: least by enlarging of their time, they might grow into some
familiarity with the enemy (as some have done) being so far out of sight.

The towns besides are very strongly fenced with trenches, castles, and store
of munition, and have garrisons within them, to the number of two or three
thousand a piece. They are stoared with vittaile if any siege should come upon
them, for the space of two or three years before hand. The four Castles of
Smolensko, Vobsko, Cazan and Astracan, he has made very strong to bear out
any siege: so that it is thought that those towns are impregnable.

As for the countries of Pechora and Permia, Means of holding the countries of
Pechora, Permia, and Siberia.
and that part of Siberia, which he has now under him, they are kept by as
easy means, as they were first got. vz. rather by showing, then by using of
arms. First, he has stoared the Country with as many Russes as there are
natives, and has there some few soldiers in garrison, enough to to keep
them under. Secondly, his officers and Magistrates there, are of his own Russe
people, and he changes them very often, vz. every year twice or thrice:
notwithstanding there be no great fear of any innovation. Thirdly, he
deuideth them into many small governments, like a staff broke in many small
pieces: so that they have no strength being severed, which was but little
neither when they were all in one. Fourthly, he provides that the people of
the Country have neither armor, nor money, being taxed and pilled so often as
he thinks good: without any means to shake of that yoke, or to relieve
themselves.

In Siberia (where he goes on in pursuing his conquest) he has diverse castles
and garrisons, to the number of six thousand soldiers of Russes, and
Polonians, and sends many new supplies thither, to plant and to inhabit, as
he wins ground. At this time besides he has gotten the kings brother of
Siberia, allured by certain of his Captains, to leave his own country by
offers of great intertainement, and pleasanter life with the Russe Emperor,
then he had in Siberia. He was brought in this last year, and is now with the
Emperor at Mosko well interteyned.

This may be said of the Russe practice, wheresoever he rules, either by right
of inheritance, or by conquest. First, he berieueth the country of armor and
other means of defense, which he permits to none, but to his Botarskies
only. Secondly, he robs them continually of their money, and commodities,
and leaves them bare with nothing but their bodies, and lives, within certain
years compass. Thirdly, he renteth and deuideth his territories into many
small pieces by several governments: so that none has much under him to make
any strength, though he had other oportunities. Fourthly, he governs his
Countries by men of small reputation, and no power of themselves, and
strangers in those places where their government lies. Fifthly, he changes
his governors once a year ordinarily, that there grow no great liking nor
intiernesse betwixt the people and them, nor acquaintance with the enemy if
they lie toward the borders. Sixthly, he appoints in one and the same place
adversary governors, the one to be as Controller of the other, as the Dukes
and Diacks: where (by means of their enuies and emulations) there is less
hurt to be feared by their agreement, and himself is better infourmed what is
done amiss. Seventhly, he sends many times into every Province secret
messengers of special trust about him as intelligences, to pry and harken out
what is doing, and what is a miss there. And this is ordinary, though it be
sudden, and unknown what time they will come.

Of the Tartars, and other borderers to the Country of Russia, with whom they
have most to do in war, and peace.
The 19. Chapter.
THeir neighbors with whom they have greatest dealings and intercourse, both
in peace and war, are first the Tartar: Secondly the Polonian whom the Russe
calls Laches, The Polonians called Laches by the Russe.
noting the first author or founder of the Nation, who was called Laches or
Leches, whereunto is added Po, which signifies People, and so is made Polaches,
that is, the People or posterity of Laches: which the Latins after their
manner of writing call Polanos. The third are the Swedens. The Polonians and
Swedens are better known to these parts of Europe then are the Tartars, that
are farther of from us (as being of Asia) and divided into many tribes,
different both in name, and government one from another. The greatest and
mightiest of them is the Chrim Tartar, The Chrim Tartar.
(whom some call the Great Cham) that lies South, and Southeastward from
Russia, and does most annoy the Country by often invasions, commonly once
every year, sometimes entering very far within the inland parts. In the year
1571. he came as far as the city of Mosko, with an army of 200000. men,
without any battle, or resistance at all, for that the Russe Emperor (then
Iuan Vasilowich) leading forth his army to encounter with him, marched a
wrong way: but as it was thought of very purpose, as not daring to adventure
the field, by reason that he doubted his nobility, and chief Captains, of
a meaning to betray him to the Tartar.

The city he took not, but fired the Subburbs, which by reason of the
buildinges (which is all of wood without any stone, The firing of Mosko by the
Chrim Tartar, in the year 1571.
brick, or lime, save certain out rooms) kindled so quickly, and went on with
such rage as that it consumed the greatest part of the city almost within the
space of four hours, being of 30. miles or more of compass. Then might you
have seen a lamentable spectacle: besides the huge and mighty flame of the
city all on light fire, the people burning in their houses and streates, but
most of all of such as labored to pass out of the gates farthest from the
enemy, where meeting together in a mighty throng, and so pressing every man
to prevent another, wedged themselves so fast within the gate, and streates
near unto it, as that three ranks walked one upon the others head, the
uppermost treading down those that were lower: so that there perished at that
time (as was said) by the fire and the press, the number of 800000 people, or
more.

The Chrim thus having fired the City, and fed his eyes with the sight of it
all on a light flame, returned with his army, and sent to the Russe Emperor a
knife (as was said) to stick himself withal: obbraiding this loss, and his
desperate case, as not daring either to meet his enemy in the field, nor to
trust his friends, or subjects at home. The principal cause of this continual
quarrel betwixt the Russe and the Chrim, is for the right of certain border
parts claimed by the Tartar, but possessed by the Russe. The Tartar alleges
that besides Astracan, and Cazan (that are the ancient posessio^ of the East
Tartar) the whole country from his bounds North and Westward, so far as the
city of Mosko, and Mosko it self, pertains to his right. Which seems to
have been true by the report of the Russes themselves, Homage done by the Russe
to the Chrim Tartar.
that tell of a certain homage that was done by the Russe Emperor every
year, to the Great Chrim or Cham, the Russe Emperor standing on foot and
feeding the Chrims horse, (himself sitting on his back) with oats out of his
own cap, in stead of a boule or maunger, and that within the castle of Mosko.
And this homage (they say) was done til the time of Basileus grandfather to
this man. Who surprising the Chrim Emperor by a stratagem, done by one of his
Nobility (called Iuan Demetrowich Belschey) was content with this ransom,
vz: with the changing of this homage into a tribute of furs: which
afterward also was denied to be paid, by this Emperors father.

Hereupon they continue the quarrel, the Russe defending his country, and
that which he has won, the Chrim Tartar inuading him once or twice every
year, sometime about Whitsontide, but oftener in Harvest. What time if the
great Cham or Chrim come in his own person, he brings with him a great army
of 100000. or 200000. men. Otherwise they make short, and sudden roads into
the country with lesser numbers, running about the list of the border as wild
geese fly, inuading and retiring where they see advantage.

Their common practice (being very populous) is to make diverse armies, The
manner of the Tartars fight, and armor.
and so drawing the Russe to one, or two places of the frontiers, to invade at
some other place, that is left without defense. Their manner of fight, or
ordering of their forces, is much after the Russe manner (spoken of before)
save that they are all horsemen, and carry nothing else but a bow, a sheafe of
arrows, and a falcon sword after the Turkish fashion. They are very expert
horsemen, and use to shoot as readily backward, as forward. Some will have a
horsmans staff like to a bore spear, besides their other weapons. The common
soldier has no other armor then his ordinary apparel, vz: a black sheeps
skin with the wool side outward in the day time, and inward in the night time,
with a cap of the same. But their Morseys or Noblemen imitate the Turk both in
apparel, and armor. When they are to pass over a river with their army, they
tie three or four horses together, and taking long poles or pieces of wood,
bind them fast to the tails of their horse: so sitting on the poles they drive
their horse over. At handie strokes (when they come to join battle) they are
accounted far better men then the Russe people, fearse by nature, but more
hardy and blouddy by continual practice of war: as men knowing no arts of
peace, nor any civil practice.

Yet their subtlety is more then may seem to agree with their barbarous
condition. The subtlety of the Tartar.
By reason they are practiced to invade continually, and to rob their
neighbors that border about them, they are very pregnant, and ready witted to
devise stratageams upon the sudden for their better advantage. As in their
war against Beala the fourth king of Hungary, whom they invaded with
500000. men, and obtained against him a great victory. Where among other,
having slain his Chauncellor, called Nicholas Schinick, they found about him
the Kings privy seal. Whereupon they devised presently to counterfeit letters
in the Kings name, to the cities and towns next about the place, where the
field was foughtt with charge that in no case they should convey themselves,
and their goods out of their dwellings, where they might abide safely without
all fear of danger, and not leave the country desolate to the possession of
so vile and barbarous an enemy, as was the Tartar nation, terming themselves
in all reproachful manner. For notwithstanding he had lost his carriages, with
some few straglers that had marched disorderly, yet he doubted not but to
recover that loss, with the access of a notable victory, if the savage
Tartar durst abide him in the field. To this purpose having written their
letters in the Polish character, by certain young men whom they took in the
field, and signed them with the Kings seal, they dispatched them forth to all
the quarters of Hungary, that lay near about the place. Whereupon the
Vngarians, that were now flying away with their goods, wives, and children upon
the rumor of the Kings overthrow, taking comfort of these counterfeit letters,
stayed at home. And so were made a pray, being surprised on the sudden by
this huge number of these Tartars, that had compassed them about before they
were aware.

When they besiege a town or fort, they offer much parle, and send many
flattering messages to persuade a surrendry: promising all things that the
inhabitants will require: but being once possessed of the place, they use all
manner of hostility, and erueltie. This they do upon a rule they have, vz:
that Justice is to be practiced but toward their own. They encounter not
lightly, but they have some ambush, whereunto (having once showed themselves,
and made some short conflict, they retire as repulfed for fear, and so draw
the enemy into it if they can. But the Russe being well acquainted with their
practice, is more wary of them. When they come a rouing with some small
number, they set on horseback counterfeit shapes of men, that their number may
seem greater.

When they make any onset, their manner is to make a great shoot, crying all
out together Olla Billa, Olla Billa, God help us, God help us. They contemn
death so much, as that they choose rather to die, then to yield to their enemy,
and are seen when they are slain to bite the very weapon, when they are past
striking, or helping of themselves. Wherein appears how different the Tartar
is in his desperate courage from the Russe, and Turk. For the Russe Soldier
if he begin once to retire puts all his safety in his speedy flight. And if
once he be taken by his enemy, he neither defends himself, nor entreats
for his life, as reckoning straight to die. The Turk commonly when he is past
hope of escaping, falls to entreaty, and casts away his weapon, offers
both his hands, and holds them up, as it were to be tied: hoping to save his
life, by offering himself bondslaue.

The chief booty the Tartars seek for in all their wars, is to get store
of captives, specially young boys, and girls, whom they sell to the Turks, or
other their neighbors. To this purpose they take with them great baskets made
like bakers panniers to carry them tenderly, and if any of them happen to
tyer, or to be sick on the way, they dash him against the ground, or some
tree, and so leave him dead: The soldiers are not troubled with keeping the
captives, and the other booty, for hindering the execution of their wars,
but they have certain bands that intend nothing else, appointed of purpose to
receive, and keep the captives and the other pray.

The Russe borders (being used to their invasions lightly every year in the
summer) keep few other cattle on the border parts, The Tartar religion.
save swine only, which the Tartar will not touch, nor drive away with him:
for that he is of the Turkish religion, and will eat no swines flesh. Of
Christ our Savior they confess as much as does the Turk in his Alkaron, vz.
that he came of the Angel Gabriel, and the Virgin Marie, that he was a great
Prophet, and shall be the Judge of the world at the last day. In other matters
likewise, they are much ordered after the manner and direction of the Turk:
having felt the Turkish forces when he won from them Azou, and Caffa, with
some other towns about the Euxine, or Black sea, that were before tributaries
to the Chrim Tartar. So that now the Emperor of the Chrims for the most part
is chosen some one of the Nobility whom the Turk does commend: whereby it is
brought now to that pass, that the Chrim Tartar gives to the Turk the tenth
part of the spoil, which he gets in his wars against the Christians.

Herein they differ from the Turkish religion, for that they have certain
idol puppets made of silk, or like stuff, of the fashion of a man, which
they fasten to the door of their walking houses, to be as Ianusses or keepers
of their house. And these idols are made not by all, but by certain religious
women, which they have among them for that, and like uses. They have besides
the image of their King or great Cham, of an huge bigness which they erect at
every stage: when the army marches: and this every one must bend and bow unto
as he passes by it, be he Tartar, or stranger. They are much given to
witchcraft, and ominous conjectures, upon every accident which they hear, or
see.

In making of marriages they have no regard of alliance or consanguinitie. Only
with his mother, sister, and daughter a man may not marry, and though he take
the woman into his house, and accompany with her, yet he accounts her not
for his wife, till he have a child by her. Then he begins to take a dowry
of her friends of horse, sheep, kyne, etc. If she be barren after a certain
time, he turns her home again.

Under the Emperor they have certain Dukes, The Tartar Nobility.
whom they call Morseis or Diuoymorseis: that rule over a certain number of
10000. 20000. or 40000. a piece, which they call hoords. When the Emperor has
any use of them to serve in his wars, they are bound to come, and to bring
with them their soldiers to a certain number, every man with his two horse at
the least, the one to ride on, the other to kill, when it comes to his turn
to have his his horse eat. For their chief vittaile is horse flesh, The
Tartar diet.
which they eat without bread, or any other thing with it. So that if a Tartar
be taken by a Russe, he shall be sure lightly to find a horse leg, or some
other part of him at his saddle bow.

This last year when I was at the Mosko, came in one Kiriach Morsey, nephewe
to the Emperor of the Chrims that now is (whose father was Emperor before)
accompanied with 300. Tartars, and his two wives, whereof one was his brothers
widow. Where being entertained in very good sort after the Russe manner; he
had sent unto his lodging for his welcome, to be made ready for his supper and
his companies, two very large and fat horses, ready flawed in a sledde. They
prefer it before other flesh, because the meat is stronger (as they say)
then beef, mutton, and such like. And yet (which is marvel) though they
serve all as horsemen in the wars, and eat all of horse flesh, there are
brought yearly to the Mosko to be exchanged for other commodities 30. or 40.
thousand Tartar horse, which they call Cones. They keep also great herds of
kine, and flocks of black sheep, rather for the skins and milk (which they
carry with them in great bottels) then for the use of the flesh, though
sometimes they eat of it. Some use they have of rise figs, and other fruits.
They drink milk or warm blood, and for the most part card them both
together. They use sometimes as they traueile by the way, to let their horse
blood in a vain, and to drink it warm, as it comes from his body.

Towns they plant none, The Tartars dwelling.
nor other standing buildings, but have walking houses which the Latins call
Veij, built upon wheels like a shepherds cottage. These they draw with them
whithersoeur they go, driving their cattaile with them. And when they come to
their stage, or standing place, they plant their cart houses very orderly in a
rank: and so make the form of streets, and of a large town. And this is the
manner of the Emperor himself, who has no other seat of his Empire but an
Agora, or town of wood, that moves with him whithersoeuer he goes. As for
the fixed and standing building used in other countries, they say they are
unwholesome and unpleasant.

They begin to move their houses and cattaile in the spring time from the
South part of their Country toward the North parts. And so driving on til
they have grased all up to the farthest part Northwarde, they return back
again toward their South country (where they continue all the winter) by
ten or twelve miles a stage: in the mean while the grass being sprung up
again, to serve for their cattaile as they return. From the border of the
Shalcan toward the Caspian sea, to the Russe frontiers, they have a goodly
Country, specially on the South and Southeast parts, but lost for lack of
tillage.

Of money they have no use at all, and therefore prefer brass and steel
before other metals, specially bullate, which they use for swords, knives, and
other necessaries. As for gold and silver they neglect it of very purpose, (as
they do all tillage of their ground) to be more free for their wandering kind
of life, and to keep their Country less subject to inuasio^s. Which gives
them great advantage against all their neighbors, ever inuading, and never
being invaded. Such as have taken upon them to invade their Country (as of
old time Cyrus and Darius Hystaspis, on the East and Southeast side) have done
it with very ill success: as we find in the stories written of those times.
For their manner is when any will invade them, to allure and draw them on by
flying and reculing (as if they were afraid) till they have drawn them some
good way within their country. Then when they begin to want vittaile and
other necessaries (as needs they must where nothing is to be had) to stop up
the passages, and enclose them with multitudes. By which stratagem (as we read
in Laonicus Chalcacondylas in his Turkish story) they had welnigh surprised
the great and huge army of Tamerlan, but that he retired with all speed he
could, toward the river Tanais, or Don, not without great loss of his men,
and carriages.

In the story of Pachymerius the Greek (which he wrote of the Emperors of
Constantinople from the beginning of the reign of Michael Palaeologus to the
time of Andronicus the elder) I remember he tells to the same purpose of
one Nogas a Tartarian captain under Cazan the Emperor of the East Tartars (of
whom the City and kingdom of Cazan may seem to have taken the denomination)
who refused a present of Pearl and other jewels sent unto him from Michael
Palaeologus: asking withal, for what use they served, and whither they were
good to keep away sickness, death, or other misfortunes of this life, or no.
So that it seems they have, ever or long time been of that mind to value
things no further, then by the use, and necessity for which they serve.

For person and complexion they have broad and flat visages, of a tanned
color into yellowe and black, fearse and cruel looks, thin haired upon the
upper lip, and pit of the chinne, light and nimble bodied, with short
legs, as if they were made naturally for horsemen: whereto they practice
themselves from their childehood, seldom going afoote about any business.
Their speech is very sudden and loud, speaking as it were out of a deep
hollow throat. When they sing you would think a kowe lowed, or some great
bandogge howled. Their greatest exercise is shooting, wherein they train up
their children from their very infancy, not suffering them to eat, til they
have shot near the mark within a certain sca^tling. They are the very same
that sometimes were called Scythae Nomades, or the Scythian Shepherds, by the
Greeks and Latins. Some think that the Turks took their beginning from the
nation of the Chrim Tartars. Of which opinion is Laonicus Chalcocondylas the
Greek Historiographer, in his first book of his Turkish story. Wherein he
follows diverse very probable conjectures: The first taken from the very name
it self, for that the word Turk signifies a shepherd, or one that follows
a vagrant and wild kind of life By which name these Scythian Tartars have
ever been noted, being called by the Greeks (...), or the Scythian shepherds.
His second reason, because the Turks (in his time) that dwelt in Asia the
less, to wit, in Lydia, Coria, Phrygia, and Cappadocia, spoke the very same
language that these Tartars did, that dwelt betwixt the river Tanais or Don.
and the country of Sarmatia, which (as is well known) are these Tartars
called Chrims. At this time also the whole nation of the Turks differ not much
in their common speech from the Tartar language, Thirdly because the Turk and
the Chrim Tartar agree so well together, as well in religion, as in matter of
traffic never inuading, or iniurying one another: save that the Turk (since
Laonicus his time) has encroached upon some Towns upon the Euxin sea, that
before perteined to the Chrim Tartar. Fourthly, because Ortogules son to
Oguzalpes, and (father to Otoman the first of name of the Turkish nation) made
his first roads out of those parts of Asia, upon the next borderers, till he
came toward the countries about the hill Taurus, where he overcame the
Greeks that inhabited there: and so enlarged the name and territory of the
Turkish nation, til he came to Eubaa and Attica, and other parts of Greece.
This is the opinion of Laonicus, who lived among the Turks in the time of
Amurat the sixth Turkish Emperor, about the year 1400. when the memory of
their original was more fresh: and therefore the likelier he was to hit the
truth.

There are diverse other Tartars that border upon Russia, as the Nagaies, the
Cheremissens, the Mordwites, the Chircasses, and the Shalcans, which all differ
in name more then in regiment, or other condition, from the Chrim Tartar except
the Chircasses that border Southwest, The Nagay Tartar the cruellest.
toward Lituania, and are far more civil then the rest of the Tartars, The
Chircasce the ciuilest Tartar.
of a comely person, and of a stately behavior, as applying themselves to the
fashion of the Polonian. Some of them have subjected themselves to the kings of
Poland, and profess Christianity. The Nagay lies Eastwarde, and is reckoned
for the best man of war among all the Tartars, but very savage, The
Cheremissen Tartar.
and cruel above all the rest. The Cheremifrn Tartar, that lies betwixt the
Russe and the Nagay, are of two sorts, the Lugauoy (that is of the valley) and
the Nagornay, or of the hilly country. These have much troubled the Emperors
of Russia. And therefore they are content now to buy peace of the^, under
pretense of giving a yearly pension of Russe commodities, to their Morseis, or
Diuoymorseis, that are chief of their tribes For which also they are bound to
serve the^ in their wars, under certain conditions. They are said to be just
and true in their dealings: and for that cause they hate the Russe people, whom
they account to be double, and false in all their dealing. And therefore the
common sort are very unwilling to keep agreement with them, but that they are
kept in by their Morseis, or Dukes for their pensions sake.

The most rude and barbarous is counted the Mordwit Tartar, The Mordwite Tartar
the most barbarous of the rest.
that has many self fashio^s, and strange kinds of behavior, differing from
the rest. For his religion, though he acknowledge one god, yet his manner is to
worship for god, that living thing, that he first meets in the morning and to
swear by it all that whole day whether it be horse, dog, catte, or whatsoever
else it be. When his friend dies, he kills his best horse, and having flayed
off the skin he carries it on high upon a long pole, before the corpse to the
place of burial. This he does (as the Russe says) that his friend may have
a good horse to carry him to heaven: but it is likelier to declare his love
toward his dead friend, in that he will have to die with him the best thing
that he has.

Next to the kingdom of Asiracan, that is the farthest part Southeastward of
the Russe dominion, lies the Shalcan, and the country of Midia: whither the
Russe merchants trade for raw silks, syndon, saphion, skins, and other
commodities. The chief towns of Media where the Russe tradeth, are, Derbent
(built by Alexander the great, as the inhabitauntes say) and Zamachie where
the staple is kept for raw silks. Their manner is in the Spring time to
revive the silke-wormes (that lie dead all the Winter) by laying them in the
warm sun, and (to hasten their quickening that they may sooner go to work)
to put them into bags, and so to hang them under their childrens arms. As for
the worm called Chrinisin (as we call it chrymson) that makes colored silk,
it is bred not in Media, but in Assyria. This trade to Derbent and Samachie for
raw silks, and other commodities, of that country, as also into Persia, and
Bougharia, down the river Volgha, and through the Caspian sea, is permitted
as well to the English, as to the Russe merchants, by the Emperors last Grant
at my being there. Which he accounts for a very special favor, and might
prove in deed very beneficial to our English merchants, if the trade were
well, and orderly used.

The whole nation of the Tartars are utterly void of all learning, and without
written Law. Yet certain rules they have which they hold by tradition,
common to all the Hoords for the practice of their life. Which are of this
sort. First, To obey their Emperor and other Magistrates, whatsoever they
command about the public service. 2. Except for the public behoof, every
man to be free and out of controlement. 3. No private man to possess any
lands, but the whole country to be as a common. 4. To neglect all daintiness
and variety of meats, and to content themselves with that which comes next
to hand, for more hardness, and readiness in the executing of their affairs.
5. To wear any base attire, and to patch their clothes, whether there be any
need or not: that when there is need, it be no shame to wear a patcht
coat. 6 To take, or steal from any stranger whatsoever they can get, as
being enemies to all men, save to such as will subject themselves to them. 7.
Toward their own hoorde and nation to be true in word, and deed. 8. To
suffer no stranger to come within the Realm, If any do, the same to be
bondslaue to him that first takes him, except such merchants and other as have
the Tartar Bull, or pastport about them.

Of the Permians, Samoites, Of the Permians, Samoites, and Lappes.
The 20. Chapter.
THe Permians and Samoits that lie from Russia, north and Northeast, are
thought likewise to have taken their beginning from the Tartar kind. And it may
partly be gessed by the fashion of their countenance, as having all broad, and
flat faces, as the Tartars have, The Permans.
except the Chirchasses. The Permians are accounted for a very ancient people.
They are now subject to the Russe. They live by hunting, and trading with their
furs, as does also the Samoyt, that dwells more toward the North sea. The
Samoites.
The Samoyt has his name (as the Russe says) of eating himself: as if in
times past, they lived as the Cannibals, eating one another. Which they make
more probable, because at this time they eat all kind of raw flesh, whatsoever
it be, even the very carrion that lies in the ditch. But as the Samoits
themselves will say, they were called Samoie, that is of themselves, as though
they were Indigenae, or people bredde upon that very soil, that never changed
their seat from one place to another, as most nations have done. They are
subject at this time to the Emperor of Russia,

I talked with certain of them, and find that they acknowledge one God: The
Samoites religion.
but represent him by such things as they have most use and good by. And
therefore they worship the Sun, the Ollen, the Losh, and such like. As for the
story of Slata Baba, Slata Baba or the golden Hag.
or the Golden hagge. (which I have read in some mappes, and descriptions of
these countries, to be an idol after the form of an old woman) that being
demanded by the Priest, gives them certain Oracles, concerning the success,
and event of things, I have found it to be but a very fable. Only in the
Province of Obdoria upon the Sea side, near to the mouth of the great river
Obba, there is a rock, which naturally (being somewhat helped by imagination)
may seem to bear the shape of a ragged woman, with a child in her arms (as
the rock by the North cape the shape of a Friar) where the Obdorian Samoites
use much to resort, by reason of the commodity of the place for fishing: and
there sometime (as their manner is) conceive, and practice their sorceries, and
ominous coniecturings about the good, or bad speed of their iourneies,
fishings, huntings, and such like,

They are clad in Seal skins, The Samoits habit and behavior.
with the hearie side outward down as low as the knees, with their breeches
and netherstocks of the same, both men and women. They are all black haired,
naturally beardlesse. And therefore the men are hardly discerned from the women
by their looks: save that the women wear a lock of hair down along both their
ears. They live in a manner a wild and a savage life, rouing still from one
place of the country to another, without any property of house or land more
to one then to an other. Their leader or directer in every company, is their
Papa or Priest.

On the North side of Russia next to Corelia, The Lappes.
lies the country of Lappia, which reaches in length from the farthest point
Northward, (toward the Northcape) to the farthest part Southeast (which the
Russe calls Sweetness or Holy nose, the English men Capegrace) about 345.
verst or miles. From Sweetness to Candelox by the way of Versega (which
measures the breadth of that country) is 90. miles or there abouts. The whole
country in a manner is either lakes, or mountains, which toward the Sea
side are called Tondro, because they are all of hard and craggy rock, but the
inland parts are well furnished with woods, that grow on the hills sides,
the lakes lying between. Their diet is very bare and simple. Bread they have
none, but feed only upon fish and foul. They are subject to the Emperor of
Russia, and the two Kings of Sweden, and Denmark: which all exact tribute and
custom of them (as was said before) but the Emperor of Russia bears the
greatest hand over them, and exact of them far more then the rest. The
opinion is that they were first termed Lappes of their brief and short speech.
The Russe deuideth the whole nation of the Lappes into two sorts. The one they
call Nowremanskoy Lapary, that is, the Noruegian Lappes: because they be of the
Danish religion. For the Danes and Noruegians they account for one people. The
other that have no religion at all, but live as brute and Heathenish people,
without God in the world, they call Dikoy Lopary, or the wild Lappes.

The whole nation is utterly unlearned, having not so much as the use of any
Alphabet, or letter among them. For practice of witchcraft and sorcery, they
pass all nations in the world. Though for the enchaunting of ships that
sail along their coast (as I have heard it reported) and their giving of winds
good to their friends, and contrary to other, whom they mean to hurt by tying
of certain knots upon a rope (somewhat like to the tale of Aeolus his windbag)
is a very fable, devised (as may seem) by themselves, to terrify sailers for
coming near their coast. Their weapons are the long bow, and handgunne,
wherein they excel, as well for quicknes to charge and discharge, as for
nearness at the mark, by reason of their co^ntinuall practice (whereto they
are forced) of shooting at wild foul. Their manner is in Summer time to come
down in great companies to the sea side, to Wardhuyse, Cola, Kegor, and the
bay of Vedagoba, and there to fish for Codd, Salmon, and But-fish, which they
sell to the Russes, Danes, and Noruegians, and now of late to the English me^
that trade thither with cloth, which they exchange with the Lappes and
Corelians for their fish, oil, and furs, whereof also they have some store.
They hold their mart at Cola on S. Peter's day: what time the Captain of
Wardhuyse (that is resiant there for the king of Denmark) must be present, or
at least send his deputy to set prices upon their stockfish, train oil,
furs, and other commodities: as also the Russe Emperors customer, or tribute
taker, to receive his custom, which is ever paid before any thing can be
bought, or sold, When their fishing is done, their manner is to draw their
carbasses, or boats on shore, and there to leave them with the keele turned
vpwardes, till the next spring tide. Their travail too and fro is upon sleds,
drawn by the Olen deer: which they use to turn a grasing all the Summer time,
in an island called Kilden (of a very good soil compared with other parts of
that country) and toward the winter time, when the snow begins to fall,
they fetch them home again, for the use of their sledde.

Of their Ecclesiastical state, with their Church offices.
The 21. Chapter.
COncerning the government of their Church, it is framed altogether after the
manner of the Greek: as being a part of that Church, and never acknowledging
the jurisdiction of the Latin Church, usurped by the Pope. That I may keep a
better measure in describing their ceremonies, the^ they in the using them
(wherein they are infinite) I will note briefly: First, what Ecclesiastical
degrees, or offices they have with the jurisdiction, and practice of them.
Secondly, what doctrine they hold in matter of religion. Thirdly, what
leiturgie, or form of service they use in their Churches, with the manner of
their administering the Sacraments. Fourthly, what other strange ceremonies,
and superstitious devotions are used among them.

Their offices, The church officers.
or degrees of Churchmen, are as many in number, and the same in a manner both
in name and degree, that were in the Western churches. First they have their
Patriarch, then their Metropolites, their Archbishops, their Vladikey or
Bishops, their Protopapes or Archpriests, their Papes or Priests, their
Deacons, Friars, Monks, Nuns, and Eremites.

Their Patriarch, The Patriarch.
or chief directer in matter of religion until this last year, was of the
city of Constantinople (whom they called the Patriarch of Sio) because being
driven by the Turk out of Constantinople (the seat of his Empire) he removed
to the I Will Sio, sometimes called Chio, and there placed his Patriarchiall sea.
So that the Emperors, and clergy of Russia, were wont yearly to send gifts
thither, and to acknowledge a spiritual kind of homage, and subjection due to
him, and to that Church. Which custom they have held (as it seems) ever
since they professed the Christian religion. Which how long it has been I
could not well learn, for that they have no story, or monument of antiquity
(that I could hear of) to show what has been done in times past within their
country concerning either Church, or common wealth matters. Only I hear a
report among them, that about three hundred years since, there was a marriage
betwixt the Emperor of Constantinople, and the kings daughter of that
country: who at the first denied to join his daughter in marriage with the
Greek Emperor, because he was of the Christian religion. Which agrees well
with that I find in the story of Laonicus Chalcacondylas concerning Turkish
affairs in his fourth book: where he speaks of such a marriage betwixt
John the Greek Emperor, and the Kings daughter of Sarmatia. And this argues
out of their own report, that at that time they had not received the Christian
religion: as also that they were converted to the faith, and withal perverted
at the very same time, receiving the doctrine of the gospel, corrupted with
superstitions even at the first when they took it from the Greek Church,
which it self then was degenerate, and corrupted with many superstitions, and
foul errors, both in doctrine and discipline: as may appear by the story of
Nicephorus Gregoras, in his 8. and 9. books. But as touching the time of their
conversion to the christian faith, I suppose rather that it is mistaken by the
Russe, for that which I find in the Polonian story, the second book the third
chapter: where is said that about the year 990. Vlodomirus Duke of Russia,
married one Anne sister to Basilius, and Constantinus brothers, and Emperors
of Constantinople. Whereupon the Russe received the faith and profession of
Christ. Which though it be somewhat more ancient then the time noted before
out of the Russe report, yet it falls out al to one reckoning, touching this
point, vz: in what truth and sincerity of doctrine the Russe received the
first stamp of religion: for as much as the Greek church at that time also was
many ways infected with error, and superstition.

At my being there, The translation of the Patriarchicall sea from
Constantinople or Sio, to Mosko.
the year 1588 came unto the Mosko the Patriarch of Constantinople, or Sio)
called Hieronomo being banished as some said) by the Turk, as some other
reported by the Greek clergy deprived. The Emp. being given altogether to
superstitious devotions, gave him great intertainment. Before his coming to
Mosko, he had been in Italy with the Pope, as was reported there by some of his
company. His arra^d was to co^sult with the Emp. concerning these points. First
about a league to pass betwixt him and the king of Spain, as the meetest
Prince to join with him in opposition against the Turk. To which purpose also
Ambassages had passed betwixt the Russe and the Persian. Likewise from the
Georgians to the Emperor of Russia, to join league together, for the inuading
of the Turk on all sides of his dominion: taking the advantage of the simple
quality of the Turk that now is. This treaty was helped forward by the
Emperors Ambassador of Almaine, sent at the same time to solicit an invasion
upon the parts of Polonia, that lie toward Rusland, and to borrow money of the
Russe Emperor, to pursue the war for his brother Maximilian, against the
Swedens son now king of Poland. But this consultation concerning a league
betwixt the Russe and the Spaniard, (which was in some forwardnes at my coming
to Mosko, and already one appointed for Embassage into Spain) was marred by
means of the overthrow given to the Spanish king by her Majesty, the Queen of
England, this last year. Which made the Russe Emperor and his Counsel, to
give a sadder countenance to the English Ambassador at that time: for that
they were disappointed of so good a policy, as was this conjunction supposed
to be betwixt them and the Spanish.

His second purpose (whereto the first served as an introduction) was in
revenge of the Turk and the Greek clergy, that had thrust him from his
seat, to treat with them about the reducing of the Russe church under the Pope
of Rome. Wherein it may seem that coming lately from Rome, he was set on by
the Pope, who has attempted the same many times before, though all in vain:
and namely in the time of the late Emperor Iuan Vasilowich, by one Anthony his
Legate. But thought this belike a far better mean to obtain his purpose by
treaty and mediation of their own Patriarch. But this not succeeding, the
Patriarch fell to a third point of treaty, concerning the resignation of his
Patriarchship, and translation of the Sea from Constantinople, or Sio, to the
city of Mosko. Which was so well liked, and entertained by the Emperor (as a
matter of high religion, and policy) that no other treaty (specially of
foreign Ambassages) could be heard, or regarded, till that matter was concluded.

The reason wherewith the Patriarch persuaded the translating of his Sea to the
city of Mosko, were these in effect. First, for that the Sea of the Patriarch
was under the Turk that is enemy to the faith. And therefore to be removed
into some other country of Christian profession. Secondly, because the Russe
church was the only natural daughter of the Greek at this time, and holds
the same doctrine and ceremonies with it the rest being all subject to the
Turk, and fallen away from the right profession. Wherein the subtle Greek to
make the better market of his broken ware, advanced the honor that would
grow to the Emperor, and his country: to have the Patriarchs seat,
translated into the chief city, and seat of his Empire. As for the right of
translating the sea, and appointing his successor, he made no doubt of it,
but that it perteyned wholly to himself.

So the Emperor, and his Counsel, The Patriarchship of Constantinople
translated to Mosko.
with the principal of his clergy being assembled at the Mosko, it was
determined that the Metropolite of Mosko, should become Patriarch of the whole
Greek Church, and have the samefull authority, and jurisdiction that
perteined before to the Patriarch of Constantinople, or Sio. And that it might
be done with more order, and solemnity, the 25. of January, 1588. the Greek
Patriarch accompanied with the Russe Clergy, went to the great Church of
Precheste, or our Lady, within the Emperors castle (having first wandered
thorough the whole city in manner of a procession, and blessing the people
with his two fingers) where he made an Oration, and delivered his resignation
in an instrument of writing, and so laid down his Patriarchicall staff.
Which was presently received by the Metropolite of Mosko, and diverse other
ceremonies used about the inauguration of this new Patriarch.

The day was holden very solemn by the people of the city, who were
commanded to forbear their works, and to attend this solemnity. The great
Patriarch that day was honored with rich presents sent him from the Emperor
and Empress, of plate, cloth of gold, furs, etc: carried with great pomp
thorough the streats of Mosko and at his departing received many gifts more,
both from the Emperor, Nobility, and Clergy. Thus the Patriarchship of
Constantinople, or Sio, (which has continued since the Counsel of Nice) is
now translated to Mosko, or they made believe that they have a Patriarch with
the same right and authority that the other had. Wherein the subtle Greek has
made good advantage of their superstition, and is now gone away with a rich
booty into Poland, whither their Patriarchship be current or not.

The matter is not unlike to make some schism betwixt the Greek and Russe
Church, if the Russe hold this Patriarchship that he has so well paid for,
and the Greeks elect an other withal, as likely they will, whither this man
were banished by the Turk, or deprived by order of his own Clergy. Which
might happen to give advantage to the Pope, and to bring over the Russe Church
to the sea of Rome (to which end peradventure he devised this stratageam, and
cast in this matter of schism among them) but that the Emperors of Russia
know well enough, by the example of other christian Princes, what inconvenience
would grow to their state and country, by subiecting themselves to the Romish
sea. To which end the late Emperor Iuan Vasilowich was very inquisitiue of
the Popes authority over the Princes of christendom, and sent one of very
purpose to Rome, to behold the order, and behauior of his court.

With this Patriarch Hieronimo was driven out at the same time by the great
Turk, one Demetrio Archbishop of Larissa: who is now in England, and
pretends the same cause of their banishment by the Turk (to wit) their not
admitting of the Popes new Calendar, for the alteration of the year. Which how
unlikely it is, may appear by these circumstances. First, because there is no
such affection, nor friendly respect betwixt the Pope and the Turk, as that
he should banish a subject for not obeying the Popes ordinance, specially in a
matter of some sequel for the alteration of times within his own countries.
Secondly, for that he makes no such scruple in deducting of times, and keeping
of a just and precise account from the incarnation of Christ: whom he does not
acknowledge otherwise then I noted before Thirdly, for that the said Patriarch
is now at Naples in Italy, where it may be ghessed he would not have gone
within the Popes reach, and so near to his nose, if he had been banished for
opposing himself against the Popes decree.

This office of Patriarchship now translated to Mosko, The Patriarchs
jurisdiction.
bears a superior authority over all the Churches, not only of Russia, and
other the Emperors dominions, but thorough out all the churches of
Christendom that were before under the Patriarch of Constantinople, or Sio: or
at least the Russe Patriarch imagines himself to have the same authority.
He has under him as his proper diocese the Province of Mosko, besides other
peculiars. His court, or office is kept at the Mosko.

Before the creation of this new Patriarch, The Metropolites.
they had but one Metropolite, that was called the Metropolite of Mosko. Now
for more state to their Church, and new Patriarch, they have two Metropolites,
the one of Nouogrod velica, the other of Rostoue. Their office is to receive of
the Patriarch such Ecclesiastical orders, as he thinks good, and to deliver
the charge of them over to the Archbishops: besides the ordering of their own
diocese.

Their Archbishops are four: of Smolensko, Archbishops.
Cazon, Vobsko, and Vologda. The parts of their office is all one with the
Metropolits: save that they have an under jurisdiction, as Suffraganes to the
Metropolites, and superiors to the Bishops. The next are the Vladikeis,
Bishops.
or Bishops, that are but six in all: of Crutitska, of Rezan, of Otfer and
Torshock, of Collomenska, of Volodemer, of Susdalla. These have every one a
very large diocese: as dividing the rest of the whole country among them.

The matters perteyning to the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction.
of the Metropolites, Archbishops, and Bishops are the same in a manner that
are used by the Clergy in other parts of Christendom. For besides their
authority over the Clergy, and ordering such matters as are meare
Ecclesiastical, their jurisdiction extends to all testamentarie causes,
matters of marriage, and diuorcementes, some pleas of injuries, etc. To which
purpose also they have their Officials, or Commissaries (which they call
Boiaren Vladitskey) that are Laymen of the degree of Dukes, Their Gentlemen
co^missaries.
or Gentlemen, that keep their Courts and execute their jurisdiction. Which
besides their other oppressions over the common people, reign over the
Priests: as the Dukes and Diacks do over the poor people, within their
precincts. As for the Archbishop or Bishop himself, he bears no sway in
deciding those causes, that are brought into his Court. But if he would
moderate any matter, he must do it by entreaty with his Gentleman official.
The reason is, because these Boiarskey, or Gentlemen officials, are not
appointed by the Bishops, but by the Emperor himself, or his Counsel, and
are to give account of their doings to none but to them. If the Bishop can
entreat at his admission to have the choice of his own official, it is
accounted for a special great favor. But to speak it as it is, the Clergy
of Russia, as well concerning their lands and revenues, as their authority and
jurisdiction, are altogether ordered and over ruled by the Emperor, and his
Counsel, and have so much, and no more of both as their pleasure does permit
the^. They have also their assistants or several Counsels (as they call them)
of certain Priests that are of their diocese, residing within their
cathedral cities, to the number of four and twenty a piece. These advise
with them about the special and necessary matters belonging to their charge.

Concerning their rentes and revenues to mainteyne their dignities, The church
revenues.
it is somewhat large. The Patriarchs yearly rents out of his lands (besides
other fees) is about 3000. rubbels, or marks. The Metropolites and Archbishops
about 2500. The Bishops some a 1000. some 800. some 500, etc. They have had
some of them (as I have heard say) ten or twelve thousand rubbels a year: as
had the Metropolite of Nouograde.

Their habit or apparel (when they show themselves in their Pontificalibus
after their solemnest manner) is a miter on their heads, The habit of their
clergy men.
after the popish fashion, set with pearl and precious stone, a cope on
their backs, commonly of cloth of gold, embrodered with pearl, and a
Crosiers staff in their hands, laid over all with plate of silver double
guilt, with a cross or sheepheardes crook at the upper end of it. Their
ordinary habit othewise when they ride or go abroad, is a hood on their
heads of black color, that hangs down their backs, and stands out like
a bongrace before. Their upper garment (which they call Reis) is a gown or
mantell of black Damask, with many listes or gardes of white Satin laid
upon it, every guard about two fingers broad, and their Crosiers staff
carried before them. Themselves follow after, blessing the people with their
two forefingers, with a marvelous grace.

The election, The election of Bishops.
and appointing of the Bishops and the rest, perteyneth wholly to the Emperor
himself. They are chosen ever out of the Monasteries: so that there is no
Bishop, Archbishop, nor Metropolite, but has been a Monk, or Friar before.
And by that reason they are, and must all be unmarried men, for their vow of
chastity when they were first shorn. When the Emperor has appointed whom
he thinks good, he is invested in the Cathedral church of his dioces, with
many ceremonies, much after the manner of the Popish inauguration. They have
also their Deanes, and their Archdeacons.

As for preaching the word of God, The learning and exercise of the Russe
Clergy.
or any teaching, or exhorting such as are under them, they neither use it, nor
have any skill of it: the whole Clergy being utterly unlearned both for
other knowledge, and in the word of God. Only their manner is twice every
year, vz. the first of September (which is the first day of their year) and on
S. John Baptists day, to make an ordinary speech to the people, every
Metropolite, Archbishop, and Bishop in his Cathedral Church, to this or like
effect: That if any be in malice toward his neighbor, he shall leave off
his malice: if any have thought of treason or rebellion against his Prince, he
beware of such practice: if he have not kept his fasts, and vows, nor done his
other duties to the holy Church, he shall amend that fault, etc. And this is a
matter of form with them, uttered in as many words, and no more, in a manner,
then I have here set down. Yet the matter is done with that grace and
solemnity, in a pulpit of purpose set up for this one Act, as if he were to
discourse at large of the whole substance of divinity. At the Mosko the
Emperor himself is ever present at this solemn exhortation.

As themselves are void of all manner of learning, so are they wary to keep
out all means that might bring any in: as fearing to have their ignorance, and
ungodliness discovered. To that purpose they have persuaded the Emperors,
that it would breed innovation, and so danger to their state, to have any
novelty of learning come within the Realm. Wherein they say but truth, for
that a man of spirit and understanding, helped by learning and liberal
education, can hardly endure a tyrannical government. Some years past in the
other Emperors time, there came a Press and Letters out of Polonia, to the
city of Mosko, where a printing house was set up, with great liking and
allowance of the Emperor himself. But not long after, the house was set on
fire in the night time, and the press and letters quite burnt up, as was
thought by the procurement of the Clergy men.

Their Priests (whom they call Papaes are made by the Bishops, Priests.
without any great trial for worthiness of gifts, before they admit them, or
ceremonies in their admission: save that their heads are shorn (not shaven
for that they like not) about an hand breadth or more in the crown, and that
place anointed with oil by the Bishop: who in his admission puts upon the
priest, first his surplesse, and then sets a white cross on his breast of
silk, or some other matter, which he is to wear eight days, and no more: and
so gives him authority to say and sing in the Church, and to administer the
Sacraments.

They are men utterly unlearned, which is no marvel, forasmuch as their
makers, the Bishops themselves (as before was said) are clear of that
quality, and make no farther use at al of any kind of learning, no not of the
scriptures themselves, save to read and to sing them. Their ordinary charge
and function is to say the Leiturgie, to administer the Sacraments after their
manner, to keep and deck their idols, and to do the other ceremonies usual
in their Churches. Their number is great because their towns are parted into
many small parishes, without any descretion for dividing them into competent
numbers of households, and people for a just congregation: as the manner in all
places where the means is neglected, for increasing of knowledge, and
instruction toward God. Which cannot well be had, where by means of an
unequal partition of the people, and parishes, there follows a want and
inequality of stipend for a sufficient ministry.

For their priests, The Russe Priests can marry but once.
it is lawful to marry for the first time. But if the first wife dye, a second
he cannot take, but he must loose his Priesthood, and his living withal. The
reason they make out of that place of Saint Paul to Timothy 1. 3. 2. not well
understood thinking that to be spoken of diverse wives successively, that the
Apostle speaks of at one and the same time. If he will needs marry again
after his first wife is dead, he is no longer called Papa, but Rospapa, or
Priest quondam. This makes the Priests to make much of their wives, who are
accounted as the matrones, and of best reputation among the women of the parish.

For the stipend of the Priest, their manner is not to pay him any tenthes of
corn, or ought else: but he must stand at the devotion of the people of his
parish, and make up the incommes toward his maintenance, so well as he can, by
offerings, shriftes, marriages, burials, dirges, and prayers for the dead and
the living. (which they call Molitua) Forbesides their public service within
their Churches, their manner is for every private man to have a prayer said
for him by the Priest, upon any occasion of business whatsoever, whether he
ride, go, sail, plough, or whatsoever else he does. Which is not framed
according to the occasion of his business, but at random, being some of their
ordinary and usual Church-prayers. And this is thought to be more holy, and
effectual, if it be repeated by the Priests mouth, rather then by his own.
They have a custom besides to solemnize the Saints day, that is patron to
their Church once every year. What time al their neighbors of their country,
and parishes about, come in to have prayers said to that Saint for themselves,
and their friends: and so make an offering to the Priest for his pains. This
offering may yield them some ten pounds a year, more or less, as the
patron, or Saint of that Church is of credit, and estimation among them. The
manner is on this day (which they keep anniuersarie) for the priest, to hire
diverse of his neighbor priests to help him: as having more dishes to dress
for the Saint, then he can well turn his hand unto. They use besides to visit
their parishioners houses, with holy water, and perfume, commonly once a
quarter: and so having sprinkled, and besensed the goodman and his wife with
the rest of their household, and household stuff, they receive some devotion
more or less, The priests maintenance.
as the man is of ability. This and the rest laid altogether, may make up for
the priest toward his maintenance, about thirty or forty rubbels a year:
whereof he pays the tenth part to the Bishop of the Dioces.

The Papa or Priest is known by his long tufts of hair, The priests attire.
hanging down by his ears, his gown with a broad cape, and a walking staff
in his hand. For the rest of his habit, he is apparelled like the common sort.
When he says the Leiturgie or service, within the Church, he has on him his
surplesse, and sometimes his coape, if the day be more solemn. They have
besides their Papaes or Priests, their Churnapapaes (as they call them) that
is; Black Priests: that may keep their Benefices, though they be admitted
Friars withal within some Monastery. They seem to be the very same that
were called Regular Priests in the Popish Church. Under the Priest, is a
Deacon in every Church, that does nothing but the office of a parish Clearke.
As for their Protopapaes, or Archepriestes, and their Archdeacons (that are
next in election to be their Protopopas) they serve only in the cathedral
Churches.

Of Friars they have an infinite rabble far greater the^ in any other
country, Friars.
where popery is professed. Every city, and good part of the country, swarmeth
full of them. For they have wrought (as the popish Friars did by their
superstition and hypocrisy) that if any part of the Realm be better and
sweeter then other, there stands a Friery, or a monastery dedicated to some
Saint.

The number of them is so much the greater, not only for that it is augmented
by the superstition of the country, but because the Friars life is the safest
from the oppressions, and exactions, that fall upon the Commons. Which causes
many to put on the Friars weed, as the best armor to bear off such blows.
Besides such as are voluntary, there are diverse that are forced to shire
themselves Friars, upon some displeasure. These are for the most part of the
chief Nobility. Diverse take the Monasteries as a place of Sanctuary, and there
become Friars, to avoid some punishment, that they had deserved by the laws
of the Realm. For if he get a Monastery over his head, and there put on a
cool before he be attached, it is a protection to him for ever against any
law, for what crime soever: except it be for treason. But this Prouiso goes
withal, that no man comes there, (except such as are commanded by the
Emperor to be received) but he gives them lands, or brings his stock with
him, and puts it into the common Treasury. Some bring a 1000 rubbels, and
some more. None is admitted under 3. or 4. hundred.

The manner of their admission is after this sort. Their manner of shiring
Friars.
First, the Abbot strippeth him of all his secular or ordinary apparel. Then
he puts upon him next to his skin, a white flannel shirt, with a long
garment over it down to the ground, girded unto him with a broad leather belt.
His uppermost garment is a weed of Garras, or Say, for color and fashion,
much like to the upper weed of a Chimney-sweeper. Then is his crown shorn a
hand breadth, or more close to the very skin, and these, or like words
pronounced by the Abbot, whiles he clippeth his hair: As these hairs are
clipped of, and taken from thy head: so now we take thee, and separate thee
clean from the world, and worldly things, etc. This done, he annoynteth his
crown with oil, and puts on his cool: and so takes him in among the
Fraternity. They vow perpetual chastity, and abstinence from flesh.

Besides their lands, (that are very great) they are the greatest merchants
in the whole country, and deal for all manner of commodities. Some of their
monasteries dispe^d in lands, one thousand, or two thousand rubbels a year.
There is one Abbey called Troits, that has in lands and fees, the sum of
100000. rubbels, or marks a year. It is built in manner of a Castle, walled
round about, with great ordinance planted on the wall, and contains within
it a large breadth of ground, and great variety of building. There are of
Friars within it, (besides their officers, and other servants) about 700. The
Empress that now is, has many vows to Saint Sergius, that is patron there:
to entreat him to make her fruitful, as having no children by the Emperor her
husband. Lightly every year she goes on pilgrimage to him from the Mosko, on
foot, about 80 English miles, with five or six thousand women attending upon
her, all in blewe liueries, and four thousand soldiers for her guard. But
Saint Sergius has not yet heard her prayers, though (they say) he has a
special gift and faculty that way.

What learning there is among their Friars, The Friars learning.
may be known by their Bishops, that are the choice men out of all their
monasteries. I talked with one of them at the City of Vologda, where (to try
his skill) I offered him a Russe Testament, and turned him to the first Chapter
of Saint Mathewes Gospel. Where he began to read in very good order. I
asked him first what part of scripture it was, that he had read? he answered,
that he could not well tell. How many Evangelists there were in the new
Testament? He said he knew not. How many Apostles there were? He thought
there were twelve. How he should be saved? Whereunto he answered me with a
piece of Russe doctrine, that he knew not whether he should be saved, or no:
but if God would Poshallouate him, or gratify him so much, as to save him, so
it was, he would be glad of it: if not, what remedy. I asked him, why he
shore himself a Friar? He answered, because he would eat his bread with
peace. This is the learning of the Friars of Russia, which though it be not to
be measured by one, yet partly it may be gessed by the ignorance of this man,
what is in the rest.

They have also many Nunneries, Nunneries.
whereof some may admit none but Noblemens widows, and daughters, when the
Emperor means to keep them unmarried, from continuing the blood or stock,
which he would have extinguished. To speak of the life of their Friars, and
Nuns, it needs not, to those that know the hypocrisy, and uncleanness of
that Cloyster-broode. The Russe himself (though otherwise addicted to all
superstition) speaks so fowlly of it, that it must needs gain silence of
any modest man.

Besides these, Eremites.
they have certain Eremites, (whom they call Holy men) that are like to those
Gymnosophists, for their life and behavior: though far unlike for their
knowledge, and learning. They use to go stark naked, save a clout about their
middle, with their hair hanging long, and wildely about their shoulders, and
many of them with an iron collar, or chain about their necks, or mids, even
in the very extremity of winter. These they take as Prophets, and men of great
holiness, giving them a liberty to speak what they list, without any
co^troulme^t, though it be of thee very highest himself. So that if he reprove
any openly, in what sort soever, they answer nothing, but that it is Po
gracum, that is, for their sins. And if any of them take some piece of sale
ware from any man's shop, as he passes by, to give where he list, he thinks
himself much beloved of God, and much beholding to the holy man, for taking it
in that sort.

Of this kind there are not many, because it is a very hard and cold
profession, to go naked in Russia, specially in Winter. Among other at this
time, they have one at Mosko, that walks naked about the streets, and
inueyeth commonly against the state, and government, especially against the
Godonoes, that are thought at this time to be great oppressors of that Common
wealth. An other there was, that dyed not many years ago (whom they called
Basileo) that would take upon him to reprove the old Emperor, Basileo the
Eremite*
for all his cruelty, and oppressions, done toward his people. His body they
have translated of late into a sumptuous Church, near the Emperors house in
Mosko, and have canonized him for a Saint. Many miracles he does there (for so
the Friars make the people to believe) and many offerings are made unto him,
not only by the people, but by the chief Nobility, and the Emperor, and
Empress themselves, which visit that Church with great devotion. But this
last year, at my being at Mosko, this Saint had ill luck, in working his
miracles. For a lame man that had his limbs restored (as it was pretended by
him) was charged by a woman that was familiar with him (being then fallen out)
that he halted but in the day time, and could leap merrily when he came home
at night. And that he had intended this matter six years before. Now he is
put into a Monastery, and there rayleth upon the Friars, that hired him to have
this counterfaite miracle, practiced upon him. Besides this disgrace, a little
before my coming from thence, there were eight slain within his Church by
fire in a thunder. Which caused his belles (that were tingling before all day
and night long as in triumph of the miracles wrought by Basileo their Saint) to
ring somewhat softlier, and has wrought no little discredit to this
Miracle-worker. There was another of great account at Plesko, Nicola the
Eremite.
(called Nichola of Plesko) that did much good, when this Emperors father came
to sack the town, upon suspicion of their reuolting and rebellion against him.
The Emperor, after he had saluted the Eremite, at his lodging, sent him a
reward. And the Holy man to requite the Emperor, sent him a piece of raw
flesh, being then their Lent time. Which the Emperor seeing, bid one to tell
him, that he marueiled that the Holy man would offer him flesh to eat in the
Lent, when it was forbidden, by order of holy Church. And does Euasko, (which
is as much to say, as Jack) think (quoth Nicola) that it is unlawful to
eat a piece of beasts flesh in Lent, and not to eat up so much man's flesh, as
he has done already. So threatening the Emperor with a prophecy of some hard
adventure to come upon him, except he left murdering of his people, and
departed the town: he saved a great many men's lives at that time.

This makes the people to like very well of them, because they are as
Pasquils, to note their great men's faults, that no man else dare speak of. Yet
it falls out sometime, that for this rude liberty, which they take upon
them, after a counterfeite manner, by imitation of Prophets, they are made away
in secret: as was one or two of them, in the last Emperors time, for being
over bold in speaking against his government.

Of their Leiturgie, or form of Church-seruice, and their manner of
administering the Sacraments.
The 22. Chapter.
THeir morning service they call Zautrana, Their morning Service.
that is, mattins. It is done in this order. The Priest enters into the
Church, with his Deacon following him. And when he is come to the middle of
the Church, he begins to say with a loud voice: Blasslauey Vladika (that
is) Bless us heavenly Pastor: meaning of Christ. Then he adds, In the name
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, one very God in
Trinity: and Aspody Pomeluy, or, Lord have mercy upon us, Lord have mercy
upon us, Lord have mercy upon us: repeated three times. This done, he
marches on toward the Chauncell, or Sanctum Sanctorum, (as they use to call
it) and so enters into the Scharsuey Dwere, or the heavenly door: which no
man may enter into, but the Priest only. Where standing at the altar, or table
(set near to the upper wall of the chauncell) he says the Lords prayer,
and then again Aspody Pomeluy, or Lord have mercy upon us, Lord have mercy
upon us, etc: pronounced twelve times. Then praised be the Trinity, the
Father, the Son and holy Ghost, for ever and ever. Whereto the Deacons, and
people say, Amen. Next after, the Priest adds the Psalms for that day, and
begins with O come let us worship, and fall down before the Lord, etc.
and therewithal himself, with the Deacons, and people, all turn themselves
toward their Idols, or Images, that hang on the wall and crossing
themselves, bow down three times, knocking their heads to the very ground
After this, he reads the ten commandments, and Athanasius Creed, out of the
Service book.

This being done, the Deacon that stands without the heavenly door, or
chauncel, reads a piece of a Lege^d, out of a written book, (for they have
it not in print) of some Saints life, miracles, etc. This is divided into many
parts, for every day in the year, and is read by them with a plain singing
note, not unlike to the Popish tune, when they soung their Gospels. After all
this (which reaches to an hour, and an half, or two hours of length) he
adds certain set Collectes, or prayers upon that which he has read out
of the Legend before: and so ends his Service. All this while stand burning
before their Idols, a great many of wax candles, (whereof some are of the
bigness of a man's wast) vowed, or enjoined by penance, upon the people of the
parish.

About 9. of the clock in the morning, they have an other service, called
Obeidna, (or Compline) much after the order of the Popish Service, that bare
that name. If it be some high, or Festival day, they furnish their Service
beside, with Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, etc. and We praise thee O
God, etc: Sung with a more solemn, and curious note.

Their Evening service, Their Evening service.
is called Vecherna, where the Priest begins with Blaslauey Vladika, as he
did in the morning, and with the Psalms appointed for the Vecherna. Which
being read, he sings, My soul does magnify the Lord, etc. And then the
Priest, Deacons, and people, all with one voice, sing, Aspody pomelui, or Lord
have mercy upon us, thirty times together. Whereunto the boys that are in the
Church, answer all with one voice, rolling it up so fast, as their lips can
go: Verij, Verij, Verij, Verij, or, Praise, Praise, Praise, etc. thirty times
together, with a very strange noise. Then is read by the priest, and upon the
holidaies sung, the first Psalm: Blessed is the man, etc. And in the end of
it, is added Alleluia repeated ten times. The next in order is some part of the
gospel read by the Priest, which he ends with Alleluia repeated three
times. And so having said a collect in remembrance of the Saint of that day, he
ends his evening service. All this while the Priest stands above at the
altar or high table, within the Chancel, or Sanctum Sanctorum, whence he never
moves all the service time. The Deacon, or Deacons (which are many in their
cathedral Churches) stand without the chancell by the Scharsuey dwere, or
heavenly door: for within they may not be seen all the service time, though
otherwise their office is to sweep, and keep it, and to set up the wax
candels before their Idols. The people stand together the whole service time in
the body of the Church, and some in the church porch* for piew, or seat they
have none within their churches.

The Sacrament of baptism they administer after this manner. The manner of the
Russe baptism.
The child is brought unto the Church (and this is done within eight days
after it is borne) if it be the child of some Nobleman, it is brought with
great pomp in a rich sled or wago^, with chaires and cushio^s of cloth of gold,
and such like sumptuous show of their best furniture. When they are come to the
Church, the Priest stands ready to receive the child within the church porch,
with his tub of water by him. And the^ begins to declare unto them, that
they have brought a little Infidel to be made a Christian, etc. This ended, he
teaches the witnesses (that are two or three) in a certain set form out of
his book, what their duty is in bringing up the child after he is baptized
vz. That he must be taught to know God, and Christ the Savior. And because God
is of great majesty, and we must not presume to come unto him without
mediators (as the manner is when we make any suit to an Emperor, or great
Prince) therefore they must teach him what Saints are the best, and chief
mediators, etc. This done, he commands the devil in the name of God after a
coniuring manner, to come out of the water: and so after certain prayers he
plungeth the child thrice over head, and ears. For this they hold to be a
point necessary, that no part of the child be vndipped in the water.

The words that bear with the^ the form of baptism uttered by the Priest,
when he dippeth in the child, are the very same that are prescribed in the
gospel, and used by us, vz: In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Ghost. For that they should altar the form of the words, and say by the
holy Ghost, (as I have heard that they did (following certain heretics of the
Greek church, I found to be untrue, as well by report of them that have bin
often at their baptismes, as by their book of Leiturgie it self, wherein the
order of baptism is precisely set down.

When the child is baptiszed, the Priest lays oil and salt tempred together
upon the forehead, and both sides of his face, and then upon his mouth,
drawing it along with his finger over the childs lips (as did the Popish
priests) saying withal certain prayers to this effect: that God will make
him a good Christian, etc: all this is done in the Church porch. Then is the
child (as being now made a Christian, and meet to be received within the
church door) carried into the church, the Priest going before, and there he is
presented to the chief Idol of the Church, being laid on a cushion before the
feet of the image, by it (as by the mediator) to be commended unto God. If
the child be fick, or weak (specially in the winter) they use to make the
water luke warm. After baptism the manner is to cut of the hair from the
childs head, and having wrapped it within a piece of wax to lay it up, as a
relic, or monument in a secret place of the church.

This is the manner of their baptism, which they account to be the best and
perfectest form. As they do all other parts of their religion, received (as
they say) by tradition from the best church* meaning the Greek. And therefore
they will take great pains to make a proselite, or convert, either of an
infidel, or of a foreign Christian, by rebaptizing him after the Russe manner.
When they take any Tartar prisoner, commonly they will offer him life, with
condition to be baptized. And yet they persuade very few of them to redeem
their life so: because of the natural hatred the Tartar bears to the Russe,
and the opinion he has of his falsehood, and injustice. The year after Mosko
was fired by the Chrim Tartar, there was taken a Diuoymorsey, one of the chief
in that exploit with 300. Tartars more: who had all their lives offered the^,
if they would be baptized after the Russe manner. Which they refused all to
do, with many reproaches against those that persuaded them. And so being
carried to the river Mosko (that runs through the city) they were all
baptized after a violent manner: being thrust down with a knock on the head
into the water, through an hole made in the yse for that purpose. Rebaptizing.
Of Lieflanders that are captives, there are many that take on the^ this second
Russe, baptism to get more liberty, and somewhat besides toward their living,
which the Emperor ordinarily uses to give them.

Of Englishmen since they frequented the country there was never any found,
that so much forgot God, his faith, and country, as that he would be content
to be baptized Russe, for any respect of fear, preferment, or other means
whatsoever: save only Richard Relph, that following before an ungodly trade,
by keeping a Caback (against the order of the country) and being put of from
that trade, and spoiled by the Emperors officers of that which he had, entered
himself this last year into the Russe profession: and so was rebaptised,
living now as much an idolater, as before he was a rioter, and unthrifty person.

Such as thus receive the Russe baptism, are first carried into some
Monastery to be instructed there in the doctrine and ceremonies of the church.
Where they use these ceremonies. First, they put him into a new and fresh suite
of apparel, made after the Russe fashion, and set a coronet or (in Summer) a
garland upon his head. Then they anoint his head with oil, and put a wax
candle light into his hand: and so pray over him four times a day, the space
of seven days. All this while he is to abstain from flesh and white meats.
The seven days being ended, he is purified and washed in a bathstoue, and so
the eight day he is brought into the church, where he is taught by the Friars
how to behave himself in presence of their idols, by ducking down, knocking
of the head, crossing himself, and such like gestures, which are the greatest
part of the Russe religion.

The sacrament of the Lords supper they receive but once a year, The
administering of the Lords supper.
in their great Lent time, a little before Easter. Three at the most are
admitted at one time, and never above. The manner of their communicating, is
thus. First they confess themselves of all their sins to the Priest (who^ they
call their ghostly father. Then they come to the Church, and are called up to
the Communion table, that stands like an altar, a little removed from the
upper end of the Church, after the Doutch manner. Here first they are asked of
the Priest whither they be clean or no, that is, whither they have never a
sin behind that they left unconfessed. If they answer, No, they are taken to
the table. Where the Priest begins with certain usual prayers, the
communicants standing in the mean while with their arms foulded one within an
other, like penitentiaries, or mourners. When these prayers are ended, the
Priest takes a spoone, and fills it full of claret wine Then he puts into
it a small piece of bread, and tempereth them both together: and so delivers
them in the spoone to the Communicants, that stand in order, speaking the
usual words of the Sacrament. Eat this etc. Drink this etc. both at one time
without any pause.

After that he delivers them again bread by it self, and then wine carded
together with a little warm water, to represent blood more rightly (as they
think) and the water withal, that flowed out of the side of Christ. Whiles
this is in doing the communicants unfold their arms. And then foulding them
again, follow the Priest thrice round about the communion table, and so
return to their places again. Where having said certain other prayers, he
dismisseth the communicants, with charge to be meary, and to cheer up
themselves for the seven days next following. Which being ended, he enioyneth
them to fast for it as long time after. Which they use to observe with very
great devotion, eating nothing else but bread and salt, except a little cabbage,
and some other herb or root, with water or quasse mead for their drink.

This is their manner of administering the Sacraments. Wherein what they differ
from the institution of Christ, and what ceremonies they have added of their
own, or rather borrowed of the Greeks, may easily be noted.

Of the doctrine of the Russe church, and what errors it holds.
The 23. Chapter.
THeir chiefest errors in matter of faith I find to be these. The Russe
errors.
First, 1. Their disallowing of certain parts of the Canonical scriptures.
concerning the word of God it self, they will not read publicly certain
books of the Canonical scripture, as the books of Moses: specially the four
last, Exodus, Leuiticus, Numeri, and Deuteronomie, which they say are al made
disauthentique, and put out of use by the coming of Christ: as not able to
discern the difference betwixt the moral, and the ceremonial law, The books
of the prophets they allow of, but read the^ not publicly in their churches
for the same reason: because they were but directers unto Christ, and proper
(as they say) to the nation of the Jews. Only the book of Psalms they have
in great estimation and sing and say them daily in their Churches, Of the new
Testament they allow, and read all except the Revelation: which therefore they
read not (though they allow it because they understand it not, neither have the
like occasion, to know the fulfilling of the prophecies contained within it,
concerning especially the apostasy of the Antichristian Church, as have the
Western Churches. Notwithstanding they have had their Antichrists of the
Greek Church, and may find their own falling of, and the punishments for it
by the Turkish invasion in the prophecies of that Book.

Secondly (which is the fountain of the rest of al their corruptions, 2.
Traditions equal to the holy Scripture.
both in doctrine and ceremonies) they hold with the Papists, that their
church Traditions are of equal authority with the written word of God.
Wherein they prefer themselves before other churches: affirming that they have
the true and right traditions delivered by the Apostles to the Greek church,
and so unto them.

3. That the church (meaning the Greek and specially the Patriarch and his
Synod, 3. The Church to have sovereign authority in interpreting the
Scriptures.
as the head of the rest) have a sovereign authority to interpret the
Scriptures, and that all are bound to hold that interpretation as sound, and
authentic.

4. Concerning the divine nature and the three persons, 4. The holy Ghost to
proceed from the Father only.
in the one substance of God, that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father
only, and not from the Son.

5. About the office of Christ, 5. Christ not sole mediator of intercession.
they hold many foul errors, and the same almost as does the Popish church:
namely that he is the sole mediator of redemption, but not of intercession.
Their chief reason (if they be talked withal) for defense of this error, is
that unapt and foolish comparison, betwixt God and a Monarch or Prince of this
world, that must be sued unto by Mediators about him: wherein they give
special preferment to some above others, as to the blessed Virgin whom they
call Precheste, or undefiled, and S. Nicolas, whom they call Scora pomosnick,
or the Speedy helper, and say that he has 300. angels of the chiefest
appointed by God to attend upon him. This has brought them to an horrible
excess of idolatry, after the grossest and prophanest manner, giving unto
their images al religious worship of prayer, thanksgiving, offerings, and
adoration, with prostrating and knocking their heads to the ground before the^,
as to God himself. Which because they do to the picture, not to the
portraiture of the Saint, they say they worship not an idol, but the Saint in
his image and so offend not God: forgetting the commandment of God, that
forbids to make the image or likeness of any thing, for any religious
worship, or use whatsoever. Their church walls are very full of them, richly
hanged and set forth with pearl and stone upon the smooth table. Though some
also they have embossed, that stick from the board almost an inch outward.
They call them Chudouodites, or their miracle workers: and when they provide
them to set up in their Churches, in no case they may say that they have bought
the image, but exchaunged money for it.

6. For the means of justification, 6. Justification by works.
they agree with the Papists, that it is not by faith only apprehe^ding Christ,
but by their works also. And that Opus operatum, or the work for the work
sake, must needs please God. And therefore they are all in their numbers of
prayers, fastes, vows, and offerings to saints, alms deeds, crossings and such
like, and carry their numbering beads about with them continually, as well the
Emperor and his Nobility as the common people, not only in the church, but in
all other public places, specially at any set or solemn meeting, as in their
fastes, law courts, common consultations, intertainement of Ambassadors, and
such like.

7. They say with the Papists that no man can be assured of his salvation, 7.
Salvation uncertain.
til the last sentence be passed at the day of judgment.

8. They use auricular confession, 8. Auricular confession.
and think that they are purged by the very action from so many sins, as
they confess by name, and in particular to the Priest.

9. They hold three sacraments, of Baptism, 9. Three Sacraments.
the Lords supper, and the last annoiling, or unction. Yet concerning their
Sacrament of extreme unction, they hold it not so necessary to salvation as
they do baptism, but think it a great curse and punishment of God, 10. All
damned that die without baptism.
if any die with out it.

10. They think there is a necessity of baptism, and that all are condemned
that die without it. 11. Anabaptisme.


11. They rebaptise as many Christians (not being of the Greek church) as they
convert to their Russe profession: because they are divided from the true
Church, which is the Greek, 12. Difference of meats.
as they say.

12. They make a difference of meats and drinks, accounting the use of one, to
be more holy then of an other. And therefore in their set fastes they forbear
to eat flesh, and white meats (as we call them) after the manner of the
Popish superstition: which they observe so strictly, and with such blind
devotion, as that they will rather die, then eat one bit of flesh, eggs, or
such like, for the health of their bodies in their extreme sicknese.

13. They hold marriage to be unlawful for all the Clergy men, 13. Marriage
for some persons unlawful.
except the priests only, and for them also after the first wife, as was said
before. Neither do they well allow of it in Lay men after the second marriage.
Which is a pretense now used against the Emperors only brother, a child of six
years old: Who therefore is not praised for in their churches (as their manner
is otherwise for the Princes blood) because he was borne of the sixth marriage,
and so not legitimate This charge was given to the priests by the Emperor
himself, by procurement of the Godonoes: who make him believe that it is a
good policy to turn away the liking of the people from the next successor.

Many other false opinions they have in matter of religion. But these are the
chief, which they hold partly by means of their traditions (which they have
received from the Greek church) but specially by ignorance of the holy
Scriptures. Which notwithstanding they have in the Polonian tongue, (that is
all one with theirs some few words excepted) yet few of them read them with
that godly care which they ought to do: neither have they (if they would)
books sufficient of the old and new Testament for the common people, but of
their Leiturgie only, or book of common service, whereof there are great
numbers.

All this mischief comes from the clergy, who being ignorant and godless
themselves, are very wary to keep the people likewise in their ignorance and
blindness, for their living and bellies sake: partly also from the manner of
government settled among them: which the Emperors (whom it specially behooves)
list not to have changed by any innovation, but to retain that religion that
best agrees with it. Which notwithstanding it is not to be doubted, but that
having the word of God in some sort (though without the ordinary means to
attain to a true sense and understanding of it) God has also his number among
them. As may partly appear by that which a Russe at Mosko said in secret to
one of my servant, speaking against their images and other superstitions:
That God had given unto England light to day, and might give it to morrow (if
he pleased) to them.

As for any inquisition or proceeding against men for matter of religion, I
could hear of none: save a few years since against one man and his wife, who
were kept in a close prison the space of 28. years, till they were over grown
into a deformed fashion, for their hair, nails, color of countenance, and
such like, and in the end were burned at Mosko, in a small house set on fire.
The cause was kept secret, but like it was for some part of truth in matter
of religion: though the people were made to believe by the Priests and Friars,
that they held some great, and damnable heresy.

Of the manner of solemnizing their Marriages.
The 24. Chapter.
THe manner of making and solemnizing their marriages is different from the
manner of other countries. The man (though he never saw the woman before) is not
permitted to have any sight of her all the time of his woing: which he does not
by himself, but by his mother or some other ancient woman of his kin, or
acquaintance. When the liking is taken (as well by the parents as by the parties
themselves, for without the knowledge and consent of the parents, the contract
is not lawful) the fathers on both sides, or such as are to the^ in steed of
fathers, with their other chief friends, have a meeting and conference about
the dowry, which is commonly very large after the ability of the parents: so
that you shall have a market man (as they call them) give a 1000. rubbels, or
more with his daughter.

As for the man it is never required of him, The manner of indowment for wives.
nor stands with their custom to make any iointer in recompense of the
dowry. But in case he have a child by his wife, she enioieth a third deal
after his disease. If he have two children by her or more, she is to have a
courtesy more, at the discretion of the husband. If the husband depart without
issue by his wife, she is returned home to her friends without any thing at
al, save only her dowry: if the husband leave so much behind him in goods When
the agreement is made concerning the dowry, they sign bonds one to the other,
as well for the payment of the dowry as the performing of the marriage by a
certain day. If the woman were never married before, her father and friends are
bound besides to assure her a maiden. Which breeds many brabbels and quarrels
at Law, if the man take any conceit concerning the behavior, and honesty of
his wife.

Thus the contract being made, the parties begin to send tokens the one to the
other, the woman first, then afterward the man, but yet see not one an other
till the marriage be solemnized. On the eaue before the marriage day, the bride
is carried in a Collimago, or coach, or in a sledde (if it be winter) to the
bridegromes house, with her marriage apparel and bedstead with her, which they
are to lie in. For this is ever provided by the Bride, and is commonly very
fair, with much cost bestowed upon it. Here she is accompaned all that night
by her mother, and other women: but not welcomed, nor once seen by the
Bridegroom himself.

When the time is come to have the marriage solemnized, Ceremonies in marriages.
the Bride has put upon her a kind of hood, made of fine knitworke, or lawne,
that covers her head, and all her body down to the middle. And so
accompanied with her friends, and the bridegroom with his, they go to Church
all on horseback, though the Church be near hand, and themselves but of
very mean degree, The words of contract, and other ceremonies in solemnizing
the marriage, are much after the order, and with the same words that are used
with us: with a ring also given to the Bride. Which being put on, and the
words of contract pronounced: the Brides hand is delivered into the hand of
the Bride groom, which stands all this while on the one side of the altar or
table, and the Bride on the other. So the marriage knot being knitte by the
Priest, the Bride comes to the Bridegroom (standing at the end of the altar
or table) and falls down at the feet, knocking her head upon his shoe, in
token of her subjection, and obedience. And the Bridegroom again casts the
lap of his gown, or upper garment, over the Bride, in token of his duty to
protect, and cherish her.

Then the Bridegroom, and Bride, standing both together at the tables end,
comes first the father, and the other friends of the Bride, and bow
themselves down low to the Bridegroom: and so likewise his friends bow
themselves to the Bride, in toke^ of affinity and love, ever after betwixt the
two kinreds. And withal, the father of the Bridegroom offreth to the priest,
a loaf of bread, who delivers it straight again to the father, and other
friends of the Bride, with attestatio^ before God and their idols, that he
deliver the dowry wholly and truly at the day appointed, and hold love ever
after, one kindred with another. Whereupon they break the loaf into pieces, and
eat of it, to testify their true and sincere meanings, for performing of that
charge, and thenceforth to become as grains of one loaf, or men of one table.

These ceremonies being ended, the Bridegroom takes the Bride by the hand,
and so they go on together, with their friends after them, toward the
Church porche. Where meet the^ certain with pots, and cups in their hands,
with meade and Russe wine. Whereof the Bridegroom takes first a charke, or
little cup full in his hand, and drinks to the Bride: who opening her hood,
or vale below, and putting the cup to her mouth underneath it (for being seen
of the Bridegroom) pleadgeth him again. Thus returning altogether from the
Church, the Bridegroom goes not home to his own, but to his fathers house,
and she likewise to hers, where either intertayn their friends apart. At the
entering into the house, they use to fling corn out of the windows, upon the
Bridegroom, and Bride, in token of plenty, and fruitfulnes to be with them
ever after.

When the Evening is come, the Bride is brought to the Bridegrooms fathers
house, and there lodges that night, with her vale or cover still over her
head. All that night she may not speak one word (for that charge she receives
by tradition from her mother, and other matrones her friends) that the
Bridegroom must neither hear, nor see her, till the day after the marriage.
Neither three days after, may she be heard to speak, save certain few
words at the table, in a set form with great manners, and reverence to the
Bridegroom. If she behave her self otherwise, it is a great prejudice to her
credit, and life ever after: and will highly be disliked of the Bridegroom
himself.

After the third day, they depart to their own, and make a feast to both their
friends together. The marriage day, and the whole time of their festival, the
Bridegroom has the honor to be called Moloday Knez, or young Duke, and the
Bride Moloday Knezay, or young Duchess.

In living with their wives, they show themselves to be but of a barbarous
condition: using them as servants, rather then wives. Except the Noble-women,
which are, or seem to be of more estimation with their husbands, then the rest
of meaner sort. They have this foul abuse, contrary to good order, and the
word of God it self, that upon dislike of his wife, or other cause
whatsoever, the man may go into a Monastery and shire himself a Friar, by
pretense of devotion: and so leave his wife to shift for her self so well as
she can.

Of the other Ceremonies of the Russe Church.
The 25. Chapter.
THe other ceremonies of their Church, The sign of the cross.
are many in number: especially, the abuse about the sign of the Cross,
which they set up in their high ways, in the tops of their Churches, and in
every door of their houses, signing themselves continually with it, on their
foreheads and breasts, with great devotion, as they will seem by their outward
gesture. Which were less offense, if they gave not withal, that religious
reverence and woorship unto it, which is due to God only, and used the dumb
show, and signing of it insteede of thanksgiving, and of all other duties
which they owe unto God. When they rise in the morning, they go commonly in
the sight of some steeple, that has acrosse on the top: and so bowing
themselves toward the cross, sign themselves withal on their foreheads, and
breasts. And this is their thanksgiving to God for their nights rest, without
any word speaking, except peradventure they say, Aspody Pomeluy, or Lord have
mercy upon us. When they sit down to meat, and rise again from it, the
thanksgiving to God, is the crossing of their foreheads and breasts. Except it
be some few that add peradventure, a word or two of some ordinary prayer,
impertinent to that purpose. When they are to give an oath for the deciding of
any controversy at Law, they do it by swearing by the Cross, and kissing
the feet of it, making it as God, whose name only is to be used in such
trial of justice. When they enter into any house (where ever there is an idol
hanging on the wall) they sign themselves with the cross, and bow themselves
to it. When they begin any work, be it little, or much they arm them selves
first with the sign of the cross. And this commonly is all their prayer to
God, for good speed of their business. And thus they serve God with crosses,
after a cross and vain manner: not understanding what the cross of Christ is,
nor the power of it. And yet they think all strangers Christians, to be no
better then Turks, in comparison of themselves (and so they will say) because
they bow not themselves, when they meet with the cross, nor sign themselves
with it, as the Russe manner is.

They have holy water in like use, Holywater.
and estimation, as the Popish Church has. But herein they exceed them, in
that they do not only hallow their holy water stocks, and tubbes full of
water, but all the rivers of the country once every year. Hallowing of rivers.
At Mosko it is done with great pomp, and solemnity: the Emperor himself
being present at it, with all his Nobility, marching through the streets
toward the river of Moskua, in manner of procession in this order as
follows. First go two Deacons, with banners in their hands, the one of
Precheste (or our Lady) the other of S. Michael, fighting with his dragon.
Then follow after, the rest of the Deacons and the priests of Mosko, two and
two in a rank, with coaps on their backs, and their idols at their breasts,
carried with girdles or slinges, made fast about their necks. Next the priests
come their Bishops in their pontificalibus: then the Friars, Monks, and Abbots:
and after, the Patriarchs, in very rich attite, with a ball, or sphere on the
top of his myter, to signify his universality over that Church. Last comes
the Emperor with all his nobility. The whole train is of a mile long, or more.
When they are come to the river, a great hole is made in the yse, where the
market is kept, of a rod and a half broad, with a stage round about it to
keep off the press. Then begins the Patriarch to say certain prayers, and
coniureth the devil to come out of the water: and so casting in salt, and
censing it with frankincense, makes the whole river to become holy water. The
morning before, all the people of Mosko use to make crosses of chawlke over
every door, and window of their houses: least the Devil being coniured out
of the water, should fly into their houses.

When the ceremonies are ended, you shall see the black Guard of the Emperors
house, and then the rest of the Town, with their pailes and buckets, to take
off the hallowed water for drink, and other uses. You shall also see the women
dippe in their children over head and ears, and many men and women leap into
it, some naked, some with their clothes on, when some man would think his
finger would freese off, if he should but dippe it into the water. When the
men have done, they bring their horse to the river, to drink of the sanctified
water: and so make them as holy as a horse. Their set day for this solemn
action of hallowing their rivers, is that we call Twelfthday. The like is done
by other Bishops, in all parts of the Realm.

Their manner is also to give it to their sick, in their greatest extremity:
thinking that it will either recover them, Drinking of holy water.
or sanctify them to God, Whereby they kill many, through their unreasonable
superstition, as did the Lord Borris his only son at my being at the Mosko:
whom he killed (as was said by the physicians) by pouring into him, cold holy
water, and presenting him naked into the Church, to their Saint Basileo, in the
cold of the Winter, in an extremity of sickness.

They have an image of Christ, which they call Neruchi, (which signifies as
much as Made without hands) for so their priests, and superstition withal,
persuades them it was. This in their processions, they carry about with them
on high upon a pole, enclosed within a Pixe, made like a lanthorn, and do
reverence to it, as to a great mystery.

At every brewing, their manner is likewise, Brewing with holy water.
to bring a dish of their woort to the Priest, within the Church: which being
hallowed by him, is powered into the brewing* and so gives it such a virtue, as
when they drink of it, they are seldom sober. The like they do with the first
fruits of their corn in Harvest.

They have an other ceremony on Palmsunday, Palmsunday.
of ancient tradition: what time the Patriarch rides through the Mosko, the
Emperor himself holding his horse bridel, and the people crying Hosanna, and
spreding their upper garments under his horse feet. The Emperor has of the
Patriarch for his good service of that day 200 rubbels of standing pension.
Another pageant they have much like to this, the week before the nativitie of
Christ* When every Bishop in his Cathedral Church sets forth a show of the
three children in the Oven. Where the Angel is made to come flying from the
roof of the Church, with great admiration of the lookers on, and many terrible
slashes of fire, are made with rosen, and gunpowder, by the Chaldians (as they
call them) that run about the town all the twelve days, disguised in their
plaiers coats, and make much good sport for the honor of the Bishops pageant.
At the Mosko, the Emperor himself, and the Empress never fail to be at it,
though it be but the same matter played every year, without any new invention
at all.

Besides their fastes on Wednesdayes, Fasts.
and Fridayes throughout the whole year, (the one because they say Christ was
sold on the Wednesday, the other because he suffered on the Friday) they have
four great Fastes, or Lentes every year. The first, (which they call their
great Lent) is at the same time with ours. The second, about Midsommer. The
third, in Harvest time. The fourth, about Hallontide: which they keep not of
policy, but of mere superstition. In their great Lent for the first week,
they eat nothing but bread and salt, and drink nothing but water, neither
meddle with any matter of their vocation, but intend their shriuing, and
fasting only. They have also 3. Vigils, or Wakes in their great Lent, which
they call Stoiania and the last Friday their great Vigil, Vigils.
as they call it. What time the whole parish must be present in the Church, and
watch from nine a clock in the Evening, til six in the morning, all the while
standing, save when they fall down, and knock their heads to their idols,
which must be an hundred and seventy times, just through the whole night.

About their burials also, Burials.
they have many superstitious and profane ceremonies: as putting within the
finger of the corpse, a letter to Saint Nicolas: whom they make their chief
mediator, and as it were, the porter of heaven gates, as the Papists do
their Peter.

In Winter time, when all is covered with snow, and the ground so hard frozen,
as that no spade, nor pikeaxe can enter their manner is not to bury their
dead, but to keep the bodies (so many as die all the Winter time) in an house,
in the suburbs, or outparts of the town, which they call Bohsedom, that is,
Gods house: where the dead bodies are pyled up together, like billets on a
woodstack, as hard with the frost as a very stone, till the Springtide come,
and resolves the frost: what time every man takes his dead friend, and
commits him to the ground.

They have besides their years and months minds, Months minds.
for their friends departed. What time they have prayers said over the grave
by the Priest: who has a penie ordinary for his pains. When any dies, they
have ordinary women mourners, that come to lament for the dead party: and stand
howling over the body, after a profane, and heathenish manner (sometimes in
the house, sometimes bringing the body into the backside asking him what he
wanted, and what he meant to die. They bury their dead, as the party used to
go, with coat, hose, boots, hat and the rest of his apparel.

Many other vain and superstitious ceremonies they have, which were long and
tedious to report. By these it may appear, how far they are fallen from the
true knowledge, and practice of Christian religion: having exchanged the word
of God, for their vain traditions, and brought al to external, and ridiculous
ceremonies, without any regard of spirit and truth, which God requires in
his true worship.

Of the Emperors domestike, or private behavior.
The 26. Chapter.
THe Emperors private behavior, so much as may be, or is meet to be known,
is after this manner. He rises commonly about 4 a clock in the morning. After
his apparrelling and washing, in comes his ghostly father, or priest of his
chamber, which is named in their tongue, Otetz Duhouna, with his cross in his
hand, wherewith he blesses him, laying it first on his forehead, then upon his
cheeks, or sides of his face, and then offreth him the end of it to kiss.
This done, the Clearke of the cross (called Chresby Deyack Profery) brings
into his chamber, a painted image, representing the Saint for that day. For
every day with them has his several Saint, as it were the patron for that
day. His private prayer.
This he places among the rest of his image gods, wherewithal his chamber is
decked, as thick almost as the wall can bear, with lamps and wax candles
burning before them. They are very costly and gorgeously decked with pearl,
and precious stone. This image being placed before him, the Emperor begins
to cross himself after the Russe manner, first on the forehead, then on both
sides of his breaste, with Aspody Pomeluy, Pomeluy mena hospody, sacroy mena
gresnick Syhodestua: which is as much to say, as, Help me O Lord my God,
Lord comfort me, defend and keep me a sinner from doing evil, etc. This he
directs toward the image, or Saint for that day, whom he names in his
prayer, together with our Lady (whom they call Precheste) Saint Nicholas, or
some other, to whom he bears most devotion, bowing himself prostrate unto
them, with knocking his head to the very ground. Thus he continues the space
of a quarter of an hour, or thereabouts.

Then comes again the ghostly father, or chamber priest, with a silver bowl
full of holy water, which they call in Russe, Sweta Voda, and a sprinkle of
Basil (as they call it) in his hand: and so al to besprinckleth first the
image gods, and then the Emperor. This holy water is brought fresh every day
from the Monasteries, far and near, sent to the Emperor from the Abbot or
Prior, in the name of the Saint, that is patron of that Monastery, as a
special token of good will from him.

These devotions being ended, he sends in to the Empress, to ask whether
she has rested in health, etc. And after a little pawse goes himself to
salute her in a middle room betwixt both their chambers. The Empress lies
apart from him, and keeps not one chamber, nor table with the Emperor
ordinarily, save upon the eaue of their Lentes, or common Fastes: what time she
is his ordinary ghest at bed and boorde. After their meeting in the morning,
they go together to their private Church or Chapel, where is said, or
soung a morning Service (called Zautrana) of an hour long or thereabouts. The
Emperor gives presence every morning.
From the Church he returns home, and sits him down in a great chamber,
to be seen and saluted by his Nobility, such as are in favor about the
Court. If he have to say to any of them, or they to him, then is the time.
And this is ordinary, except his health, or some other occasion alter the
custom.

About nine in the morning, he goes to another Church within his Castle: where
is soung by Priests, and Choristers, the high Service (called Obeadna or
Complin) which commonly lasts two hours: the Emperor in the mean time*
talking commonly with some of his Council, Nobility, or captains, which have
to say to him, or he to them. And the Council likewise confer together among
themselves, as if they were in their council house. This ended, he returns
home, and recreateth himself until it be dinner time.

He is served at his table on this manner. First, every dish (as it is
delivered at the dresser) is tasted by the Cook, The Emperors service at his
Table.
in the presence of the high Steward, or his Deputy. And so is received by
the Gentlemen wayters (called Shilshey) and by them carried up to the Emperors
table, the high Steward or his Deputy going before. There it is received by
the Sewer (called Erastnoy) who gives a taste of every dishe to the Taster,
and so places it before the Emperor. The number of his dishes for his
ordinary service is about seventy: dressed somewhat grosely, with much
garlic, and salt, much after the Doutch manner. When he exceeds upon some
occasion of the day* or entertainment of some Ambassador, he has many more
dishes. The service is sent up by 2. dishes at a time, or three at the most
that he may eat it warm, first the baked, then the roast meats, and last the
brothes. In his dyning chamber is an other table: where sit the chief of his
Nobility that are about his Court, and his ghostly father, or Chapleine. On
the one side of the chamber stands a cubbard or table of plate, very fair
and rich, with a great cesterne of Copper by it, full of yse and snow, wherein
stand the pottes that serve for that meal. The taster holds the cup that he
drinks in all dinner time, and delivers it unto him with a say, when he
calls for it. The manner is to make many dishes out of the service after it
is set on the table, and to send them to such Noblemen and officers, as the
Emperor likes best. And this is counted a great favor, and honor.

After dinner he lays him down to rest, where commonly he takes three
hours sleep, except he employ one of the hours to bathing, or boxing. And
this custom for sleeping after dinner, is an ordinary matter with him, as
withal the Russes. After his sleep, he goes to even song (called Vechurna)
and thence returning, for the most part recreateth himself with the Empress
till supper time, with iesters, and dwarfes, men and women, that tumble before
him, and sing many songs after the Russe manner. This is his common recreation
betwixt meals, that he most delights in. On other special recreation is
the fight with wild Bears, which are caught in pittes, or nets, and are kept
in barred cages for that purpose, against the Emperor be disposed to see the
pastime. The fight with the Bear is on this sort. The man is turned into a
circle walled round about, where he is to quite himself so well as he can: for
there is no way to fly out. When the Bear is turned loose he comes upon him
with open mouth. If at the first pushe he miss his aim, so that the Bear
come within him, he is in great danger. But the wild Bear being very
fearse, has this quality, that gives advantage to the Hunter. His manner is
when he assaileth a man, to rise up right on his two hinder legs, and so to
come roaring with open mouth upon him. And if the Hunter then can pushe right
into the very breast of him betwixt his forelegges (as commonly he will not
miss) resting the other end of their boarespeare at the side of his foot,
and so keeping the pike still toward the face of the Bear, he speedeth him
commonly at one blow. But many times these Hunters come short, and are either
slain, or miserably torn with the teeth and talents of the fierce beast. If
the party quite himself well in this fight with the Bear, he is carried to
drink at the Emperors seller door: where he drinks himself drunk for the
honor of Hospodare. And this is his reward for aduenturing his life, for the
Emperors pleasure. To maintain this pastime the Emperor has certain huntsmen
that are appointed for that purpose to take the wild Bear. This is his
recreation commonly on the holy days. Sometimes he spends his time in looking
upon his goldsmiths, and Iewellers, tailers, embroderers, painters, and such
like, and so goes to his supper. When it draws towaeds bed time, his priest
says certain prayers: and then the Emperor blesses and crosses himself,
as in the morning for a quarter of an hour or thereaboutes, and so goes to
his bed.

The Emperor that now is (called Theodore Iuanowich) is for his person of a
mean stature, somewhat low and gross, of a sallowe complexion, and inclining
to the dropsy, hawke nosed, unsteady in his pase by reason of some weakness of
his lims, heavy and inactive, yet commonly smiling almost to a laughter. For
quality otherwise, simple and slow witted, but very gentle, and of an easy
nature, quiet, merciful, of no martial disposition, nor greatly apt for
matter of policy, very superstitious, and infinite that way. Besides his
private devotions at home, he goes every week commonly on pilgrimage to some
Monastery, or other that is nearest hand. He is of 34. years old, or
thereaboutes, and has reigned almost the space of six years.

Of the Emperors private, or householde Officers.
The 27. Chapter.
THe chief officers of the Emperors household, ar these which follow The first
is the office of the Boiaren Conesheua, Master of the Horse.
or master of the Horse. Which co^teineth no more then is expressed by the
name, that is* to be ouerseer, of the Horse, and not Magister equitum, or
Master of the Horsemen. For he appoints other for that service, as occasion
does require (as before was said.) He that bears that office at this time,
is Borris Federowich Godonoe, brother to the Empress* Of Horse for service in
his wars (besides other for his ordinary uses) he has to the number of
10000. which are kept about Mosko.

The next is the Lord Steward of his household at this time, The L. Steward.
one Gregory Vasilowich Godonoe. The L. Tresurer.
The third is his Treasurer, that keeps all his moneys, jewels, plate, etc:
now called Stepan Vasilowich Godonoe. The fourth his Controller, Controller,
Chamberlain.
now Andreas Petrowich Clesinine. The fifth his Chamberlain. He that attends
that office at this time, is called Estoma Bisabroza Pastelnischay. Tasters.
The sixth his Tasters, now Theodore Alexandrowich, and Iuan Vasilowich Godonoe.
The seventh his Harbengers, Harbe^gers.
which are three Noble men, and diverse other Gentlemen that do the office
under them. These are his ordinary officers, and offices of the chiefest
account.

Of Gentlemen beside that wait about his chamber, Gentlemen of the chamber.
and person (called Shilsey Strapsey) there are two hundred, all Noblemens
sons. The Guard.
His ordinary Guard is 2000, Hagbutters ready with their pieces charged, and
their match lighted, with other necessary furniture* continually day and
night: which come not within the house, but wait without in the court or yard,
where the Emperor is abiding. In the night time there lodges next to his
bedchamber the chief Chamberlain, with one or two more of best trust about
him. A second chamber of there lodge six other of like account, for their
trust and faithfulness. In the third chamber lie certain young Gentlemen, of
these two hundred, called Shilsey Strapsey, that take their turns by forties
every night. Grooms.
There are Grooms besides that watch in their course, and lie at every gate and
door of the Court, called Estopnick.

The Hagbutters or Gunners, whereof there are two thousand (as was said before)
watch about the Emperors lodging, or bed chamber by course two hundred and
fifty every night, and two hundred and fifty more in the Court yard, and
about the Treasure house. His court or house at the Mosko is made Castle wise,
walled about with great store of fair ordinance planted upon the wall, and
conteyneth a great breadth of ground within it, with many dwelling houses.
Which are appointed for such as are known to be sure, and trusty to the
Emperor.

Of the private behavior, or quality of the Russe people.
The 28. Chapter.
THe private behavior and quality of the Russe people, Constitution of their
bodies.
may partly be understood by that which has been said concerning the
public state and usage of the country. As touching the natural habit of
their bodies, they are for the most part of a large sise, and of very fleshly
bodies: accounting it a grace to be somewhat gross and burley, and therefore
they nourish and spread their beardes, to have them long and broad. But for the
most part they are very unwieldy and inactive withal. Which may be thought to
come partly of the climate, and the numbnes which they get by the cold in
winter, and partly of their diet that stands most of roots, onions, garlike,
cabbage, and such like things that breed gross humors, which they use to eat
alone, and with their other meats.

Their diet is rather much then curious At their meals they begin commonly
with a Chark or small cup of Aqua vitae, Their diet.
(which they call Russe wine) and then drink not till toward the end of
their meals, taking it in largely, and all together, with kissing one another,
at every pledge. And therefore after dinner there is no talking with them, but
every man goes to his bench to take his afternoones sleep, which is as
ordinary with them as their nights rest. When they exceed, and have variety
of dishes, the first are their baked meats (for roste meats they use little)
and then their broathes, or pottage. To drink drunk, is an ordinary matter
with them every day in the week. Their common drink is Mead, the poorer sort
use water, and a thin drink called Quasse, which is nothing else (as we say)
but water turned out of his wits, with a little branne meashed with it.

This diet would breed in them many diseases, but that they use bathstoues, or
hot houses in steed of all physic, commonly twice or thrice every week.
All the winter time, and almost the whole Summer, they heat there Peaches,
which are made like the Germane bathstoaues, and their Potlads like ouens, that
so warm the house, that a stranger at the first shall hardly like of it.
These two extremities, specially in the winter of heat within their houses, and
of extreme cold without, together with their diet, makes them of a dark,
and sallow complexion, their skins being tanned and parched both with cold
and with heat: specially the women, that for the greater part are of far
worse complexions, then the men. Whereof the cause take to be their keeping
within the hot houses, and busying themselves about the heating, and using of
their bathstoues, and peaches.

The Russe because that he is used to both these extremities of heat and of
cold, can bear them both a great deal more patiently, then strangers can
do. You shall see them sometimes (to season their bodies) come out of their
bathstoues all on a froth, and fuming as hot almost as a pigge at a spitte,
and presently to leap into the river stark naked, or to power cold water all
over their bodies, and that in the coldest of all the winter time. The women to
mende the bad hue of their skins, use to paint their faces with white and
read colors, so visibly, that every man may perceive it. Which is made no
matter, because it is common, and liked well by their husbands: who make their
wives and daughters anordinarie allowance to buy them colors to paint their
faces withal, and delight themselves much to see them of foul women to become
such fair images. This parcheth the skin and helps to deforme them when
their painting is of.

They apparel themselves after the Greek manner. The Noble man's attire.
The Noblemans attire is on this fashion. First a Taffia or little night cappe
on his head, that covers little more then his crown, commonly very rich
wrought of silk and gold thread, and set with pearl and precious stone. His
head he keeps shaven close to the very skin, except he be in some displeasure
with the Emperor. Then he suffers his hair to grow and hang down upon
his shoulders, covering his face as ugly and deformedly as he can, Over the
Taffia he wears a wide cap of black Fox (which they account for the best
furre) with a Tiara or long bonnet put within it, standing up like a Persian or
Babilonian hat. About his neck (which is seen al bare) is a collar set with
pearl and precious stone, about three or four fingers broad. Next over his
shirt, (which is curiously wrought, because he strippeth himself into it in
the Summer time, while he is within the house) is a Shepon, or light garment of
silk made down to the knees, buttoned before: and then a Caftan or a close
coat buttoned, and girt to him with a Persian girdle, whereat he hanges his
knives and spoone. This commonly is of cloth of gold, and hangs down as low
as his ankles, Over that he wears a lose garment of some rich silk, furred
and faced about with some gold lace, called a Ferris. An other over that of
chamlet, or like stuff called an Alkaben, sleeued and hanging low, and the
cape commonly brooched* and set all with pearl. When he goes abroad, he
casts over all these (which are but slight (though they seem to be many) an
other garment called an Honoratkey, like to the Alkaben, save that it is made
without a collar for the neck. And this is commonly of fine cloth, or Camels
hair. His bus kins (which he wears in stead of hose, with linen folles
under them in steed of boot hose) are made of a Persian leather called Saphian,
embrodered with pearl. His upper stocks commonly are of cloth of gold. When
he goes abroad, he mounteth on horseback, though it be but to the next door:
which is the manner also of the Boiarskey, or Gentlemen.

The Boiarskey or Gentleman's attire is of the same fashion, The Gentleman's
apparel.
but differs in stuff: and yet he will have his Caftan or vndercoat
sometimes of cloth of gold, the rest of cloth, or silk.

The Noble woman (called Chyna Boiarshena) wears on her head, The Noble
woman's attire.
first a caull of some soft silk (which is commonly read) and over it a
fruntlet, called Obrosa of white color. Over that her cap (made after the
coife fashion of cloth of gold) called Shapka Zempska, edged with some rich
furre, and set with pearl and stone. Though they have of late begone to
disdain embrodering with pearl about their cappes, because the Diacks, and
some Merchants wives have taken up the fashion. In their ears they wear
earerings (which they call Sargee) of two inches or more compass, the matter
of gold set with Rubies, or Saphires, or some like precious stone. In Summer
they go often with kerchieffes of fine white lawne, or Cambricke, fastened
under the chinne, with two long tassels pendent. The kerchiefe spotted and set
thick with rich pearl. When they ride or go abroad in raynie weather, they
wear white hattes with colored bands (called Stapa Zemskoy). About their
necks they were collers of three or four fingers broad, set with rich pearl
and precious stone. Their upper garment is a loose gown called Oposhen
commonly of skarlet, with wide loose sleeves, hanging down to the ground
buttened before with great gold buttons, or at least silver and guilt night as
big as a walnut. Which has hanging over it fastened under the cappe, a large
broad cape of some rich furre, that hangs down almost to the mids of
their backs. Next under the Oposken or upper garment, they wear another
called a Leitnick that is made close before with great wide sleeves, the cuffe
or half sleeue up to the elbowes, commonly of cloth of gold: and under that a
Ferris Zemskoy, which hangs loose buttoned throughout to the very foot. On
the hand wrests they wear very fair braselets, about two fingers broad of
pearl and precious stone. They go all in buskins of white, yellow, blew, or
some other colored leather, embrodered with pearl. This is the attire of the
Noblewoman of Russia, when she makes the best show of her self. The
Gentlewomans apparel may differ in the stuff, but is all one for the making
or fashion.

As for the poor Mousick and his wife they go poorly cladde. The Mousicks or
common man's attire.
The man with his Odnoratkey, or loose gown to the small of the leg, tied
together with a lace before, of course white or blew cloth, with some Shube or
long wastcoat of furre, or of sheepskinne under it, and his furred cappe, and
buskins. The poorer sort of them have their Odnoratkey, or upper garment, made
of Kowes hair. This is their winter habit. In the summer time, commonly they
wear nothing but their shirts on their backs, and buskins on their legs.
The woman goes in a red or blew gown, when she makes the best show, and
with some warm Shube of furre under it in the winter time. But in the Summer,
nothing but her two shirts (for so they call the^) one over the other, whether
they be within doors, or without. On their heads, they wear caps of some
colored stuff, many of velvet, or of cloth of gold: but for the most part
kerchiefes. Without earings of silver or some other metal, and her cross
about her neck, you shall see no Russe woman, be she wife, or maid.

As touching their behavior, Their wits and capacities.
and quality otherwise, they are of reasonable capacities, if they had those
means that some other nations have to train up their wits in good nurture,
and learning. Which they might borrowe of the Polonians; and other their
neighbors, but that they refuse it of a very self pride, as accounting their
own fashions to be far the best. Partly also (as I said before) for that their
manner of bringing up (void of all good learning, and civil behavior) is
thought by their governors most agreeable to that State, and their manner of
government. Which the people would hardely bear, if they were once ciuilled,
and brought to more understanding of God, and good policy. This causes the
Emperors to keep out al means of making it better, and to be very wary for
excluding of all peregrinitie, that might alter their fashions. Which were
less to be disliked, if it set not a print into the very minds of his
people. For as themselves are very hardly and cruelly dealte withal by
their chief Magistrates, and other superiors, so are they as cruel one
against an other, specially over their inferiors, and such as are under them.
So that the basest and wretchedest Christianoe (as they call him) that stoupeth
and croucheth like a dog to the Gentleman, and licketh up the dust that lies
at his feet, is an intolerable tyrant, Cruelty of the Russe people.
where he has the advantage. By this means the whole Country is filled with
rapine, and murder. They make no account of the life of a man. You shall have a
man robbed sometime in the very streats of their towns, if he go late in the
evening: and yet no man to come forth out of his doors to rescue him, though
he hear him cry out. I will not speak of the strangeness of the murders,
and other cruelties committed among them, that would scarsly be believed to
be done among men, specially such as profess themselves Christians.

The number of their vagrant and begging poor is almost infinite: that are so
pinched with famine and extreme need, as that they beg after a violent and
desperate manner, with give me and cut me, give me and kill me, and such
like phrases. Whereby it may be gheassed, what they are toward strangers,
that are so unnatural and cruel toward their own. And yet it may be
doubted whither is the greater, the cruelty or intemperancie that is used in
that country. Intemperancie.
I will not speak of it, because it is so soul and not to be named. The
whole country ouerfloweth with all sin of that kind. And no marvel, as
having no law to restrain whoredoms, adulteries, and like uncleanness of
life.

As for the truth of his word, the Russe for the most part makes small regard
of it, so he may gain by a lie, and breach of his promise. And it may be
said truly (as they know best that have traded most with them) that from the
great to the small (except some few that will scarcely be found) the Russe
neither believes any thing that an other man speaks, nor speaks any thing
himself worthy to be believed. These qualities make the^ very odious to all
their neighbors, specially to the Tartars, that account themselves to be
honest and just, in comparision of the Russe. It is supposed by some that do
well consider of the state of both countries, that the offense they take at the
Russe government, and their manner of behavior, has been a great cause to
keep the Tartar still Heathenish, and to mislike (as he does) of the
Christian profession.

FINIS.

