THE FLOWER DE LVCE.
Which conteyneth the discourse of a Frenchman deteyned in Paris, upon the
impieties and counterfeatings contained in the manifest of Spain, published in
the month of January. 1593.
Hitherto did I always hope that shortly we should so open our eyes as we
should need no farther provocation to stir up our just displeasure against
the ancient and captiall ennemies of the Flower de Luce, until being
reassembled together under the French ba^ner, we should pass over the Pirinean
mountains for the delivery of the poor Nauarrean slaves out of captivity, who
do stretch forth their arms to that mighty prince to who^e God has
vouchsafed these two goodly crowns, the one by descent from his father, the
other from his mother. But since that after so many vain hopes one in an others
neck whereinto we have been forced in this town of Paris, for the lulling a
sleep of our senses and the deceiving of our extreme misery, we still in the
end do see that they from whom we expected our felicity (as sometimes it
has fallen out, that such as have been authors of great mischiefs, have also
been ministers of great remedies) since I say that in liew of acknowledging
their lawful king, they have passed the pikes: and plunged themselves headlong
in the horrible goulfe of Spanish bondage, I can no longer keep this long
silence, for so long as we reteyne any spark of the humor of our ancient
French liberty, we cannot but send forth some speeches, some sighs the
testimonies of our intent. Before we give up the ghost we must even with our
blood write this our last testament for our posterity, to the end they may
know that their auncesters were no such traitors to their Princes, that
voluntarily would suffer themselves to be chayned up under the locks of this
cruel and most barbarous nation.

O Innocent posterity, who in secret shall read these last lamentations of your
dying mother, euer-more remember that your selves are descended of the race of
those who time out of mind, have made other nations of the earth to tremble,
who have passed the Alps, and the Pirinean mountains, who have sailed over
every sea, to make their weapons to glister in the bowels of foreign empires:
who never fered any thing except that the sky should fall upon them, as being
assured to conquer and tame whatsoever upon the face of the earth durst meddle
with them. This only remembrance will so inflame your minds with spite and
rage, that in time you shall gather strength, yea albeit all weapons should
fail you, even with your hands to stifle these serpents who having once
wrethed you within their trains will suck forth the very marow out of your
bones.

Never think dear children that those shameful covenants whereinto your
parents are entered did proceed of their voluntary good will, neither measure
the intent of a great nation according to the notable wickedness of a number
of mutinous not frenchmen, but bastards here engendered by Spanyardes: No it is
not to be thought that any so infamous or wretched cogitation could ever
penetrate the heart of any man descended of a perfect french race. I will not
here bring into consideration the horrible cruelties that have dispeopled the
Indians, in putting to death more then remains upon the rest of the face of
the earth: neither will I set before you the insatiable couetize that has
dried up the minds of Peru, and banished the welthiest houses in Portugal and
the Low countries, all this beseems those that seek to have a stranger to
their master, yet will they have one that is tolerable. France has no skill
in such a choice: France acknowledges none but her own children, those whom
she has suckled, noursed and brought up in her bosom, over whom she
commands, her king only excepted, whom God has made to be borne the eldest
of the most ancient, greatest and most flourishing famely in the world, that
has swaied the french scepter so many years. France gives ear to that only
child whom she cherishes, and loves most tenderly, to whom she bears an
extraordinary affection, as accompting nothing difficult or dangerous that may
tend to the exalting of him above all other Princes of the earth. In him has
she showed all her contentation: her glory and majesty are shadowed and do
wholly glister in her eldest son, whose enterprises may for a while so long as
his mother sleeps be somewhat slacked, but in the end if she waken and that
the potion which by her enemies has been ministered to lull her on sleep, has
lost all force: when she returns to the knowledge of her self and begins
to stir her benumbed arms, in how short space shall we see all these spanish
forces cut in pieces? all these garrisons of moors died in their own blood,
the woeful countenance of France changed into joy and mirth, and all these
storms driven away by the beautiful beams of the son which shall restore
unto us the light-some day of contentation and perfect liberty? our churches
shall not (as they seek to persuade) be desolate, but contrariwise they shall
be replenished with that ancient multitude which usually we have seen among
us. We all together shall render praise to God for the felicity unto us
granted, when round about us we shall behold not the spanish insolency full
of pomp and vanity, but the sweetness of our parents and the delightsome
company of those that have been borne in the same town with us. Oh happy day,
most prosperous and so long desired of all good men in this poor town, who
groan under the burden of foreign dominion with whom we may without fear
bewail our passed calamities, rejoice our present felicity, and still hope for
a more full accomplishment thereof.

Albeit our goods be wasted, and that we enjoy but even half a life evil
compacted in a weak body, fallen away with extreme famine, yet may we at the
least speak bouldier: Our misery shall be at an end: and the affliction of
things passed shall never be agmented with fear of such as are to come. We
shall no longer see this proud Rodomontes presidents of the counsails of the
bastards of France: our ears shall not be filled with their proud threats,
and vain bragges of their mighty armies that should drive the wars a hundred
leagues from us, win so many fields and carry our king into the Bastille.

Nevertheless since this day shall be so fortunate unto us, why do not we
endeavor to hasten it, even with the hasard of our lives: must the fear of
death make us shamefully and cowardly die for hunger, when otherwise we might
with weapon be r^u^nged of those that draw us into these extremities, by making
us so obstinately to with-stand our countery and king? and yet does the
superfluity of their expenses evidently declare unto us, that with them this
time is as easily ouerpassed, as to us it is hard and intolerable. The great
pentions that they daily receive from their good master, causes them to
acknowledge him, and to term him The mighty king: the universal king: the
Catholic king: the king of kings: the great Monarck, victorious both by sea
and by land, and whatsoever other flattery may be invented, they will heap
upon him in exchange of his ducats. What more assured testimony ca^ we crave
to prove that such people are no frenchmen? The Achayans bring already entered
into acknowledgement of the Roman empire Aristaenetus the Megapolitain a man
of great credit amongst them, on a time in open connsaile said that it were
good to honor the Romans and not to show any ingratitude toward them, whereupon
Philopoemen, a man who justly was by the historygraphers termed the last
Grecian, hearing this speech, a while held his peace, but in the end so pressed
with impacience and choler that he could no longer keep silence said.
Aristaenetus, why make thou such have to see the wretched destiny of Greece.
For thief thirty years have there been among us a geuerall complaint
prosecuted not only by the nobility, but even by all men of courage, for yt the
king of Spain has presumed to think to cause his Ambassadors to take the
precedence from ours. What frenchman has not with just indignation complained
hereof? and yet now even at once he that intituleth himself the pretector and
liutenant of the crown, of the mightienesse and majesty of France, has
showed himself such a coward, or rather such a traitor, to term the king of
Spain the great king, and in what comparison; but that the king of France must
be little

Why Charles of Lorraine, can thou find any example that by letters patents
sealed with the Flower de Luce the title of Great was ever attributed to any
foreign kings, nay but contrariwise many times have the fields flowed with
blood for the preservation of the title of Augustus to the kings of France, the
first, the ancientest and the most mighty princes in Christiandome, who do
enjoy the crown of liberty and glory above all other kings, yet now aloud
publicly in letters patents sealed with the Flower de Luce by thee falsified,
thou call the Spanyard, the great king, a title which in our fathers days
would alone have cost thee thy life. Why Duke of Mayenne, art thou in such have
to advance the wretched destinies of France. He have, say thou, succored our
Catholic religion: nay, say, thy ambitious and the practizes of thy family
against this estate. To the end to undermine a crown of many years standing,
and to lay hold again upon the sundry vain pretenses ever since
Charlemagne, by histories convicted of falsehood, as showing that it is not past
six score years since the race of Vaudemont entered into the house of
Lorraine, which in less then 460. years have fallen into seven several
families: To strike, I say so great a stroke, to extinguish the blood royal,
and to stepe into their place, it is requisite to have great support and a
wonderful plausible pretense: this forteresse is not to be assaulted with
weak battery, considering that in such actions the lest errors are so
perilous. The support has been the king of Spain, the ancient enemy to
France, and one who by inheritance purposes to become Monarck over all
Christiandome. The only pretense any way to be taken, was for religion, all
others being far to weak. Upon this ground have they long since hired those
whose tounges have been saleable in the pulpits dedicated to the truth, by
whose means they have cast upon the people al those charms that have brought
this estate so near to destruction. Herevppon likewise have they long since
sent the Ieswistes, very Spanish Colonies, who have shed forth the poison of
their consperacy under the shadow of holiness, and under the color of
confession (O wonderful policy:) have abused the devotion of the French
nation, whom by seceret oaths they have bound to their league. Who also in liew
of instructing our people in the Catholic religion, are become trumpets of
war, firebrands of sedition, protectors and defenders of murder and robbery,
to be brief, who are waxen foreign leuine to sower the dowe of our France and
to alter the fedility into treachery and rebellion, so cunningly conducting
their masters affairs that they have filled this realm, before flourishing,
with fire and blood, and even with the French swords murdered so much brave
and valiant nobility as had been of force and power sufficient to reconquer
Naples and Millan which this Gothicke race has stolen from our fordfathers.

These cursed policies did long lie hidden, but at ye last the war begun with
all extremity about the year 85. against a most Catholic king, and so
acknowledged by those that most hated him, against a king yet in the flower of
his age, together with the detestable murder committed upon his person four
years after, have too evidently declared this pretense of religion to be
utterly false and of no appearance. This cruel and horrible murder of their
king having brought them into execration with all courageous persons, now to
cover their subtilties used in the compassing thereof, they do in their
declarations give out this impression to the people, that the kings death was a
blow from heaven. Oh abominable impiety? Oh mighty king, whom all the
subtilties of thy enemies, who abusing thy authority and too much lenity were
become masters of thy best towns, could never stop from enclosing them in the
capital city of thy realm, where they found themselves brought into such
extremity, that without that knife forged in hell, the had been already
chastized for all their notable treazons, Oh mighty king, who could not
have any fuller confession of the victory, even at thy enemies hands then the
kind of thy death, is it possible that thy subjects, even thy children who
yet do speak the french language should endure this cruel parricide, the like
whereof was never seen, neither any thing so detestable? which has
replenished all men with sorrow and tears, to be termed a blow from heaven? O
God who never without punishment, suffer thy holy name to be abused in such
and so horrible transgrassions, can thou permit the invention, even a blow of
the devil who tormenteth mankind to be attributed unto thee, and that thou who
art protector of kings should be proclaimed their murderer? Suffer not O
Lord such blasphemies, but with a stripe of thy mighty arm, even a blow
indeed from heaven, break the cursed head of these traitors to their king, of
these bloody paricides who seek to cover their detestable coniuration and
conspiracy under the veil of thy holy name.

What an indignity is this, O ye french nation, that they, who impudent and
shameless dare yet, though falsey, cause themselves to be called as you,
should bewail the death of the Duke of Parma whom they entitle of happy
memory, a title never publickely attributed to other but kings, and
contrariwise wish us to believe our deceased king to have been such a one: that
God who is all good, yea the fountain of all goodness has caused the throat of
his anointed to be cut, even his who upon his head did bear the chief crown
of all the nations that are baptized in his name. So that a petty foreign
Prince, the usurper of Saint Peter's patrimony, is not only compared with the
king of France, with the king of the Flower de Luce, but is also magnified by
the same tongue that blasphemeth against the memory of our deceased king. Yet
were this tongue spanish in sound as it is in affection, it were the more
tolerable, but a french tongue to be polluted with such impure speeches. Oh
what an indignity? what a sorrow.

The reason of these so contrary speeches is very apparent. The death of this
Farnese who signed no otherwise but Alexander, have given a great blow at the
affairs of this war, as finding no successor that can approach to his
reputation, so that for want of all others Don Philip has been constrained to
set in such a Captain as is not otherwise known but only that he has been
the chief executioner of the poor Indians, by him murdered without resistance,
whom also the inhabitants of the country will not receive as fearing his
extreme cruelty. On the other side the Guysardes imagined that the death of
the late king should have brought them to the royalty, and that by their
policies they should soon disunite us each from other, making us to believe
that no man can be a good Catholic unless he be a spanyard or a Lorraine,
unless he wear the red cross or the duble cross. They have above two years
deteyned the people in Paris upon an opinion that there was no mass said at
Tours and have drowned those that durst testefy ye contrary. But since all their
purposes are grounded upon falsehood, they be to be excused for the cruel
punishment by them inflicted upon those that testify the truth, their
capital ennemy.

Many who since the death of our late king never lived in this city of Paris,
may perhaps give credit to this declaration by them published, namely that
they have labored to bring his Majesty now reigning into the bosom of the
Church: But we who for these four years have continually heard their Sermons
do know the contrary, also that they never preached unto us any thing so much,
as that albeit he should become as good a Catholic as S. Jews (these be
their very words) the Curate of S. Bennets said in S. Mederickes, as good a
Catholic as I take him to be, yet is he by no means to be received, as
being a Relaps and impenitent. Such as would seem the mildest, said. that he
might be admitted into the Church, but it was requisite, for penance of his
fault, that he should resign his crown to those that had reclaimed him. That
he might be a Catholic, but no king. Thirty thousand persons not only have
heard but do daily hear these speeches from the mouths of Boucher and Comolet
the Ieswistes, and yet would they feign persuade the rest of all France yt they
have endeavored to convert him. O ye hipocrites as you are, know you not in
your consciences that you never desired his conversion, but his estate, that
you care not whether he have a crown in heaven, so you may get yt which he
has upon earth? do not your consciences bear you witness that you could wish
that tumulteously at his return from some warlike exploit, he should enter
into our church, to the end for ever hereafter he might be though an Atheist,
using religion as a cloak to play his personage in, and so lose his credit
with all Christian people. In your consciences do you not know that of all
things in this world, you must fear least in some lawful counsel by the
working of the holy ghost, his errors should be laid open before him? If you
stand not in wonderful fear thereof, why do you so shrink away? why had you
rather see all France on a flame and shortly brought into combustion, and so
many miserable persons overwhelmed with the intolerable burden of these
tedious wars, and brought into such poverty, that their misery has far
surmounted the misery of their friends deceased? why I say had you not rather
try this remedy which only is proper, and has been practiced by the ancient
fathers in the cure of such diseazes. A remedy often times reiterated for one
self error, for the truth which is always like it self in all places, and at
all times, is never tied to one only counsel: A remedy that might serve not
him only, but all other of his religion. Why I say had you not rather use this
gentle and wholesome medecin, then fire and sword whereto man's conscience is
no way subject, weapons do never breed any conuerts, but rather deniers of
their faith. To bodily ulcers bodily matters, and to the wounds of the spirit,
spiritual remedies do agree. To seek by maine force to pluck up error in
religion, is to seek to cure the soul by the body, nay rather to kill then to
cure: by darkness to show light, and by cruelty to teach clemency. If ye
list to destroy error, it is requisite you should instruct the man, and the way
to instruct is in a free counsel to hear his reasons, and to let him
understand yours.

Yet if God by the success of your armies, would declare ye same to be
acceptable in his sight: If he would grant you great advantages over our king,
and minister hope to force so many mighty towns, which do daily increase and
fortefie with the ruin and spoils of our poor Paris, your heat to prosecute
your wars might some way be excusable. But having utterly lost a great and
notable battle, even when ye were assisted with the power of Spain,
Germany, Switzerland Lorraine, yea and the self same day as it were
miraculosly having also lost a second battle in Anuergne. Again this last
year the Duke of Ioieuse one of the principal pillars of the Spanish faction,
being defeated and slain in a pitched field with the loss of three thousand
men, either drowned or left dead in the field, among whom were found all the
Capteines of the rebels throughout the whole country, whereupon they were
forced to vncoule friar Angel, who in the end shall receive like recompense
for breaking his vow solemnly made unto God, as his brother had for violating
his faith to his king, who had so highly cherished and exalted his ungrateful
famely. Likewise in the same month of October the general of the army of
Lorraine, having lost both his own life and his masters army, who were
overcome by a handful of men, who for 10000 accounted the Duke of Bouillon for
their head, of whose good fortune and advancement, I meruel not though the Duke
of Lorraine his neighbor makes so many complaints, considering that in so
short space he has already defeated him of two strong towns and cut in pieces
the flower of his men of war, who now might have stood him in some steed for
the defense of other his strong holds against 12000 men, and 20 canons that do
lay sore to them. After I say so many great losses, and all your great towns
so straightly beseeged, what hope can there remain, especially this Alexander
of Parma being no longer a worlds man? True it is that hereafter we may
peradventure have some succor from the Sauoyan, who will bring his great
forces to assist his cunning to be crowned in our city of Paris: for he has
married one of the daughters of Spain: and since that by the advice of the
Doctors of Millan, the Salicke law ought to surcease, he has no doubt a part
in the succession: for at Paris there is no prerogative of Eldership among the
daughters, and therefore the town may well enough be divided. Let the eldest
chose either the Loure or the Palace, the one shall hold for Sauoy, the other
for Spain. But I doubt he has other matters to think upon, he sees already
the french ancients so forward toward the midest of Piedmont, that thirty
thousand canon shot will hardly root them out, and yet before he come to that,
he must win the field against those that have proffered him battle any time
these six months, whom he dare not encounter in the plain field with all his
own power and the power of his father in law. This is a very Scipios policy.
Our king has procured the war to be transported into Africa, and the
firebrand thereof into the dominions of the Spanyard and of his son in law,
who already entitled himself Earl of Prouence, from whence he has found one
of the heirs of Gaston of Foix and of the valiant Nogaret, that shall not
only expel him but also proceed further, and evidently give him notice of the
old proverb which says. That France was never so weak but a man might still
find some cause of earnest fight, and that either soon or late she will give
him to wit that it is dangerous dealing with her.

Oh Ungrateful Sauoyan, among all earthly people the most unthankful. France
restored to thy mother, that which with the swords point and upon good cause
she had taken from thy grandfather, and thou in liew of acknowledging this
magnificence, and in all manner of good duty, reuerencing the majesty of the
french empire, do by notable treasons endeavor to rent and dismember the
same, still conspiring with her Capital enemies. Remember that I do
prognosticate unto thee, that a Spanish wife shall procure to thee the loss of
that which a French wife brought to thy father, nothing can defend thee. All
the cunning speech of the Archbishop of Lions together with the abstract of all
the seditious libells and orations, spued out against our kings, and by these
pentioners of Castile, published under the title of a declaration, can no whit
prevail with this valiant nobility, whose ears and hearts are stopped against
such Mermaids as seek to plonge them in the goulfe of all misery. All these
latter policyes they take as assured arguments that the strength of this
detestable conspiracy draws to decay. Your selves do now know that this busy
and seditious communalty is not able to vanquish the French nobility, cannot
bear the first push of their horses, neither may any way abide the glims of
their glistering armor. What will ye then do, seek some means by fair
words to divide these gallant ge^tlemen among themselves, and in a pitched field
procure them to cut each others throats. Oh what a happy day would that be unto
you, wherein there should be never a blow stricken in vain: where the loss
either of the one or the other should be an equal gain, and like advancement
of your drifts, which can have no success so long as there be any gentlemen in
France. They are borne to liberty, to glory: They can brook no foreign
dominion or commandment. Any speeches of the king of Spain, of the Sauoyan,
or of the Lorraines, they cannot hear but that needs they must enter into
choler, into indignation, into threats, yea and into arms to the end to exalt
the name and honor of France above all things in the world. They cannot abide
to hear any king but their own, entitled the great king, without ouerrunning
of those that dare give out such servile, Infamous and base speeches. They are
not acquainted with this title Universal king, in whatsoever language it be
disguized: They know not that old tirant otherwise then by the name of king
of Spain, which no man dare now pronounce in their presence for fear least at
that only word they should call to mind that it is the name of their capital
enemy, the sworn enemy to their fathers, the same who wrongfully deteyneth
from France the one half of her provinces: who procured the death of his own
son, and of his wife the daughter of king Henry the second, and since help
forward the deaths of his two brother in laws, the late Monsieur and our last
king. Likewise to the end ye may the better know him, he was son to Charles
the fifth, the poysoner of the french Dolphine: who by treasons stole ye
greatest riches of this realm: who laid the foundations of his tyranny on the
city of Rome which his son has since perfectly established and laid fast,
purchasing with coin the voice of the consistory and so bringing into the
holy sea his nurcelings and pentioners, according to the degrees of their
affection to Spain. Do you then meruell that their bulls forged in Madrlt
which took only their edge at Rome, wherewith they endeavor to make France
through her division, tributarie to them, have been condemned by this imperial
and sacred Senate of our king. A senate governed by a Cato, replenished with
Phocions, and evermore accustomed to revenge the injuries of the crown.

The french nobility has sent ye Marquize of Pizani, to be assured of the
truth. If it appear that Rome is as surely tied to the Spaniard as Civil, and
that their declarations can not be well enterteyned, they will well enough
provide remedies necessary. This is not the first time that the holy sea has
been transferred to this side of the mountes, albeit I be very well assured
there shall be no such necessity: For the French sword is strong enough yet
once again to deliver Rome out of the hands of this Gothik and Sarrazin
stock. Neither do we believe that all that is beyond the Alps does love this
universal king, but that contrariwise the clearer that their sight is
naturally, the more they do apprehend the effects of his insupportable
dominion and the execution of the hereditarie purposes of his father Charles.
This French Cath. Nobility is of force sufficient to preserve both the Estate
and their Religion, neither need they the help of these sovereigns of
Spain, of Sauoy, or of Lorraine so often mentioned in your declaration, who
under pretense of succor do seek to drive them out of the inheritance
purchased with their ancesters blood, ye like whereof have happened almost to
all the nations in the world, as histories do testify. Our holy Cath. Romish
Religion is not otherwise assaulted but by your wretched League, which withal
breeds Atheism, defloratio^ of sacred virgins, murder of priests, sacking of
Churches in all parts of the Realm: so far is our king from bringing any
alteration whatsoever, or from contrarying his oath even in the least title,
that contrariwise he is careful of all that concerns our Religion and the
celebratio^ of ye holy mysteries as our selves. Witness all the towns that he
has subdued under his obedience, in the which it can not be found that he has
diminished the least relick, or one only sacred vessel. (yet the most part of
yours is either moulten, or tra^sported into Arthois) Neither is there any one
Religious person or Priest, that contained him self within his habit and his
profession, that was ever molested, even with the least word: whereas yours are
either dead for hunger, or withdrawn into such towns as rest in his Majesty's
obedience, where they have been received, sustained and found acknowledging
those things which they could never have imagined, and which your falshoodes
and slanders continually preached forth did debar them the sight of. Upon
what occasion, ween you has God sent you these great afflictions, this want of
all things, especially of silver, but eue^ to the end that the people being by
little and little slipped from you and retired into such towns as rest in their
kings obedience, should confess their fault and simplicity in that they have
so long suffered them selves to be abused by these enchantments, which made
them see the things that never were, that made them believe that all the
Princes, all the Officers of the Crown, so many brave Lords and Gentlemen were
no longer Catholics, because they would not stoop to the commandments of
this great Catholic king, and the letters patents of Charles of Lorrayne. Is
it not for this crime of heresy that ye have robbed and spoiled the house of
Neuers, and given the Duchy of Rethelois to a Spartaque, whom ye have
procured to take the title of Duke of Rethelois and Peer of France? or have ye
so evil entreated this Duke of Neuers at the express commandment of the king
of Spain, who hates him as much as any Prince upon the earth, because that
having more deeply penetrated and more manifestly revealed to all France his
pernicious practices, to the end to stop and confound them under the
protection of our king, he daily increases in affection bringing of valor,
couradge, diligence and military discretion so much as may be desired. And
besides the matter which I accoumpt to fullness of all his comme^dations is
this, yt he brings up his only son, his Majesty's cousin germain in
extreme dislike and hatred of this Spanish League.

Must we not also as heretics condemn, excommunicate and proscribe Venise,
Florence, Mantua, Soleure, Fribourg and other Catholics our faithful
confederates, who are so presumptuous as to dare to undertake to stop the
increase of your great kings Monarchy, who also will be partakers in the
glorious reuendge of the murder of the first Prince of Christendom, whereto
all Europe stands bound? Believe me this beautiful and glistering cloak of
Religion, wherewith your ambition has been so long shadowed is now thread
bare, full of holes, we may see through it and evidently discern your wretched
and pernicious purposes. Now that the incredible felicity that had guided you
even to the mark, so as ye were ready to mount unto the flower Royal, has
forsaken you, whom think you to persuade to enter into your ship half broken,
when it is upon the point of shipwreck? Whom wee^ you to persuade to come
starve for hunger among your sixtene robbers, who after the Spanish manner hung
up their chief Justice in the view of all Paris, in the midst of the
co^federates of the conspiracy of the haulter, whose dagger is at ye throats
of all those in whose hearts there rests any sparcke of humanity or
clemency? to be brief, among so many fearful tokens of Gods wrath,
cruelties, divisions, ruins, all sorts of desolations, yea and diseases
utterly new and unknown to the French, of whom you are no longer. How I say do
you now think to make such poisons to work, considering that in August and
September 89. when ye seemed to have achieved your affairs, having murdered
our king, and with an army of 30000. men enclosed his successor in Dieppe,
after you had published like pardons, like abolitions, yet could you not in all
find above three or four remissionaries, and among them but one only
Gentleman, whose name will remain infamous among all posterity, unless by
some notable service he wash away so shameful a blot of treason committed
immediately after the slaughter of his king, his good master and one who had so
highly favored him. Is it possible, Vitry that the tall, pale, and fearful
image of this great king, should not continually appear in thy sight or follow
thee wheresoever thou go? do thou not see him with one hand houlding his
bloody wound, and with the other the red gore knife, continually following
thee to be reuendged of thy notable treachery? Is it possible that thou can
without tre^bling and sighing hear him with a fearful voice object unto thee
thy trespass in these words? Oh traitor, while I lived thou did honor me,
but the next day after my death thou have worshipped my murderers: thou have
bowed thy knee in those places where they deified that monster more cruel then
the Tigers: thou have accompanied those that triumphed and publicly rejoiced
in my death? yet do I more marvel how our Lieutenant general of the Spanish
crown in France, who sees that in liew of so many Gentlemen that have
habandoned his rebellion and ranged them selves under the flower de Luce, he
could not win past two or three in four years, how I say he is now
persuaded that he may divide the Princes of the blood of France, and draw them
to his party. O ambitious Lorraine, have thou dared to think that thou
should have such subjects to stoop to thy commandementes, or to obey to
thy letters patentes, as necessarily they must, if they had taken thy side? or
will thou habandon to them thy Lieutenancie, and submit thy self under the
laws and Magistrates, over whom thou now do so proudly command in those
towns whcih thy tyra^nie does possess? If thou will why have thou not spoken
the word? why have thou not said that thou were ready to lay away all thy power
and to establish them above thy self, and above all thy stock of Lorraine?
Thou have been wary enough for proceeding so far, not that thou art not
assured that they all are too magnanimous and too virtuous Princes to League
them selves with those that are yet besprinckeled with the blood of the
slaughter of the eldest of their family Royal, who loved them as his
children: whose cruel and barbarous death all laws of God and man do bind
them to reuendge, so long as their valiant souls shall be enclosed within
their bodies: but by such offers, though fained, thou did fear to provoke
the old tyrant of Spain, who abhors the whole name of Bourbon. And
indeed what appearance is there of division among persons so well united? you
Lorrains have long time directed the heads of your spears against the whole
race of Bourbon, and with fire and sword do prosecute ye rooting out of their
family Royal: When fortune most smiled upon you and that you seemed to be
upon the highest step to climb to the Royalty, then did they together
resist you: And now that all true Frenchmen upon the opening of their eyes do
manifestly discern in your dri^tes with such dexterity conducted that whereas
your grandfather came into France weak in goods, poor in honor, naked in
dignity, who in the year 1522. following the wars in Picardie under the
Duke of Vandosme commanded only over one company of men of arms, you in our
adge find your selves among you seized of the most important governments of
this Estate, yea and had it not been for the 23. of December 1588. had gone
away with the rule of all France, under the commandments of your master the
king of Spain. Now I say that every one that is of any calling or courage
thoroughout this Realm, is gathered to his Majesty to chastise your ambition,
the cause of so many miseries, what ground can ye take, to imagine that the
Princes of the blood should divide them selves, and purchase the ruin and
death each of other, to the end to leave their room to the vpstartes of
Lorraine? Well if you cannot thrust in the spirit of division into Bourbon,
yet at the least ye will draw unto you those mighty me^ who within these four
years, have so often put you so shamefully to flight. I think the Duke of
Aumale looks by means of this declaration, that this brave and courageous
Lo^gueuille, who with less then 1200. Frenchmen, who standing not upon their
number, but upon their valor in a pitched field, overthrew him and all his
army consisting of 8000. men and 10. canons and pursued him even to S. Denis,
shall one of these days send to offer him his service, desiring pardon for his
former faults and crave to be reconciled with his high and mighty cousin,
Lieutenant general to this great king the Monarcke of Spain, France and
Italy. Oh miserable Leaguers, into what frenzy are ye entered, when ye think
with your goodly figures of Rhetoric to persuade those, who in one month do
hear more Masses then you do in a year: who under the kings authority next
to the Princes of his blood are the very pillars of the state and of our
Religion: to persuade them I say, that they all are heretics, and that none
but you only, who are conspired with these new Christians, as yet for the most
part in heart Jews and Sarazins, are true Catholics: to the end yt therefore
they may yield themselves bound into your hands, so that without labor ye may
in short time root out all these great and noble houses, all these families
fatal for expulsion of strangers out of France. No, no, if your Spanish
remembrances import no other matter, I do well see that this old dotard is at
an end with all his sleights, since yt to subdue France to him self he craves
the help of the French Gentlemen, who altogether under one self banner seamed
of Flower de Luces, have so often chased his Spanish troops, and who as
brethren of one belly, crowned with like garlands achieved in so many
battles, shall for ever be united to maintain their liberties, franchises
and preeminences, which with such wounds and so many hazards their
predecessors have left unto them inseperably conjoined with the preservation of
the crown upon the head of the lawful heir.

Courage therefore oh Frenchmen, the victory is yours, Parma is dead, Ioyeuse
and all his power are laid along, the Lorraine and the Sauoyan shut up in their
capital towns in liew of giving do crave succor at the Leaguers in France.
The horrible conspiracy against Rennes is discovered, the traitors are
punished, and the ducats of such purchase of towns are converted to our use.
Behold Montmorencie marching with a brave army and the sword of France in his
hand: let us set on with like courage, a power divided yields no fruict: let
every man endeavor him self: common interest craves it and calls you
thereto: your country inuiteth you: all the veins of Paris are stopped, it
must dry up, unless our selves will norish the rebellion, that is, kindle the
fire which consumes this Estate. Let ye king remember ye throughout the whole
triumph of Silla the fortunate, there was nothing made so goodly a show as the
train of yt most noble and rich of the City of Rome, returning through his
victory from exile whether ye dregs of ye people had driven the^, and them
crowned with garlands of flowers did accompany his triu^pha^t chariot, calling
him their father and savior, because that by his means they returned into
their country and recovered their goods, their wives and their children. The
joy of so many good Fre^chme^, who shall reenter into Paris will be no less
and ye honor infinite times greater, made firm and assured to a lawful king.

Let the^ all the public treasure be employed to this effect: let every one
particularly let him self blood to cure this burning fever: let all these
Iesuistes speeches, the only procurers of a millio^ of Fre^chme^ to slay each
other, be stopped: let all those that build their particular purposes upon the
public calamities (which they hope for hereafter) be rased from among the
number of Frenchmen: let all those, who having no feeling of the grief of ye
body, do not help to relieve it be cut of as rotten members and the great
goods that they enjoy with express charge to succor ye state in such and so
vrge^t necessities (a charge by solemn oath renewed at every change) be taken
from them and themselves declared unworthy of nobility, and those goodly
inherita^ces given to those brave Gentlemen, who for these four years have
continually had the cuyrace on their backs, without whose help together with
ye conduct of this great king, ye true French Alexander, we all should be most
miserable bondine^ to the Spaniard, and this we must confess: their names
ought to be written in golden letters and so consecrate to the posterity, and
the names of ye others withered with perpetual ignominy to them and all their
posterity. You Magistrates who in your hands do hold the Justice of France,
come in with such virtue, with such courage, acknowledging ye affectionate and
severely chastising the traitors and trechours to their country, yt you may
participate in the honor of the restauratio^ of the Estate. Armies can not be
but in certain places, neither do they terrify any but those whom they draw
near unto: the force of Justice at one self time penetrateth into all places,
yea even into the most inaccessible: her scarres and wounds are far more
sharp and of longer continuance then those of Bellona. To be brief, at this
time let all those that list to live and dye Frenchmen, set their hands
earnestly to this work, so excellent, and so necessary for the
reestablishment of this great crown in her first eminency and ancient glory.
Let us no longer flatter the disease, and we shall soon see the wound purged
and cured, we shall speedely see ye end of all these rebels. We shall behold
the chariot with the body of our late king brought from Compiegne even into
Paris by these rebels even in their shyrtes to the wonderful consolation of
all good men. You Sir whose memory we moisten with our tears, appease your
just wrath against this poor people, against your City of Paris, sometime of
you so well-beloved, so favored and so enritched: she has committed the most
notable ingratitude and treachery that ever was or shall be in the world, but
already she has felt such a punishment that the scarres will remain for ever:
cast the rest of your indignation, of your just vengeance upon the guilty,
pardon the innocent: Comfort your self in yt God has given you such a
successor as after your decease will make you to be acknowledged even of all
those, who in your life time did disauow you: who in your Louure will restore
your defaced arms and garlands that were pulled down, and will exalte your
memory into the highest degree of honor and glory. Help us also by your
prayers to obtain for him at Gods hand so long life, that after the ending of
his own he may accomplish the course of your years that were cut of.

FINIS.

