JOY IN Tribulation. OR, CONSOLATIONS FOR AFFLICTED SPIRITS.

By PHINEES FLETCHER, B.D. and Minister of Gods Word at Hilgay in Norfolk.

PSALM. 34. 19. Many are the troubles of the righteous; but the Lord delivers
him out of all.

LONDON: Printed for James Boler, dwelling at the sign of the Marigold in
Paul's Churchyard. 1632.

TO THE TRVLY HONORABLE, MY MOST HONOred Cousins, Sir WALTER ROBERTS, Knight
and Baronet: and to his gracious Lady, everlasting Consola^io^s of the Eternal
Comforter.
SIR, your very ancient Gentry does not so enoble you in the eyes of the world,
as your new man in the sight of the Church: Greg. Naz.
(...), says that ancient and eloquent Father, The new birth is the noblest
birth: In the Creation, Man was the first, and last creature; last in time,
first in place and dignily, being made the Son of God, Luk 3. 38.
and the great Favorite of heaven. And now the New Creature, though last
borne, as Jacob, yet as Iac^b, obtaines the birthright, and over-tops the
elder. The best Herald, Gods blessed Spirit, preferres the Beraeans as more
Noble, or best borne, Acts 17.11
who received the Word with all readiness of mind, etc. And surely if high
blood of Generous parents sets us aloft in the eye of the world, how much more
luster among Christians will that immortal seed give you, whereby you are
borne, Ioh. 1.13^
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.

Now though I well know that the near relation of fleshly Alliance, and blood
which is betwixt us, (beside many other knots of friendship) have tied my
heart, long since, unto you both, in all unfeyned affection, yet this
spiritual kindred is a much dearer, and nearer link, uniting my soul unto
you in the bond of the Spirit; so that I can truly say with that blessed
Apostle, ^^es. ^.8
I am affectionately desirous of you, and willing to impart to you (not only
this slender fruit of) the Gospel (but) mine own soul, bebause you were
dear unto me. I am confident you will receive this pledge of love with the
same af^ection with which it is presented, and therefore leaving these few
Consolations to the application of that great Comforter, and your selves with
all your Olive branches, unto the Unction of that holy one, and perfect growth
of the blessed Spirit, I commend the weak Author to your Christian love, and
prayers, who while he is, shall ever be

Your willing servant in the Lord Jesus, PHINEES FLETCHER.

TO THE POOR in SPIRIT.
CHristian Reader: Whosoever thou art who mournest, and art humbled under the
sense of spiritual poverty, to thee belongs that blessedness of the heavenly
kingdom, and strong consolations of that great Comforter: Mat. 5.3,4^
witness he that bought it for thee, and by his own mouth has bequeathed it
to thee in his Testament. But how cunning Satan is to hide this evidence from
thy blubbered eyes, w^ll need no other testimony then thine own unquiet and
dejected spirit. The height of grace is rejoicing in the Lord: 1 Pet. 1. 8.
and this is a joy un^peakeable and glorious, and indeed a lesser he^ven upon
earth. Now that cursed enemy envies thee that thy future heaven, but is raging
mad that thou should even here also enjoy an heaven of joy, in this vale of
tears; therefore employes all his policies, and fallacies to hinder thy
rejoicing, and to hold down thy heart in distrustful fears and sorrows.

Thou may easily observe, that none have been more c^st down in this
uncomfortable mourning, then those, who (thou will confess) have had most cause
of rejoicing.

That Princely Prophet had the oath of God (attesting by his holiness) that he
would not fail David. Psal^ 89.35
And I know thou will acknowledge that he was (in the deepest mourning) a
blessed Saint, and had great cause to rejoice always in the Lord; yet was
there a time when his soul lay groaning under an intolerable burden of heavy
discomforts. Esa. 50.10
He that when he walked in darkness, and had no light, when not one spark
of earthly consolation shined forth unto him, See 1 Samuel 35^6.
could yet stay himself on the Lord, and could fill his heart (in this wane,
nay, eclipse) with the borrowed light of his countenance, ^ven this Saint
found a time when his soul refused comfort; Psalm. 77^2.
when even the remembrance of ^od) his maine cordial) became his spe^iall
co^asive; so that his spirit was overwhelmed with it. Read carefully that 77
Psalm, and thou will confess that thy troubles of spirit do not equal, at
least cannot exceed his.

It is a constant practice of Satan, to hold, and rock a carnal heart in all
presumptuous quietness, and rejoicing; and, (if he may) to keep down the
believing soul in continual unchearefulnesse and mourning. I have desired
therefore to publish this little Treatise, which God has blessed to some in
private, that if he be pleased to glorify his power in great weakness, thy
wounds may be suppled, if not cured; and to give occasion to some Brother, who
has more gifts, and less employment, to enlarge this excellent subject.
Remember thou, that the joy of the Lord is thy strength. Neh^ 8.10.
Oh let not thy sorrow, (no not for sin) drown thy rejoicing in that
Savior, who is become sin for thee, that thou might be the
righteousness of God in him. 2 Cor. 5.^1
I know when thy soul is far from peace, thou will be ready to say, My
strength, and my hope is perished from the Lord; Lam. 3.24, 25,26.
but remember, the Lord is thy portion: Remember, It is good that a man should
both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord. And let thy heart be
assured (and in that assurance comforted) that The Lord is good unto them that
wait for him, to the soul that seeks. Wait for thy Lord, for he will come,
and will not tarry. He that testifies these things says, Rev^ 2^^2^^
Surely I come quickly. Amen, Even so, Come Lord Jesus. If you receive any
profit, let me have some use of it in thy prayers.

Thy compassionate Fellow-member, P. F.

CHRISTIAN CONSOLATIONS FOR THE AFFLICTED SPIRIT.
CHAP. I. The necessity of comfort in this life.
AS in this estat of mortality our weak bodies stand in continual need of
reparation, as well by Phy^icall purgations, to dissolve and cast out ill
humors, which through distemper either of air or diet have crept in upon us,
as continually by seasonable refreshings, and some exercise to gather and
maintain strength and health; so, and much more our weaker Spirits, in this
sinful world so subject to backsliding, have much necessity of continual
comfort, as well to raise up our fainting souls, when they are staggering
through unbelief; as to under-prop and hold them fast, when they stand by
faith.

For Comfort in the large sense being nothing else, but the fortifying the
heart against the assault of evil, it cannot be denied, but that malicious
enemy of man, especially of Christian men, holds every one in a straight
siedge, and fails not to make battery by all manner of engines against soul
and body with temporal and spiritual evils. The most have most need of
comfort, but no sense of their need: for they suppose they are strong, Rev^
3.17.
and have need of nothing: They are lusty and strong, Psa. 73^ 4^5
they are not in trouble as other men, nor are plagued as other: they conceit
themselves all whole, as those proud Pharisees, and see no use of a Physician:
but this strength is merely imaginary, and (as a dream) only in their fancy,
and therefore but a castle in the air. Even in earthly, much more in the
spiritual estate, no man is so weak indeed, as he who is strong in his own
conceit: this very conceit being as a traitorous warder to open a door of
security, and betray all to the enemy. Others feel much want of comfort, but
want not so much as they feel: for being strongly assaulted, and finding great
weakness, they think all lost, or very desperate; and utterly forget that then
they are strong indeed, ^ Cor. 12. 10.
when they are weak in their own feeling: sense of weakness thrusting out
importunate prayers to seek for help, and importunity of prayer never failing
to bring in strength and succor.

But Comfort in the stricter sense, being nothing else but a ^enitive plaster
for a wounded Spirit, is by our heavenly Physician prescribed only to an heart
sick of sin, and broken with godly sorrow. To apply that Balm of Gilead to
any other Patient, we (his Apothe^aries) have no warrant; but to administer it
unto these we have strait charge and commandment.

Certainly, our most bl^ssed Savior purpos^ly took upon him our infirmities,
that being himself touched with the ^eeing of our weakness, Heb. 2. ^^ 18.
and 4. 15^
he might be a merciful high Priest: most unlike those Pharisaical Priests by
himself condemned; They bound heavy burdens, and g^ievous to be borne, Mat.
23 ^^
and laid them on men's shoulders, but would not touch them themselves with one
of their fingers. Ma^^ 11.^^
1 Ioh. 5. ^^
But his yoke is light (his Commandments not grievous) and yet he bears it
first himself, and receives the whole weight upon his own shoulders. As he
therefore comma^ds his Disciples to take up their cross and follow him and
shuts out of his company all such as refuse (as being unworthy of him; Mat.
10.38
) so he takes it up first himself, and either proportions the cross to their
strength, or measures strength to them, according to the cross which they
bear. First, the curse he takes altogether upon himself, Gal 3. 13.
and bears it off wholly from them. Secondly, he sends in that Comforter to
them, who shall sustain and strongly carry them through, and when by reason of
sinful infirmity they are ready to faint, shall put new spirit into them.

And to this end he does not only command his Mess^ngers to rebuke sharply,
Ti^ ^1. 13
that men may be sound in the faith, and the dead rotten flesh of our corrupt
nature may be cut out; but charge them to comfort; 2 ^im. 4^^^
for so signifies all that word ((...)) ordinarily transl^ted exhort. 2 Sam^
(...)
And as David sent his servants to comfort Ha^^n, s^ the Son of David, our
most gracious Savior, sends his Ambassadors to every afflicted and dejected
soul, and commands them comfort you, Esa. 40. (...)
comfort you my people, Speak comfortably to Jerusalem.

As therefore we are most willing to bring, so must thou who art a Christian
be as ready to receive this m^ssage.

I am one (the least and lowest, yet one) of these Messengers: and who are the
Israel of God, and his true (suppose never so weak) servants, but those that
desire to fear his name? Neh. 1. 10, 11.
who shall be refreshed, Mat. 11.29.
but he that is laden? wherefore has God given a tongue of the learned, Esa.
50.4.
but to minister a seasonable word to him that is weary? and if we are weary,
why do we not accept, nay greedily take hold of the refreshing offered?
whosoever thou art who groanest under the burden of sin, and sighest to
feel the fetters of thy strong corruptions; whosoever breakest thy heart,
disquietest, and vexest thy spirit in the sight and sense of thy rebellious
flesh, crying out, Romans 7.24.
Who shall deliver me from this body of death? Psa. 119.32
When will thou enlarge my heart, that I may run in the way of thy
Commandments? know the Lord Jesus was purposely anointed for thee, Luke 4.^^^
even to heal the broken hearted, to set at liberty them that are bruised:
know that all the comforts of the blessed Spirit are thy portion; and not only
the Minister, but every member of Christ upon occasion bound to reach it forth
to thee, and charged to comfort the feeble minded. 1 The. (...)
Now therefore as the Lord h^th given me an heart and hand desirous to
distribute a word of comfort unto an^ fainting Christian, so the same God of
all mercy and compass on give every weary soul an hand to take fast hold of
it, and to hold it fast; to receive it re^dily, and steadfastly to retain it.
Verily to this end the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 1.3, 4.
the father of mercies, and God of all comfort does comfort us in all our
tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any affliction,
by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God. Let not therefore
the Consolations of God seem a small matter unto us. Job 15. 11
Comfort then in every respect is very needeful: needful for the Stewards of
Christ, faithfully to deal this portion to the afflicted, and no less need
have they to receive it: But where (says the sick soul) oh where should I
find it.

CHAP. II. Where comfort is to be found: even in all things; and first in
affliction it self.
SUrely it is not the least of our miseries, which sin brought in upon us,
that with the loss of all spiritual comfort, we lost also all knowledge
where to seek and find it. How easily can we by our taste discern the best
meats and drinks, how easily can we learn where, and how to procure them?
but in what consists our true comfort, the strength and solace of our poor,
naked, miserable Spirits, and where to search for it we are wholly ignorant,
blind as stones, nay worse, wilfully blind. What fool will let down a nett
for fish in the mountains, or set a toil for Dear in the Seas? Mat. 7.16^
Do men look for grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? yet this madness is
common to natural men, who think to find strength in vanity, and comfort in
vexation: when seeks a rich man for shelter against the evil day? His wealth
is his strong City, and an high wall in his conce^t. Pro^ 18,1^
Where do worldlings search for, and hope to find joy, Psalm. 4.7.
and solace? in their Wheat, and Wine. The Epicure comforts and cheers up his
soul, Eat, drink, and be merry, Lu. 1^.19^
thou have goods laid up for many years. Nay, the drunken Hog thinks to drink
down sorrow in his swiltub; 1 Cor. 15.3^
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. Come, and I will bring
wine, Esa. 56.12^
and we will fill our selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as
this day, and much more abundant: as if a man should seek for Paradise under
the frozen Poles, for heaven in hell.

Now as nothing is more vain then to search for comfort against the sorrows
of this world in this world of sorrows, so as fond were it for a Christian to
rake out any comfort from the puddles of heathen and natural men. Their best
Physicians and medicines can never possibly work upon the part affected, that
is, the Conscience. The choice of them are but as Io^s friends, m^serable
comforters. Their barrennes in this fruit will yield us an excellent document
how beggar-poore our nature is in any grace; when we observe what weak
comforts those strong wits with all their study, and help of nature produced
in the necessities of themselves, and their friends. Look what difference we
find in swoons and qualmes, between hot water and small beer, such, and
infinitely more shall we observe between the consolatio^s given by God in the
Scriptures, and natural men in their writings. See it in some instances.

As first against affliction in general: All calamities (say they) are either
casual, and a wise man will despise chanceable events; or else fatal, such as
by destiny are set out for us, and therefore cannot be avoided, but must be
borne. Now consider what virtue there is in such a plaster to heal the least
scratch of any trouble.

Compare with this the comforts of the blessed Spirit.i. God offers himself to
thee in affliction as a Father: Heb. 1^.7.
armeth thee with proportionable strength to pass through it: 1 Cor. 10^ 13.
cleanses thy defiled heart by this purging fire, Pro. 20.30
and purifies it from the dross of sin; 1 Cor. 11. 32.
prevents eternal condemnation, 2 Cor. 14.7
and embrightens thy heavenly crown by it. And what wound so deep, which
these ingredients will not perfectly cure, and skin soundly?

Come to particulars: In banishment, the Philosopher will tell thee, Every
soil is a valiant man's Country. In disgrace and infamy, It is but popular
breath, lighter the^ air. In death; Cities (say they) States, the whole world
of men are mortal. Now alas what strength is there in these weak reeds to
bear up a soul plunged, and even swallowed up in fear and horror? Certainly,
if a man were sinking before, these comfortours would be so far from raising
his dejected heart, that they would rather utterly overwhelme, and drown it in
all hopeless perplexity.

But our great comfort maks us to see, Heb. 11.13
that here we are strangers and Pilgrims: Phil. 3.20
neither can we be exiled from God, and from our heavenly Jerusalem, Mat. 5.11.
12.
and Blessed are you when men revile and persecute you, and say all manner of
evil of you. Rejoice, and leap for joy, for great is your reward in heaven.
He makes us to know that death is bu^ a sleep in the Lord, 1 The. 4.14.
a rest from all labou^, Rev. 14.1^
which cannot separate from the love of God, Rom^ 8.38. 39.
but uniteth us unto Christ. Phil. 1.^.^.
By these and such like, the souls of the faithful have been revived, and
quickened in the midst of death, and supported in spite of all opposition of
Satan, and his instruments. Heathens then are Physicians of no value, and all
their Simples gathered from their natural reason, like to those of our
Empiricks, which perhaps will not hurt, but certainly will nothing help us.

Therefore passing by these dry pits, which will hold no water, let us come to
the springhead, even our glorious head, the Lord Jesus (who is both the
Physician, and medicine of the broken heart) and to his holy Ordinances, the
channels (full channels) of all heavenly consolation.

For I purpose not here to sum up all the Cordials, which may refresh and
glad an humbled, dejected Spirit, (that must be the work of greater gifts and
longer time) Verily as the Be draws honey from every herb, eve^ weeds and
venomous plants; so the faithful Christian may extract comfort from all
things, even the most grievous and fearful. If he looks up to heaven, it
was made for him; here to light him, hereafter to harbor him: If down to the
earth, it is given to the Sons of men, especially the Sons of God, as a
Nurs^ of their temporal life, and a bed in death. All the Creatures are his;
nay, death and hell yield him this comfort, (not only that he is delivered
from them, but) that they shall revenge him of his enemies, and torment his
tormentors. But I desire to be short, and therefore will confine my self to
narrower limits.

Now as in any great house there are not only Cisternes retaining, and by
diverse pipes conveighing water unto every Office, but specially a living well,
or fountain, feeding these Cisternes: So in the Church, (which is Gods house)
we shall find certain Ordinances of God, wherein he lays up, and whereby h^e
conveyes these sweet refreshings unto our souls: Afterward, they will lead us
on unto the Wellhead, that River of God, nay, Seas and Oceans of all
consolation, even the God of all comfort. First, therefore, (to omit many) the
Lord has stored up for us, and brings home to us much comfort, as well in
other holy means, as in affliction it self. But (as Nathaniel of Nazareth,
so) some Christian, perhaps, will speak of affliction: Can any good thing come
out of evil?

CHAP. III. The description and distribution of Afflictions.
TRue it is, that Affliction is of it self the very Spring of bitterness,
worldly sorrow, and death: The natural fruit of it is no other but murmuring,
cursing, and desperate blaspheming; but is wholly changed through the grace of
God, powerfully working in it. Look as the waters of Marah were very bitter,
Exodus 15. 23.25.
yet when the Tree, pointed out by God, was cast into them, they became sweet:
And as those Springs of Jericho flowed with death and barrennes, 2 Kin. 2.19
20,21,2^.
yet were healed by Elisha with salt: so when God seasoneth Afflictions with
that Tree of Life, Heb. 2.10
(who was himself consecrate through Afflictions,) and with that Salt of his
Spirit, he makes them wholesome and pleasant.

The Cross, therefore, is as some wine, which though of it self it be tart
and unpleasant, yet seasoned with a little Sugar, it will not only go down
with delight, but warm the stomach, and make the heart merry.

Now Affliction is nothing else (as we know) but some evil and grievance
pressing us either in body or soul, drawn in by sin, and sent in by our just
God; in general, (as an Herald of Arms) to summon all men to lay down their
rebellion, and come in by Repentance: in particular, a Messenger of wrath, and
beginning of hell to the reprobate and disobedient, but an Ambassador for
peace, and the narrow gate to heaven to the Elect and faithful. Briefly to
run over this description:

That Affliction is a grievous evil, shall need no other witness but our
sense; yet further testified by that infallible Truth: Heb. 12.^1
No chastisement for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous. That it
is the attendant of sin, is evident: Romans 5.12, and 6.23.
Death entered by sin, and the wages of sin is death temporal and eternal.
Lam. 3.39.
Wherefore is the living man sorrowful? Man suffers for his sin. Ier. 5.25^
Your iniquities have hindered good things from you, and your sins have
turned away these things. In a word, read Deutr. 28. from the 15. ver. to the
end, and, we shall there find, that the disobedience and breach of Gods law
(which is sin, 1 Ioh. 3.4.) is that needle, which draws after it the whole
file, and long thread of misery and evil.

Again, that God is the sovereign disposer, who orders it according to his
own pleasure, is most evident: Lam. 3.38, 42,43,44, 45.
Out of the mouth of God proceeds not evil, and good? yes answers the same
Prophet, and Spirit: We have transgressed and rebelled, and thou have not
pardoned. Thou have covered with anger; and persecuted us; thou have slain, and
have not pitied; thou have covered thy self with a cloud, that our prayer
should not pass through; thou have made us the of-scouring and refuse in the
midst of the people. Shall there be any evil in a City, Amos 3.6.
and the Lord has not done it. I make peace, and create evil? Esa. 45.7.


Moreover, that the general end, and office of affliction is as a trumpet, to
summon and call us into the Courts of God, to lay down our rebellion, and
acknowledge our fealty, is every where manifest in Scripture: Ier. 18.11.
I prepare a plague, and purpose a thing against you, return therefore every
one. Amos 4^ 6, 7,8,9,10, 11.
I have given you cleanness of teeth, yet have you not turned unto me. I have
withheld the rain, yet have you not returned unto me. Pestilence have I
sent among you, yet have you not returned to mee^ I have over-throwne you as
Sodom and Gomorra, yet have you not returned to me: where the Lord most
plainly discovers his end of sending in so many grievances among them,
namely, that they might return by repentance. Ier. 2.30.
I have smitten your children in vain, they have received no correction.
Affliction is no good end, when correction, or amendment follows not. Esaias 15.
Wherefore should you be smitten any more? you fall away more and more. The
special end why God smites cease when men reject repentance.

Fur^hermore, that Affliction is a messenger of wrath, and indeed the gate of
hell to the Reprobate, will easily appear by many plain testimonies. Fire is
kindled in my wrath, and shall burn to the bottom of hell. Deuteronomy ^2. 22, 23.
I will send plagues among them, I will bestow mine arrows upon them. Such
were those afflictions laid upon Caine, Saul, Judas, etc. Especially this truth
will be cleared in those plagus spent on Pharaoh and Egypt; which were not
appointed by God, or ever intended as means to reclaim him (else God would
have rebuked Satan, and not suffered him to harden the heart of that heathen
King by them to further obstinacy) but, 1. to make his resistance more
unexcusable; 2. to be forerunners to his destruction of body and soul. For,
to this end God appointed him, to show his power in him: even that power of the
Potter over the clay, to make one vessel to honor another to dishonor: that
power, whereby he has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom be will he
hardens. Compare Exodus 9. 16. with Romans 9.17.18.21.

But that Afflictions are Ambassadors of peace to the faithful, and indeed a
narrow gate, (yet a gate) leading to their happiness shall most clearly be
showed by that which follows, and in the mean time may be sufficiently
manifested by the testimony of the Apostle, Act. 14.22.
We must through many afflictions enter into the kingdom of God.

Now all afflictions may be differenced either from the subject, in which they
exist, or the end for which they are sent. The subject in which they exist is
either soul or body (where I so far extend the words, as to include in them
al necessaries belonging to both.) Thus blindness, hardness, deadness of
heart, terrors, grief, desertions of the Spirit, sinful infirmity, and many
other may be reckoned among the evils and afflictions of soul: so sickness,
pain, loss of friends, poverty, disgrace, and infinite other hanging upon the
body and bodily estate. Again, they may be considered from their end, why they
are sent by God; namely, for correction to some, to others for confusion; and
thus they are chastisements to his children, to rebels punishments It will
therefore much further our proceeding, if we briefly lay down the difference
between chastisme^t and punishment

First then it is more apparent then can be denied, that in the matter of them
there is none or little difference: For in outward evils, Eccl. 9.2.
All things come alike to all, the same cond^tion to the just and unjust, to
him that swears, and to him that fears an oath. So likewise many spiritual
evils are common to al; which is evidently cleared in the testimonies of many
afflicted Saints; Iob^ 6, 4.
The arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof drinks up my
spirit: the terrors of God do set themselves in array against me. Job. 13.26
Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me possess the iniquities
of my youth. Psal^ 51.12
Thus David complains that he had lost the joy of Gods salvation: see also
Psalm. 38.2. and 2 Cor. 7.5. So then, both the faithful and unfaithful suffer
many evils; and the same afflictions in the matter of them befall both.

Secondly, it must be remembered, that by reason of this neerenesse in their
matter, they are sometimes used one for another: and punishment called
chastisement, and chastisement used for punishment, and though not often, yet
sometime even the Scripture uses these terms promiscuously, affirming the
godly to be punished, and the heathen chastened. But in propriety of spee^h
there is very much, and palpable difference: For, Divine chastisement is such
affliction which God of his fatherly wisdom and love lays upon his children,
for the trial and increase of his grace in them here, and their glory in him
hereafter, sustayning them in the mean time by his Spirit, and so bringing
forth in them the fruit of holiness and righteousness.

Contrary, Divine punishment is that affliction which God in wrath and hatred
lays upon the wicked, as an enemy to their confusion, and further damnation,
withholding the comfort, and saving work of his holy Spirit, which therefore
produces in them murmuring, despair, and blaspheming.

CHAP. IIII. The difference between punishnishment and chastisement.
OBserve from hence five manifest differeces whereby the chastisements of God
are distinguished from his punishments. The first is from the fountain, or
cause, whence they issue. Chastisement is from a fatherly love, and
faithfulness in his Covenant. Heb. 12. 6.
Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every ^on whom he receives.
Rev. ^.19.
As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten. See also Pr. 3.12. His promise in his
Covenant is, If they break my Statuts and keep not my Commandments: Psalm.
89.31 32,33, 34, 35.
Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with
strokes: My Covenant will I not break, etc. I have sworn by my holiness I will
not fail David. The Prophet knowing this, confesses, Ps. 115.7^.
I know that of very faithfulness thou have afflicted me.

Contrarily, the punishment of the wicked is from the wrath of God, as an
Enemy: Romans 1.18
The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, which withold the truth in unrighteousness. and 2.8^
Upon them that disobey the truth, shall be indignation and wrath. Thus when
the Lord had set down the great provocations of that rebellious people, he
infers; Deu. 32.22
Fire is kindled in my wrath, and shall burn to the bottom of hell. Ier.
15.14.
I will make thee to pass with thine enemies into a land which thou know
not; for a fire is kindled in mine anger, which shall burn upon you.

God scourge^h every son whom he receives, but bastards are without
correct^on: Heb. 12.^.^
which is more evide^tly taught us in that word of the original there rendered
(chastise) (...), which is derived from (...), a son, or child. Reason also
will further confirm it; For correction being the cutting off the offense,
that the offender may be reconciled, belongs therefore to children: But
punishment is the cutting off the offender, that others may take heed and
beware; and therefore is due to rebels and traitors.

The third difference is the which signifies to set righ^, or strait. Psa.
119.67
Before I was affl^cted I went astray, but now I keep thy word^ Rev. 3. 19.
As many as I love I rebuke and chasten; be zealous therefore, and amend.
Another end is trial and exercise of our faith, love, patience, and other
graces. Hence afflictions called a fiery trial to prove us. 1 Pet. 4,12
So another Apostle calls tentations, The trial of our faith. Iam. 1.2,3.
Consider also that saying of Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 1.6.7. Look as by some
paynefull work in putting forth the strength of the arms, legs, etc. for
the overcomming of some difficulties, the body is exercised, the sinews and
other organicall parts much confirmed, the vital, and all the members not a
little strengthened: so when our faith, love, patience, or any other member of
the new man is employed in any spiritual actions, wherein some fleshly
Combatant is vehemently opposed, certain is it, that howsoever (for the
present) there may follow some sense (at least) of weakness, yet even the
grace so tried, and the whole inward man gathers much comfort, and activenesse
from such fiery trials. For it is the very exercise of the spiritual man; Heb.
12.1^
yielding excellent fruit to those that are exercised by it. For as trees
shaken with the wind are better rooted: so grace after a storm is more firmly
settled. Romans 5.3, 4,5:
Patience is wroght out, and perfited by tribulation, and grows fruitful in
experie^c^: Iam. 13^^^
when we grow highin our own conceit, and begin to be exalted above measure;
then this affliction (as a pruning knife) tops our pride, abaseth us in our
own eyes, and humbles us under the mighty hand of God: Lam. 3.19. 20.
Remembering the gall and wormwood, my soul is humbled within me. Thus when
Peter arrogantly preferreh his faith and love above all his fellow Apostles,
and all men; Mat. 26.31 33.
If all men be offended because of thee, yet will I never be offended:
strooken down with that trial, and sifted, he left his swelling conceit
behind him in the sieve, and laying aside his comparisons, answers in a more
modest streine, Ioh, 21.15
Simon, love thou me more then these? Lord (says he) thou know that I
love thee So also that choice vessel of God was kept down by the buffeter of
Satan: 2 Cor. 12.7
nay, See Romans 8.16.17.
even the assurance and increase of our glory is intended, 2 Cor. 4.17
and wrought by afflictions. But has the Lord any such end in the punishment
of the ungodly? No; but for this cause have I appointed thee, that I might show
my power in thee. Exodus 9.16


The fourth difference is in 1 Cor. 10. 13.
God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that which you
are able, but will give the issue with the temptation, that you may be able to
bear. 2 Cor. 1.4
God comfort us in all our tribulations. This we evidently see exemplified
in Job, who being assailed with all manner of temptations, yet was even mightily
supported by that powerful Spirit, by whom in the midst of that fiery furnace
(which like that of Nebuchadnezzar, was heated seven times more than usual) he
was strongly sustained in faith: Job 13.15. 16.18. and 19.25,
Though he slay me, I will trust in him: He shall be my salvation: I know I
shall be justified: I am sure my Redeemer lives. Contrary, the punishments of
the wicked are no way lightened by this blessed Comforter, and therefore they
instantly sink under them: as Saul, Caine and Judas. Observe this truth in one
instance: Acts 12.
Peter is apprehended, imprisoned, bound with two chains, between two
soldiers: All this breaks not his rest: he sleeps, strong light could not
awake him, till he was smote on the side by the Angel; he knew the next day
was his last, yet see how soundly he sleeps: when he awakes he sees a sudden
great light, but without any fear. This rest came not from flesh and blood;
but that blessed Spirit speaking peace to his soul in Christ, gave him power
to say, and do with David: Psalm. 4.8.
I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep, for thou Lord only make me
dwell in safety. On the otherside, Saul was at liberty, had a strong army, had
often vanquished those enemies yet no sooner hard of death (and that by the
devil, the father of lies) but falls along on the earth, 1 Samuel 28. 20,21.
was sore afraid, and there was no strength in him, and though he could not but
be very hungry, as having eaten no bread all day and night, yet refuses to
eat. Whence came this fear? from natural cowardice? nay certainly, Saul was
a man used to dangers, and naturally of more courage than Peter, a poor
Fisherman; but the cause was, 1 Samuel 16. 14.
The Spirit of the Lord (even in his ordinary gifts, as valor, etc.) was
departed from Saul: how then could any strength be in him?

Heb. 12.10 11.
He chastises us for our own profit, that we may be partakers of his
holiness. It brings forth the pleasant fruit of righteousness to them that
are thereby exercised. 2 Cor. 4.17
This momentarie light affliction causes unto us a most excelling excellent
(so is the original) eternal weight of glory. Now what can all the world boast
of in the least degree comparable to this? I call every christian soul to
witness, that all is dung and loss in comparison of these sweet fruits; even
that (by carnal men) so much despised holiness, is the image and beauty of
God stamped upon a christian, the divine nature; infinitely therefore above all
earthly excellencies, which perish with the using.

But what is the fruit of divine punishment, when the visitation of the judge
comes upon them, either in that general day of those great Assizes, or the
more particular of his private Sessions; some despair, as Caine, Saul, Judas;
some murmr, as the rebellious Israelites; Rev. 16.9.
some blaspheme the name of God, who has power over these plagus: Hos. 10^8.
some call to the mountains and rocks to fall upon them, Rev, 6.16.
and cover them. Hence arises much comfort to every afflicted Christian: even
our affliction it self, if we well consider it, will afford us no little help
against the grief and smart of it.

CHAP. V. What comforts a Christian soul may gather from affliction it self.
FIrst therefore is it a small comfort that this evil comes not only from God
as a Father, but from the wisdom, love, faithfulness of such a father? The Lord
in his gracious love determines to do us good, makes an everlasting covenant
with us (not to please our flesh and blood, but) to do us good, Ier. 32^40, 41
puts his fear into our hearts, that we shall never depart from him, yea,
to delight in us to do us good: and in his wisdom knowing that there is in us
naturally a deceitful heart, starting aside like a broken bow, Ier. 5.^3.
an evil and unfaithful heart ready to depart from the living God; Heb. 3.12.
such, as when it was at the best, soon turned out of the way which he
ma^ded; he appointed his chastiseme^ts as thongs to bind us to his fear, and
to settle us in his covenant, in which consists our only happiness.

Can we think that God takes any pleasure in the smart of his children? Heb.
12.10
If we (which after our own pleasure) have no delight in the grief of our
infants; oh then let our own affections teach us, that he who is love, who is
infinite love, Lam. 3.33.
does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men: were not our
necessity more then his pleasure, we should never taste of chastisement. How
then should we rejoice (if not in the smart of the correction, yet) in the love
of the Correctour? Shall a little Sugar sweeten, and make pleasant to our taste
many things, which in themselves are sower and bitter; and shall not the love
of Christ, which is better than wine, Can^. 1.1.
which is better than life it self, Psalm. 63.3.
sweeten a light, nay the most grievous aff^iction? Justly may we blame our
taste, that there is much flesh, and little savor of the Spirit in it, Cant,
5.1^
if Christ Jesus, who is wholly delectable, and his love, which to us is the
most delectable thing in him, cannot take away the bitterness of some gentle,
nay, the most sharp correction.

Secondly, how soveraign^ a Cordial is it to an afflicted Spirit, when he
remembers that all his troubles are either such as the world lays upon him to
draw him from God to it self, or God lays upon him, to draw him to himself
from the world? Seeing both of them are the very portion of Gods children. For
the former, persecutions of wicked men, slanders, reproaches, and the scofs of
the world are ranked among chief blessings, and are bequeathed by Christ as
his legacy: See, Mar. 10.30. and we in such a case commanded by our Savior to
rejoice, Mat. 5. 11, 12.
and to dance for joy, as being a most happy and blessed estate: For the other,
should we not as much rejoice in it? Heb. 12,7.
For in these afflictions God is offered to us (so is the word (...)) as unto
Sons. Is there any gift in the world, or is the world it self a gift
comparable to God? Seeing then that God offers himself to us in these
chastising afflictions, how welcome should they be unto us, and how great
pleasure should we take in them, not for any thing indeed in them, but for
that which they bring unto us? Is not their estate woeful, who being in the
visible Church, and making no other account but to share the inheritance, shall
at length be found bastards, and thrust out of doors (like scornful Ismael)
to their eternal shame and confusion? Heb. 12. 8.
Now such are all they who receive no chastisement from the hand of God: who
then would not comfort himself in that correction, which is indeed for the
time, unpleasant to the flesh, but yet even then, to the spirit, an evidence of
an happiness beyond all thought or time? who would not with Moses, Heb. 11.25
rather choose to suffer affliction with the children of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season?

Isa. 105^19
Thus in the first sense the Lord tried Joseph by his affliction. Thus Abraham's
faith; thus the faith of those three royal young men was proved or tried. Dan.
3.
Likewise that other kind of trial, whereby, as gold is purified in the
furnace, so grace in affliction, is mentioned by the Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.7.
That the trial of your faith being much more precious then gold, though it
be^ried by fire, might be found unto praise, and honor, and glory. So Job, Job
23. 10
He knows my way, and tries me, and I shall come forth as gold. A speech
worthy to be (as indeed it is) eternized for ever, and fitly written down by
the finger of that blessed Spirit, by whose mouth it was also spoken. The Lord
(says that holy Patient) knows all my ways; he knows how dearly, more
than my appointed food, I have occounted his Word: he knows that I have
followed his steps yet he tries me, (not because he is ignorant of any thing
in me, for he knows all my ways, but) first, that as in a furnace the most
precious metal leaves behind it some dross, so I from this trial might come
forth much more purified and cleansed from my sinful steynes and pollution; and
secondly, that I might be current in his kingdom, even a pattern, as well of
his powerful grace in upholding me, as of patience to them which shall be
herafter exercised by like afflictions. A Christian who has seen and loathed
the filthiness of his sinful heart, what will he not be willing to do or
suffer, that he may have it cleansed? Many weak women will endure much to mend
some deformity in their bodies, and shall not a Christian suffer the devils
image to be scoured off (although it be with smarting water) that the beauty
of God may be imprinted upon him?

But especially it should Dan. 3.
could not consume the bodies of those stout Confessors, nay, could not singe a
thread of their garments, so long as the Angel of the Lord was among them; what
affliction or trouble shall hurt us, when the Lord of Angels is with us, nay in
us, supporting our weakness, and bearing it out in all our troubles?

Pro. 20.30
) The blewnesse of the wound serves to purge the evil, and the stripes within
the bowels of the belly. It purges out the old leven, and makes us a new
lump. Secondly, the fire of affliction softneth our iron hearts, and prepares
them for the hammar of the Word, Ier. 23.29.
to frame us after the image of God, and to set upon us the beauty of his
holiness. It brings forth the pleasant fruit of righteousness. Now what is
there in all the world, which if we might wish and have, we would prefer or
equal with this holiness? Neither should it too much trouble, nay in some
respect it should cheer us that we find inward terrors, and grievances,
doubts, desertions, buffeters of Satan; we apply outward medicines to infants
and weak ones, but inward Physic, as it is given by expert Physicians, to
the strong, so it works more strongly. Inward stripes work on the bowels,
cleanse the inward man: this shaking rooteth our faith more strongly, and this
disease of doubting occasionally, se^leth us in more fullness and assurance of
faith.

CHAP. VI. The application of this comfort by meditation.
NOw when we have well tasted and swallowed this Cordial, let us by some
meditation, and particular appli^ation labor to digest it, and even
incorporate this spiritual food into our souls. For as it is with this
earthly, so is it with that heavenly fire of the Word; it will soon be
extinguished, or else lie dead and useless, unless it be blown up by
meditation. Thus therefore let the afflicted spirit confer and commune with it
self.

Is it not my gracious God who reaches forth this bitter cup of wormwood to
me? Comes it not from his wonderful love, and faithfulness in his Covenant;
who promising to do me good, has therefore in my necessity tempered this
potion for me? My unfaithful heart requires it, his faithfulness gives it.
My dead, cold heart, and the sick sinful matter in my soul calls for it:
his flagrant love, his wisdom and compassion administreth it; and shall not I
then receive it? If he sent it in wrath, should not I take it with humility
and patience? and if he reach it to me in love and faithfulness, shall not I
receive it with cheerful thankfulness? Ioh. 18.11
Oh shall not I drink of the Cup which my Father has given me? Had it been a
Messenger of confusion, well might I tremble and mourn, yet not murmr, but
being an Ambassador of peace, employed purposely for my Sovereign, and
Supreme good, and his glory, shall I not make it welcome? And will not he
work his own ends by it? Shall no^ this bitter root, by his sanctifying
power, shoot forth that most pleasant fruit of holiness and glory? Oh thou
ravishing beauty of Divine holiness, thou most excellent Image, and nature of
God! Oh thou unspeakeable and unconceivable happiness with God in glory! Shall
any thing be unwelcome which brings you to me, or carries me to you? Were it
water, fire, were it hell it self, should I not pass through it to attain
you? This light affliction brings with it a weight of glory: This momentary
affliction, an eternal glory: this despised affliction, an excelling excellent
glory; and can then the root be so bitter, as the fruit delightful? Can I
with a good will, nay, with plea^ure, eat a bitter or sour sallat, as helping
to purge out some mellancholy humors, and to whet the dull appetite; and shall
I not much more swallow this Pil which is bitter only in the mouth, but in the
stomach full of sweetness and nourishment? Nay, are not all these afflictions
(being sanctified by God) especial evidences of my adoption and filiation
through Christ? Are not these stripes so many witnesses that I am his child?
And this smart, a sure testimony that I am genuine and no bastard? And with all
the res^, has not he promised and assured me not to fail, nor forsake me, but
to uphold me in it, and bring me through it, and comfort me by it, and
glorify me after it? Have not all the members of that glorious body, and the
Head himself, the Prince of glory, been perfited through afflictions? Heb. 2.
10.
Have they not all (Head and members) passed through this vale of tears, this
roa^ing wilderness, through many fears, terrors, grievous desertions; Heb.
5.7.
crying out with strong cries, and bitter, to him that is able to save them,
Heb. 12.2.
yet setting the joy before them, have endured the cross, despised the shame,
and are now set down in the glory of God. Now therefore, Romans 5:5.
rejoice my soul in tribulations, knowing that tribulation brings forth
patience, and patience, experience; and expertence, hope; and hope makes not
ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the holy
Ghost, who is given to to us. ^am. 1.3.
Nay count thou it exceeding joy, when thou falle^t into these temptations,
knowing that the trial of faith brings forth patience.

Only thou (oh my gracious God) who scourgest every Son whom thou receivest,
receive me whom thou scourgest. Thou who chastisest where thou love, oh love
this poor soul which thou chastisest! Thou who correctest not for thy
pleasure, but for our profit, oh teach me to profit by thy correction! Make my
soul to partake of thy Sons holiness, and then lay on what measure thou
see good of his affliction. Oh let me be conformed to his death and
sufferings, that I may be conformed to his life and resurrection. Gracious
Father, after thou have crowned me with his thorns, crown me also with his
glory.

CHAP. VII. Comforts arising from the Word.
NOw as good Chyrurgians often heal some sores with lancing, and cure with
wounds; so the Lord most frequently opens some passage by affliction, and
makes an issue for the sinful corruption of our souls, to drayne them, and
draw out the sinful matter which is in them; and makes a lesser wound to cure
the greater. But as he uses these lancers and corrosives, so also has he
singular lenitives and anodynes to comfort and strengthen the wounded Spirit.
Three especial means has the wisdom of God set out for sovereigne Cordials
to a sick soul. First, his Word: Secondly, those holy mysteries which we
ordinarily call Sacraments: Thirdly, Prayer: all of them fitted by his wisdom
to our necessity, and excellent helps, as well to preserve the sound, as to
heal the bruised heart. For Prayer is as the opening of a festered wound, and
letting out the filth of the soul, that corrupt core of the old Adam, which
fills it with pain and anguish. The Word is as the plaster, which applying
the death and resurrection of Christ unto the sore, as well rotteth and draws
out the sinful matter, as also quickneth the sounder part, and causes the
spirit to grow and wax in health and strength. The Sacraments are as Roulers
binding on, keeping close and fast the plaster to the pa^^ affected. Of all
these something would be noted severally, but briefly.

To begin with the Word, I purpose not to gather thence all those comforts
which are every where stored up in it, this task would take up all the time of
Methuselah. It shall be sufficient evidently to demonstrate, first, That God
has given his Word to be a comfort to his chosen; and secondly, wherein
generally it may be applied unto us as a sovereign Cordial. Neither do I
intend to distinguish between the Word written and preached, the substance
being in both the same, and the difference only in the means and manner of
conveyng it unto us; the one being as the Salve in the lump, the other as the
same Salve, spread and applied. Sufficient is it, that whether it be delivered
by hand or mouth, Psalm. 11^ 50.92.
it is our comfort in affliction, and that which quickneth us. When we are
ready to perish in afflict^on, it is our delight. Oh when the spirit of a man
is wounded with the sting, and vexed with the smart of sin, when being
stricken with the curse of the Law, it is sick at the heart, striving and
struggling for life with hellish agonyes; Ps^ 119.103
How sweet then are his promise, unto our mouth? more then honey unto our
taste. Look as a weary and fainting Traveller, stifled with dust, and melted
with heat, is revived with a cool stream, and gentle breath of air, so the
soul of an humbled sinner tired and tormented with fiery temptations, is
wonderfully refreshed with those sweet breathings of the blessed Spirit, and
these waters of Life flowing from the Sanctuary. Pro. 25.25.
As are cold waters to a weary soul; so are good news from a far Country.
Never did the chased, and embossed Heart so longue for the rivers of water, or
more greedily plunge, or bathe himself in them when he had found them, as the
afflicted Conscience, pursued by Satan, and hunted by the cries of his own
loud sins, thirsts, pynes, and even faynts for those joyful news of peace
brought down from heaven. Now to this very end was the Word written, That we
might have comfort from the Scriptures. Romans 15.4.
And therefore are we commanded to comfort one another with those words. 1
The. ^.18
To this end was it put into the mouths of Gods Messengers, Psalm. 50.4.
That they might administer a word in season to him that is weary; who are
therefore with a fearful adjuration straightly charged to comfort, 2 Timothy 4.
1,2.
for so signifies that word ((...)) the English (exhort.) And verily,
therefore themselves are ordinarily more exercised with afflictions, 2 Cor.
1.4, 5, 6.
and in them sustained, and comforted by the blessed Spirit, that they may be
the better experienced, and more able to comfort the afflicted: so that their
affliction is for others consolation. Certainly, whether we consider the Word
of God without us, either as a Torch or Lamp going before us in these dark and
slippery ways; or as a Guide behind us, when we are ready to turn out of the
way, to the right hand, or left; or whether we consider it as a Seed within us,
immortal to beget us unto eternal life, and fruitful to feed and sustain us
in it, how great in all these particulars, is the consolation which a weary
soul receives by it.

Is it a small comfort to a weak and sliding foo^, traveling in a dark and
dangerous way, to have a light before him, directing where to step and tread
safely? Is it not a great vexation when we are journeying in a vast and
perilous desert, that we neither know the way, nor have any hope of
direction? Gen^ 37.15
Oh when we are wandering (as Joseph seeking for his Brethren) traveling in a
search for the Lord Jesus, straggling in a solitary way, seeing no print of any
foot before us, how welcome then would any man of God be unto us, who would set
us in the path which leads to Life, and that Lord of Life? Can we account it
a light blessing that the Lord went before his people in a pillar of a Cloud by
day, and a pillar of fire by night through that roaring wilderness, till they
arrived at that land of Canaan? But how much greater a mercy does God vouchsafe
us, in allowing us so perfect a Guide which shall never leave us till we are
brought unto himself, and to our eternal and glorious rest? which is not
only a pillar of fire, or cloud, to point out the way unto us, but a
storehouse also, filled with all needful helps to supply us in the way, and
furnish us in all our wants and necessities.

Are we hungry? it is our food: Are we thirsty: it is a Well of Life: Are we
stung with that fiery Serpent? it holds out the bra^en Serpent unto us: Are
we assaulted with strong enemies? It is the sword of the Spirit wounding that
crooked Serpent, Ephesians. 6.17.
and keeping off those Principalities, powers, and spiritual wickednesses in
high places. Are we resisted in our possession by these cursed Canaanites
(whose stature and walls were up to heaven) our sinful corruptions? It is the
mighty ordinance of God to batter down these strong holds, 2 Cor. 10. 4,5.
and high towers exalted against the knowledge of God, and to bring every
thought in subjection to Christ. But above all the rest, how sweet a comfort is
it that even in the horrors of death, and agony of temptations we comfortably
find and feel it in us as a powerful seed of life, quickening and repayring
our fainting souls, so that when we are sunk in the depths of trial, and
seem even enclosed in the belly of hell, it underproppeth the weary hand, and
sharpneth the voice of our drooping faith, saying, yet God is good to Israel.
Psalm. 23.1.


Surely, when I hear the Lord with his own voice testify, Luke 10.42
That when this better part is chosen, it shall not be taken away: 1 Pet. 1.23
24,25.
when his holy Spirit witnesses to our spirits, you are borne not of mortal
but immortal seed, the Word of God. All flesh is grass, and the glory of it
as the flower of grass: The grass withers, and the flower thereof falls
away; But the word of the Lord endures for ever: and again strongly assures
us, that we cannot fall wholly, or finally away by sin, because the Seed of
God remains in us. 1 Ioh. 3. 9^
I cannot conceive what any soul could wish to it self more comfortable on
earth. Pro. 23.5.
Riches have wings as an Eagle, and fly away. Esa. 5.14.
Hell has opened her mouth wide to swallow the glory, pomp, and joy of the
mighty. Beauty is vanity, and favor deceitful. Pro. 31.30
All our strength but sorrow and labor. Psalm. 90.10
Children, if good, our continual fears; if evil, our perpetual griefs:
and in a word, Every man in his best earthly estate altogether vanity: Psalm.
39. 5.
Life decreasing by the growth of it; the earth, yea, even the heavens also
passing away; but this blessed Word never passes; never, but as the truth of
God, in his covenant with Christ, has evi^^ntly expressed: Esa. 59.21^
My Spirit, and my Word which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of
thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds
seed from henceforth, says the Lord, for ever. Verily, were there no other
comfort to a Christian, but only that word of Truth, the seed, and food of
everlasting life, begetting him to God, and still remaining and waxing in him,
it were sufficient, (if the balance be even, and the hand steady which
weighs it) to sink down all the discomforts of this world, and to establish
a Christian heart with strong consolations, and glorious rejoycings.

CHAP. VIII. More special comforts from special parts of the Word.
LEt us descend into some few specials, and insist a ^ittle upon the main
parts of these holy writings. Now the Scriptures, (as I conceive) may not
unfitly be divided into these four general heads. First, the Doctrinall,
wherein the blessed Spirit teaches and instructs us in all necessary truths.
Secondly, the Historical, in which as well the good examples of the Saints, and
their happy success, as also the perverse behavior of wicked Rebels, and
their miserable issues are set before us. Thirdly, the Prophetical (so more
specially called) where the men of God encourage^ strengthen, and excite us to
walk in that good way which is pleasing and acceptable to the Lord. Fourthly,
Practical (as the Psalms, etc.) wherein the constant practice of the
faithful, and their actions, as well within as without, are lively represented
to our eyes.

Now what great helps and comforts in every one o^ these does that holy Spirit
reach forth unto us? Consider our estate, and their use. We are Travelers
through this wilderness of sin, toward the heavenly Jerusalem, ignorant, and
wandering, soon weary and faint. How useful then, how helpful are all these
unto us? The first is as an open Kings highway to conduct us. The second is as
a Guide, treading, and beating a path before us. The third as goads and nayls
to rouse up our sluggish nature, and hold fast our slippery feet from
backsliding. The fourth as cheerful company, heartning and refreshing our
drooping spirits, when our weak hearts begin to tire, and those good ways wax
tedious to sinful flesh. Let us now handle some of these particulars in
several.

Surely, whatsoever comforts a wayfaring man could wish in his journey, are in
these helps offered, and given him: The the ways are first plain, and easy,
not hard to find: Secondly, when they are clean, not deep and miery:
Thirdly, when they are even; not mountaynous, and rocky: Fourthly, when they
are strait, not crooked and winding, then are they accounted very good, and are
no little helps and comforts to any Traveller: Nay, in such ways we go not
only with patience, but with delight.

Thus the ways of God in his Word, Pro. 8.9.
are first plain to him that understands: not only a plain way, but light
too, in the way, Psalm. 119. 105. not like these earthly, but that heavenly way.
For as that ( via lactea) or milkey path, (as it is called) in heaven, which by
the infinite lights, stuck very thick in it, embrightens it self: Pro. 4.18.
so, the path of the just, is as the shining light which shines more and more
unto the perfect day. Secondly, they are clean and pure, Psa, 19.8,9
very pure ( Psa. 119.140.) not a spot of sinful mire in them; so far from
entangling, and encombring our feet, that they rather hasten and quicken us.
Thirdly, they are very even and smooth, not stony and troublesome; Valleys
filled, mountains plained, and roughness smoothed: Luke 3.5.
Very easy and light. Mat. 11. 30. no way grievous, 1 Ioh. 5.3. nay, very
pleasant, and sweet above the honey, and honey-combe. Ps. 119.103 Psa. 19.8.
Lastly, they are right and strait, no crookedness, or perverseness in them.
See Prove. 8. 8, 9. Luke 3. 4, 5.

And what marvel then, if they who have walked in those ways, have been
wonderfully delighted, and even ravished in such paths? Pro. 3.17.
They are ways of pleasantness, and paths of peace, in which we find all the
rich treasures and jewels of wisdom, eternal life, and perfect blessedness.

A second comfort that a Traveller Eunuch ( Acts 8.31.) and the experience of
every good Christian, what a comfort is it that God has given us so many
directions, and excellent Guides, walking in every good path before us^ If we
desire to travel in the way of faith, the Father of the faithful will lead us
the way, and chearefully call us after him, Romans 4. 18 19,20.
Who against hope believed in hope, and being not weak in faith, considered
not his own body now dead, nor the deadness of Sarahs womb: He staggered not
in the promise through unbeleefe. So likewise that Guide and Captain of Gods
people, who went before them from Egypt unto the land of Canaan, will march
before us in that way of faith to the land of Promise, whose piercing eye of
faith beholding him who is invisible, Heb. 11.25 26, 27.
and fastened on the recompense of the reward, despised the wrath of the King,
and chose the afflictions of Gods people before the pleasures of sin,
esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt.

Would we walk in love? We have choice of excellent Guides. In that love of
Christ how cheerfully will that holy Penitent (converted Mary) point, and tread
out that path for us? Luke 7.47.
Who having much forgiven her, loved much; and thought nothing too dear, o^
precious for the beautiful feet of that great Apostle, and Prince of peace.
Romans 10. ^5
Oh how powerfully will that chosen Vessel draw us after him in this tract of
love to the Lord Jesus, and to all his members? How did the love of Christ
constrain him? 2 Cor. 5.14
How did he rejoice in tribulations, bonds, and death it self for Christ? ^
Cor. 12. 15.
How did his heart burn and flame in charity, who could willingly spend, and
^e spent for them whom the more abundantly he loved, the less he was loved
again? Who weying the profit of the Churches with his own glory in Christ, was
in a strait, Phil. 1.22, 23,24.
and knew not which to prefer, whether his own infinite and glorious
happiness with Christ in heaven, joined with some loss to the Church, or the
advantage of Gods people, joined with infinite miseries which he suffered on
earth.

If we desire a Guide in the way of patience; that holy Patient offers
himself unto us. He steeling his resolution, and whetting it upon a strong
faith, Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him: Iob^ 13.15.
cutteth his way through thorns and briars, infinite grievances of body and
soul, and rests in this confidence, Iob^ 23.10
When he has tried me, I shall come forth as gold.

Consider now how comfortable to the Israelites in the Desert, was that Pillar
of a Cloud, and fire, walking before them, and pointing out fit lodgings for
them: But oh ^ow much more cheerful is this Cloud of the faithful Saints,
Heb^ 12.1.
leading the way; and infinitely above them all the Lord Jesus himself, the
Author and finisher of our faith, who in all these, and every other good path,
not only guides us with his foot, but upholdeth us with his hand, and makes
his example as well a pattern to govern our steps, as a staff to support our
weak souls, till we rest for ever with him in glory.

CHAP. IX. Comforts from the Prophetical and Practical Scriptures.
ANother comfortable help reins, a sharp snaffle, a spur and switch to
quicken his slow beast. Oh then what solid and plentiful consolation will
those Prophetical Scriptures pour forth unto us. For when we consider our
untoward disposition, by reason of so much sin cleaving yet still so fast unto
us, when we remember how slow and slippery our affections are, which carry on
our actions in the ways of life, it cannot but be a great comfort that the
Lord has given us means to cast out this frowardness, and to bring into
order our disorderly nature. I will insist only in two particulars of our
corruption.

First, although our gracious Word as well discovered the way of life leading
to himself, and cleared our eyes to discern it, although he has given us
the history of his Saints as excellent Guides, to direct us, yet how dull and
sluggish are we, how heavy in every good duty? How dull of hearing? Heb. ^.11.
How slow of heart to believe? Luke 24,25
Our hands hang down, our knees how feeble? Heb. 12,12
Now the words of the wise are as goads to quicken our sluggishnesse. Eccl.
12.^1


Secondly, we are as slippery as we are sluggish. I appeal to any Christian
who has any knowledge of himself, what trouble, grief, and wrestling he
finds in himself to hold fast his heart from starting and wandering in every
service of God. If we look to our minds, how slippery our memories? In
retayning that good word of God, very ^ievs.

In which respect we often enforce our gracious Teacher to chide with us. Ier.
2.31.
Can a Maid forget her ornaments, or a Bride her attire? yet my people have
forgotten me days without number. Mat. 16.9.
Do you not remember the five loaves, etc. Heb. 12 5.
You have forgotten the exhortation. Our hearts and affections how sliding?
Nothing so deceitful: Ier, 17. 9.
ready to depart from the living God. Heb. 3.12.
Solomon loved the Lord, and walked in the ways of David his father: 1 Kin.
3.3.
But we see how soon that love cooled in him. The Galatians loved Paul, Gal.
4.15, 18.
even to pluck out their eyes, and give them to him. But how soon left they
to be zealously affected in that which was good? Gal. 1.6.
And as their affections were to the Minister of the Gospel, so to the Gospel
it self, soon removed to another Gospel. How fervent was that first love of
the Ephesians? Rev. 2.3^ 4
But it quickly decayed. The Israelites when they heard the Lord speak out of
the fire, solemnly protested, Deu. 5.27.
Speak thou unto us all that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee; and we
will hear and do it. and 9.12.
But how suddenly had they corrupted themselves, and turned out of the good
way? How earnestly was Peter resolved, and vehemently promised, that he would
dye with Christ, and not deny him. But oh how soon, how easily, and
fearfully he slipped, and headlong fell into an utter denial with oaths and
curses.

Now then when a Christian is cast down in the sight of this his sinful
corruption, how comfortable is that Ordinance of God (which he knows to be
appointed, assisted, and sanctified by the blessed Spirit) as nails, fastened
and driven home, holding in, and keeping close his starting heart unto the
fear of God, and not suffering it to warpe by this treacherous revolting?
Certainly, as that Word spoken by Christ, fiered the hearts of his Disciples,
Luke 24.32
that they felt them to burn within, while he discoursed with them, and opened
the Scriptures. So those faithful Christians, who give up their hearts unto a
constant reading, hearing, and meditating in that holy Word, shall
experimentally find and feel it to be a fire to thaw their frozen, dead, and
sluggish spirits; to put forward and quicken them; strong bonds to tie and knit
their wavering affections unto all constancy, and cheerfulness in Gods
service. How does that reproving Word awaken David, 2 Samuel 12.
rouse, and raise him from his deep and long security? How do those sweet
promises quicken him, and, enlarging his heart, hasten his feet to run in the
way of Gods Commandments. Psalm. 119. 32.50.


The same effects of this blessed Ordinance our experience teaches us, in
which respect not only those precious promises, but even those sharp
reproves also are sweet and comfortable: bitter indeed in the mouth, but
sweet and very cordial to the inward man; stirring up our sleepy nature,
dashing out that sl^ggishnesse, and binding our hearts more close and fast in
that fear of God, which is the very knot of our Covenant.

Lastly, how welcome to which we enjoy with those blessed Saints.

Look as in our Travel nothing more cheareth, and makes us forget all
weariness, than good Company, discoursing of things profitable, and
delightful: So, when we go along with these blessed Saints, in those
practical writings, opening their very hearts unto us, and unfolding the whole
frame of the inward man, how are we recreated and strengthened? How sweetly do
we forget, and with little or no trouble swallow many difficulties and hard
passages in our journey through this wretched world? How comfortable is the
Communion of Saints, even in this life? Our conversation with them is a little
Paradise. Oh how infinite joy will flow from that holy fellowship in heaven? It
is one, and not the least part of our happiness, Heb. 12.23^
that we shall come to that general assembly, and the Church of the firstborn
which are written in heaven? Now then when we here converse and confer with
them, it cannot but be a great delight and refreshing to our souls. And the
more, because in all occurrents and occasions they will furnish us in any duty.

In receiving of any blessing, how shall we see their hearts swell, and their
lips overflow with all thankfulness? How do they melt in humiliation, and
swim in tears? How do they sharpen their voices in fervent petition? In any
desertion, what expressions of longueings? What sighing, pining, mourning? How
do they fill their mouths with insinuating arguments to woo the Lords
return, and regain the sense of his favor, Psalm. 51.^2
giving him no rest till they feel the joy of their salvation restored?

CHAP. X. The application of this comfort by meditation.
HEnce also may an afflicted Spirit take words unto it self, and say; Why do
I thus vex mine own heart, and disquiet my self in vain? Do I not still
enjoy the holy and blessed Word of my God? Is there any loss which it does not
richly supply? Can I be poor, who possess those precious Promises? Pro. 8.34.
Can I be miserable, who attend on the posts of his doors, and hear him? If I
lose father, mother, house, lands, have not I a promise of an hundredfold for
the present, beside that eternal life to come? Mar. 10.30. If I am in any
distress, have I not a promise, that when Father and Mother forsake me, he
well take me up? Psalm. 27.10. Have I not his command to cast my care upon him?
Psalm. 55. 22. and his promise, That he will care for me, 1 Pet. 5.7. Have I
not his word, that he will never turn away from me to do me good? Ier. 32.40,
41.
that he will rejoice in me to do me good? His promise is, that I shall want
nothing that is good; Psalm. 34. 9, 10^
and his word is good, as good as his deed: How then shall I be destitute of any
good blessing, 1 Timothy 4.8.
who have the Promise of this life, and the life to come? Why then, oh my
soul, art thou cast down, and troubled within me? Is not that immortal seed
of the Word cast into thy heart? Does it not still abide and remain in thee?
Yea, Psalm. 23.4.
though I walk in the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil,
for thy rod and staff comfort me. Is not thy Word my way? a way leading me to
life? a lamp in the way, enlightening me, and a Guide with a light directing
me? a burning light quickening my frozen heart, when it is dull; a sweet
Companion, refreshing me when I am weary? Is it not a plain way, an even way,
a clean way, a strait, delightful, and pleasant way? Did thou ever, oh my
soul, tread one step in it, but that thou foundest some precious Jemme and
Jewel? What treasures of knowledge, and wisdom, of faith, hope, love, and
every rich grace have there offered, and even thrust themselves into thy hands?
Oh what lovely fellowship, what heavenly company, what sweet and ravishing
conferences have, and do I there enjoy!

No sooner stepped I into that path of faith, but^ instantly that Father of the
faithful went before me, and with an hundred sweet comforts drew me on to
those his steps; that walking in the same faith, I might obtain the same
blessing. Gal 3.9.
When I entered into the tract of Godly sorrow, and true Repentance, how
cheerfully did that weeping Marie lead and conduct me? When I set my foot into
the way of heavenly love, how fervently did that most zealous Apostle draw me
after him?

See, see how many glorious Saints; see, oh see the King of Saints and glory,
thy gracious Savior, in every good way directing, sustayning, cheering, and
even carrying thee along to that heavenly Paradise.

What my soul? Shall those three Eastern Sages, when one Star alone leading
them to Christ, (then a poor despised Infant) went before them; Mat. 2.9,10
shall they rejoice, rejoice with exceeding great joy? And will thou, or for
very shame can thou hang down the head, when so many heavenly lights, when
the Sun of righteousness himself, comforting thee with his own, and such
his Stars presence, and cheerful beams, leads and conducteth thee to
that inheritance of light, and infinite glory? Oh then thou eternal Word, Way,
and Light, who have brought my feet, and entered them into thy Word (a lightsome
way) settle me yet more deeply in it, that my heart may stand fast in thee my
way. Put thy Word into my mouth, that my mouth (ever talking of it) may grow
fruitful in edification: Oh clear mine eyes with this true heavenly light,
that I may behold with joy, the light of thy countenance.

CHAP. XI. Comforts sealed up in the Sacraments.
IT has also pleased our gracious God to add seals to his Word, That by two
immutable things, wherein it is impossible that God should lie, we might have
strong consolation. Heb. 6.18.
Certainly, every word of God is infallible. Heaven and earth shall pass, but
not a word that he has spoken. God has not therefore annexed seals to his
Covenant, that it, or his purpose, but that our weak hearts might be
strengthened and confirmed. How unspeakable is this comfort, that the Lord
should be so far from despising our weak faith, and disdaining our poor
souls, struggling under unbeleefe, that he should yield to our weakness, and
underprop it with these powerful abetters of his truth? He might shake the
head at us when he sees so little credit given to his Word; but he rather
strengthens us with these sacred mysteries; which are to us as the hand of
Christ, reached out to Peter, to save our wavering souls ready to sink
through unbeleefe. The Covenant of God is, Ier. 32.38. 40,41.
I will be their God, and I will not turn away from them to do them good, but
will put my fear into their hearts, that they shall never depart from me:
Yea, I will rejoice over them to do them good. The consolations^ flowing from
this Covenant thus sealed, how strong, how full?

For first, throw down a man thus sealed up in this covenant of grace, from
all the joys of this world, into a very hell upon earth; Had he lost all his
substance, children, health of body; nay, peace of soul also, in some measure,
as Job; yet may he thence, with strong comfort, infallibly conclude, That this
estate is good for him; nay, best for him. For God is faithful, and his
Covenant sure, (beyond all possibility of deceiving, or being deceived) who
has promised, and sealed his promise to do him good, to rejoice over him in
doing him good. Hence the faithful soul will build this conclusion, and rest
upon it: Ps 119,71
It is good for me to be thus afflicted. Lam. 3.27
It is good for me to bear the yoke in my youth. Oh, if my faith were as
strong as my sense, I should taste much more sweetness in Gods goodness,
than bitterness in his affliction.

Again, especially when we consider the matter of these Sacraments, and
nature of these seals; what rivers of comfort must needs flow into the heart
of him who rightly partaketh them? Look as Princes grave their own
portraitures in their seals, sitting in state upon their Thrones, invested
with their royal apparel, adorned with their Crowns and Scepters: So the
Lord Jesus Christ in these his Signets has lively represented himself in his
death, conquering, triumphing and leading captive all our enemies, and even
trampling them under our feet. But Princes can grave nothing on their seals
but their dead Images: Not so here; For in these the very person of the Lord
Jesus is given us, as being not only represented, but presented and exhibited
to the faithful. The body of Christ feeding and strengthening, the blood of
Christ, washing, and (more than wine) cheering up our fainting spirits, is
there offered and given us who reach out the hand of faith to receive him. Now
how he should be unhappy, who has Christ, or miss of comfort, whose soul is
filled with the Lord Jesus, it is not possible to conceive.

But let us consider them a little severally.

Baptism is that Sacrament wherein God applies the blood of Christ to wash us
from all the pollution of our sin, and to communi^^te unto us his own glorious
pureness. Let us therefore take some notice, first, as well of the filthiness
of sin, as our filthiness by it, and then of this excellent pureness.

Certain is it, that our created understanding cannot find power in it self
to conceive, much less words to express the infinite loathsomeness of sin.
Hence is it that in Scripture the wisdom of God resembles it to all those
things which are to our senses most abhorred: sin to stinking mudde, a sinner
to aswine wallowing in that mire: sin to a loathsome vomit, a sinner to a
dog licking up his vomit: in a word, sin to death, a sinner to a rotten
carcass, and his throat to an open Sepulcher, exhaling, and belching out
stench and putrefaction: so infectious, that one sin entering into the world,
tainted and slew the whole world with sin, turning Saints into swine, Angels
into Devils: so loathsome, that even both the materials of man, Levit. 25.
in the very touch, defile; and the most pure and holy duties, Pro. 15. 8.
passing through a sinful heart, are altogether abhorred, and abominable: It
staineth the very righteousness of the Saints, Esa. 64. 6.
(who are not on earth yet absolutely cleansed from it;) so that in it self it
is no better than a filthy clout. This is our estate, from which by Christ
(applied unto us in Baptism) we are delivered.

Secondly, ponder well what is this image of Christ, which Baptism imprinteth
upon us: It is even the Divine nature, that glorious beauty of holiness,
which, in God, the blessed Angels (above all other attributes) admire and
praise. Esa. 6.3. Surely, if any thing can be in God more excellent than other,
then holiness is it: As the face is in the body, so is holiness in the Lord,
the very beauty of the Divine Nature. And as a passionate Lover is even
ravished with the presence and sight of his beloved; so is it the complete
happiness of the creature to behold that face of God shining with that
ravishing bewty of holiness. Men swear by the greater, Heb. 6^ 13. 15.
but because none is greater than God, therefore God swears by himself, but
in himself, by nothing (that I remember) but his holiness. Psa. 89.35
Oh then how unspeakeable is the comfort of this holy Ordinance, which clensing
us from such a filthiness, washes us into such a beauty.

Again, the Lords Supper is that holy Mystery wherein the Spirit perfecteth
this work which he has begun in us, and thoroughly assures us Christ.

Look as when the wax is hard, the first impression changes the form, and
mak^th some, though no perfect print of the Image ingraved in the seal: so
that Image of God, which by Baptism is stamped upon us, but by reason of our
sinful hard hearts, as yet in part only, is by often applying the Lord in
that other Seal more perfectly expressed, and more lively pourtrayed in us. So
being entered into life by Baptism, we are nourished by the Lords Supper, and
more strengthened, till we attain unto full growth and ripeness.

CHAP. XII. Meditation in these comforts given in the Sacraments.
NOw here again let us commune with our own hearts, and say; Why, oh my
soul, art thou so distracted, and rent with doubts and distrustful fears?
Have thou not the seals of Gods Covenant for thee, yea, in thee? If he will
do thee good, shall any creature be able to hurt thee? If he will knit my
heart to him in his fear, what shall separate it from his love? Oh be
persuaded (for which thou have so strong evidence and assurance) That no
tribulation, Romans 8.38, 39.
nor anguish, nor life, nor death, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come shall be able to separate thee from the love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Now therefore cast thy burden upon his
truth; lean and stablish all thy hopes upon these his sealed Promises. Oh let
perfect love cast out all distrust and fear. Assure thy self he will not,
nay, in his truth cannot fail thee in such assurances. How should not he pity
his own (though never so weak) life in thee, who pitied thy death in sin?
How should he hate thee now his child, who loved thee once an enemy? Oh my
God, as thou have given me an eye, in some measure, to see my sinful
filthiness; so have thou given me an heart, in the same measure, to loath my
self so polluted and filthy. Lord, thou have made me to know, and I desire
with more feeling, to acknowledge that I am beyond measure, beyond mine own
apprehension, in nature, horrible and loathsome: my root, rottenness; my
stalk, corruption; my fruit, contagion; more vile than the earth I tread on,
more polluted than the dung I scorn to tread on. But (oh incomprehensible
height, depth, breadth and length of thy grace!) those thine infinitely pure
eyes could even then with compassion behold this unmeasurably impure and
infectious mire, when no eye pitied me, when I had no pity on my self, even
then had thou compassion on me. Ezekiel. 16.
When I was cast out as the execrable and loathsome dunghill of the world, even
then d^ddest thou not despise me: I was dead in sin, stinking in the grave of
my lusts, yet even then did thou say unto me, Live. Thou washedst me with
the water of life, the Blood of the Lord Jesus; annoyntedst me with the oil of
thy gracious Spirit, and did set thine own beauty upon me. Job. 6. 32, 33.
Thou have nourished me with the true Manna, That bread of heaven, which gives
life unto the world: And daily do thou vouchsafe to renew me after thine
image, and to strengthen thy life and nature in me.

And now my God, is there any thing like this, to be like to thee? Oh what an
honor, what a Crown is this unto me? In all other endowments every creature
may excel me. Stones more durable, Plants more vegetative, Beasts more
sensible, even Devils more wise and understanding: But herein have thou
magnified thy grace toward me thy abject Creature, that I excel other works
of thy hands in that, wherein thou (my glorious God) excellest thy self: that
thou have printed thy holiness, thy Divine image and beauty upon me, and
crowned me with thy glory and honor. Rejoice then, oh my soul, in the Lord,
and dance for joy. His grace has prevented, and far out-runne thy wishes: As
the first Adam lost all his happiness by his ambitious desires to be like
unto God in knowing good and evil, so the second Adam has restored all
happiness, by satisfying our ambition, in making us like himself, in loving
good, and hating evil. The life and estate which thou enjoyest in Christ, the
nourishment of that life, and the assurance of that estate, equalleth, and
transcendeth thy most ambitious desires and wishes. Phil. 4^4.
Rejoice then in the Lord, again I say rejoice: for the world is thine, 1 Cor.
3.22
things present, and to come, are thine, life and death are thine, nay, the
Lord of life is thine, thy portion, the seal of thy portion, and of thine
inheritance in glory.

CHAP. XIII. Comforts arising from Prayer.
A Third Ordinance of God in which he yields us much consolation, is Prayer:
wherein whether we consider the privilege which we enjoy, namely, that we dust
and sinful ashes may speak unto the glorious Lord of heaven, and upon all
occasions, at any time of need, boldly, through Christ, Eph^ 3.12.
approach unto his presence, and make all our wants known unto him: or the
power and efficacy of Prayer, that we never speak in vain, but prosper in
all our suits; what can be a greater consolation to an afflicted Spirit? What?
Has God opened an eutrance for us unto his grace, through the meditation which
is in Christ? Has he set out the Son of his love to be our Intercessour?
Clothed him with our infirmities, Heb. 2.17.
that he might be an high Priest for us, merciful, sensible, and tender of our
weakness? Has he appointed this Angel of the Covenant, Rev^ 8.3.
to incence and perfume our prayers with his most fragrant mediation, and so to
bring them into his presence? Has he exempted no time, but made every hour,
every minute a season for this holy Ordinance so that the oftener we come, the
more welcome; and the more importunate our suit, the more sweet and pleasing?
Has he not permitted, but commanded, Psal^ 50.
Call upon me in the day of trouble; and instantly promised, and I will
deliver thee? Has he not bid, Mat. 7.
Aske^ and assured us, you shall receive? Does he wish us, Be careful for
nothing, but in all thiugs let your requests be shown to God in prayer? And
because we know not how to pray as we ought, Romans 8.26.
has he given us his Spirit to help our infirmities, and to make
intercession for u^, with groans which cannot be uttered? And can any man want
comfort, who enjoys this privilege of Gods children, and of the favorites of
the King of heaven?

But some, perhaps, will reply here, Do not we see many Saints complain, and
have not I found by experience, that God does not always grant what we ask?

Ans. The Rules here of that Ancient Father, are good: Aug. de ser. Dom. ser.
53.
Sometimes God gives in wrath what is asked of him: sometimes denies in love.
And again, Epist. 34.
The Lord is gracious, who often gives not what we ask, that he may give
what we should ask. And yet again, God always hears us, not always our
wills, but always our profit. God gives the Israelites flesh in wrath, and
with store of flesh, Ps. 106. 15
leanenesse of Spirit. Hos. 13.11
He gives a King in anger, when they ask him, 2 Cor. ^2.
but he denied Paul in love, that he might keep down his heart from rising
in pride, and stablish it with sufficiency of grace. Sometimes our Children
ask of us things which are no way good, and sometimes they ask things that
are good, but out of due time; we give them neither: Thus often do we, and
therefore receive not. But fully to answer this objection, we must by no means
forget, that in all petitions there is both a general intention and purpose of
asking good, and a desire of some particular, which we suppose to be good; but
through our dullness in understanding, and want of a discerning Spirit, may be
good, or evil. Again, we must remember, that in God there is an infinite
wisdom which clearly and perfectly discerns what either in it self, or to
us is evil, or good.

Now then, if the Lord should satisfy us in our mistake, granting the
particular which we co^ceive to be good and he knows evil) and so should
deny us the good which he knows we intend and purpose; this (under a seeming
grant) were a plain denial; whereas the contrary seeming a denial, yet is,
(and will hereafter plainly appear to be) an evident grant, though not of that
which we ignorantly ask, yet of that which in truth we desire. Certain is
it, that by reason of our great ignorance in asking, every faithful Christian
prays with all subjection to Gods will and wisdom (so we are taught as well
by precept, Thy will be done, Mat. 6.
as by practice, Not my will, but thy will be done; Luke 22^42
) and as certain, that what we so ask, we shall without fail receive. For
he that gave Christ, unasked, to us, when we were enemies, will not deny any
grace (when he is entreated) to them who are reconciled in Christ, and ask in
his name. This then is sufficient for a Christian, that he first knows, that
God has willed and decreed to give him Christ, and with him all good things,
and secondly, that whatsoever he asks according to that will, he shall
without all fail receive, 1 Ioh. 5.14.

CHAP. XIV. An Answer to some further objections.
BUt some weak dejected Christian will be ready to reply; All things indeed
are possible to him that believes, but, alas, I have no faith to pray. True it
is, that prayer is but the speech of faith, And how can they call upon him in
whom they believe not. Faith (says that excellent Father) gives life to
prayer, and prayer gets strength for faith. Aug. de verb. com^ ser. 36.


For answer, let an humble soul well consider how a man, with grief, should
sensibly feel want of faith, if he had not some faith to give him sense and
feeling? How should spiritual sense be without life, or spiritual life without
faith. As he in the Gospel first found his sight in the defect of it, ( that
he saw men like trees,) So might weak Christians easily discern some measure
of true faith, even in this grief, and complaints for want of faith.

Again, we shall easily perceive, in these Complainers, much detestation of
sin, not only in others, but especially in themselves, and passionat desires
to glorify God in all faithful service. And from what root can these fruits
arise, but from that faith which purifieth the heart.

Some others complain, I know well that fervent prayer prevails much; but I
have no heat, no life, no fervor of prayer; but in such duties find a
wonderful coldness, d^lnesse, and even deadness of spirit. But let such
know, and continually remember, that these feelings are very common to Gods
dearest Saints on earth: I am afflicted very much, (says David, Ps. 119.1^7
) quicken me, oh Lord, according to thy Word. Nine several times does that
holy Prophet call for quickening grace in that only Psalm; which evidently
argues much sense of spiritual dullness and deadness.

At such times therefore ( because the Word quickneth us) Psa. 119.50
let us shake ou^ this heaviness by some meditations on those grounds of
prayer which we find in the Word.

Now these grounds are either such as are within, or without us: Those within
are first some feeling of a grievous defect and want; secondly, some
apprehension of good in the things desired. The outward are, first, the
ability, secondly, the bounty of those whom we ask. Now as where in much want
there is no feeling of any defect, or if there be sense, yet no desire of
supply, there no man will seek out for help: So, when all these concur, yet
will we not ask, where either there is wrll, but no power, or much power but
no will to succor us. But when a man finds at home nothing but want and
beggary (as well want of all necessaries, as want of strength in himself to
procure them) and this want stirs up hunger, he will soon leave his own
bare walls, to get relief of some rich and bountiful person.

And according to the measure of these grounds will be his diligence in using
means, and seeking help: where there is much sense of much want, strong
desires of supply, certain knowledge of great ability and bounty in some near
neighbor, there also the putting forth of means to procure relief will be
answerable.

Now then let a Christian, wh^ desires to sharpen his voice in prayer, when
his heart with serious meditations: 1. Of his desperate wants; want of all
necessary grace, want of all power to supply it of himself. Consider that thou
art poor, Rev. 3. 17.
wretched, miserable, blind and naked: no sufficiency in thee to think one
good thought. 2 (...)
2. When thou have taken a good view of thy many and grievous wants, ponder
well the necessity of the grace which thou want: Remember the profit, the
sweetness, the excellency of it; Phil. 3.8. 10.
that All things are dung and loss in comparison of the excellen^ knowledge of
Christ, the v^rtue of his resurrection, and comformitie to his death. By this
means thou will find thy desires to be kin^led within thee. Then ^et before
thine eyes that Father of Lights, from whom (as beams from the Sun) flow out
infinite streams of grace and goodness toward his creatures: weigh diligently
that he is rich, infinitely rich to all that call upon him: Romans 10^12
gracious, infinitely gracious to those who seek him in Christ. Men grow poor
by much giving: but he, the more he gives, the more he may. Mat. 13.1^
No end of his store, no end or beginning of his goodness: insomuch, that
where he once gives, there he ever gives; one grace ever making way for
another^ and the more thou desire and ask, the more welcome; and the more
excellent the things which thou beggest, the more sure thou a^^ to receive
them. If Solomon ask wisdom, he shall have it with advantage of other
blessings which he asked not: how much more when thou ask holiness? Oh if
thou ask, Give me thy self to be my Father; give me thy Son to be my Head
and Savior; give me thy holy Spirit to be my life and quickner; give me
obedience to all; How should thou miss? Thou which art a parent, how
willingly can thou (being thy self evil) give good things to thy child,
though the more thou give the less thou have; but if he ask wisely, things
that are truly good, not toys, and trifles, how art thou delighted in his
petitions? how gladly do thou give him with increase, whatsoever he
entreats? How much more shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to
those that ask him? Luke 11.13
Remember the example of blind Bartimeu^. Mar. 10.46 etc.
He feeling the great miss of his eyes, and the discomfort of perpetual
darkness, and knowing well that as in himself there was no help, so in
Christ ( as being the light of the world) there was both infinite power, and
grace, (as denying none that came unto him laden and oppressed) never ceased
crying, Jesus thou son of David have mercy on me. They discourage and rebuke
him that he should hold his peace: what then? Did he sit down and cease? No,
but whetted with the remembrance of his own misery, and Christ his mercy, Cried
out so much the more a great deal, Jesus thou son of David have mercy upon
me. Remember how earnestly, and uncessantly he sued; remember how he prospered
in his suit. Now go thou, and do likewise. Sharpen thy desires with serious
meditation on thy wants: set before thine eyes this power and bounty of the
Lord, and then entreat, beg, sue, importune his favor, and never give him
over, till he give thee in thy request. Luke 18.1.
Nor let thy spirit faint, but know thou shall obtain as sure as God is true.
Thou can not fail, because he cannot be unfaithful.

CHAP. XV. The application of this comfort by meditation.
NOw then when thou find thy Spirit cast down within thee, rowze it up with
some such meditation.

How is it (my Soul) how is it, oh thou of little faith, that thus in the day
of trouble thou refusest comfort? Psalm. 77.2.
Have thou not good leave, yea, a precious liberty, nay, a sweet command from
thy gracious Lord, Iam. 5.
Is any man afflicted? let him pray. Oh my my Lord, Shall all flesh come unto
thee, because thou hear prayer? Psalm. 65.2.
And shall not I who have had so much experience, Psalm. 116. 2
how often thou have inclined thine ear unto me, shall not I call upon thee as
long as I live? Psalm. 138.3
In the very day that I cried, thou have answered me, and strengthenest me
with the strength of thy right hand in my soul. Can I then want comfort, who
have thine ear to hear me, thy compassion to pity me, thy strong hand to
relieve me? Iam. 5.13.
Is there no time untimely in prayer, no season unseasonable, but the time of
affliction the very set hour of audience? ( Psa. 50. 15.) and shall I not then
take hold of this privilege, and use it with cheerfulness? Oh my heavenly
Father, even I a sinful wretch will give any good thing to the child of my
body, when he asks: But if he desire me to teach him things profitable, his
book, his trade, his duty to thee, to my self, and others, how joyfully do I
hear him? how gladly do I instruct him? how willingly reward him? How then
should thou (so infinitely good) so (beyond all that I can think) gracious
and bountiful, deny me thy poor creature begging of thee any thing that is
truly good, especially when longing after thee and thy righteousness, in this
barren and thirsty land, my soul pants and faints for thy presence, and
for that holy Spirit, w^ereby I call upon thee Abba Father? Oh how should
thou not (according to thy Covenant) delight in me to do me good, and as thou
have promised, rejoice over me to give me my hearts desire? Zeph. 3.7^


Now then thou, my gracious Father, who art more ready to give thy Spirit,
Psalm. 1^
than we to ask him, even that Spirit of Prayer and supplication; Thou who
have commanded, Call upon me in the time of trouble, and have promised, I will
hear thee; Hear now the supplication of thy servant, and when thou hear,
be merciful. Thou who command, Psa. 27.8,9
Seek my face, and have given thy servant an heart to answer, Lord thy face
will I seek: oh hide not thy face from me, nor cast thy creature away in
displeasure: Yea, oh my God, quicke^ thy servant in the sense of my want and
misery, and in the knowledge of thy powerful grace and mercy, always to
pray, and never to faint: Ps. 138.7,^
So, though I walk in the midst of troubles, thou will revive me, and perfect
that which concerns me.

CHAP. XVI. Comforts arising immediately from God himself. And first in
general.
Look as a vessel, which is coutinually driven down by the current of any
River, will at length fall into the maine Sea, which being the common
storehouse of waters, both supplieth the want, and receives the overplus of
lesser streams; So when our souls have been carried along within these
narrower banks of comforts, they will easily be wafted into that wide Ocean,
whence every consolation flows, and into it ebbeth again, and emptyeth it
self. Certainly, the final comfort of a Christian soul, into which all the
rest are resolved, is God himself, infinite in all goodness, and unchangeable in
his love, and therefore an unexhausted Well, a standing and overflowing
fountain of infinite consolations.

Hence as he challenges this title, and calls himself The God of patience
and consolation; Romans 15.5.
nay, The God of all comfort; 2 Cor. 1.3
so his faithful servants, from their experience, confess him every where
their strength, joy, portion, inh^ritance, their Rock, Tower, Shield,
Fortress, etc. Well might David rejoice and glory in the Lord: Psalm 73.26
My flesh (says he) fails, and my heart also; but God is the strength of my
heart, and my portion for ever. How strong and invincible was that faith, and
by it that comfort of Job? Job 13.15, 16.
Although he kill me, yet will I trust in him, and he shall be my salvation.
And how answerable was their practice to this their profession? Do but
consider what we read of these holy men.

David being driven from his native Country, and from his Fathers house, in
disgrace with the Court, and in displeasure, nay, deadly hatred of his Prince,
deprived of all his deserved honors, the just recompense of his noble service,
by the malice and tyranny of Saul; and (which he accounted, far above the
rest, the greatest misery) banished from the holy Assemblies, and the house of
God; affamished, and even starved for want of that Word, (which he preferred
above all the earth) not only thrust out from abiding in the inheritance of
the Lord, but by the rage of his Adversaries enforced to seek Sanctuary in
idolatous Countries, 1 Samuel 26^ 19.
where he might have been seduced to serve other gods, had yet at length hid
his head under the protection of an Heathenish King, and found that favor from
an enemy, and a Heathen, which he had lost among his friends, and Gods people.
There he placed himself in a foreign City with his wives, 1 Samuel 27.
and some few loose men, who for their own advantage had follow^d him. But
when he retireth thither, he finds the City burned, his wives, and all his
substance; the wives, children, and all the goods of all his followers carried
away. Nothing now was left him but his soldiers; and they, (grieved and vexed
at the heart for their loss) take all against him, conspire, intend, and
speak to stone him: Look out now into all the world, and see where you can
find upon earth, one spark of comfort for this Saint of God: yet even then
when he was utterly desolate and forlorn, he could send up his dejected soul
to heaven, and there did find, and feel infinite comfort in the Lord his God.
See the 1 Samuel, chap. 30. from the 1. to the 7. verse.

Do we not find the like, nay, more in Job? His estate was lost, and for
outward blessings (goods, and children) he was stripped as naked as he was
borne: His wife left him, but as a snare: His friends come to comfort him, but
through the craft of Satan, shake him more thau all the rest of his
afflictions. His life was yet whole in his body, but his body broken and
wounded with sore plagues from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot:
But yet the Spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity. Pro. 18.14
True; but a wounded spirit, who can bear? The inner-man embroyled by Satan,
and terrors of the spirit joined to griefs and troubles of the body; without,
Job 10.17.
plagues continually renewed, changes, and armies of sorrows set against him;
Job 6.4.
within, and without, the arrows of the Almighty shot at him, sticking in
him, and their venime drink^ng up his spirit; the terrors of God fighting
against him, made him the most afflicted, and (if it were possible for the
faithful to be miserable) the most wretched man on earth: But even then his
poor soul, over-wrastled with temptations, cast down within him, and almost
smothered with this load and heap of afflictions, could lift up the head to
search out the Redeemer, and find unspeakable comfort in him. Job 19.25 26^27.
I am sure my Redeemer lives, and I shall see God in my flesh, etc.

What was left to those three royal young men ( Dan. 3.) in that burning anger
of the Tyrant, and that sevenfold heated furnace? What to the Apostle
persecuted by Jews, disgraced by Heathens, stoned by the consent of both, and
(as a dead carrion) dragged, and cast out of the City; yea, too little
esteemed, nay, judged by his own children in the Spirit? yet were they then
even full of comfort in God. Oh consider with what noble courage those three
noble Captives defy the roaring of that Lion, even the fierceness of that
proud King, and tell him to his Beard, Dan. 3.17.
Our God can, and will deliver us out of thine hand? With what Christian valor
could that great Champion of the Lord Jesus, compassed in, and pressed down
with all the most bitter persecutions of this world cry out Victory, and sing
his Triumph? not only saying with the Heathen, Quam levia sunth^^ quam h^ec
non curo?
How light are all these things, how slightlie do I weigh them? nay, These
light momentarie afflictions cause to us an excelling excellent eternal weight
of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. but, Romans 8.37
In all these things we are more than Conquerors through him that loves us.
So right is it, oh thou Eternal Truth, which thou have spoken: Esa 51.12.
I, even I am he that comfort you; who art thou, that thou should fear a
mortal man, and the son of man which shall be made as grass.

Sure is it God cannot but be the greatest comfort to them whom enjoy him,
because he is the greatest good: For even those heathens (as truly observed
that most judicious Divine, August. de doct. Chris. l. 1. c. 7.
and learned Father) who consider him by the eye of the understanding, and not
by sense, prefer him above all visible, and corporal, above all
intelligible, and spiritual natures: Nor can (says he^ any man be found, who
thinks God to be that, than which any thing can be better. In this all men
consent, that they advance him above all things. Let us therefore, from this
incomprehensible Sea of consolation, draw out some especial and particular
comforts.

CHAP. XVII. The more special comforts which are in God: And first in the
Father.
NOw as that glorious one God is distinguished into three persons, so may we
discern in Scripture a threefold relation between us, and every person; full
of unspeakable joy and sweetness: God the Father vouchsafes to be our
father; God the Son has undertaken to be our Savior; The blessed Spirit
gives himself unto us to be peculiarly, and in more specialty, our Comforter.

First, then God the Father maybe considered in this relation either to God, or
the creature: In the first kind he is a Father only to the Son, by an
essential communication of his substance. In the second, he is a Father either
generally to all reasonable creatures, by creation; to Angels ( Job 1.6.) who
are there called the children of God: Esa. 64.8.
to men, Thou art our Father, and we the work of thy hands: and hence Adam
styled the Son of God: Luke 3. 38.
or else more particularly he is a Father to the faithful by grace, and that
as well by adoption as by regeneration. For the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ
culleth out from among the families of worldly men those whom before he has
predestined, and brings them into his own family, sets out for them,
and instateth them into a portion of grace, and inheritance of glory:) Read
Gal. 4. 4,5,6. and Ephesians. 1.4,5.) and then by that immortal seed of his Word
begets them to that divine nature; 1 Pet. 1.3.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his
abundant mercy has begotten us. Iam. 1. 17, 1^.
Of his own will the Father of lights has begotten us.

It is altogether impossible in this land of darkness to behold the infinite
light of heavenly comfort which flows from this relation. For what comparison
between any earthly estate, and our adoption into heaven? The children of
Nobles, and of the greatest Princes in revolution of no long time fall back
into as mean a condition as the lowest: Joseph and Marie lineally descended
from David (a great and potent Monarch) how soon could they slide down in the
current of this world into a very low estate? He a poor Carpenter, She his
Spouse: Thus is it in all earthly creatures: Look as in plants many little
threeds grow up into a big root, and that shoots forth into a strong and
mighty body, which yet being divided into many arms and branches, at length
ends in small twigs: So is it with all the glory of this world; gloriously it
seems to glister for a short time in a fleshly eye, and to flame and glitter
to the admiration of silly men, but as it is blown up from a poor spark, so
it quickly sinketh into a little dust and ashes. But in this spiritual estate
there is no measure in the glory, or time: but as their Father, and elder
Brother, so are they Kings: for glory, unspeakeable; for durance, eternal.

For when the Almighty, All-wise God, accepts, and adopteth us for children
unto himself, he enters into an everlasting Covenant with us of grace and
love, and binds up our unstable, starting, and warping souls in the bundle
of life with a double tie; first, of his love to us; secondly, of our love to
him; I will never turn away from them to do them good: yea, I^r. 32.40, 41.
I will delight in them to do them good: and I will put my fear into their
hearts, that they shall never depart from me.

Do but consider what Spring-tides of infinite consolations flow into our
empty souls from this Sea of comfort. Certainly, children recejve some comfort
from bad parents, much more from good. But what earthly comfort can that child
want (which is in the power of man to give) whose Parent abounds in love,
wisdom and riches. Were a Father only loving, or only rich, or wise only,
yet even from any of these ^ingle in a parent some benefit would be reaped by
the children; but when they all meet (...) sed with much evil in this world?
nay, are any men so full of wants and griefs? Surely they neither want any
true good, or are oppressed with any thing which indeed is evil, whose wants
on earth are richly supplied with excellent treasures of grace and glory, and
evils of sense made fruitful in all spiritual bles^ings. For this is an
especial privilege of Gods children, that as the wicked are ever cursed, even
in their blessings, Mal. 2.2. so the faithful are ever blessed, even in
earthly curses; Rom^ 8.28.
all things working together for their good; and that they know, Phil. 1.19.

Do but observe what a strong foundation is here laid for every faithful
Christian to build up his soul in unspeakeable comfort, and to solace himself
even in his worst estate. Can any reasonable man deny, but that such a
condition is good, comfortable, nay, best, and most happy for a man, which
comes to him from infinite love, assisted with infinite power and wisdom:
Now then thus will a faithful Christian conclude in his most grievous
aff^ictions and crosses. Have not I a sure word, and infallible, that all these
things come unto me, not only from Gods power and wisdom, but from his love?
P^a. ^36.5.
He makes the heavens by his wisdom: Ps. 104.24.
In wisdom has he done all his works. Heb. 12.6, 7.
Come not all his chastisements from love, from his fatherly love?

So again, an afflicted soul will hence cheer up it self in the midst of
all troubles. Howsoever these grievances are bitter in the mouth, and seem
(when they are tasted by sense and carnal reason) very unpleasant and evil;
yet indeed, if I better consider them, and their nature, looking on them with
a spiritual eye, I shall discern nothing but an outside, and show of evil,
but full within of much sweetness, and precious treasure. As that Heathens
staff which he dedicated to his Idol, made of horn without, but within
filled with gold; or as some fruits bitter in the rine, but pleasant in the
pulpe of them: So is there here an appearance of evil covering a world of
good; when I have taken away the paring, I shall taste the fruit very
delightful and wholesome: they seem messengers of death, but they bring life;
they seem full of sorrow, yet cause much rejoicing; they threaten poverty, but
fill with riches. The evil is in seeming only, but the good and profit real.
It was a prerogative not proper to the Apostle, but common to all the members
of Christ, that they are as dying, but (certainly, nay, eternally) living; as
sorrowful, yet always rejoicing, as having nothing, but indeed possessing
all things. Read 2 Cor. 6. 9,10^

CHAP. XVIII. Applying these comforts by Meditation.
NOW when we have thoroughly beheld, considered, and by faith applied this
truth to our hearts, let us by some short meditation stir up our fainting
spirits, and quicken them in remembrance of this great privilege given us by
God.

Let us take words with us, Hos. 14.2.
turn into our own souls, and say, Psalm. 42.11^
Why art thou cast down my soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? Has
not the Lord commanded thee, and doubled, and often repeated that command,
Phil. ^.4.
Rejoice in the Lord, again I say rejoice? Rejoice evermore. 1 The. 5.16


none in earth with thee: And has not he said unto thee, as to them; Heb. 13.5.
I will not fail, nor forsake thee? And wilt not thou then conclude, Psa. 27.10
If Father and Mother (and all the world) forsake me, yet the Lord will gather
me up.

Has not thy gracious Lord and glorious creator adopted thee unto himself,
brought thee home into his house, settled thee in his Family? Has he not cast
into thy heart that immortal seed of his Word, and so begotten thee unto
himself? Have thou not found his almighty power, put forth in this quickening
word, to raise thee up from that grave of lusts, in which thou layest dead in
sins and trespasses, rotting, and even crawling with the worms of hell? Is
the Lord then of heaven and earth, the Father of Christ, the Father of lights
become thy Father, and can thou want any thing that is good? were there not
much more good in this conflicting, and afflicted state then evil, nay, were
not this by his overruling hand co^verted wholly to thy good; how should it
come from him who is infinite goodness, to thee whom he has infinitely loved?

True, oh most true! his love is better then life: Psalm. 63.3.
and nothing ca^ proceed from that love but good; but I cannot see that love
through these tears, through this thick cloud of earthly sorrows. But oh his
love is not more sweet, then evident; see, oh see it in his gifts. He has not
spared his only Son, but given him to the death, even to the cursed death of
the cross; How then shall he not with him give thee all things also? He has
given thee his holy Spirit, the life of thy life, and his own glorious self;
and can he with himself (the infinite incomprehensible good) give any thing
which is not good? Assure thy self whatsoever is given by and with him, cannot
but be (through him) good, exceeding good, beyond that which thou do, or
can conceive. Now therefore remember, It is his covenant to do thee good.
Know then, (know it of a truth) and thoroughly persuade and settle thy self in
it, that as now thou art under the rod, because it is good for thee to be
afflicted; so when it shall be good for thee, thou shall rest from al thy
tro^ble, and sh^lt b^ satisfied with abundance of peace. Oh then, my soul, be
not thou of an hasty spirit, Esa. 18.16.
For he that believes w^ll not make have. H^d Joseph appointed the time of his
deliverance; Had the oppressed Israelites set out the limits of their Egyptian
bondage; or those three young captive Champions prescribed their fiery trial,
how would they all have hindered their own happiness, and Gods glory? If my
righteous Brethren smite me, it is a kindness, their reproof is an excellent
oil: Psa 141.5.
What then is the rod of my heavenly Father but his fatherly love? What his
rebuke, but a rich perfume, and precious balm, clensing my defiled nature, and
preserving it from all fleshly pollution? Psalm. 37.5.
Roll then thy way upon the Lord, Psa. 103.9.
and he shall bring it to pass: wait upon his hand; and remember he is not
always chiding: ^sa 54^7.8
For a small moment he may forsake, but with great mercies he will gather me;
In a little wrath he may hide his face for a moment, but with everlasting
kindness will he have mercy upon me. Oh then, my heavenly father, who
vouchsafest to wait, Esa 30^^8.
that thou may be gracious to me, give me power with patience to wait upon
thy grace: Thou who make it thy exaltation and glory to show me mercy, oh
give me an heart to attend thy mercy, till thou receivest me to thy glory.

CHAP. XIX. Comforts taken from the second person of Trinity.
AS God the Father has vouchsafed us that unspeakeable comfort and honor to
be our Father, so the Son yields us no less, in that he undertakes to be
the Savior of all the faithful; and not in part, but an entire and perfect
Savior from all evil. For evil may be considered either in the root, or
fruit of it; and our Savior has utterly abolished both for us. The greatest
evil, and the very root of all other is sin: and the fruit of sin is
principally (as including all the rest) the wrath of God and death. Now our Lord
saves his people (first) from sin, Mat. 1.21.
in being a perfect sacrifice ( Heb. 10. 14) and consequently, a propitiation
for all their sins; I Ioh. 2.2. Secondly, he delivers his people from wrath,
1 The. 1.10
and the curse, Gal. 3.13.
by bearing the curse and wrath for them. In a word he has redeemed the
faithful from all enemies of body and soul. See, Luke 1. 71. 74. Death, Sin,
and the curse of the Law, he has swallowed up into victory, 1 Cor. 15. 55,
56,57.

Object.
But some weak Christian, perhaps, will here sigh out an objection: How has
Christ delivered me from sin, when I still find this cursed law of my
members rebelling against the law of my mind, Rom, 7.23
and leading me captive to the law of sin? How am I delivered from death,
when nothing is more sure to me than death, and I dye daily? Ans. Answ.
First, observe that the Apostle (who in the person of the faithful utters
those words) was even then devered from sin by Christ, and gives thanks in the
words instantly following for his deliverance. Hence it is apparent, that even
the^ when sin rebelleth in us, nay, by strong hand carries us captive, we are
delivered from it; delivered first from the usurping power, Romans 6.14.
and dominion of it, whereby we were enslaved, and served it with greediness^;
and again, from the guilt of it; It shall not be imputed or accounted to us:
but we reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5.19. Insomuch that where the Apostle
confesses plainly his sins both of omission and commission, yet in this regard
he dares confidently, and does truly affirm, Romans 7.19, 20.
It is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me. Sin in the
faithful, is as sickness in the body, getting up now again, and having
overcome, yet not wholly freed from al incombrance of the disease. Now as when
our children, through bodily distemper, and sickly weakness, cannot do what
they desire, and endeavor to do, and do some things which they hate
themselves, and are to us offeusive, we impute to them neither their omissions
or commissions: so deals God with his children.

Secondly, as the Lord by Jesus (the Son of Nun) brought in his people into
the land of Canaan, and trod all their enemies under their feet^ yet left some
of the Ca^anites among them for diverse ends: So is i^ with us; (For all that
story of Isreal's passage from Egypt to the land of rest, is but as a type, or
picture of Gods dealing with all his Saints;) The Lord our God has given us
the true Jesus to lead us into possession of that heavenly Canaan our eternal
life, and kingdom of glory. Now he has already entered us into that eternal
life (for he that believes has eternal life. Ioh. 5.24.
) and taken, and holds possession of glory for us. Eph^ ^.^.
( For in him we already sit in heavenly places.) He has conquered our
enemies, and led them in show and triumph, yet for some ends has left some of
these enemies; and has) not yet fully destroyed them.

And as among that people some of those Ganaanits were reserved as enemies,
some as servants; the former to prove Israel, Judge. 3. 1, 2,3,4.
whether they would hearken to the Commandments of the Lord, and to teach them
war: the other to help them in some works, as the G^beonites ( Josh.
9.21.27.) so has the Lord in the faithful, left some of these inhabitants of
our corrupt nature, as well to teach us spiritual warfare, as to prove us
whether we will cleave to him: Ephesians. 6.11. etc.
and hence is it, that he frames for us, and gives us spiritual armor, and
commands us to exercise our selves in it. (And such are all our ^infull
corruptions and rebellions:) as some also to serve us, to do some good office
for us: and such is death, which is to us, as those servants to the Prodigal,
Luke 15.2
appointed by our Lord and Father to pull off our rags, 2 Cor. 5.^.
that we may be clothed upon; and as those who took from Iehoshuah his
filthy garments, Zech. 3.4.^
and set a fair Diadem upon him: Este^ 6. 8. 11.
As Haman to Mordecai, who (against his will) clothed him with royal appa^ell,
set the Crowne-royall on his head, and brought him into the presence of the
great King.

Now then look as it was with those Israelites, and the fiery Serpents, when
God had, by the sight of the Brazen Serpent, cured them of their wounds and
bitings, especially if withal he had pulled out their stings, they might be
truly said to be perfectly saved from those Serpents, although they were yet
among them, and did many ways annoy and encumber them So, when the Lord has
not only cancelled our sin, and healed those poisonous bitings of it, 1 Cor.
15. 56,57,
but taken out the sting also of it, that it shall not be able to kill, we are
said truly to be saved, and delivered already from sin and death; which
still are enemies, but not able to effect their malice, or do any evil to us,
which Christ has not, or will not tnrne to our eternal good and happiness.

Surely then this truth, that the Son of God blessed for ever is our Savior,
is a privilege wonderful; especially if we consider the manner how he wrought
salvation for us. Look then first to his Incarnation, wherein he fitted
himself for our redemption; then to his passions and exaltation, whereby he
has p^rfected our happiness, and we shall find unspeakeable consolations in
every one of them.

First, there is no Creature can boast of so glorious a prerogative, as a
fai^hfull man; that God refusing the nature of Angels, has taken our nature
into him, and become man l^ke us in all things: H^b ^. 16, 17, 18.
covered, and troubled with the same infirmities, that from the sense of them
in himself, he might more compassionately intercede for us, more effectually
and speedily help us. The Word was made flesh, Ioh. 1.14. of the seed of
Abraham, Heb. 2. 16. and of David, Romans 1. 3. conceived in the womb of a
Virgin, Luke 1. 31.
and borne by her. Thus he became one with us; Flesh of our flesh, and bone of
our bone: so nearely was this our nature united to him, that as body and soul
make up one man, so God and man make one Christ; that as the Word is said to
be flesh, so the blood of that flesh is called The Blood of God. Act. 20.28


Secondly, in this our flesh he gave full satisfaction to the Justice of God,
by suffering in that nature, in which God was offended.

This Prince of our salvation was consecrate through afflictions. Heb. 2.10^
He gave his back to the smiters, his cheeks to the nippers, he held not his
face from shame and spitting. Esa^ 50.6.


He was attached, bound, accursed, and condemned as an offender, in whose
mouth there was no guile, by the same Judge, who knew and confessed himself
innocent: he was rejected by the heathen, by his own people, abused, mocked,
and scorned by all sorts, nailed to the Cross, there dyed, and after buried;
and not only swamme through his own blood, but waded through the fiery
stream of Gods wrath for us. Oh then, if he has loved us to his death, how
much more will he love us to our life? Will the Lord after all his sufferings
lose the soul for which he suffered? Or can he, who thus loved us, being then
enemies, that he chose to bear off the wrath of God for us, by drawing it on
himself, suffer any part of that wrath to fall upon us, now that he has
redeemed us to himself, killed the enmity, and drawn our hearts to thirst,
longue, and pine for him and his righteousness.

Thirdly, that he might perfect us, as he dyed for our sins, so he rose
again for our justification: Romans 4.25
ascended into heaven, and having received all power and authority, sits at
the right hand of God, a continual Intercessour for us: Romans 8.34.
Heb. 7.25.
and shall thence descend with the shout of an Angel, and the trumpet of God,
to raise, quicken and receive us to glory. I cannot but here, therefore,
insert that sweet meditation of holy Augustine in Psalm. 148.

From his heavenly Country he brought all good things unto us, and in our
Country endured all our evils; yet promised us, that we should be there, from
whence he came, and said, I will that where I am, they may be also with me. So
wonderful was his love, that because he was with u^ in our habitations, we
should be with him in his Mansions. Oh mortal man, what has he promised thee
that thou shall live for ever; And do thou not believe him? Believe, believe.

It is more that he has already done, then that which he has promised.
What has he done? he died for thee. What has he promised? that thou
should live with him. It is more incredible, that the Eternal should once
dye, then that a mortal should live for ever.

Now we hold fast what is harder to believe. If God dyed for man, shall not
man live with God? Shall not a mortal live aeternally, for whom he dyed, who
lives aeternally?

Verily, the afflictions of this life are so far from being worthy of the
glory which is purchased for us in the life to come, that rather they are
nothing to those comfortable, nay glorious privileges, which we presently
enjoy: For what can any earthly misery, (which at the furthest proceeds to a
temporal death) show comparable with this union with God, and glorious
fellowship with the Father through Christ? We are united to God by affinity,
by a spiritual, and therefore indissoluble bond of marriage: he has married
our nature, nay, our persons: has set his own image on us, and given us his,
even the divine nature: and so as he is our flesh, so we flesh of his flesh,
and bone of his bone. Eph^ 5.30.
We are united to him by a spiritual consanguinity; to the Father, as our
father, ( Ioh. 20.17.) to the Son, as our brother; Heb. 2.11. nay, as members
to the Head, Ephesians. 5. 30. And because all fleshly and mixed union is no way
comparable to that simple union of Spirits, We are one Spirit with him, 1 Cor.
6.17. that as there is no union like that of the Trinity of persons in the
unity of the Godhead, so we also should be united spiritually to our God,
Ioh. 17.21
That as the Father is in Christ, and Christ in the Father, so we may be one
in them.

Go to now; Let all the world conspire against us, to load our hearts with
affliction: let sinful flesh join with the world, and all the infernal
spirits with both, if thou have tasted this cordial, if ever thou have truly
relished the sweetness of the Lord Jesus, ( the strength of thy heart) all
they shall effect is but this; somewhat the sooner, and closer to knit thy
soul unto God in Christ, and by withdrawing earthly and sensual, to heap
upon thee spiritual and eternal comforts.

CHAP. XX. The more close applying of this comfort by meditation.
NOw that we may thoroughly digest this cordial, and find some heart and
strength in it, let us quicken it by some such meditation. Oh my soul, is
there any thing to be compared unto the Lord Jesus? Is not al in the world,
nay, all the world, and a world of worlds in respect of him loss and dung?
Had thou received no other pledge of Gods love, no other comfort but Christ
alone, were no^ this sufficient, abundant, nay, an infinite testimony of his
eternal love, and a con^^lation beyond all misery? But when he is given
thee, what is not given thee? when thou have him who is Lord of all, thou have
all things with gim: Eph^ 3.19.
Oh if thou had knowledge of this love of Christ, which passes knowledge,
what trouble, what earthly grief co^ld dismay thee? how wholesome, how
pleasant, how delectable, how heavenly is the least taste of it? O sweet,
gracious, glorious Savior, whether I look up to thee my head in heaven, or
down to my self thy most unworthy member on earth; whether I consider what
great things thou have done for my poor soul, or how thou have done the^, I
cannot but find infinite love in thee, and infinite comfort in thy love Thou art
that true light, Ioh. 1.9.
all other borrowed from thee. Heb. 1.3.
Thou art the brightness of thy fathers glory, making and sustaining all
things. Thou art the express Image of thy fathers person; God, equal to thy
father: Phil. 2.6
The mighty God, Esa. ^.6..
the everlast^ng Father, the Prince of peace. Rev. 19.1^
Thou art the King of glory, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. how fair,
how pleasant, how full of ravishing delights is thy love? Thy cheeks as a bed
of spices, Cant 5.13 16
as sweet flowers; thy lips like Lill^es, dropping sweet smelling mirrhe; thy
mouth most sweet: Thou art altogether lovely. How is it then that I have found
favor in thy sight? who although once framed by thee after thine image, yet
wilfully giving up my self unto sin and Satam, became the most deformed, the
most abject, the most polluted, and silthy offscouring of the world. Oh my
Lord, I am ^nfinitely unable to conceive either thy glorious excelle^ce, or my
loathsome vileness, yet have thou set thine heart upon such an one to love me,
and expressed that love by such effects, that neither I can find words to
utter it, nor thoughts to apprehend it; yet feign would I kindle and inflame my
cold heart in the sight and sense of it.

If I cast down mine eye to look upon my bottomless misery, I see my self
shut up, and imprisoned in unbeleefe, Rom 11.12
bound in the chains of death, condemned to hell, where the pit had shut her
mouth upon me: my lif^ consuming in poasting vanity, my soul delig^ti^g in ^he
service of such a mast^r, whose wages is endless mis^ry; a slave in the world
to Satan by disobedience, and after in the other worl^ a companion to him in
infini^e torment. Psalm. 11. 6.
Snares, fire, brimstone, and an horrible tempest, this was the portion of my
cup. And as my state was infinitely fearful, so altogether helpelesse: No
creature had either power, or pity to succor me; nay, mine own soul so
far from compassion of it self, that it rejoiced and triumphed in this depth
of hellish misery. From this, and far greater calamity then in this, or any
word can be expressed have thou graciously rescued me.

Thou reachedst forth thy hand, and have pl^cked me out of the belly of hell.
Thou have drawn me out of the horrible pit, where no stay was, and have set my
feet upon the rock in a large place.

Now if I lift up mine eyes to take view of that glory, to which thou have so
graciously adva^ced me, I find my tongue and heart yet far more unaable to
utter or conceive it. Had thou left me to my self, (now after this
delivera^ce) in health and safety, yet oh how wonderful had thy grace bin? But
this great, this infinite mercy was a small thing in thine eyes, O Lord God: 2 Samuel 7.19
but have promo^ed me to an inappehe^sible height of glory with thy self. Thou
have preferred me to thy service, and thy service is liberty, nay, thy service
is a kingdom, Rev. 5^10.
even to reign on earth. And as if all this were too little, thou have made me
a son with thee to the same Father, the Father of lights; and what estate is
any thing but dung to this? Thou have annexed me as an heir with thy self,
who art the heir of all things; so that by thee, I, the most base drudge of
sin and Satan, am lifted up to a throne and crown, to an immortal crown of
glory; such as never eye saw, never ear heard, never entered into the heart of
man. ^ Cor. 2.9.
Thou have washed me, set thine own beauteous image upon me: thou have
reconciled, justified, fully redeemed me, raised, and set me with thy self in
heavenly places; and with all this, and above all this, thou have knit and
united me to thy self, and to thy glorious Father; so that I (poor worm,
dust, dung) even I might be one, even as thou art in the Father, and the Father
in thee, John 17.21
that I might be one in both. Ob height, depth, breadth, and length of thy love!
how incomprehensible is thy grace, how heavenly my consolation?

And how have thou wrought all this for me? O my God, my Lord, my gracious
Redeemer; where shall I seek words, or thoughts to set out this mercy?
wonderful is thy love in all the rest, and that my soul knows right well;
but in this how far beyond all possibility of apprehension, and all
expressions of wonder? That my miserable mortality might be clothed upon, 2
Cor. 5.4.
and I be borne anew in the divine nature; thou did strip thy self of those
robes of divine Majesty, Phil. 2,6.
in which thou knew it to be no robbery to be equal to God; and wast borne
in my weak nature, and found in the servileforme of my fleshly infirmities.

Thou gave thy body, thou gave thy soul for my sin; thou wast bound,
thou wast mocked, thou wast scourged, condemned, nailed, and dead on the cross:
Thou (oh mirrhor, oh infinite miracle of mercy!) thou (the love of the Father)
did taste not only gall and vinegar, but even wrath, and hell for me the
child of wrath, and brand of hell.

Oh my dead soul, can thou see all this, and want comfort? Can one cup of
wine cheer thy heart, and shall not such fruit of such a Vine fill thee with
joys unspeakeable and glorious? Oh what is thy portion, when such is the
price? what thine inheritance, when such the purchase? Rejoice then oh my
soul, rejoice evermore in such a Lord, and such a love; for whatsoever thou
have lost, thou have gained Christ, and lost but dung: with him thou receivest
whatsoever is truly good, and partest for him with nothing, but what in some
respect is evil: Have I lost Parents, Children, friends, lands, livings, yet I
have not lost Christ, nor my Lord will not lose me. If I lose my life with the
rest, yet shall I not lose the life of Christ; he is my life, he in life and
death is my advantage. Phil. 1.21.
Let Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, Wife, Children, forsake, and hate me, yet
the Lord Jesus will never leave me, never cease to love me; and he is better
than a world of friends and kindred. Oh my Lord, to be in heaven without thee
were exile; but a sick bed, a loathsome prison with thee is an heavenly
Paradise. Why then should I be troubled, seeing thou have made me to dwell in
thee by faith, and thou vouchsafest to dwell in me by thy blessed Spirit?

Only, thou my Savior who have loved me to death, make me ever to live in
thee, and in thy love: thou who have dyed for me, plant thy death in me, and
bury my corruptions in thy grave. Tho who wast crucified for me, crucify the
world to me, the flesh in me, and graft in me the life of thy resurrection:
make, oh make me to re^oyce in the fellowship of thy sufferings, and in thy
good time change this crown of thorns, into that of glory.

CHAP. XXI. Comforts which flow from the holy Ghost.
Again, with those former (drawn from the two first persons of the blessed
Trinity) annexe the consolations of Gods holy Spirit, who dwells in the
faithful. Sweet and excellent are these comforts: Neither is it in vain,
that in specialty the holy Ghost is called the Comforter; as being that person,
who is sent by the Father, and the Son, by himself to work this effect in
us. Let us then remember that this blessed Spirit does not only dwell in us by
his gifts, faith, love, etc. but personally, which is evidently expressed
Ephesians. 1.13,14. You are sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, which (or
rather, who) (...) in the Greek, cannot in ordinary construction of Grammar,
agree with that of Spirit, the one being of the neuter, the other of the
masculine, but the gender purposely changed against use, to show that the
person of the blessed Spirit is with us, in us, and so continues, and stays as
an earnest of our inheritance, and our full redemption; in which respect we
are called his Temples, 1 Corinthians. 6. 19. Thus also when the holy Ghost is
promised us, Ioh. 16. 13, 14. our Savior alters the gender, and uses the
masculine ((...)) he, the Spirit of Truth: and again, he (not it) shall
glorify me: to show that the very third person of Trinity is given us: yet
he dwells not in us, as sometime in the Temple made with hands, but as the
soul rather dwells in the body, so does the holy Ghost dwell in the faithful,
quickening, sustaining, and leading them on to the rest of their souls, and
Lieging with us. Look as in the body the heart and Head produce life, sense, and
motion by the vital, and animal spirits; which being sent by them, and
diffused into every particular member, quicken, and move it; So the Spirit of
Christ flowing from him into his mystical body, fills every part with life,
sense, and motion. Ioh. 6. 63.
It is the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3^6^
(says our Savior, so his Apostle) that quickens. Therefore is he called our
life; Romans 8.10.
and they that live in the Spirit, G^^^ 5. 25.
walk also, or move in the Spirit. There is also spiritual sense; a taste,
Psalm. 34. 8. and 119.103
whereby we perceive the sweetness of God, of the grace of God, and the word
of his grace; whereby the spiritual man savours the things of the Spirit; Romans
^,5^
a spiritual touch, and tenderness: when the Lord takes away the heart of
stone, and gives an heart of flesh: Ezekiel. 36 26, 27.
a spiritual eye, whereby the spiritual man discernes all things: 1 Cor. 2.
14. 15.
a spiritual hearing, delighting in the Word, and promise of God, more than
any musical harmony; a spiritual sent, whereby the very name of Christ is as
an Oyntme^t Cant. 7.3.
powered forth.

Now the holy Ghost does not only work this comfort in us by faith, givi^g us
power to apprehend things absent, or to come, but applies them more
immediately by this very sense, so that the soul shall even feel with joy
unspeakeable, the consolations of God flow into it.

Thus the blessed Spirit does first speak peace unto us from God, and then
gives o^r spirits an open ear to hear his voice, and know our peace, that so
we may come to find our selves children of God, and heirs with Christ. Rom 8.
15. 16, 17.
Thus he does not only spread a Table for us, and there sets forth that Bread
of heaven in the holy Ordinances of God, but gives us power to eat, making
them more sweet to us than the honycombe, and thus brings us on to more
fullness of growth, and eternal life thorough Christ.

Hence comes it that a Christian can rejoice in tribulation, because this
holy spirit sheds abroad in our hearts that love of God which is better than
life, Psalm. 63.3.
and gives us so palpable a sense of it, that it bears down all other
feelings before it: See Romans 5. 3,4, 5. So the Apostles ( Acts 5. 41.)

Thus as the sufferings of Christ do abound in any of his members: 2 Cor. 1^5.
so does the God of consolation cause his comforts to abound through Christ.
And as he thus sustaines the soul in ordinary afflictions; so again in
extra-ordinary troubles, he pours out more than ordinary refreshings:
always affording grace proportionable for the trial, 1 Cor. 10. 13
and the issue with the tentation. Thus when wicked persecutors have devised
exquisite torments for the bodies of the faithful, this blessed Spirit has
measured out unto them, strong and strange joys, even transcendant ravishings.

Ruffin. lib. 1. cap 36
Famous is the Story of that thrice famous Martyr, Theodorus, recorded by
Ruffinus; who being apprehended by an Officer of that cursed Apostata, Julian;
and from the very spring of day, torme^^ed grievously till ten of the clock,
yet all that time in many changes of torments and tormentors; such (says he)
as no age ever saw the like, did nothing else but with a calm, and cheerful
countenance, sing that Psalm; Let them be confounded who worship graven
Images, and trust in their Idols. Afterward, being demanded by Ruffinus,
concerning his sense of these pains, aff^rmed that he had little feeling of
any bodily grief, but that there stood by him a certain young man, who wiped
off the sweat with a most shining cloth, and often poured on him cooling
waters, that he was ravished with delight, and could not but be more sad when
he was let down from the rack.

Above all the rest, when the faithful heart feels in it self that holy
Spirit sealing up his happiness, and lying there as a pledge, and earnest
until he be fully instated into it; it is altogether impossible to express
the unspeakable joy, and glorious comfort which flows into it. This made the
Hebrews rejoice in the spoiling of their goods; Heb. 10.34
and the Apostles to go from the whip-stocke with more joy in their hearts,
than blood on their backs. This put that strange speech into the mouth of the
Apostle, who as he labored more than all, 2 Cor. 11. 23
so was in stripes above measure, so often in prison, so often in danger, and in
death; when his heart overflowed with an unutterable rejoicing, and he thus
expresses it: 2 Cor. 7.4.
I am filled with comfort, I am exceeding joyous; or (as the word properly
signifies) I am more than redundantly joyous in all our tribulation.

There was no ability in his tongue, nor possibility in words to set out that
flowing affection running over in his heart.

Oh then what trouble should deject us when he is our Comforter? Art thou dull
of hearing, art thou very unteachable? That Spirit is thy Teacher, who makes
the rudest Fishermen the most learned Doctors of the world, who taught them
all tongues, and knowledge in an instant: Art thou very forgetful? This
blessed Spirit is given thee to bring all things to thy mind. Art thou slow in
duty, faint, and soon weary? This holy Spirit is sent to quicken thee, to
baptize thee with fire. Want thou any grace, or any measure of grace? They
are all fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22, 23.
springing from this root, Love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith etc: Art thou assaulted with fear and doubting? Ephesians. 1.^4.
This gracious Spirit is thy seal, and the earnest of thy inheritance, until
the redemption of the possession.

CHAP. XXII. How to apply these comforts by meditation.
NOw when we have thoroughly weighed this great privilege, and in it our many
comforts, let us lay the^ nearer to heart, and fasten them there by some
meditation. Thus confer with thy soul:

O gracious Comforter, who have taken possession of this worthless heart for
my Lord and Savior, and keep it unto his use, and kingdom; how should I
want consolation, who enjoy thee the only Comforter? How should I want that
joy of the Spirit, who enjoy the Spirit of Life, and oil of gladness? Thou
art my life, which can not dye^ thou my strength, and the length of my days.
Thou have opened mine eyes to behold that heavenly honor, and excellent glory,
those wonderful joys, and infinite happiness which is given me by my Father,
and purchased by my gracious Redeemer: Thou have bored mine ears to hear those
more than heavenly strains of that Angelical song: Luke ^. 14.
On earth peace, good will toward man. Thou have quickened my palate to taste
how good and sweet the Lord is. Thou have caused my soul to sent those
precious ointments, so that I find that costly Spiknard, spent on my Saviors
head, had all the sweetness from the head on which it was spent. Thou have
ravished my soul with those delectable feelings of peace, and love, which is
better than life, and the most heavenly sense of thy gracious presence. The
spirit of a man will sustain his infirmities, how much more will thou, most
gracious Spirit, who art God Almighty, bear up, and sustain thy weak
fainting creature, who leans upon thee, lives by thee, and wholly gives up
his soul unto thee? When I am dull, thou quicknest me; when forgetful, thou
promptest me; when cold, thy fiery baptism warms me; when doubtful, thou
confirmest me; when sad thou co^forrest me. Now then thou my gracious
Comforter, persit the temple which thou art building; forsake not the work of
^hine hands; prosper, oh prosper thy handyworke; enliven, strengthen, quicken,
sustain me, that I may live in thee, walk in thee, abide in thee, rejoice in
thee, serve, praise, and bless thee for ever.

CHAP. XXIII. Further confirmation for the weak soul.
EXcellent are these comforts (will many a weakly Christian say, who (as yet)
is held down by strength of tentation) singular refreshings and sovereign
cordials, able not only to cure a sick, but revive a dead spirit: but, alas,
I have no portion in them. Oh could I feel in my soul this glorious heavenly
relation to God, could I by any search find, by any (but one) good and sure
proof be assured that I were the least of Gods children, the lowest of Christ
his members, a living, though never so little stone of that blessed Temple of
the holy Spirit, all the discomforts of this present world, poverty, loss,
contempt, reproaches, and scoffs of men should never trouble me. Oh then how
cheerfully could I wade through any grief, any tentation? But woe is me, I
feel my soul snared, chained and enthrald in sinful fetters. Easily and
clearly I perceive many signs rather of a natural estate, still subject to
sin, and Satan; no power to get up from under my corruptions; but no good
sign can I disc^rne, at least no certain evidence of such an happiness.

Now indeed it is most true that howsoever these consolations are most approved
medicines, yet have they none or not their perfect operation, where either they
are not well and close applied, or (soon after this applying) are rubbed off
with some tentation. In the last place therefore it will not be amiss, nay,
very expedient by some few, but apparent notes, and infallible marks of
regeneration, to clear the eyes of an afflicted Spirit, dimmed and deluded in
the mists of Satan.

True it is, that the Adversary, and his Antichristian Popish Teachers wrest,
and streine al their wits to persuade men that this assured knowledge of their
election, and salvation by ordinary means is a dangerous (nay so provdly
peremptory are they without all warrant) a damnable doctrine, encouraging men
to all presu^ption, and fleshly liberty. Hence the Cou^cil of Trent fastens an
anathema upon it; and no marvel: For that subtle Serpent knowing well how much
labor of love, and even contention in all holy obedience, what readiness to
serve, and fervor in their service this certainty of Gods favor brought forth
in all the Saints; contrarily, what uncheerefulnesse and heartlesnesse in all
duty springs from distrust and doubtfulnesse, strives with all his might,
either utterly to root out, or much weaken this assurance of faith, whereby
they hold fast the profession of their hope without wavering. Heb. 10.23
So his false Apostles, 2 Cor. 11. 13.
deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, join
issue with him, as knowing this Doctrine would not only quench their Purgatory,
but which is worse, wonderfully cool their kitchen.

In the Epilogue, therefore, and conclusion of this discourse, I will very
briefly (as in such a subject I may) lay down and handle these three
propositions: First, That the faithful by ordinary revelations may attain the
certain and infallible persuasion of their salvation by Christ. Secondly, That
it is a Christian duty to labor for it. Thirdly, That this assurance is the
gift of God, which every one of his children do not presently receive, nor so
retain, but that the sense of it sometimes may fail them. And lastly, I will
set down some means whereby we may secure our souls in this assurance of
our happiness, which is the Sun of al comfort: First, then, that a faithful
Christian may by ordinary, without extraordinary revelations (by visions,
Angels, etc.) be fully assured of the life of grace already in his possession,
and of glory certainly reserved for him, will appear, first, by diverse clear
Testimonies of Gods word; secondly, by the examples of the Saints; thirdly, by
evident reason.


CHAP. XXIIII. Proof of Scriptures testifying in the faithful a possibility
to assure their salvation by ordinary means.
FOr the evidence of this truth, consider that discourse of the Apostle, 1 Cor.
2. 9,10,11,12 verses ^ a place much wrested by Papists, and grossly abused; but
as all the words of Wisdom, ( Pro. 8. 9.) plain to him that will understand.
Thus you shall find the Apostle affirm: 1. That no eye has seen, ear heard,
or ever entered into the thought of man those things which God has prepared
for his chosen: 2. God has revealed even these things unto us by his Spirit;
for, because no man can know the mind of man, save the spirit of the man which
is in him, and those to whom he unfolds himself in evident expressions, much
less can any man know the things of God, but the Spirit of God, and they to
whom that Spirit reveals the^, therefore (because our dull understandings
cannot pierce into the secrets of God) the Lord has given us his Spirit, to
this very purpose, that we might know the things which are given us of God.
Observe hence, that God does not only preordaine his children unto glory, such
as eye has not seen, etc. but by a second gift of his Spirit manifests this
his decree unto them; which blessed Spirit opens their eyes to discern this
grace bestowed, not on othe^s only, but themselves.

To this testimony in the next place, adjoyne that also in the Romans 8.
15,16,17. which will both clear, and much confirm the former; You have not
received the spirit of bondage to fear again, but you have received th Spirit
of adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father. The Spirit himself bears witness
with our spirits that we are the children of God, and if children, then heirs;
heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ. Where mark a double grace, and
gift of God: 1. That dignity, and unspeakeable honor of being children, and
heirs to himself, and joint heirs with Christ, which is conferred on all the
faithful, not only Apostle, and others of eminent gifts, and place in the
Church, but commonly on all those true Believers at Rome. 2. That Spirit of
bondage (cau^ing fear) is cast our, and the Spirit of adoption (even the
Spirit of God) is given them but to what end? even to witness unto their
consciences, that they are sons, and heirs of God, and joint heirs with
Christ^ Now this is such a witness, as neither can deceive, or be deceived;
and this Testimony of the Apostle so clear, that even the great Cardinal (the
late Champion of Rome) has no shift for any defense, which every child's eye
will not easily pierce through:

Take a third from 2 Cor. 5. 1. We k^ow if this earthly house of our
Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, not made with hands, but
eternal i^ the heavens: For in this we groan, earnestly desiring to be
cloothed upon with our house, which is from heaven. And in the 9 ver. the
Spirit gives us this reason; For we walk by faith, not ^y sight; where as the
Apostle speaks generally of the faithful, so also he mentions no
conjecture, no guess or flickering earthly hope, but a plain evident
knowledge, full of heavenly confidence, even groaning in desire of dissolution,
that so they may be clothed upon.

And how comes this knowledge? by some extraordinary revelation? no; walking
by faith, not by sight and sense.

Lastly, not to be (as were very easy) too copious in a matter often cleared,
see that testimony of another Apostle, 1 John.3. 1, 2. Behold what manner of
love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of
God, etc. Therefore the world knows us not, because it knew him not. Beloved,
now are we the sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be,
but we know when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see
him as he is.

Carefully attend the Apostle. He magnifies the wonderful love of God, and
calls us out with joy and admiration to take view of it, especially in two
effects: 1. The glorious dignity to which he prefers us; namely, To be his
children: 2. The manifestation of this our happy estate, not indeed to the
world (which thinks us the most abject of creatures) but to our own
consciences, so that we now perceive our selves to be children, and though yet
we know not the parcels, and particulars of that excellent estate, until we
come to enjoy it, yet so much already we know, (not guess) that when Christ
appears, we shall appear with him in glory, and be like unto him, by that
beatificall vision of God, seeing him face to face.

Add only to this a further confirmation from the mouth of the same Spirit,
by the hand of the same Penman; 1 Ioh. 4. 16. And we have known and believed
the love that God has to us. Knit it to the former, and how strongly will it
bind up our hearts in this point of faith? Behold (says he) and admire the
fatherly love of God to us poor abjects in the world; he has made us
children, despised indeed by worldly men, but by himself so magnified, that
when Christ appears, we shall also appear with him in glory, and be
eternally happy in beholding his face: This love he has testified, this
Testimony we have known, and attained this knowledge by faith. To which very
end I have wrote this whole Epistle, That you may know you have eternal life:
See 1 Ioh. 5.13.

CHAP. XXV. Further confirmation from the examples of the Saints, and
testimonies of the Ancient.
LEt us look now to the evidence which rises from the examples of the Saints,
and to the testimony of our predecessors, the ancient Doctors in the Christian
Church. How transparently does this confidence, and assurance of faith shine
forth in the practice of the faithful? Upon what grounds could Abraham so
readily forsake his own native Country, and his fathers house; so cheerfully
confess himself a sojorner in the earthly Canaan; so earnestly look for an
heavenly habitations; so obediently sacrifice his only son, in whom were
shut up all the promises, but from this assurance of faith? What was it in
Moses that caused him to refuse the adoption of Pharaoh but the knowledge of
his adoption by God? What made the reproach of Christ more glorious in his eyes
than all the treasures of Egypt, but this respect to the recompense of the
reward? of which had he not a full assurance, he could not so easily have
left (as we say) a bird in the hand for two in the bush. What was it that
hardened his heart, and steeled it against the rage of the King, to cut through
all impediments, but this assurance of Gods favor?

But had these Saints, in this point, no extraordinary revelations? What
testifies the Spirit? By faith they did all these things; that faith, which
made them acknowledge, not only that God is, but that he is a rewarder of all
that diligently seek him: Read Heb. 11. Whence sprung all those confident
speeches of Job, in the midst of a very hell in earthly misery? He shall be
(says that holy Patient) he shall be my salvation. I know I shall be
justified. Himself points out the fountain whence he drew these strong
comforts: Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, Job 13 15. 16.18. Whence
also he undauntedly averres, I know, (not the Redeemer generally of the
faithful, but) that my Redeemer lives, Job 19.25, 27.
and I shall see him (I shall enjoy that beatificall sight of God) for my self.

How boldly does David profess, Psa. 73.24.
Thou shall guide me by thy Counsel, and after receive me to glory. And
again, Psal^ 49.5.
Wherefore should I fear in the days of evil, when the wickedness of my
heels compass me? But these examples are very frequent, and every where
meet us in the paths of holy Scripture.

Unto this practice of the Saints, let us annex some authorities of the ancient
Fathers in the Church, who, no doubt, spoke from their knowledge, and feeling.
Hilar. in Mat. c. 5. The Lord will have us hope for the kingdom of heaven
without any wavering of an inconstant will; Otherwise there is no
justification by faith, if faith it self be doubtful.

So Chrysostom in Romans Hom. 9. We boast, or glory (says the Apostle) That
thou may know what mind he must have, who has pledged his faith to God. For
he must not only have a full persuasion of those things which he has
received, but of those which are to come, as if already given him; For a man
glories of that which he already possesses: Because, therefore, our hope is
as firm of future things, as of present, therefore (says he) we rejoice, or
glory of these, as of the other. But to omit many other, verily that of
Bernard, who lived in the very darkness, and almost midnight of Popery, is
not to be neglected. Thus he writes in Annunc. ser. 1.

It is necessary for thee first to believe, that thou can have no pardon of
sin, but by Gods indulgence, etc. Lastly, that thou can not d^serve, by any
works, the kingdom of heaven, but that it also must be freely given.

But these are not sufficient: they are but the beginnings and foundations of
faith. If therefore thou beleevest that thy sins cannot be forgiven, but by
him against whom they are committed, thou do well. But to this, add yet
further, that thou believe this also, namely, that thy sins by him are
forgiven. This is the testimony of the holy Spirit, who witnesses unto our
hearts, saying, Thy sins are forgiven thee. Thus the Apostle determines,
that a man is justified by faith freely. So thou must also have the testimony
of the same Spirit, that thou by the gift of God shall attain eternal life.
Thus far Bernard.

Add to these some reason for further confirmation, and so we will finish this
point. It cannot be denied that true faith may ordinarily apprehend, by
infallible certainty, any promise which God has revealed. For this is by all
confessed to be the very end of faith, that we might be certainly persuaded
(without doubting) of Gods promises. But God has promised to every true
Believer eternal life (as cannot be denied) Ioh. 5.24. etc. and has many
ways confirmed his promise by oath, seals, earnest: hence it must necessarily
follow, that the faithful may be infallibly assured of their salvation and
glory.

But some here object; Indeed if men could surely know that they had true
faith, then they might be surely persuaded: but how should they come to this
knowledge? Certainly that we may attain this knowledge, and power of discerning
our faith, is not only apparent by that sentence of the Apostle, exhorting the
Corinthians to prove and examine their faith, 2 Cor. 13.5
but by sense also, and every man's experience: when I believe an able man
promising me any kindnesie, I know, and even feel that I believe him. So that
weak believer could even from sense, say, Mar. 9.24.
I believe, help my unbelief. But some object further; The promise (say they)
is only general: we have no particular promise, Thou Peter, or John shall be
saved: therefore no sufficient warrant to apply that general promise to our
selves in particular. But this is both fond, and false. For as every man has a
particular command in the general precept; (where God charge al men to
believe, obey, fear, there he charge every one singly, Thou Peter, John
shall believe, etc. So has every singular person a special promi^e to
himself believing in the general, where glory is promised unto every Believer.

CHAP. XXVI. That it is every Christians duty to labor for this assurance.
AS now it is sufficiently cleared, that the faithful by the ordinary
revelation of the holy Ghost in the Word, may grow up by faith, to an
infallible assurance of Gods gracious purpose to justify, and glorify them;
so will it as plainly appear, that it is their duty to labor for this
growth, and to give their souls no rest, till they find this blessed estate
sealed up, and thoroughly settled upon them: which will be manifested unto us,
first, by many testimonies; secondly, by some reason taken from the Word. Thus
our Savior charge us, Luk^ 12.23
Fear not, little Flock, for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the
kingdom. Where our gracious Lord laying down that ground (namely) the
certain purpose, and promise of God fully decreeing, nay, delighting to give
us the crown of glory, thence raises up this command, and teaches how to
expect it, even without fear.

The like is that in the Heb. 10. 19.23. where the Apostle premising that
boldness of faith, whereby we may enter into the holiest by the blood of
Christ, builds up this confidence of faith by this exhortation: Let us hold
fast the profession of our faith without wavering, Heb. 10.1
and gives a strong reason, 1 The. 5.24
For he is faithful that has promised: Who will also do it. Very obvious,
and frequent are such places condemning this wavering, and distrust of Gods
gracious purpose toward us, and commanding us with assurance of faith to lay
hold of these promises.

Add to these that vehement, and evident exhortation of the Apostle; 2 Cor.
13.5
Examine your selves whether you be in the faith^ Prove your own selves: Know
you not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be
reprobates? Where first he takes it as granted, that Christians may by
examination know themselves, whether Christ dwell in them: secondly, he
earnestly exciteth them to make trial, and proof of this their estate.

Beyond all exception, and cavil, is that charge of the Spirit: 2 Pet. 1.10.
Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give all diligence to make your calling, and
ele^tion sure. But here also some difficulty is objected. For although we now
find our selves in a good estate, and have firm assurance of our present
happiness, yet how should we be certain so to continue unto the end?
without which perseverance there can be no salvation. True is it, that the
sense and feeling of this our blessed estate in the sense of Gods favor, may
be withdrawn for a time: but where faith is, it fails not; where the life
of grace is planted, it dies not: You have not chosen me, but I have chosen
you, and ordained that you should go and bring forth fruit, and your fruit
should remain: Ioh. 15.16
Upon which words hear Saint Augustine determining, De correp. et great. c 12
(not as if his testimony could add any thing unto Christ, but that we may
know what was the common belief of the Church at that time, and may be armed
against Popish error,) When Christ (says he) has affirmed, I have ordained
that you bring forth fruit, and that your fruit remain, who dares say, Perhaps
it shall not remain?

How unanswerable is that testimony of David: The righteous shall flourish like
a Palm, Psalm. 92. 12^13,14.
(now the Palm never loses his leaf, or fruit; Plin.
) Those that be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts
of the house of our God: They shall still bring forth more fruit in their age;
they shall be fat and flourishing. As full is that of his Son Solomon; Pro.
4.18.
The path of the just is as the shining light, which shines more and more unto
the perfect day.

And this flows not from any thing in man, either of nature or grace, but
from that covenant, and faithfulness of God, who seeing the first Adam could not
stand in the covenant of works ( Do this and live) has renewed with the
faithful, in the second Adam, a covenant of grace, in which he has undertaken
to work all our works for us: Esa. 26.12.
First, that he will never depart from us, but delight in us to do us good:
Secondly, that he will put such a fear, of himself, into our hearts, that we
shall never depart from him. And what else is this (says Augustine) but such,
De bono perseveran. c. 2.
and so great shall be my fear, which I shall put into their hearts, that they
shall with perseverance keep close unto me.

And fully to confirm and setle thy soul in assurance of thy perseverance,
and infallible attaining that purchased possession; 1. Remember that not only
God has wrought that eternal mansion for thee, but also wrought thee for it,
2 Cor. 5.1.5. 2. Build on that promise, that he that has begotten thee to that
incorruptible inheritance, not only reserves it in heaven for thee, but
preserves, and keeps thee by his power unto this salvation. 1 Pet. ^^3^ 4,5.


But further Papists reply; This is a doctrine that opens a wide gate to all
sinful liberty, and utterly loosneth the bond of fear, and care to please God.

For Answer; First, how does, or can this estate in Gods covenant loosen, or
slack that bond of gracious fear, when it is apparent that this everlasting
covenant binds our hearts fast unto God in this fear? Secondly, is there
nothing to be feared in God, but his condemning Justice? Oh how fearf^ll (to
his children) are his rods and scourges? how very fearful? Nay, his very
frown, his threatening word so full of terror, that it shakes the heart of the
faithful: they tremble, they melt at it. Esa^ 66.2.
When I heard, (says Habakkuk) my belly trembled, Hab. 3. 16.
my lips quivered at the voice: Rottenness entered into my bones, and I
trembled in my self, that I might rest in the day of trouble.

Sure I am (and no^e so impudent who dare deny it) that when our blessed
Savior and his faithful members, Paul, Peter, etc. had this heavenly
assurance fully acquieting their souls, it was so far from cooling their
zeal, and slackning their fervent diligence to please God, and ply his work,
that nothing more furthered their holy ambition to be serviceable and
acceptable unto him.

In the next place, let us confirm this truth by a reason, or two: 1. It will
be confessed that a Christian ought to labor for such an estate, wherein he
should continually rejoice in the Lord, be ever praising, and blessing his
name, and have strong consolation: For it is the command of God to delight our
selves in the Lord, Psalm. 39.4^
to rejoice evermore, 1 The. 5. ^6
always to rejoice in the Lord, Phil. 4^4.
doubled upon us, to stir up our souls to bless the Lord, even in the sense
of pardon and forgiveness; Psalm. 104. 1,^,3.
in every thing to be thankful: 1 The. 5.18
he has given with his promise, his oath also, Heb. 6.17. 18.
( that we might have strong consolation) but without this certainty of faith,
and assurance of our happiness, and the eternal favor of God, we cannot
attain such an estate, in which we can from the heart rejoice in him, ever
praise him, and enjoy solid comfort from him: For what sound joy can that soul
find in Christ, who thus hangs between heaven and hell, and has no assurance
whether the Lord will come to him as a Judge to condemn, or as a Savior to
free and acquit him? How can a man be heartily thankful to God for Christ,
and bless him for such a gift, when he is altogether in doubt whether he has
any portion in his meditation? how can he pour out his soul in blessing the
Lord Jesus for his love, and fruits of it, when he is uncertain whether he
shall be built upon, Mat. ^1.^4
or dashed against this rock? What strong consolation can arise from a wavering
opinion, or flickering hope, whether the Lord has appointed us unto glory with
himself, or torment with the devil?

Secondly, that which God offers us in his Word, confirms by oath, conveies
by his seals, and (above all the rest) unchangeably assures by his Spirit (as
a very pledge, and ea^nest unto this end) that estate not only is firm, and
irrevocable, but) ought with all laborious endevor and vehement contention be
sought and made fast and sure upon us: Now it is most apparent, that by all
these means the Lord offers the assurance of salvation to the faithful: and
offers them to this very end, that they might be stablished in the assurance
of his gracious purpose; (as even in earthly covenants, w^itings, oaths,
^eales, pawnes are given for no other purpose but to confirm the intent of the
giver, and the state of the receiver. Be this then thoroughly settled in us, ^
Pet. 1.10
that we ought to give all diligence to make our election and calling sure.

CHAP. XXVII. That this assurance is the gift of God, the feeling of it
sometimes withheld, sometimes with-drawne from the faithful.
LAstly, that this full persuasion of faith, assuring our election, and
salvation is the gift of God, cannot be denied, and therefore shall not need
any copious, or exact proof: For we all know, and acknowledge that every good
and perfect gift is from above, Iams 1. 17^
and comes down from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness,
nor shadow of turning. Among which gifts, even the Giver himself is the
chief, and the very sum of all the rest, namely, that blessed Spirit given
by the Father ( Ioh. 14. 16.) who testifies to our spirits, that we are Sons
of God, and Heirs with the Lord Jesus Christ: and who bringerh with him as well
that gift of faith (1 Cor. 12. 9.) and the fullness of it, as also that
spiritual life, and sense whereby we see, and feel the ex^ellent things which
are given us by God, 1^ Cor. 2.9.
things which eye has not seen, ear h^th not heard, nor ever entered into the
heart of man.

Secondly, as it is manifest that it is the gift of God, so is it as apparent
that it is not given at all times to all Believers. For first, when we are newborn Babes, we find our faith so far from any full assurance, that others
discern our life in our earnest longings after the Word, and our fervent
desires that we could believe, rather than our selves in feeling that we do
believe.

For whereas it is impossible to come to any assurance of our salvation without
a spirit of discerning, whereby being able to try things that differ, we can
examine and prove our faith in God, and love to his Saints (and so come to the
knowledge of our dwelling in Christ, and that we are translated from death to
life) this spirit of discerning is not ordinarily given to Infants in
understanding. Look as the Children of great Princes (yet in their infancy)
much rejoice in their costly Robes, Coronets, etc. but have not yet discretion
to gather thence their Noble parentage and dignity, to which they are borne: so
Christian Babes, though they see themselves richly adorned with those heavenly
graces of God and do not a little rejoice in the preseut estate which they
feel, yet cannot in this their infancy, by a reflected act of the judgment,
gather thence their sure title, and claim to all those precious promises of
God, and their future glory, which depend on the former.

Secondly, yet further, when the children of God (...) up to some ma^u(...) ye^
i^ pleases the Lord, (as for many reasons best known to his own wisdom, so
certainly for his own glory in them, and their glory in him) to exercise them
with many temptations, and manifold trials; so that being encumbred with much
wrestling against unbeleefe, and other corruptions, they cannot for the present
attain this certainty. But when the eye of faith is strengthened, and these
mists of tentation over-blowne, the faithful soul sees clearly the love of
God in Christ, by his holy Spirit leading him to salvation, and evidently
discernes his everlasting happiness sealed up to his soul in the new Covenant.

And yet even then we are subject to lose, though not the favor of God, yet
the sense of his favor, and consequently, that comfortable persuasion of our
eternal life. For as some men by much neglect of seasonable refreshings decay
in bodily strength, and liveliness of spirit; and some other by great
distemper fall into sickness and weakness; so the strongest Christian who
could say as David, Psa. 23.4,6
Though I walk through the shadow of death I will fear no evil, for thou art
with me: Surely, goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life;
yet either by neglect, or coldness in the means, ( Word, Prayer, etc.) or by
some grievous sin may find that joy of his salvation utterly hidden and
clouded; as did also that holy Prophet ( Psalm. 51.12.) after he had committed
that foul sin upon Vriah and his wife.

CHAP. XXVIII. What means must be used for obtaining this assurance.
SUrely, the land of Canaan was the glory of al lands, Ezekiel. 20.6
that garden of God, which he had allotted, and bequeathed to Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, and their seed, even to his own dear children on earth. As a father
therefore, intending some portion for his beloved child, will build, plant,
furnish, and adorn it with all commodious helps, and convenient pleasures for
his good; Deu. 11.12
so the Lord cared for this land, his eyes were continually upon it from the
beginning of the year to the ending. Hence as it flourished with Corn, Balm,
Oil, etc. so was it watered with showers, and flowing Rivers of Milk, Wine,
and Honey: yet was this earthly, but a dark shadow of that heavenly Canaan:
which land of eternal life the Lord legac^ed only to his heirs, even the
joynt-heires with Christ. How rich therefore is it in glory, how ravishing in
divine pleasures? If the outward courts of heaven dazzle the strongest eye with
surpassing beauty and brightness? Oh what is the inward retiring, and
Presence of that great King? How unspeakeably, how incomprehensibly bright and
glorious? No marvel then if the Children of God (having tasted some fruits of
this heavenly Country) labor for full assurance in the conveyance of this
purchased possession.

Now then in the next and last place, let us consider by what means a
Christian may attain this security, and find his soul firmly instated and
settled in it.

Verily, as in the material, so is it in this spiritual building: he that will
build sure, must dig deep, and casting out loose ^ands, lay a fast, and
strong foundation, and then set up the walls, and roof. So he that would
build up his soul in assurance of his heavenly Mansion, must first fling out
loose waverings of a distrustful heart, and doubtful appearances cast into his
mind by Satan; and then lay his ground upon the Rock, the sure and unmovable
promises of God in Christ.

I have often observed diverse of the faithful, strong in many graces, and in
this only (to sight) weak, who have by the plain evidence of the Spirit in
the Word bin clearly convinced, that the Lord has planted, and rooted the
life of grace in their hearts, and so have been (for the present) not a little
cheered, and comforted; yet after by some tentation to have bin wholly
disheartened, and cast down again in themselves from all their joys and
consolations; concluding that all their religion was mere hypocrisy, and
themselves bare forms and images without life: This (I am persuaded) proceeds
especially from want of a thorough-grounding their persuasions: much suspense,
and unsetlednesse remaining in them.

Now then it will be very needful and expedient, (as briefly as may be) to
set down how far the way of hypo^risie (in appearance) lies in our way to
life, and the period of it, where it stops.

First then it cannot be denied, but that a man of mere shows, without the
life of God, may in his outward carriage to the Word, and ordinance of God,
keep way with a faithful and sincere Christian; hear, frequent, invite
others, honor the Word, and the Messengers of it. Most of these are found in
Herod, Luke 13.22.
a stinking Fox, a rancke-smelling Dissembler: Mar 6.20.
He heard John, and knowing him a just, and holy man, feared, and observed
him; when he heard him, did many things. So those hypocrites ( Ezekiel. 33.
30,31, 32.) come to the Word, as Gods people, sit there as the people of God,
and call on others to the same duty. Thus far they seem to hold way with
the Saints; where do they part? 1. In the ground, and end of this their
frequent hearing: 2. In the effects and issues following their attendance.

The ground, and end of hearing the Word, in an hypocrite, is sometimes his
carnal delight, when his lustful ear is tickled with the soft eloquence, and
sweet tongue of the Speaker, and his itching heart clawed with carnal
wisdom: Sometimes he is driven by the cries of his yelping conscience: His
best end is by further informing his understanding to set a fair gloss upon
his profession, and that he may not sit as a mute, stand as a Cipher, when
matters of Religion are in discourse, and handling. But the faithful soul,
out of a deep loathing of sinful matter in himself, and an unflaked hunger
and thirst of righteousness, knowing the word to be both the physic of the
soul, whereby it is thoroughly cleansed; and the food, whereby it is nourished,
presents himself before the Ordinance of God, that he may find it Gods power
to his salvation, in purging out all sinful filthiness, and filling him with
the fruits of righteousness. Thus are they described, Esa. 2. 3. They shall
say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and he will
teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths. Where the faithful
plainly express their end of coming to God in his Word, not only that it may
be a light to teach, and point out the right way, but that it may give strength
to their feet, and enable them to walk in every good path?

Secondly, they differ in the effect and fruit of hearing: For where the heart
thus draws near to God, as that holy Cornelius, to hear (as in the presence
of the Lord) all things commanded by him: Acts 10.33
the Word is a mighty weapon to beat down all strong holds, 2 Chr. 10. 4,5.
and every thing exalted against the knowledge of God, to bring every thought
in obedience to Christ^ it will work effectually when it is thus received: see 1
The. 2. 13. so that the faithful soul can truly say, I know no sin which my
heart does not loath, and desire to expel: I know no command of Christ, in
which I do not unfeinedly desire, and endeavor to walk with God.

This cannot stand with hypocrisy: because (as in a Tomb) there must be both
a beautiful front without, and a dead heart within. An hypocrite must have a
show, else he is an heathen: and but a show, else a true Believer. But he is a
neuter to both: Not a plain Infidel, for he has a form of godliness: not
faithful indeed, for his heart still cleaves to much sinful filthiness, and
is not purified from the whorish love of some darling-sinnes. Many things (as
Herod) he may; all, not only he does not, but he will not do.

CHAP. XXIX. Containing other marks differencing the true, from the seeming
Christian.
NOr only in the walls without, but in some more inward rooms we shall find
the hypocrite fairly dressed and painted. If we look to his understanding,
we shall see it often very live-like portrayed with the form of knowledge; so
that the brain may be even printed with the Word, that he may be a light, and
Teacher of others, Romans 2.19,20.

Secondly, in the affection also there may be some joy in hearing: And thus
far in the inward man, the dissembler may keep company with the faithful;
where do they break? 1. The knowledge of an hypocrite is, at least in some
points, merely speculative, ann works not upon the will, and affection to
chose, and love the good which he knows. Much of Gods will he knows, and
hates: as Ahab and Herod: I hate him a Prophet, indeed, of God, 1 Kin. 22,8
(says that wicked man, sold to work wickedness) of whom we may inquire;
but I hate him, for he speaks not good to me, but evil: Yet could this King
in some things humble himself, rent his clothes, put sackcloth on his flesh,
and fasted: and ^1. 27.
So also that other incestuous beast hated the reproving Word, and killed the
reprover. Contrary, the knowledge of the faithful seasons the heart, draws
the will and affection, nay, the actions also after it. 2. The difference in
their joy is plain and palpable. For the formal man's joy arises not from the
word, indeed, or any love to the truth of God, but from his own fancies, and
dreams falsely collected from the Word, witlesly, and wilfully (and therefore
strongly) conceived in his own deceitful heart. For when he hears mercy and
glory proclaimed to sinners upon condition of believing, he builds a
presumption of pardon and salvation upon that sa^dy faith of devils; carnally,
(as Papists at this day) co^cluding (and thence raises up al his that faith
consists only in the understanding, partly in an action of the apprehension,
conceiving what is the object of faith, partly in an action of the judgment,
consenting to it, and approving it as a truth of God: he thinks not of the
maine and principal act of saving faith (without which the other profit
nothing) that action of the will letting al go, and taking hold of Christ for
salvation, choosing him as the supreme good and happiness, and bringing him to
his heart, whereby he is washed and purified. And hence blasphemously imagining
Christ to be but as a cloak for his sins, he pleasantly dreams of
obtaining grace without any tr^e repentance, or change of the whole man.

Hence the promises of God, thus by himself abused, are welcome, and a false
joy follows a false hope. But the command of God, much more the threatening
word, and reproof for breach of the command, is grievous to him, and
insupportable; hated as cords, as bonds, as death, and the very Cross. For
esteemi^g his lusts to be himself (and indeed he is little else) he accounts
himself in them wounded, fettered, and crucified: when his lust is restreined,
he is imprisoned: when his sin is pierced, his very heart is wounded: when
his corruption languishes, he faints, and is dead in the nest, and with as much
joy will he go to the Gallowse, as to that Cross of Christ, whereby the world
is crucified to him, and he unto the world.

See this exemplified in that noted hypocrite, Herod. The preaching of John, (
as of Christ and all his Messengers, Mar. 1. 14, 15.) consisted of two maine
points, Repent, and Believe. Repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand: Mat
3.2.
and, Behold the Lomb of God which takes away the sins of the world, Ioh.
1.29. Now it is easy to find what, in the preaching of John, this incestuous
beast hard so gladly. Is it any marvel if such a wretch (fancying a remission
of sin, without forsaking sin, and impunity by Christ) should with much joy
hear of such a Savior as he blasphemously supposed? But that other necessary
part of the Gospel, Repentance, rising from faith, 2 Timothy 2.19
( Let every one which names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity) this
he hated, and the Preacher of it to the death. Now then had it been the truth
of God in which he rejoiced, the doctrine of repentance, and forsaking sin would
have bin as well entertained as the doctrine of remission, and pardon of sin;
because both are equally the word of the same God: but when we see the one
received with joy, and honor of the messenger, the other rejected with hate,
and death of the speaker, who discerns not that his joy sprung from that fond
dream of his rotten spirit, that though he walked according to the
stubbornness of his own wicked heart, Deu. 29.19
he should have peace.

Most unlike is the joy of the faithful hearer, who loves the Word with a most
entire, unexpressible affection: Oh how I love thy Word, Ps. 119.97
and therefore loves it, because a word of truth, Psal' 119. 29.30.140
and a pure word, an unreconcilable enemy to all sinful filthiness: and when
he hears that double promise, the one of remitting, the other of snbduing
sin; when he hears of glory, and holiness, he is (as the Apostle) in a
strait, and knows not which to prefer, esteeming the conformity to the
death, and life of Christ brought in the Word, nothing less, then the
fellowship with him in glory.

Take a further view of this in some instances. The uprightness of David's, and
Hezekiahs heart with God was seen in this: For when that bitter reproof
touched the quick, David takes all the blame upon himself; I have sinned:
Hezekiah further confe^seth the Word, not only just, but good, Esa. 39.8. But
Amaziah, who did that (in the general) which was right, but not with an
upright heart like his father David (2 King. 14.3.) discovers that hypocrisy
of heart in rejecting the Word, when it came near, and home to his sin, 2
Chro. 25.2.16.

To couclude this point: remember this palpable difference betwixt an upright,
and dissembling heart: The faithful loves, and rejoices in that part of the
word of God which the hypocrite hates; and in the self same respect, the one
detests and grieves at it, the other loves and rejoices in it: why does the
rebuke of Christ sound as death to the dissembler, but as the glad tidings of
life to the upright? In both, because it is the trumpet of God to sound an
alarm against sin, that (as the walls of Jericho) it shall fall at this blast,
and be destroyed. This very nature, and effect of the Word, that it is the
Sword of the Spirit, piercing every sinful lust to the heart, and mortifying
these earthly members, Psa. 141.5.
is the very cause why to the sound Christian it is a precious oil and
perfume, to the dissembler as a reproach, he cannot delight in it, Ier. 6. 10.

CHAP. XXX. Differencing the zeal, and desires after Christ in the hypocrite,
and faithful.
ANd yet further even in godly zeal, and earnest longings after Christ the
hypocrite will seem to hold pace with the sou^dest, and best Christian: he can
be very zealous in diverse things: Ieh^ had a zeal ^or the Lord; yet a
transparent dissembler: See 2 King. 10. 16. 28, 29, 31. He took no heed to
walk in the law of the Lord with all his heart.

Paul before his conversion, and other Jews, all persecutors, yet zealous of
the Law of God, Acts 22.3. Romans 10. 2. And certainly for tha^ holy Apostle, it
is hard to say, whether before, or after conversion he were more fervent
against, or for Christ, and his truth. How zealous was the Pharisees in the
observation of their forefathers Traditions? How zealous of old those false
Teachers in abstinence: Touch not, taste not, handle not, Colos. 2. ^1, 23.
how seemingly humble, neglecting the body, and giving it no honor, etc. So
the Papists ^t this day, with much show o^ zeal, maintain their traditions,
abstinence from flesh, from marriage, lying in hairecloth, etc.

But where is the difference? 1. The Dissembler is very hot in some
particulars, which concern Gods glory, but has his own ends in them all, and
therefore when those ends fail, is as cold in other things, which are as, or
more needful than the former. How zealous was Iehu against Ahabs Idols? He
rooted out the Baalims. Not so much warm against Ieroboams Idols, but served
the Calves of Bethel; whereby he plainly uncovered his dissembling heart, and
manifested his hypocrisy to every eye.

2. The hypocrites zeal is all external, flaming out in bitter terms against
some other who dishonor God, but never moved to see God dishonored in his
own heart and actions. But the faithful, as they cannot but grieve, and burn
when they see others grossly offending, blaspheming and provoking God, so are
they most vexed with their own (though far less) rebellions and failings.

3. Lastly, the dissembler spends his heat in matters of no moment; his
indignation will be much more kindled in the use or disuse of matters of
indiffere^cy, then in the weightiest things of the Law or Gospel. But the
upright heart knows well, that there are some things in which he must contend
earnestly; Jude 3^
for matters of faith, even to loss of life; and therefore will not fail to
strive, and wrestle for the truth of God (the faith given to the Saints) but
spend al his strength in such contention, live and dye in defense of it. In
other things he must not strive: 2 Timothy 2.23.
for Gods Church has no such custom (1 Cor. 11.16.) Tit. 2. 8,9.


In the last place, as in zeal, so in earnest desires an hypocrite will seem
to run as fast to Christ, to thirst and long for him, as the most faithful:
For when the hard skin of his seared cons^ience is flayed off, by those knives
of circumcision (the sharp law of God) and the terrors of hell gate upon his
galled soul, in the sense of these agonies he will value Christ as highly,
desire him as heartily (as well to the sight of others, as to his own sense) as
any true member of Christ: What in the world would he not give, nay, a whole
world to purchase one drop of that precious blood?

This goes very far (will some say) can any Christian go further? Yes
verily: For the faithful soul, in the day peace, continues still as highly
and dearly to esteem the Lord Jesus, even after reconciliation: when he
hears the blessed Spirit speaking peace to him, Phil. 3.8.
then he esteems all things dung and loss in comparison of the knowledge of
Christ. Here the hypocrite leaves him. In the storm he will run as fast to
Christ, ( the rock and refuge from the tempest of Gods wrath) as any: Psalm,
32.2.
in fair weather he makes no have, he goes back, or stands still. The one
esteems Christ as medicine only, and therefore in extremity of pain, when he
is sick at heart, whither will he not send for him? and though the pocion and
prescription be grievous, yet then it is forced down, though he send it up
again: but as soon as he is a little cheered, he loathes his Physic: The
other knows him to be as well his meat as medicine, and therefore in health
(when he finds his heart assured of salvation) longues, and hungers for him
and his righteousness.

The one desires him for justification in the day of wrath, to wipe off his
reckoning, and enter him into glory: The other also for sanctification to
cleanse him from sin, and beautify his soul in the glorious image of God: If
the Lord would give the hypocrite free leave to take his pleasure in sin,
without fear of judgment, how would he rejoice, as in a great and special
privilege? he would account himself as happy in his liberty to sin, as in
his exemption from the reward of sin. But oh how woeful a captivity, how
loathsome a grave, how base a drudgery, and miserable thraldom would a
faithful soul account of such a license? as much ha^ing the filthiness of
sin, as the punishment; the spiritual death, as the eternal.

CHAP. XXXI. Applying these things for removing tentations rising from conceit
of hypocrisy.
NOw then, seeing we know how far an hypocrite may seem to go in the good
way, let us proceed to remove that wavering which bears down many a weak
Christian in a very painful and discomfortable estate. I find two especial
temptations, applied by Satan, to shake the faith of a weak soul, and to hold
it in suspense, that it cannot rise up to any strong consolation in the sense
and feeling of Gods grace and favor. The first and chief is, that whatsoever
^hey do, is done in hypocrisy. True it is, they can hear the Word, they can
frequent the assemblies, reverence the sincere Teachers of it, invite others to
the fellowship of the same grace, rejoice in the Word, but all this (says the
Tempter, and truly) may be in an hypocrite, and in themselves they think it
is all no better than dissembling. They have some zeal (they confess) to the
truth, but an hypocritical zeal; some desire and longing after Christ, but
hypocritical; all is mere hypocrisy. Thus they say, thus they think.

Now let such a Christian, 1. seriously consider, that the subtle Serpent does
not only tempt men to presumption, but also to distrust; as is apparent in
those assaults, by which he set upon our blessed Savior: As he allures him to
a presumptuous casting himself down from the pinnacle of the Temple, because
the Angels waited on him to lift, and bear him up; so also he labors to
draw him to a distrust of Gods providence, and therefore (as the son of God)
to command the stones to be made bread: See Matthew. 4. 3. 6. And as the ignorant
and careless worldling is the most ordinary object upon whom he works
gross, presumptuous dreams of salvation; (those he persuades, God is
merciful, Christ came to save all men, and therefore when he hears the word
of the curse, he causes him, from these grounds, to bless himself in his
heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk after the stubbornness of
mine own heart, adding drunkenness to thirst; thus he rocks him in a dead
sleep of sin.) As thus he works gross presumptions upon the careless and
blind professor, so he never pursues any with those weapons of distrustful,
and unbeleeving fears, but those who are either quite gone, or now going, or
at least setting their faces to go out of his Egypt, in travel toward the
heavenly Canaan.

So then when he assaults thee with this weapon, know assuredly that Satan
plainly discerns that God has wakened, and raised thy soul from that drowsy
cradle of sin, in which he so long had lulled thee in deep security. Again,
remember thy corrupt heart is very deceitful, not only to hide up sin in
it, and to flatter thee with fair, but false hopes, and so to breed pride,
and presumption; but as cunning also to conceal any grace which is in it, and
so to affright thee with likely, but false fears: It will be then a necessary
point of wisdom not to give full, and rash credit to either hope, or fear,
but diligently to weigh thy estate in that balance of the Word, which is the
truth, and cannot deceive thee: First then (humbling thy soul by prayer^ and
entreating the assistance of that holy Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.12
who is purposely sent that thou may know these things which are given thee
of God,) take a perfect examin^tion, and trial of thy estate: Thou hear,
and frequentest the Word, so do dissemblers: But does an hypocrite, or can he
follow it with an heart hungring after perfect obedience? Does he desire to
find every thought subdued to the yoke of Christ? Nay; even then in his
hearing, his heart (not steals away, but) with good leave, and full permission)
goes after his covetousness, Exek. 33. 31,32.
or some other corrupt lust, and resolves to keep himself reserved in some
things; making, and setting up in his heart a law against the law of God;
namely, that he will not so be tied to it, but that in some things he will use
his own liberty.

Again, both a sound, and rotten heart rejoice in the Word: But thou find
love to the word, not in thy mouth as the dissembler, Ezekiel. 33. 31. when
indeed his soul hates it, (at least some part of it) but in thy heart. He
receives not the love of the truth, 2 These. 2. 10. and therefore rejoices not
in the truth of God, but in the lies of Satan, promising life without
reformation: but thou out of love to the Word, even because it is a purifying
word, rejoycest in it, especially that power of it, whereby thy soul is
washed, and cleansed from thine own wickedness.

The upright and dissembler both burn in zeal; but thou find thy heart
angry, and grieved, not with some, but al sins, not with others only, but most
with thine own, whereby God is dishonored.

Lastly, the hypocrite can thirst for Christ at sometimes, when he is in the
furnace, as iron, his heart for the present is softened, but as soon as it is
out of the fiery trial, returns to his hardness, and indeed was only
troubled, never changed. But thou find a deep, and unquenched thirst of
Christ and his righteousness, ever burning in thy soul; so that even in the
days of peace thy heart is ever sighing after him, and esteemest him as the
only medicine for thy sick spirit, so the only food when thon art healthy
and strong. In all of these may the faithful soul easily perceive that he
has outstript the hypocrite, and left him far behind, and is certainly
entered into the true way of grace to glory.

CHAP. XXXII. Removing that tentation which rises from comparison with other
Christians.
ANother ordinary tentation of Satan, is, when he works the humbled soul to
compare the graces of some other with their own, and the means either common,
and equal to both, or perhaps less to others, who yet (as he conceives)
outstrip him in grace; and so to discourage, and overthrow this work of faith
in him.

Oh (says a dejected spirit) I have had more time, more seed, more labor
bestowed on me, far more than such, or such a Christian, and yet how
fruitful are they? But I, how barren, and bare in knowledge, in faith, in
love, etc. how wonderfully have they outgrowne me?

But first, let such a troubled heart observe, that this depressing, despising,
and condemning our selves in respect of unfruitfulnesse, whereby we seem to
come short of others, is an eminent grace of God, unto which, by promise, he
has tied all his other graces. God gives grace to the ^umble. 1 Pet. 5,5.
And this is a certain fruit of true humility.

S^condly, they are often deceived in their judgments. For know this, and
remember it as a sure truth; the more thou have profited in grace, and art
enriched in this durable substance, the more covetous will thy heart be of
spiritual gifts. When a worldling begins to taste the sweetness of earthly
lucre, oh how greedily does he thirst after it? And though he lay up treasure
as dust, and gulp down sinful pleasure as water, yet a dry drop^ie possesses
him. The more he drinks, the more he thirsts: so is it with that soul which
being weaned from this, and in love with that world to come, is fired with an
holy, and heavenly covetousness of spiritual riches: The more he bags up of
those evelasting treasures, the more poor will he seem to himself: oh how
good a sign is it, when the riches of grace make thee poor in spirit: Mar.
5.3.
when Christ speaks unto thee, as sometime to the church of Smyrna, Rev. 2.9,
I know thy tribulation and poverty, but thou art rich. For as it is a certain
sign that he who supposes he knows, believes, loves much, 1 Cor. 8.^.
knows nothing as he ought to know: that when we think we are increased in
goods, Rev. 2.17.
and want nothing, then there is nothing which we want not, We are wretched,
poor, miserable, blind, and naked: so when the desires sailing to the
heavenly Jerusalem^ and filled with the breath of that holy Spirit, are carried
so swiftly, that they think the actions stand still, and either move not, or
go backward; certainly that heart which sends forth these desires, is strong,
and fervent in the life of grace.

Thirdly, if those whom

But withal, and above all remember, and apply to this purpose that common
axiom, That truth, or substance is not capable o^ more, or less. Suppose thy
mis-conceit true, that thou were far inferior in grace to many, who are
far younger in the life of grace than thou; this hinders not, but that thou
have the true life of Christ and his Spirit, as well, though not so full as
they. Neither in this life, nor in the other, the eldest are ever the
strongest. But as a child, or weak man, troubled with much sickness, has as
true and very life as he that is strong, and never tasted one sick hour; so
the weak Christian, held down intentation, has as verily the life of God, as
they who have outwrastled Satan, and sin, and enjoy much liberty, and
enlargement of spirit. Who doubts but that Paul, after conversion, though borne
out of time, excelled in grace many of the Apostles themselves: yet were they
not only living, but eminent members of Christ.

Apply these things to thy soul, and so cast out this wavering in spirit, and
those fears which breed painfulnesse: 1 Ioh. 4.18
And then endeavor to ground thy assurance, and establish thy soul by some
infallible and evident signs of thy election and ^alvation.

CHAP. XXXIII. Containing some infallible signs of our Calling and Election.
MAny sure, and evident marks has the Lord Jesus Christ set upon his Sheep,
which as by the hand of his Spirit in the Scripture he has graven, so has he
by the same hand printed them upon us, that considering our selves marked out
by them, we may come, not only to a probable hope, but full assurance of
faith, that we are his chosen Flock, and Sheep of his pasture, Ioh. 10.28, 29.
who shall never perish, never be plucked out of his, and his Fathers hand. Of
very many I will insist only upon some few.

First then, read advisedly Ioh. 3. 1, 2. Behold what manner of love the Father
has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God^ And, we
know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as
he is. Hence, in the first place, it is evident, that those whom the Father
has made children unto himself, he has most dearly, and everlastingly
loved: (see also Ier. 31. 3.) And again, that when we know our filiation,
(when we are made Sons,) we know also that when Christ shall appear, we
shall see him as he is, and be glorified with him: This then is clear, that
when we are children of God, we are eternally beloved by him, and shall reign
with him in eternity. But how shall we know that we are made children? Look
into the 9 verse of that chap. The seed of God remains in them who are borne
of God: Iam. 1.18^
he begets us by the Word of truth. 1 Pet. 1.23
That immortal seed brings forth in us an immortal life. Hence also is it
manifest that when God has powerfully and effectually sown this seed in the
heart of any man, then the life of God, (that eternal life) is given him: in
which regard the Gospel is often called the power of God to salvation. Romans
1.16
But some will say; 1 Cor. 1.18
Now I plainly see my estate were sure, if I could infallibly know that the
Word were effectually applied unto me by God. Oh how should I be sure of that?
how should I be certain that the Word is made to me a seed of life? Read 1
Pet. 2. 2. and compare with it the three last verses of the former chapter. We
are borne not of mortal, but immortal seed, the word of God: this Word
endures for ever: and this is the Word which by the Gospel is preached unto
you. Wherefore laying aside, etc. As newborn babes ^esire (or thirst for) the
sincere milk of the Gospel, that you may grow thereby. From all these
Scriptures linked together, observe how plainly, and necessarily, beyond all
contradiction, these two conclu^ions are gathered^ 1. Whosoever thirsts for
the sincere milk of the Gospel to grow up by it in grace, and all obedience,
he is certainly newborn, and a babe, (at least) in this immortal life. 2.
Whosoever is borne of God by this seed of his Word, is everlastingly beloved of
God, and shall appear with Christ in glory.

When therefore we find that whereas heretofore, being full, we loathed this
hony-combe; Prove. 27.7.
but now, feeling our selves empty and hungry, even the most bitter part of
Gods word is sweet unto us: so that we can truly say, All the words of God,
even his commands, and judgments, as well as his promises, Psalm. 119. 103.
are pleasant unto our taste, more than home unto our mouth; that frequently,
as the Infant for the breast, we longue for it, not for custom, fear, or
knowledge only, but to grow up in all obedience to God, then may we, without
all question, conclude; Seeing God has effectually applied this Word unto my
soul, and in his eternal love begotten me as a child, and heir to
himself, joint heir with Christ, I know that nothing shall separate me from
the love of God, which is in Christ; nothing shall pluck me out of the hand
of my gracious Savior, and my Almighty Father.

Again, whosoever is partaker Christ reigns in him, is certainly a true
member of the Lord Jesus, and one of them, for whom Christ has dyed: See Romans
8.37,38. We are more than Conquerors through him that loved us: I am persuaded,
therefore, that nothing shall separate us, etc. 1 Cor. 15. 57.
God has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. So then, when by the
Word the strong holds of Satan are battered, and beaten down in us, and every
thought subdued to the obedience of Christ; when the dominion of sin is
deposed in us, and the Scepter of Christ, and his Throne set up in our hearts,
we are in the state of grace, ( Romans 6.14.) and members of his mystical body,
baptized into his death, quickened in his resurrection, as is apparent in the
whole course of that chapter. But how should I be assured that Christ reigns
in me, and not sin? Why? Rom^ 6.16.
Know you not that to whom you yield your selves servants to obey, his servants
yon are to whom you obey. Mark then, obedience in service must be from a
yielding willingness, and love: Ephesians. 6.7.
(With good will doing service:) If then thou obeyest, thou yeeldest up thy
self, (not forced) with love, and good will to do what is commanded: See then,
and con^ider not so much what thou do, but what thou would do, and whom
thou obeyest. Thou do the evil thou would not do; thou do not the
good thou would do: Then this is no obedience, when it is done, but not
with good will: Romans 2.20.
nay, so far art thou from obeying, that it is not done by thee, but by sin in
thee. Sin does it in thee, thou do it not in sin. But when the inward man
delights in the law of God, howsoever the command of the Lord is not done as
it ought, yet because out of love to it, and the giver of it, thy will puts on
the outward man to obedience: hence is manifest, that the law of God is written
in thy heart, (see Psalm. 40.8.) and that thou live in obedience not to sin,
but Christ. Hence it is clearly evinced that thou art not a serva^t of sin,
whose yoke thou hate: Thou yeeldest not up thy self with love, and
cheerfulness to obey it, but sighest under the burden of it: a captive then
thou may be to sin, but no servant. Remember this^ He is not a member of
Christ, and his faithful servant, who either for fear of law, anger of
superiors, or some such outward respect, is driven and enforced to Christian
duties: yet the hand, or foot (which by reason of some sore breeding in it, or
some weakness by a blow, or fall, thorn sticking in it, and festering, cannot
do the office of it is notwithstanding a member; and a servant not thoroughly
recovered of a deadly malady, nor able to do perfect service, is yet a faithful
servant: So neither is he a servant to sin, who overwrastled by strong
tentations, detesting this body of death, is carried captive, sending up his
spirit in groans unutterable, and crying out, oh wretched man that I am, who
shall deliver me? And he certainly is a servant, and member of Christ, who,
pressed with sinful weakness, would do what he cannot, and does what he
can. Take a more through view of this truth in a familiar, and confessed
instance: Spai^e is truly said to be under the dominion of the Spanish King;
because the people acknowledging themselves Subjects, willingly live under his
laws: but Holland is as truly said not to be under his dominion, because
having shaken off his yoke, they live not under his laws, nor will hear of
his service. And although sometime in fight they are overcome, yet do they
renew their forces, and both openly profess, and behave themselves as enemies.
Thus is it with the faithful: Romans 6.17.
They were the servants of sin, but now from the heart they have obeyed that
form of doctrine which was delivered them. They hate, and reject the Law of
sin in their members. But does not sin fight against them? Yes, and they
against it: And this is a sign of enmity, not obedience: But it often
prevails also. True, but it prevails as an Enemy; therefore they renew their
strength by prayer, pluck up their hearts, and set themselves in order to
resist, and subdue it: No sign of dominion in all this, but rather of that
deadly feod mentioned by the Apostle, Gal. 5. 17.
The spirit lusts against the flesh, and the flesh against the spirit, and
these two are contrary.

Hence again we may know that we have claim to Christ, and all that he has
done for the Elect. For, if I am not under the dominion of sin, I am under
grace, and the true subject of Christ, even a member of his body. But I plainly
find in me a rebellion against sin; within, by loathing it as a body of
death, and a stinking carrion; without, by opposing it in all my actions, and
laboring to free my self not only from subjection, but from the encumbrance,
and molestation of it, utterly to root it our, as the spiritual Canaanite.
Certain am I therefore, that Christ has subdued sin in me, settled me in his
kingdom, and in his body: Nothing can separate me from him.

As it is very easy to see the such times we have no sense of it, yet others
conversing with us, evidently perceive it working for life; so in the new man,
1 Cor. 12.6
It is the same Spirit which works all in all: so that when we feel it not
our selves, others easily see it.

Two maine actions of the Spirit, comprehending the rest, are mortification,
opposing, resisting, and working out the old man, (all sinful matter in us,)
or Vivification, quickening, repairing, and strengthening the new man. No sooner
the Spirit enters, but it discovers to us much ignorance; and then stirs up
to incline the ear unto wisdom, Pr. 2.2, 3,4
and apply the heart to understanding, the tongue to cry for knowledge, and
lift up the voice for understanding. When now the i^^elligible part is somewhat
cleared, and light brought forth in this new Creation; strait the dullness, and
deadness of the concupiscible part (the will, and affections) is laid open.
Then the heart longues, and the tongue calls out for quicke^i^g grace. Take
notice of this in the Saints: Thus David begs for more light, Psalm. 119. ^^.
33, 34.
Open mine eyes, that I may see the wonders of thy Law. Teach me, O Lord, the
way of thy S^at^tes. Give me understanding. But now when by the grace of God,
in the exercise of the Word, he was grown wiser than his enemses, and of more
understanding than all his teachers; then strait his eye was upon that
sluggishnesse, and deadness of spirit: and how loud, and frequent is he for
quickening? Psalm. 119. 107. 149. 154. 156. 159, etc.
Quicken me according to thy Word; quicken me according to thy judgment;
quicken me according to thy loving kindness: how often repeated in that one
Psalm?

Certain is it, that as we can never in this life wholly shake off all
sinful infirmities; so that blessed Spirit will never suffer us to rest in
any: Look as in the earthly Canaan the Israelites (until the reign of
Solomon) were never in full peace; sometime vexed with Iabin of Canaan,
sometime with the Philistims, but ever victorious: Remarkable is it, that ever
their vexation was a sure sign of their enlargement; and oppression by the
enemy, ushered in the destruction of the oppressor: (for when Isreal's soul was
grieved with the Canaa^ites, Judge. 10.16
Gods soul was grieved for his Israel:) So in the state of grace, till that
true Solomon, the Prince of peace, shall fully reign over all his, and our
enemies, we shall ever be in continual strife with our sinful corruptions;
first with one, then with another; and nothing should more fully assure us that
God has certainly purposed to cut off any sinful affection in us, then that
discovering it to our eyes, and giving us sense of the burden; he gives us no
rest, that we may give him no rest, but seek importunately for help, till we
find it subdued, and destroyed in us. Neither does the blessed Spirit, by his
baptism of fire, only mortify, and purge out the dross of our sinful
nature, but quickens us by that heat of life in vivification; so that the
soul, enflamed with the thirst of grace and glory, can make no stay in his
race, till it touch the mark; with all diligence adding to faith, virtue; to
virtue, knowledge; to knowledge, temperance: ^ Pet. 1. 5, 6,7.
and when we are not destitute of any grace, 2 Pet. 3,18
then putting us forward to grow in the grace which we have received.

Hence is it that even in the depth of tentation when our selves (judging by
sense) suppose that all is lost; standers by (as they say) see further then
we, and can easily discern this Spirit mightily working in us, grieving under
the load of sin, and unutterably groaning under this oppression, judging our
selves, sighing for grace.

By this then may we evidently dis^rne the Spirit dwelling in us, that we are
ever in spiritual motion, action, and exercise; sometime mortifying, sometime
quickening, ever leading us forward to perfection: (See Romans 8.11.13, 14.) so
that we can never rest, or sit down in a contented estate, till we are fully
complete in happiness, and glory.

Lastly, another sign whereby from death unto life, 1 Ioh, 3.^4
is, our love to the Brethren. For certainly, Mat. 10.41 42.
He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets
reward: and he that receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man,
shall receive the reward of a righteous man; and he that gives a cup of water
to a Disciple in the name of a Disciple, verily he in no wise shall lose his
reward: Nay this token of our love proves and makes good all the former;
namely, that God is our Father, the Lord Jesus our Savior, and we Temples of
the holy Ghost: 1 Ioh. 4.1.
For, whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is borne of God, and every
one that loves him that begot, loves him also that is begotten of him. and
4.7.
And, Behold, let us love one another: for love is of God, and every one that
loves, is borne of God, and knows God. Where the love of Gods children is
set out by the Spirit as a sure token both of our love to God, and our new
birth by God.

Again, our Savior appoints it as the Badge of his Disciples; By this shall
all men (how much more our selves) know, that you are my Disciples if you love
one another. John 13.35.
Read also, 1 Ioh. 3.23,24. This is his command, that we should believe, and
love one another: and he that keeps this Commandment dwells in him, and he in
him. And hereby we know that he abides in us by the Spirit he has given us.

The two great commandments of the Gospel, are Faith, and love, which when
they are written in our hearts by the Spirit, and he stirs us up to cleave
unto our head by faith, unto our fellow members by love, it is manifest that we
dwell in Christ, and Christ in us by that holy Spirit.

Hence also may a faithful soul surely gather; God himself has most
clearly testified, that if I love the Brethren, I am translated from death to
life, that I am borne of God, and therefore love the children of God, because
being my self his child, I love my Father. Christ has set his badge, and
cognizance upon me in that love, and that holy Spirit is ^hee, which by his
presence has brought my heart into obedience of this precept. Certain then is
it, that this love to the Saints, is proper only to the Saints, even to those
whom God has begotten by his Word, saved by his death, and sanctified by his
grace. Seeing then I find this love to the Saints rooted in my heart, that my
soul cleaves to their persons, delights in their fellowship, admires their
excellencies, sure am I that the same grace which I love f^ourishing in others,
is planted in my self, that their Father is my Father, their Head my Head, and
that Spirit which dwells in them, rests on me, and will abide with me forever.

CHAP. XXXIV. Recollecting and applying these things by short meditation.
NOw then in the last place let the troubled soul in some inward conference,
underset, and prop up his shaken faith by applying these assurances unto
himself.

Say then in thy heart: How long (oh my soul) how long will thou suffer this
fear, which has torment, 1 Ioh. 4-18
to hold thee down in continual affright, and vexation? how long shall it
keep out that spiritual joy, which is thy only Paradise on earth?

Search, oh my Spirit, search ou^ in these heavenly Records those sure
evidences, whereby thy Lord has graciously conv^yed unto thee this happy and
blessed estate. Are they not laid up in the midst of thy heart? See here
first diverse strong assurances that God has cleansed thee from reigning
hypocrisy, that he has given thee a thirst of righteousness, not only a
desire to know him, but to walk with him in all sincerity of obedience. That
he has given thee an unfeined delight, and joy, not only in the Promises,
but in every Commandment of thy Lord, liking, and heartily loving that
purifying fire of the Word, whereby thou art refined as gold, and separate from
this sinful dross, which is so mixed, and incorporate with thee. A zealous
anger, and grief burning within thee, detesting every sin whereby thy
Savior is dishonored; and above all, thine own, in which thou (unthankefull
wretch) too often forgettest that incomperable, incomprehensible love,
wherewith he has compassed, and embraced thee. A continual longing after the
Lord Jesus, after his death, that thou may be buried in it; after his
resurrection, that thou may be quickened by it; and not only justified in
that other, but sactifi^d in this life, and renewed after that his glorious
image, and divine beauty. True indeed, my weak soul, too true thou art full
of infirmities, very unfruitful, very unprofitable: every one out-strips thee,
and those who have set out long after thee in this heavenly race, are now much
before thee: But yet comfort thy self, for even in this estate thy gracious
Savior leaves thee not altogether comfortless, but still affords thee some
token of his eternal love: for seeing thy weakness, thou art humbled within
me, and broken with grief of thy barrenness. Esa. ^7.15.
Remember that he as much delights in the low feat of an humble spirit, as in
the loftiest Throne of his glorious heavens.

But rise, my dejected soul, oh rise up in strong consolations, and glorious
rejoycings. See here, oh see thou have an infallible evidence that the Father
of lights has begotten thee through the word of Truth: and that thou art borne
anew, not of mortal, but immortal seed, the Word of God; and therefore
entered not into a corruptible, but eternal life. For, see thou not that
seed of thy Father abiding in thee? feel thou not an unslaked thirst of
that sincere milk of the Gospel, not that thou might have it in thy mouth
for discourse, but in thy heart for growth; growth in all obedience, growth in
all holiness and perfection. Behold also, behold with joy unspeakeable, Thy
Savior has assured his victory unto thee, and has already thrown down the
dominion of sin in thee. It is, indeed, an enemy, a strong, a grievous,
encombring, vexing, and ah too often prevailing enemy, but an enemy: thou
professest no obedience, but proclaimest open war to every sin: how much
more will he, who conquered it reigning, subdue it rebelling in thee? yea,
certainly, the Lord Jesus has set up his victorious Cross in thee, and he
that now hangs out a flagge of defiance, will shortly set up his banner of
triumph, trample all thine enemies, and bruise under thy feet both sin, and
Satan.

Consider also that the ble^sed Spirit (the life of thy spirit) dwells, and
continually works in thee. It cannot be that unclean spirit (the Prince of
disobedience) it cannot be the spirit of the world, or that fleshly sinful
spirit within thee, which is ever washing thee from uncleanness, seperating
thee more and more from the world, and the corruption which is in the world
through lust, which draws and frames thy desires and actions to all obedience
unto the Lord Jesus; which gives thee no peace in sin, suffers thee not to
rest in any imperfection, discovers thy corruption, causes thee to groan
under it, puts thee forward in thy race, enflames thy affections, and orders
thy feet to turn out of the evil, into the good way, and to run in it. Do
thou not find in thee an unfeyned love to the Brethren? Does not thy judgment
highly esteem them? Does not thy will, do not thy affections entirely love,
and honor them? Does not thy whole soul bless them? How do thou cleave to
them in heart? How do thou admire those that excel upon the earth in
holiness? How do thou delight in them, and art ravished with their heavenly
fellowship?

Look now to thy evidence; sworn by the Father, written by the Spirit, sealed
by the blood of thy Savior.

Is not he borne of God, who loves the children of God? Is not he a member,
who loves a fellow-member? Is not he quickened by the same Spirit, who is
united in the same spiritual love to those who live and walk in the Spirit?
Rejoice then, oh my sonle, rejoice in the Lord, and in these assurances of his
everlasting truth, and favor. Cast out this spirit of bondage, this servile,
this tormenting fear. Bring in that joy of the Spirit, seat it in the midst of
thy heart. There let it abide, there let it reign, making thee to delight in
the Lord, to turn, and tune thy groans and sighs, to hymns and spiritual
songs, ever blessing him, who never cease to bless thee; to love his glory,
and glory in his love, to serve him in joy, and rejoice in his service.

CHAP. XXXV. Con^luding all with Prayer.
OH glorious Trinity of persons, in the unity of one God, draw me nearer into
that holy fellowship, that more than heavenly Fellowship, which you purposed,
purchased, and sealed to me. 1 John 1.3.
O Father of all mercies, seeing thou have accepted me, so poor, miserable,
sinful wretch, and adopted me; seeing (by that immortal seed) thou have
begotten me to thy self; make me, oh make me greatly to longue after my
Fathers house; weane me from my pilgrimage; suffer me not to stay, and linger
in these vanities; suffer me not to do at upon vexation. Thy bountiful hand
has given me all things; 1 Cor. 3.^2
Things present, and things to come, all are mine: Some are mine to use, some
to enjoy: to use this world, not abusing it; to enjoy thy self, and the world
to come. Oh then let me not seek to enjoy those things which I should only
use, lest I be held from those things which I should enjoy. Give me every day
more clearly to perceive that I am on earth a stranger, and so journer, a
Traveller toward thy heavenly Jerusalem: teach me to cast behind my back what
I know I must shortly leave bhinde me; and set my face fully toward thee. For
what inheritance have I in the world? What portion on earth? Thou art my rich
inheritance, my All-sufficient God; oh cast me not away from thee, thou
Supreme good, and highest happiness, so shall I never want any thing that is
truly good and happy.

Oh my gracious Savior, my soul pants after thee; weary of this sinful
world, more weary of this sinful flesh, chained miserably to this body of
death, and led captive after sin; it looks up to thee, and sighs after thee
my glorious deliverer; when shall I appear in thy presence? When shall this
weather-beaten Tabernacle be dissolved, to be builded up again, and fashioned
according to that Temple of thy glorious body? Psa^ 116.16
O Lord, truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the son of thy handmaid:
thou have broken my bonds. Now therefore take, and challenge thine own. Esa.
26.13.
Other Lords beside thee have had dominion over me; but I will remember thee
only, and thy name. Cruel, imperious, and shameful Lords have tyrannized
over me, and wasted my soul: The false world, and worse than it, Satan; and
worse then he, Sin; their service, slavery; their wages, death: When I was
theirs, I was neither thine nor mine own. But Lord rescue the price of thine
own blood, restore me to thee, and to my self: Nay, cut me off from my
self, that I may be grafted, and abide wholly in thee; empty me of my self
that I may be filled with thee; let me dye in my self, that I may live in
thee; let me be nothing in my self, that I may be all in thee. Oh ravish my
heart with thy beauty, and teach me to abhor the painted harlotry of this
sinful world; unite my heart unto thee by faith, and knit it fast in love: And
seeing thou have sought up this lost sheep, and brought me into thy flock,
fold me in thy protection, and feed me in these green pastures, till I rest
with thee for ever.

Oh thou holy and blessed Spirit, who sealest unto me those precious promises,
apply powerfully this signet to my heart, and seal it up in thy Covenant. Open
mine eyes, and fasten them on Christ, and those things where Christ sits at
the right hand of God: Make me to know, and remember that I can lose no good
thing, so long as I enjoy thee: Oh, with all thy other graces, I beseech thee
speak peace to this troubled heart, and give thy servant to hear what thou
speak. Say to my soul, The Father of Christ is thy father, the Lord Jesus
is thy wisdom, thy righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. I am thy
life, thy pledge, and earnest of that purchased inheritance; I am thy stay, I
am thy Comforter: Dan. 10.19
Fear not, peace be unto thee, be strong, and of a good courage, so shall thy
weak Temple be strengthened, so shall all earthly sorrow, and tormenting fears
vanish as a morning cloud, and my soul shall ever rejoice in thee my most
merciful God, my most gracious Redeemer, and sweetest Comforter. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

