THE FALL OF BABYLON IN VSVRPING ECCLESIASTICAL POWER AND OFFICES. AND THE
MISERABLE ESTATE of them that partake of her fornications.

Revelation 18.4. Come out of her my People, that ye be not pertarkers of her
sins, and that ye receyve not of her plagues.

Imprinted in the year of our Lord. 1634.

THE PREFACE TO THE Reader.
IT was a question prophetically asked of those times, wherein the Church and
truth of God should suffer greatest persecution and opposition, why do the
Heathen rage, Psa. 2.
and the People imagine a vain thing? The Kings of the Earth set themselves,
and the Rulers take counsel together against the Lord, and against his Christ,
saying: Let us break their bands asunder, and cast their cords from us. But
for all these forces and devises of men, who are not Jews indeed, Christians
indeed, but Gentiles and Heathen. Yet, says God, have I set my King upon my
holy hill of Syon; and that as he says, to have the Heathen for his
inheritance, and the ends of the Earth for his possession: either to rule them
by the rod of his power, by the revealed word, or to break them in pieces like
a Potters vessel: ^or it had been s^yde, He shall judge among the Nations.
Isa. 2.
Well therefore is it added, Be wise now therefore o ye Kings, be instructed ye
Judges of the earth: Serve the Lord with fear, etc. For as the Church of God
in general, so every true member of it, will be ready to say, Chap. 33.
The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King; and
that therefore it were a happy thing, if Princes and States would be pleased to
consider, that they are only Lords over men properly and directly, as they are
their subjects, and not as they are Christ's Disciples, Christians, and
spiritually his subjects; withal, that God is not pleased with unwilling
worshippers, whereby neither Christian societies are bettered, nor the persons
themselves: For while all are compelled to a conformity, especially if it be
in things not according to the word of God, many having presently their
Religion in respect of man's authority, and not of Gods, become Hypocrites,
Timeservers, and a kind of Atheists: and which is worse, such men, by their
formalitie, though they have little else in them, do often attain authority in
such Churches, and thereby get dominion over men's faith in other things. For
though in the primitive times, the Bishops of Rome had no such ample power, yet
the fi st step to it was that of imposing conformity in things devised by men,
and by them counted indifferent and innocent, if not proffitable and necessary;
which power being granted them, they soon got authority over all Ministers
and People; and then so much over Kings, that in very policy, they thought
it their best course to hold all their subjects, in matters of Religion, to
the obedience of the Church of Rome, rather then to adventure the danger of her
displeasure; whereby they brought both themselves, and their subjects into a
far worfe thraldom, then that of the Egyptian bondage.

What reason then is there, that this power, thus Popishly taken up, should
still be maintained against the poor subjects? From the beginning it was not
so. For the Ancients finding the burden imposed by Heathen Tyrants to be
intolerable, said, Tertull.
that it is no property of Religion, to compel to Religion: which ought to be
taken up freely; that no man is forced by the christians against his will,
Lactanc.
seeing he that wants faith and devotion is unserviceable to God: and that God,
not being contentious, would not be worshipped of the unwilling.

And in deed after he had manifested his whole truth, and the new Jerusalem,
his true church, if these things would not serve to convince men, he says. He
that is unjust, let him be unjust still, and he that is filthy, Rev, 22.
let him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him be righteous
still. Yet do I not deny all compulsion to the hearing of Gods word, as the
means to work religion, and common to all sorts good and bad; much less
excuse civil disobedience, palliated with religious shows and pretenses, used
by Annabaptists and others, or condemn necessary restraint of publik
idolatry, and the exercise of all erroneous religions: So as these rules of
reason be held inviol^ble: That the bond between Magistrate and subject is
essentially civil; but religious accidentally only, th ugh eminent: So that he
is only to hinder and punish that which God would have hindered and punished;
and to cherish that only which God would have cherished; and not by the cunning
of prevaricators, who serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies, to be
drawn either to hold them guilty that follow Gods Testament, or those
guiltless, who err in their hearts and practices, because they have not
known his ways; nor indeed will know them; whence it may come to pass, that
he that persecutes the chu ch of Christ, and defe^deth the Synagogne of Satan
may think he does God service; when he has rather cause to fear that he
helps his grand enemy the devil. I have therefore endeavored to show these
things in the fall of Babylon; and withal, that as the christian Magistrate
has his power of Magistracy from God, which his Christianity serves to
sanctify and direct; so undoubtedly he is to use it for God and his honor,
and that in his true worship in which he is espetially honored, and only
against the contrary. The world does ring of three complaints.

1. When a State professes the reformed Religion, and has Churches governed
by Elders, as near as it can to the practice of the primitive Churches; yet by
a tolleration, or connivance gives leave to Annabaptists, Arminians, Lutherans,
Papists, and others, to have Churches in the same Cities.

2. When a State is of the Popish Religion, and maintaynes it, yet both gives
absolute tolleration to the reformed Religion, and contemnes it, as in France.

3. When a State professes the Protestant Religion, and withal a hierarchy,
traditions and Ceremonies, which are Romish, commanding all to a conformity
in them, and forbidding all confutation of them, and of some other Popish and
Arminian tenets and practices, much connived at.

In the two first, men say, if Satan have a Synagogue or Throne in the one
end of a City, yet Christ has a Throne in the other; his Temple is open, and
his Servants have liberty to serve him, as the primitive Churches did; neither
is any man compelled to other; they may freely preach and write against all
errors; This cannot be said of the third; and therefore, if a poor
Christian, that would fly out of Babylon, be forced to dwell in one of them,
let him learn by Christ's word, in which he ought to take up his habitation.

THE FALL OF BABYLON IN VSVRPING ECCLESIASTICAL POWER AND OFFICES. And the
miserable estate of them that partake of her Fornication.
THE church of Ephesus, who had only left her first love in some few things,
Rev. 2.3.^
in zeal against them that were evil, in trying the Spirts, in labor and
patience, which may seem to be very small faults, in respect of those which
may be found in the churches of these times, was yet told by Christ that she
was fallen. The church of Thiatira did but suffer the woman Iezabel to teach
people, that they might eat things sacrificed unto idols, Verse. 20, 21.22.
and yet Christ says this was to seduce them to commit fornication. And I gave
^er space to repent of her fornication, and she repented not. Behold, I ^^ll
cast her into a bed, and them that commit fornication with her into great
tribulation, except they repent of their deeds. And J will kill her children
with death, and all the churches shall know that I am he that searches the
reins and the hearts. He acknowledges her charity, and service, and faith,
and patience, Verse. 19.
and ber works, and the last to be more then the first; And yet all this will
not serve, if she presume to teach any thing that he has not taught, if she
do not keep his wo^l^ to the end, but give a liberty where he gives none; If
this (...) fault be not repented of, Verse. 26.18
he who is the Son of God, a^^ whose eyes are as a flame of fire, ^es it
might not be win^^^d at, that it should be severely punished, and much more
^hen a church transgresses in many things, for therefore he adds And I will
give unto every one of you according to your works. But this our gracious Lord
has not only warned churches of the mystery of iniquity, the general
Apostacy after Antichrist, the fall of Babylon, and the cup full of
abominations and filthiness of her fornications, whereof she would make the
nations to drink; but has also by his Servants convinced her, and all that
commit fornication with her of all those abominations. Plesses shows how the
mystery of iniquity was opposed in all ages. And when these could not
prevail with them, to make them leave their wicked works; but the last were
still more, and worse then the first, Christ-suffered heavy judgments to fall
on them, declared in the vision of the trumpets: where among, the rest, that of
the sixth is remarkable; whereby is signified the coming in of the Turks with
fire and sword, Rev. 9.16.^8.
and the great slaughters they should make among christians. And yet it is
said, The rest of the men which were not killed by these plagues, repented not
of the works of their hands, that they should not worship devils, and idols of
gold and silver, and brass and stone and of wood, which neither can see,
Premonition to all Christian Monarchs page 87. De cultu Adorat. lib. 3. disp.
1. cap. 5.
not hear nor walk. That they worship devils while they receyve doctrines of
devils, is a thing true enough: And howsoever, King James has showed it to be
fulfilled in them, saying. As for worshipping of devils; look your great
Iesuited Doctor, Vasques: and as for all the rest, it is the maine doctrine of
the Roman church. And then it is subjoined in this text. Neither repented they
of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornication nor of
their thefts. By their murders, their persecutions are meant, and bloody
massacres. For their sorceries, consider of their Agnus Dei, that will slaken
fire, of the hallowed shirts, and diverse sorts of Relics; and also of prayers
that will preserve men from the violence of shot, of fire, of sword, of
thunder, and such like dangers; And judge if this be not very like to sorcerie
and incantation of charms. By their fornication is meant, both their
spiritual fornication, and corporal, by reason of the restraint cf their
churchmen from marriage: They are guilty of theft, in stealing from God the
titles and greatness of power due to him, and bestowing it upon their head
(...) Antichrist (I will add one thing, by usurping other Ecclesiastical
offices, and depriveing them of their places, who were set about his throne.)
As also by heaping up treasure with their juggling wares, and merchandise of
the Souls of men, by Iubiles, Pardons, Relics, and such like strong
delusious.

When these Judgments would not reclaim them, Christ sent forth Messengers,
One Angel, Rev. 14.6.
having an everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth:
which the best expositors take to be meant of Wicklise, or of him with John
Husse and others: And there followed another Angel, saying, Verse. 8.9.
Babylon is fallen, is fallen which, many take to be meant of Luther and
others. And the third Angel followed them, with a loud voice, denouncing
eternal damnation to every one that should worship the Beast, Rev. 15.6.
and his image, and receive his mark in his forhead, or in his hand. Yea the
Lord sent out of the Temple seven Angels, having the seven last plagues,
clothed in pure and white linen. After the four first had powered out their
vials, Chap. 16.9.
In stead of amending them, it is said, they blasphemed the name of God,
which has power of these plagues: that is, they blasphemed the word of God,
by which, being cleared, they were now scorched, as by fire: they blaspheme
the true and bright shining sense, which now was manifested: And they repented
not to give him glory. So when the fifth Angel powred-out his vial upon the
seat of the Beast, Verse. 10.
and his Kingdom was full of darkness: which seems to be done in Plesses
his history of the papacy, and the like works: by which indeed his Kingdom,
which many had thought to proceed from the light of Gods truth, appeared to be
full of darkness: For all this in justifying of it, they blaspheme the God of
heaven, and as it is added, they repented not of their deeds. Verse. 12.
Therefore no marvel if the next be powered out on the river Euphrates to dry
up the waters of it, that the way of the Kings of the East may be prepared to
destroy Babylon (where the river, as Babylon it self, mount Sion, Jerusalem,
the Temple and other things must needs be mystical) and at the pouring out of
the seventh vial she comes in remembrance before God, Verse. 19.
to give her the cup of his wrath, and then God calls to his people to take
heed of pertaking of her sins, that they receive not of her plagues.

For as Christ said of that Iezabel in Thiatira, J will cast her into a bed,
Rev. 2.
and all that commit fornication with her into great tribulation: So we may
be sure will be done unto them that continue in any of the Babylonian
corruptions. For consider the meaning of that last clause, and all that commit
adultery with her. Which is not meant of them only that then lived in the
bosom of that church, but of all others that then, or after should fall into
that her first error; yea though they should be, at enmity with her, for her
after errors, or not know her: there are none exempted that fall into the same
error, only, As many as have not this doctrine: mark, and so for the doctrine
of the Nicolaitans, of Babylon, or any other: therefore if a man forsake all
Babylons errors, save one; if he hold but one of the first, as this about
Bishops, which is the root of all the rest, he commits adultery with her
in that, he pertaketh of her sins, and may receive of her plagues. She has
many others. It is true, that all nations have drunk of them. The reformed
churches have therefore discovered and abandoned them: Among which, the church
of England will not acknowledge that, though she retain diocessan Bishops,
their courts and power, in imposing diverse Romish customs, canons, and
ceremonies, that yet these are any part of the Babylonian corruptions, for
which she is taxed in the holy Scriptures, and at the last rewarded. Some,
seeing Bishops bear such sway in the church of England, do plainly affirm
that they are of God, and ordained in the new Testament, knowing that otherwise
so great power and authority in the church cannot be lawful, Gal. 3.15.
seeing the Apostle says, though it be a man's Testament: yet if it be
confirmed, no man dissanulleth or adds thereto, much less to Gods. Others
there are, that if you tell them, it was an invention of the Romanists, and
other Clergy men, after the death of the Apostles: they so much reverence that
church of Martyrs, that they care not much whether it be of the Apostles, or
them, which is a very great folly and vanity, seeing our Lord taxes so
many churches of those times with great corruptions, and it has been
manifested that the church of Rome, both in this case, and many others, did
quickly grow worse then them all; that many were the presumptions and burdens,
she laid on the church; that the foundation of diocessan episcopacie, was
making the pastors of great cities, to be always presidents of Sinods; which
so increased their authority, that in time the title of Bishops came to be
restrained to them, who being in such power, were as ready to take it, as
others in flattery to give it.

And why then should so much be ascribed to their Synods, seeing so many
foolish and presumptious things were determined by them? As abouts Temples,
Altars, Masses, vestments, holy water, orders, Metropolitans, all very
superstitious, and so much for their own glory, that An ichrist rose out of
them? Our Lord says, he that speaks, of him self seeks his own glory:
Ioh. 7.18.
but he that seeks his glory that sent him (by speaking his truth, as in the
two verses before) the same is true and no unrighteousness is in him: which
argues, Also chap. 8.38.
that they who speak any thing besides his revealed will, who speak any thing
besides his truth, or command what he has not commanded, they are false and
seek their own glory, yea, and there is much unrighteousness in them; they
defile a church, they speak that which they have seen with their father; and
that therefore those prelates, who ordained these things sought their own
glory, defiled the church, and were guided by other spirits, then the Spirit
of Christ, who only taks of Christ's, and shows unto men. Chap. 16.13.14.
Which is also plain by this, that, to their own glory, they are more
observed then the commandments of God, as Lent, and other things then
devised. So Telesphorus sought his own glory, Platina in Telesphor.
when he ordained, That in the night of Christ's birth day, three massos should
be celebrated, the first at midnight, when Christ was borne in Bethelem, the
second at the break of day, when he was known to the Shepherds, the third at
the time of the day when he was nailed on the cross: for after that hour it
was forbidden to celebrate it. Because Paul says As often as ye eat this bread,
and drink this cup, ye show the Lords death: therefore in the primative
church, they often received the Sacrament, commonly once every Lords day; which
was well. But this was no warrant for them to devise to show his death by a
kind of Sacrifice, as Alexander first invented, See Platiin Alex.
and sometime twice or thrice in a morning in this superstitious manner: which
soon served hypocrites for a pretense of less preaching, or hearing the word,
growing ignorant, and making the mass, ordained in those times, the chief
part of their religion, which must needs be much to their glory (in an
Antichristian sense) that speaking of themselves devised it, and were so
followed in it. Idem in Eleuther.
And so in ordaining diocessan Bishops, Archbishops and Patriarchs after the
example of the flamins, Archflamins, and Protoflamins, as Platina and others
show. Indeed all ordinances did greatly increase their glory, were they
never so foolish; because they, being in honor, had st ll flatterers to
defend them, and persuade obedience to them. Therefore, read Damasus, Platina
and others that write their lives, and you shall find there was then scarce
any. B. of Rome, that did not invent some ordinance, least he should be thought
an ill husband in increasing the glory of his Sea. Idem in Zepherin. an. 198.
Idem in Calist. and in Steph. 1
Zepherinus ordained that the cup in the Sacrament should be of glass, and no
more of wood: as it was before. This was after altered and commanded to be of
gold, silver or pewter. Calistus ordained that there should be a fast thrice a
year on the saturday for corn, wine and oil, which after was changed to the
fast at four times. Stephen 1. ordained that Priests should not wear holy
garments, but in the church and in celebrating holy rites, least if they did
otherwise, they should fall into the sin of Balthazar, who touched the holy
vessels with profane hands. In the times of the Apostles, before presbyters
wore such garments, before Surplesses, coapes and such vestments were taken
from the h^athen, there was little need of such an ordinance. Howsoever the
Scriptures do so forbid profane carriage at all times, and in all Christians,
that this needed not to keep priests from being drunk in their Surplesses.
What should I speak of hallowing grapes on the Altar, and such like foolish
ordinances? The very shame of those ages, and of them that so much reverence
their inventions, and canons for their Antiquity. But it is rather, because
Vrbanus made one which enricheth the Prelates; because Dionisius limited the
confines of diverse diocesses, and Cajus distinguished the orders; because
though in all these things, they spoke of them selves, yet they were confirmed
in the council of Nice who indeed sought Christ's glory, and spoke out of his
Testament in her creed. But whether she spoke of her self, or of these
Bishops of Rome, and their inventions and customs, in her other Canons about
Bishops, the Reader may find by the Scriptures, if he do but observe that
rule of Christ: Ioh. 7.17.
If any man will do his will, that is, be ordered by it, he shall know of the
doctrine whether it be of God, er whether J speak of my self: Men can not
know the truth in this point, because they are not willing to know it, much
less to do it, and hold it fast, as they are willed.

But because God has suffered diocessan Bishops so many hundred years, and
has not suddenly slain them, when they began to innovate, as he did Nadab,
Abihu, and Vzza, therefore men are so foolish, as to think he is so well
pleased with the invention, that now it should not be so much as questioned;
when they know, if that argument were good, the like might be said for
Antichrist, who began to rise and reign with them: yet will not men see it.
Much less will they believe, that as for lesser presu^ptions in the
Corinthians, Paul says, for this cause many are weak and sick, and many
sleep; 1. Cor. 11.21.31.
so God punished these, as well at their first rising, with the persecutions,
as since, with many plagues spiritual and temporal. Eccl. 8.11. Psa. 50.21.
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore
the heart of the Sons of men is fully set in them to do evil. J kept
silence and thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self.
That is well enough pleased with thy works: But I vvil reprove thee and set them
in order before thine eyes: and as the Prophet shows, Ier. 5.1.3.4.5. Isa.
26.9.10.11.
God inflicteth his punishments on a city or people, to make them seek his
truth and to bring them to the knowledge of it: O Lord are not thine eyes upon
the truth? thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved, for they know
not the way of the Lord, they have broken the yoke and burst the bonds. When
thy Judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn
righteousness. The godly will, but let favor be showed to the wicked, yet will
he not learn righteousness: Nor yet when the hand of God is upon them: Exodus
32, 34.
When thy hand is lifted up, they will not see: But they shall see and be
ashamed for their envy at the people: and as he says in a like case. In the
day when I visit, Ier. 12.1. Habak. 1.13.
I will visit their sin upon them. In the mean time, why should any godly
man be so moved at their prosperity, as to put forth his hand to their
wickedness? or in discontent to say, wherefore does the way of the wicked
prosper, wherefore are all they happy, that deal very trecherously? For then
he will make them to see, that his church is called the Tabernacle of the
Testimony. The Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimony in heaven was
opened; Reu. 15.5. Chap. 11.19.
And there was seen in it the Ark of his Testament. To show us; that as, under
the first Testament, all things concerning the Priests and the service, was to
continue according to the first institution, 1. Sam. 2.28
so ought it to be under the new. I did give, says God, to Elie) unto the
house thy Father all the offerings made by fire, to let him know, they ought to
have been contented with what God had given them, and not to take more, as his
Sons did: the Testimony was as well concerning the office and right of the
Priests as other things, there was not any thing to be suffered of
coueteousnes, ambitious usurpation, or humane invention.

Deuteronomy. 19.19.20.
So was it to be under the new Testament. For when God by Moses had spoken of
Christ, and that which he should speak in his name, it is added in the next
words, But the Prophet which shall presume to speak a word in my name, which I
have not commanded him to speak, even that Prophet shall die. And when Christ
says, Reu. 22.18.
If a man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagnes
written in this book; we are not only to take it of thrusting things into
the text, or adding to it; but of speaking, and in his name imposing on
Churches and people things in religion, which he commanded not. God so taxed
this fault in the Jews, Isa. 29.13. Mat. 15.8.
that he counted all things yea their very worshipping of him to be vain,
while this was suffered. Because in the primative Church, men did not strive to
overcome the intruding of inventions, by holding fast Christ's works unto the
end, but let in, now a little and then a little, the truth was daily betrayed and
lost, and so it must needs be where they are maintained, the lesser
presumptions make way for the greater. Gods word and truth is his glory; Psa.
4.3.
But, says he, how long will ye turn my glory into shame? yet this they do,
who would make it defend, or allow, the inventions and precepts of men. This is
a harlot like trick, to give, her husbands goods and glory, to her adulterers;
But as Israel and Judah did it, so have Christian Churches. Thou o Rome wast at
first a famous Church, but like them, Ezech. 15. Esa. 48.8. chap. 1.
thou did trust in thine own beauty and playedst the harlot because of thy
renown; thou did deal very trecherously and wast called a transgressor from
the womb. How soon did the faithful city become an Harlot? It was full of
judgment, righteousness lodged in it. But now murderers etc, The Prophets
Prophecy falsely, Ier. 5.31.
and the Priests bear rulle by their means, and my people love to have it
so: and what will they do in the end thereof? I answer they made a like
custom, and long continuance a warrant for their inventions, as they do, that
upon like grounds defend evil. They despise the Law of the Lord. Amos. 2.4.
And their lies caused them to err after which their Fathers walked. They
would rather do as their Fa hers had done and taught, then as God commanded.
By reason thereof men talk in vain, that tell them of Gods ordinance. They
cannot hearken: Ier. 6.10.
Behold the word of the Lord is unto them a reproach: they have no delight in
it. I have written to him the great things of my Law, but they where counted
as a strange thing. Hos. 8.12.
And the reason is well given, Can the Ethiopian change his skin? Or the
Leopard his spots? Chap. 13.23.
then may ye also do good that are accustomed to do evil. All men are
subject to find excuses, and even to wrest the Scriptures to defend ancient
custome^.

It was Gods gracious promise unto them for all this: Isa. 1.25.26. Chap. 2.12.
I will purge away thy dross: And I will restore thy Judges as at the first,
and thy counselors as at the beginning. We saw he has promised as much in
the case of his church: for the day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one
that is proud and lofty, that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low. In
the mean while, we must know, Chap. 5.1.
he planted a vinyard in a very fruitful hill, and he fenced it: he looked
that it should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes: therefore
he took away the hedge thereof, and it was not dug and pruned as it should
be. So was the hedge taken from the church in the time of the persecutions,
when she brought forth the wild grapes of men's inventions. Isa. 24.5. Ezech.
5.6 Amos. 2.4
Men will confess it was for some sin, as Israel was always plagued,
Because they transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance (mark, changed the
ordinance) brake the everlasting covenant. Though they kept it in fundamental
points of religion, yet with Korah, and Vzzah they brake and changed it in
Ecclesiastical order, service and ceremonies, which opened the gap to greater
transgressions. Had they continued in his ordinances, doubtless they had never
been so afflicted, he would have been to them as he promised to Israel, Exodus
34.24.
I will cast out the nations before thee, and enlarge thy borders: neither
shall any man desire thy land, when thou shall go up to appear before the
Lord thrice in the year; he would so have ruled their enemies hearts: but
when men observe not his ordinances, or like the Angels keep not their first
estate, then by his plagues, he seeks to abate their pride. Now we shall
have seen that in the primative church, the Clergy did soon decline from his
ways in such things, and were plagued, Isa. 9.16. Chap. 52. Chap. 42.24. Chap.
8.16
both they and their people. For the Leaders of this people cause them to
err, and they that are led of them are destroyed. So, they that rule over them
make them to howl, and my name continually every day is blasphemed. Who gave
Jacob for a spoil, and Jsrael to the Robbers? Did not the Lord, he against
whom we have sinned? for they would not walk in his ways, ande. And therefore
he says bind up the Testimony, Seal the law among my Disciples, Certain
that lived despised in corners, and persecuted, even of some of their own
brethren, while he hid his face from the house of Jacob. Ier. 2:30. Isa. 57.17.
For, says he, in vain have I smitten your children they received no
correction: your own sword has devoured your Prophets etc. For the iniquity
of his coveteousnes was I wroth and smote him. J hid me and he went on
frowardly in the way of his own heart. So that Coveteousnes has in all ages
been the root of all evil, Ier. 6.13.
especially in churchmen. For every one is given to coveteousnes (and what
follows thereupon) from the Prophet to the Priest, every one deals falsely:
And they bend their tongue like their bow for lies (such as are for their
honor or proffit) but they are not valiant for the truth. Such was the fruit
of coveteousnes and ambition in Elies Sons; such in Gehezi, in Ziba and
others, as well of the Priests as of the people; and such has it ever been as
well in the christian, as in the Jewish churches. There was doubtless a lust of
the eyes after the pride of life, a seeking after pre-eminence and authority in
the Bishops of Rome from the very death of the Apostles. Their devises to
superintend over neighbor churches, or parishes, and their Decrees in their
Synods, wherein they for the most part ruled all for their own glory, do
sufficiently declare it: this was the foundation of their greatness. And some
desire there might be of filthy lucre: but the first open proof recorded is
that decree of Vrbanus, Platina in Urban. 1.
that the church might receive from the faithful, inheritance of lands: This
was about the year 224. For before times the preaching Bishop was maintained
by that which the seven Deacons gathered for the poor and church uses, as
both Damasus and Platina show in the life of Evaristus, who died for the Truth
in the year 109. and was, it seems, the last of the vncorrupt Pastors of that
little flock in Rome. He presumed not to make ordinances; And so as Hegesippus
says, to the times of Trajan, or thereabouts, the church continued clean and
undefiled, as a virgin; Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 26. and lib. 4. c. 21.
but since that sacred company left the world, the conspiracy of iniquity
began to work with open face. They tell us indeed of an ordinance that his
predecessor Annaclet made against Clergy men's nourishing of long hair, in
head or beard: Platina in Anaclet. 1. Cor. 11.14.
which having respect to that of the Apostle, seemed tolerable. But the
Apostles words were sufficient, what need such an ordinance? yet if he made
it, that served for a pretense, that they might make others. The like may be
said of that command of his, that the consecration being ended, all the
faithful should communicate, or they that would not, should go out of the
church. These their best preceps were steps to intolerable presumptions in
others; as in Alexander who, succeeding Euaristus, ordained holy water, the
mass and other inventions, which others increased: So was this of Vrbanus a
step to extreme coveteousnes, and many other corruptions.

Cyprian yields this reason of the persecution of Decius, Cyprian lib. de
lapsis.
Because every man slept in the coveteous desires of his own heart, it was
high time for God to awak them with his rod; There was no longer any devotion
left in the priests, Anno 253
no sincere faith in ministers, no mercy in their works, no government in
their manners etc. The Bishops them selves who should have served for a spur
and pattern of well doing, abandoning their holy functions and forsaking
their flocks, go a gadding into other countries, haunting marts and faires
for filthy lucres sake, little caring to relieve their hungry and starving
brethren, so themselves might have money at will; getting lands by fraud, and
money by griping usury: and what did we not deserve for these ill doeings?
The Churches, ye see; were not the more purified, but more defiled after
diocessan Bishops were set up. Howsoever this shows their folly, who ascribe
so much to the wisdom and holiness of those times. Eusebius gives the like
reasons of the persecution of Dioclesian, Platina in Marcel.
as Platina observes, saying, Eusebius imagines that it was permitted of God
for the corrupt manners, with the too much liberty and indulgence of the
Christians, espetiallie of the Clergy, to bridle whose perverseness, the divine
justice ordained this persecution, while he saw dissembling in their
countenance, fraud in their hearts, and deceit in their words. For these
striving among themselves with envy, pride, enmities, hatreds, seemed to
s^^iour more of a tyranny then of the Priesthood, altogether forg^tt^ng the
Christian piety, and rather profaning then celebrating the divine mysteries.
But what then, says he, do we think will become of our age, Wherein our vices
are increased to that height, that they have scarce left for us a place of
mercy with God? How little Religion is there, and that rather dissembled then
true? (he might have said, and that rather after men's inventions, then Gods
ordinances) what corrupt manner etc. Eusebius say more, yet I have chosen to
allege him in Platinaes words, to keep malicious minds from pretending
deceit, in alleging it.

Men may well think, that when with constantine there entered such a deal of
peace and plenty, there must needs be more corruption. Their own Authors
show it; for Baronius says, Baron. in 324. art. 78. and 79.
Constantine, in the 24 year of his reign, ordained that the Bishops should
from that time forward have the same Priueliedges, which the idolatrous Priests
had enjoyed in times past. They had, says he, as chief among them Rex
Sacrificulus, who in solemn feasts was wont to watch and have an eye over the
rest. They had also their Sovereign Pontife, Pontifex Maximus, Arbitrator of
all questions arising among them: and who can think, says he, that Constantine
could long endure that these should exceed Christians in pomp and glory? He
might have said, that the Bishops of Rome could long endure it? Howsoever this
was the goodly reason of their greatness, contrary to that of Christ, Luke 22.
the Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, etc. but ye shall not
be so: Yet Baronius shows the Pope and Cardinals to have the honor in
riding, clothing and other things, that these Pontifes had. It appears in
Platina, on the like of Eleutherus, that the power of Bishops, Archbishops and
Patriarchs was taken from the example of these pagans: they were then only
held in titles of like nature: but now in the power, pomp and riches of them.
Polidor Virgil also acknowledges that many things have com into the Church of
Rome from the Hebrews, the ancient Romans, De invent rerum. l. 5. c. 1. Book
of the Iubile see the Root of Romish Rites.
and other Pagans. M. Derlincourt proves this out of the Bishop of Mande,
Gratian, and diverse others of their own Authors; and among other things, that
the dignities and power of Bishops, Archbishops, and Patriarchs, were taken
from the heathen. And for their wealth Cedrenus in his History says, that
Constantine in the 26 and 27 years of his Empire labored to pull down the
idols, and to convey their rents and revenues to the Churches. From this
greatness of dignity and wealth, there soon followed a greatness of power and
tyranie, in imposing the Romish Laws, about supremacy, worshipping of
images, praying to Saints, single life of Priests, purgatory, pardons, and the
like. Was not Babylon fallen in all this? Was not here a manifest change of
Christ's ordinances, about Bishops and other things?

Excommunication was at first a punishment inflicted by many, not of one. But
they haueing made one breach, 2. Cor. 6. and 2 Thessalonians. 3 14. Histor. of the
counc. of Trent. l. 4. p. 331.
to set up a kind of diocessan Bishops, the mystery of iniquity could not
rest there; but as one says, the members of the Churches, neglecting their
duties, at last left all to the Bishops, who out of ambition embraced it, and,
the persecutions ceasing, erected a tribunal, which was much frequented. That
yet they judging honestly at the first, Constantine made a Law, that there
should lie no appeal from the Sentences of the Bishops: which authority they
abusing, that Law about 70 years after was revoked by Arcadius and Honorius,
and one made that they should not be thought to have a court: which was
executed in Rome it self, and after by Valentinian strengthened by another Law
to that purpose. This was not digging up the root of the mystery of
iniquity, by taking away this diocessan power and restoring the Eldership,
whereof not only Princes, but even Clergy men were now grown ignorant, but
lopping the branches, which after grew and spread more then ever: for this
power thus taken away was restored by Justinian, who, 500 years after Christ,
established unto them a court and audience. And after the power of Bishops
greatly increased, when they came to be Councillors to King and Princes, and
to bear offices under them, as to be Chancellours, Treasurors and the like.
Whereby their Canons, power, traditions and Ceremonies, came to be received
with the greater authority, and no man durst gainsay them, were they never so
superstitious, popish, and tyranicall. All this came from their first
presumptions, in not abiding in the ordinance and Wisdom of God, touching the
Edership, as they were willed, but giue^ng a kind of authority and
superintendencie to the Pastor or Bishop of great cities, over the lesser
towns and all presbiters about them. For thus Bishops, by that means,
encroached from one step to another, till at last the very name of the
presbiterie grew odious unto them, as it does now to the Bishops and their
defenders in England: where all proofs of it are prohibited, and more
carefully kept from Princes and people, then any Popish Doctrine, and as if
they were as dangerous, as the Blasphemies of Arrius, and other monsters. And
thus blinded by ambition, coueteousnes and flattery, they despise the Law of
the Lord, Amos. 2.
and their lies caused them to err after which their Fathers walked: they
would rather do as their Fathers had done and taught, then as God
commanded: And thus we see that the Lord may say unto them, Mal. 3.7.
Even from the days of your Fathers, ye are gone away from mine ordinances, and
have not kept them. And which is a greater mischief, the antiquity of this
wicked wandering, is made an authority against the old and good way, as against
a foolerie, and against all that seek it as against Hypocrites, fools, and
Schismatikes: By reason whereof, Ier. 6.10.
men talk in vain that tell them of Gods ordinance, or the new Jerusalem,
wherein they shall be restored: they cannot hearken: Behold the word of the
Lord is unto them a reproach, Hos. 6.12.
they have no delight in it. God writes to them the great things of his Law,
but they are counted as a strange thing: groundles and mad opinions, worthy
imprissonment, banishment and what not? It is a wonderful thing, that men
should profess to live in the light and obedience of the Gospel, and yet like
hypocrites despise it in any thing, as they do in matter of the presbiterie,
and those gracious promises of the new Jerusalem, which are confirmed and
sealed in the new Testament with the blood of the Son of God. I confess, it
is thus in many of the gentry and commons, because they are not suffered to see
any proofs of it: If any be not willing to see them, that is worse. But in the
Prelates, many Clergy men, yea and some Princes, who have seen proofs of
these things, or might if they would, and yet scorn and reject them, as
folly, and matters of reproach, and worthy correction and persecution, it is a
plain treading under foot the Son of God, who has Reu. 1.1.11.19. and Ioh.
16.13.
revealed the Father in these things, and counting the blood of the covenant
an unholy thing, wherewith the new Testament was sanctified, confirmed or
dedicated, as the first covenant was with the blood of beasts: yea, this is to
do despite unto the Spirit of grace, which first shows us Gods grace in
ordaining these things, and after in promises of restoring them.

And indeed seeing it is manifest, Act. 14. chap. 20.28. 1. Pet. 5.2. Tit. 1.9.
that the Apostles ordained Elders in every Church that their office was to
feed the flock, over which the Holy Ghost made them Bishops; that they were to
take the oversight thereof, by sound Doctrine to convince the gainsayers,
reprove, correct and instruct in righteousness; and if this would not serve,
after the first and second admonition to excommunicate, in and with the consent
of the congregation, who can deny, but that all this is of the substance of
religion necessary to the salvation of the people, and proper to every
Prosbyter. Every man will be ready to confess, that it is better there be a
Pilot, a Master, and a Masters mate, in every ship, to watch over the same,
and all that is in it, as the Lord in Wisdom ordained Elders to be Bishops in
every Church, or congregation, to watch over it, and all the Souls therein,
leaving them in his Testament a card, and rules to steer and sail by, the
word of God, being their Rudder, then that there should be but one in a whole
fleet, one Bishop in a diocese, and all the rest but shadows, or lesser
wheels, to be led and moved by him, as it came to pass by the wisdom and
encroachments of men: whereby Bishops neither leaving the brethren, nor yet the
presbyters any voice in censures, or part in the government, do themselves
bring in the inventions and evils Christ would keep out, get dominion over
men's faith, and by their power, and traditions, make the word of none effect
in diverse perticulars. A thing which is expressly forbidden in the new
Testament. My brethren be not many Masters, knowing that we shall receive the
greater condemnation: Iam. 3.1.
that is, because in the causes and controversies of heretics, Psalm. 100.
Schismatiks and other delinquents, it is said of the word, Rule thou in the
midst of thine enemies: He shall judge among the nations: the Presbyters and
members of the church do but rule and judge by him, as steeres men by the
Rudder, judges and jurots by the law, not by their own inventions or
pretended authority: And therefore our savior, who was against all such
dominion in the church, says to his Disciples, Mat. 20.25. Chap. 123.8.
The Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them: But ye shall not not
be so. Be not ye called Rabbi: for one is your Master, even Christ, and all ye
are brethren. Therefore when there is cause of accusing or censuring any, he
does not say, Tell the Bishops, but Tell the church. And accordingly in the
times of the Apostles, Chap. 18.17.
and long after, as the epistles of Cyprian do manifest, they were judged by
the word in an assembly of presbyters and brethren, as the incestuous
Corinthian: which shows us, that neither one man, nor the presbiters alone,
were judges in such cases, but the church: which by the Scriptures either
cleared or censured any person accused, as by the word of God he appeared,
either guilty or not guilty: for so does the word judge among the nations:
And therefore seeing, God has so ordained, and it was in the primitive church
so practiced, it is not a thing indifferent, as some think, whether Presbyters
or diocessan Bishops hold the government, but in effect a matter of salvation,
espetially to every church, and by consequence to every Soul in it; as the
well or ill guiding of a ship concerns the salvation of every passenger
embarked in it. For though in a tempest, some are saved without good Pilots,
and some in the shipwreck by a board: yet others are not without skillful sea
men: and so in the church, but for the most part not without helps in
government. God has in nothing given this to one in a diocese, and his
officials, but to the presbyters of every church, elected according to his
ordinance.

For though the provision of Bishops and Pastors have been sometime in the
hands of the Clergy and people; sometimes in the hands of K ngs and Patrons:
then in the hands of Popes. and then again in the hands of Kings and patrons,
as now in England yet, as many have proved, for the first seven or eight
hundred years after Christ, the people in most places did choose them,
according to the practice of the primative church, and the power given them in
the new Testament: For so says Cyprian, The people have principally the power
either to choose such priests as are worthy or to refuse such as are unworthy.
Cypri. 1. Epist. 4. Act. 14.23 Beza. Annot. in Act. 14. Tit. 1.
And so says Luke, They ordained them Elders in every church by election.
Where, says Beza, the force of the word (...) is to be noted, that we may
know that Paul and Barnabas carried nothing by private will, nor exercised any
tyranie in the church, nor lastly did any such thing, as at this day the Romish
harlot or her pages do, whom they call ordinaries. And by this place, says
he, must that be understood, I left thee in Creete to ordain them Elders in
every city, as I had appointed thee; that is by election, as the Apostles
left it to the church and people there assembled to choose one in the place of
Judas: Beza Annot. in Act. 1.
And they appointed two. Nothing, says Beza, is here carried privately by
Peter, as by one endued with a more excellent dignity, but publicly and by
the suffrages of the whole church: So, as he shows, were the seven Deacons
chosen; and so is that to be understood, Lay hands suddenly on no man, that is
to make him a presbyter, amd so give him a part in this charge of the Eldership
till he be tried, the church or people have chosen him, and prayer be made for
him, as at the election of Mathias and the seven Deacons. It is ill for the
Souls of Kings, Bishops and patrons, and indeed worse for the church, that
any one of these have the choice or confirmation of Pastors, helpers and
Elders, which are lawful callings, or of diocessan Bishops, Deanes, prebends
and others which are unlawful: For this makes divines flatter all such
Princes, Patrons and Prelates or their favorites, and so is cause of
exceeding great corruption and hypocrisy in church and common wealth. For by
this means Princes, Prelates and their favorites, though they do what they
list in religion, shall be sure to be flattered in it, as the popes were, as
soon as ever they grew great, and to have any power over the Clergy: and
this indeed made them attempt what they list, and carry or obtain it, while
very few durst call it incroaching or corruption, such was and such is the
fruit of this power in the church, and therefore God would neither commit the
election or confirmation of his ministers, nor the government to one in a
diocese, but to the presbyters and members of every church as abovesaide. Men
will not see these things: but if we tell them, these all do contrary to the
decrees of Christ; to stop our mouths, with those Jews and others of the
baser sort, they say, These all do contrary to the decrees of Caesar, Act.
17.5.7.
saying, that there is another King, in these cases, namely Christ: making a
very heinous matter of it, that we are so bold as to affirm it. But it were
to be wished that they would so give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars, as
not to take from God the things that are Gods to give them to Caesar. These are
things that have been manifested to be Gods. Why then will they persuade Kings,
that they do God service and show love to his church, his Jerusalem, while
they strengthen the Prelates that usurp these offices, suppress the very
name of the presbiterie, and make Princes believe that as they do more or
less uphold their hierarchy, so God will more or less bless them and
theirs. Wherein they reason like Baronius, Baron. in an. 452,
who speaking of the law of Valentinian abovementioned, which curtailed the
power of Bishops, says That the making of it incensed the wrath of God, and
caused Attila with the Hunnes to come down upon the Empire. When that was
rather because he left them so much power as he did, and did not rather reduce
them to that order and power wherein the Apostles left them, taking away all
that which made the word of God in diverse particulars of none effect, or is
contrary to his ordinances, though it had been given them by Emperors or
Synods. They should have all known, that it is the King eternal and
immortal, who is only wise: 1. Tim. 1.17. Isa. 30.22. Pro. 8.
mark that word only wise, especially in Spiritual things: The Lord is our
Judge, the Lord is our lawgiver the Lord is our King. Christ being the wisdom
of God says, By me Kings reign and Princes decree justice: that is, when what
they can, they govern according to Gods revealed wisdom. Much more then in
matters of religion; they are not set in the throne, to do and require the
doing of their own will, but Gods, as David acknowledged, and therefore
said, Give thy judgments o God (thy judgments, not men's, not mine) to the
King, and thy righteousness to the Kings Son. Psa. 70.1 2. Chron. 29.23. 2 Samuel 22.51. 1 Chro. 29 11.12.
So it is said, Solomon sat on the throne of the Lord insteade of David his
father; who is said to be Gods King. Every king therefore should acknowledge
God King of his kingdom, as David of his, Thine o Lord is the greatness, and the
power and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty: for all that is in
the heaven and in the earth is thine: thine is the kingdom o Lord, and thou art
exalted as head above all: that is, the^ above Kings, who being set on the
throne of the (...) that is to see his word, his laws and Statutes observed,
to se^ (...) and the righteousness thereof: for then do they bring their
glory and honor to the new Jerusalem: Hos. 2.19.
then is he married to them and their pepole in righteousness, in judgment, in
loveing kindness and in mercies, as he promises: that is when Kings make
priests, and people live and do according to the order which he appoints
them in his word, as both Hezechiah and David himself did, when he saw Vzza
slain for breaking that order. He sits on the throne of the Lord that gives
his power and strength to God and to his ordinances, as the Kings, which are
the horns of the Beast, gave their power and strength unto the Beast, to
enforce his laws, rites and errors on their people, which was a war against
the lamb; But at last, as is graciously promised, The lamb shall overcome
them. Rev. 17.
For he is the Lord of Lords and King of Kings. If therefore they will be said
to sit on his throne, they must do the like for Christ against Antichrist, and
all enemies of his truth, seeing God has set his King upon his holy hill of
Sion, to rule all nations in matters of religion, and therefore adds Be wise
now therefore o ye Kings. Psa. 2.
Let it not be said your subjects dwell where Satan has his throne for
Antichrist or any other. David knew the true wisdom when he said, 2. Sam.
22.22.
J have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed from my God:
for all his judgments were before me, etc. And when in an assembly of all his
Princes, Captains, 1. Chro. 28 1.8.9.
and (...) to them, Keep and seek for all the com^ (...) ^th Solomon and
(...) th^e, but if (...) ^^^^re did God (...) ^e a King among his Sons. ^
He was a King indee^ ^or God, seeing he thus reigned, psa, 47.3.
and in this ^ense had ever such sayi^gs in his mouth God is the King of all
the Earth; The shields of the eart^ belong unto God. For the Lord is a great
God, and a great King above all Gods. The holy one of Israel is our King.

The prelates and their adherents say, there must be order in the church*
diocessan Bishops to be over others, Objection
question and reje^ (...) ^ers. God has not appoin^ (...) therefore Kings and
councels (...) I answer this is to say (...) God has not had a sufficient
(...) ^rch, and to accuse his Testament of insufficiency, as if the (...) ^d
not as well provided for his church in this case, as in others* when yet for
these ends, he ordained Elders to be Bishops (...) every congregation. Now all
his ordinances are perfect. His work is perfect: Deuteronomy 32.4
for all his ways are judgment. He is God and changes not: therefore to say,
that this was only for the times of the Apostles, and as the church increased
and those times changed, the wisdom of men might provide better, is a great
presumption: yet such has been the wisdom of the flesh, Act. 15.18
and of the world to think so: But known unto God are all his works from the
beginning of the world. Men cannot in time better them. If the Eldership had not
been sufficient, he would either never have ordained it, to be so soon
abolished, or have foretold and given authority to his church to ordain
diocessans. This he did not, but for bad to add to his word, Mar. 13.34
because himself gave authority to his servants, the Apostles, and to every
man his work. Ephesians. 4.11.12.
And by them he has set sufficient officers in the church, for the perfecting
of the saints, for the work of the ministry, etc. And what can we have more.
If men would but see it, the Elders in the Reformed churches do better look to
the order God requires, then diocessan Bishops do or can. For this order is
showed in his Testament: That is per^^^^: and he says, Deuteronomy. 12.32. Gal. 3.15.
Thou shall not add thereto, nor dim^^^sh from it. It (...) true* B^^ (...) us
like Vzz^, do more then Go^ commands; ^^ey look to diver^ things that
Elders do not once look afte^ but (...) is then after men's traditions and
commandments, which turn from the truth, are popish, tyranical and
superfluous while by obstinate defending these, they make divisions and
contentions, contrary to the Apostolic doctrine, and so ^^^ve not the Lord
Jesus Christ, Romans 16.
but their own belly, and by good words and fair speeches deceive the
hearts of the simple; this is not to uphold the church of Christ, but their
own kingdom.

It will be said some of them have both (...) ^d written well, yea confirmed
(...) sup^^essed Heret^^^ (...) but their numbe^ (...) ^h, as (...) did in the
church of Rome, wherein man (...) ar^ ^a^^* Bishops, Monks and Jesuits confute
some he^^^^^ks and preach well in all things save for the maintenance of ^^^ire
orders and superstition: So do English prelates. How soe^^^ ^^at has been as
well if not better performed by other mini^^^^ at home and in the reformed
churches. Histor. of the coun. of Trent. p. 24.
There have been diverse honest Popes, who have confessed some errors in the
power and practice of the church; as of late Adrian 6. who sending to the Diet
of Noremberg confesses many corruptions in the sea and Church of Rome, and
promises reformation: But this makes the calling of Popes never a whit the
more Lawful or necessary. As it was with Popes, so it is with Bishops, the
better some of them have been, the worse for the Church: for they do but hold
up the reputation of the office, and so hold way for worse successors and
their traditions.

Neither is it better for the suppressing of heritikes and leude livers, that
one in a diocese has this power: for he cannot look to all the Clergy, much
less to all the people, though he should mind nothing else: How then can he
do it, if he be a counselor of Estate, and a judge in the Starchamber and
high commission? Among the Clergy in England (and much more among the people,
many are said to be drunkards, coueteous, contentious, heretical, Arminians,
non residents, dumb ministers, zealous defenders of canons and ceremonies,
preaching little else, Popelings, dunces, drones, persecutors of those that
preach and hear the word diligently. If the Bishop who cannot look to all,
see not the most of them, countenance others, or be by any means made to
connive, they may keep their Churches, and others from preaching in them, and
do no good, but much hurt in them: which is not so in the Churches of France,
where there are few, or rather none of this kind: that discipline has easy
means to remedy these things, both in the Clergy and people, or rather
indeed, it preventeth them; so much better is that which God ordained, then
that which men after invented to mend it. Again because the Bishop might be
heretical or wicked, to help that, they ordained Archbishops, and because
some Archbishops might be such, they ordained Patriarchs, and because some of
them might be corrupted, (as they were) they admitted of Appeals, and ordained
a Pope, and then because he might err, or be wicked, as Liberius, Honorius,
John 13 and others, they were forced to affirm the Pope cannot err, and in
all these things, men were still persuaded to contribute to their honor,
wealth and power, as necessary to the kingdom of God: and therefore still as
this honor and power increased, the Scriptures were by flatterers wrested to
defend it: therefore though in the invention of diocessan Bishops, there was not
so great coueteousnes, ambition and wickedness; yet the prosecution of it, to
bring it to its grouth, was only to make themselves fat with the offerings of
the people, 1. Sam. 2.29.
as God says of the presumptious innovations and coveteous desires of Elies
Sons. Thus from the first step in ordaining diocessan Bishops, the mystery
of iniquity could not rest till it came to the height. Some will say, it has
not yet done so in England. But what remedy is there in the mean against the
Appealer, or any wicked Prelate, non resident, or other delinquent? If, as of
late in the Starchamber, Bishops set themselves to defend the use of Images in
Churches, yea those of the Trinity; what other Bishops, or Ministers dare
oppose them in pulpit or print? They, being great and able to prefer others,
are sure to be flattered and followed, and by this means their honor and
power being daily increased, they may prevail in these and many other cases,
as the Church of Rome did in these and the like: their office therefore does
not make ready a people prepared for Christ, Reu. 11.
but rather for Antichrist. If the witnesses will Prophecy against them, it
must also be in sackcloth, bonds and imprisonment: for they have obtained, or
rather retained, so much Romish power, as to bring them to it, and punish all
that reprove them: God tells them of Babylon the great, the Mother of
Harlots, Chap. 17,
to show them, she may have daughters, there may be Babylon the less, yea many
lesser Babylons, Harlots in corruptions and fornications.

The counselors of the Parliament of Paris opposed against the authority that
the council of Trent gave to the Bishops in this kind, where the
Ecclesiastical authority they said, Histor. of the council of Trent. lib. 8.
p. 819.
was enlarged beyond its bounds, with the wrong and diminution of the
temporal, by giueing power to Bishops to proceed to pecuniarie mulcts, and
imprisonment against the laitye, whereas no authority was given by Christ to
his ministers, but mere and pure spiritual; that when the Clergy was made a
member and part of the policy, the Princes did by favor allow the Bishops to
punish inferior Clergy men with temporal punishments; but to use such kind
of punishments against the laiques, they had neither from the Law of God, nor
of man, but by usurpation only. Yet commonly the most grievous they inflict,
is for taking part with the Apostles in defense of the presbiterie, taxing the
Prelates of worldly policy and tyranie, or for some disobedience, or
irregularity to their power, inventions and ceremonies: wherein note their
hypocrisy, who in the mean will not permit men to preach against images,
Altars, bowing to them etc. Much less any thing that shows the presbiterall
government to be ordained of God, and necessary: when indeed it is their own
office that is not necessary, seeing it only serves for such things to
persecute men for the Testimony of Jesus, and more to force unnecessary, then
necessary ceremonies. For kneeling in prayer, good order, and reverent gesture
in the Church, are used in the french Churches, as commendable and necessary:
and yet in men that in those other things are disobedient to the truth, their
very prayers are abominable, and but mockeries, much more their own devised
cringes and gestures, as in Papists who abound in such things, and as if a man
should with all order and reverence bow his body to the King, his chair of
Estate, Image or seal, and yet despise, or neglect, many of his wholesome Laws
and commandments. The orders and ceremonies which God ordained are indeed to
religion, as the bark, or leaves to a tree, that is, a comely part of it; but
as for other ceremonies, and inventions, with their pretended significations,
which being devised by man, are more then are in the reformed Churches of
France, or were in the Apostles time, they are not to the religion and truth of
God, as they say, like the bark to the tree, which if it be taken off, the
tree withers; but as the ivye to the oak which seems to adorn and embrace
it, but indeed binds, shadows, and by degrees wastes and destroys it. For
these shows serve many for a religion, and a cloak of persecution, and the
power of Bishops serves for a tyranous terror to keep men from p^aching and
writing the truth, and setting their names to their books in the cases of
the hierarchy, traditions, Altars, images, pelagianisme, or the like and
consequently to beget flattery and lukewarmnesse in Clergy and people, and
eat out that love and zeal of the truth in all things, that they either do
now, or may hereafter, prohibit or maintain: Such was, and such is the fruit
of their power: and therefore certainly it is not of God, but of men, of the
world, of the coueteous lust of the eyes, and of the pride of life; and
therefore what matters it who gave it them, whether councels or Kings; they
cannot make black white, nor evil good, nor that Lawful which is so unlawful
and pernicious to the Kingdom of God. Constantine no doubt thought he had
offered a great sacrifice to God, in giueing them so much as he did, other
Emperors, Kings therefore have augmented it: But he that forbids to add to
his word, or take from it says, to obey is better then sacrifice. 1. Sam. 15.
Therefore Asa to do that which was right in the eyes of God, did not urge his
own, or other men's inventions, 2. Chro. 14.3.4.
but took away the Altars of the strange Gods, and the high places and Images,
other Kings had erected, and commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of their
Fathers, and to do the Law (mark) and the commandment. Christ being the
King of Kings and Lord of Lords, though Kings as his deputies have great
power in matters of Religion, yet that is so, as in these things not so seek
their own, but Gods will done in ear^h, as it is in heaven; I, says he,
Ioh. 8.26. chap. 6.34. Tract. 40.41.54.
speak to the world those things which I have heard of him. J came not to do
mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. He sai^e this that was the
eternal word and Wisdom of God, yea very God and eternal l fe. For indeed
he was not his own wisdom and word, but the Fathers, as August n does m^n^fest
on these and the like places of the Gosspell: And shall not Kings then, who
are but his Deputies, much more say it, yea and do it? either by causing the
word of God to be faithfully taught in their cities, as David and Iehoshaphat,
or by rooting out all monuments and stumbling blocks of superstition and
idollatrie, and by suffering their subjects to preach freely against them, and
to worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness, as Hezechiah and Josiah did:
that is, in a word, by causing their subjects to worship God aright, and take
his mark in the purity of his ordinances; and not to worship the Beast and
take his mark, in receiving, professing, and defending his corrupt traditions
and ceremonies. For to serve God, and make others serve him in the beauty of
holiness, Psa. 110.3.
is to make men serve him in the holiness of the truth, according to all that
is written in his Testament Ios. 1.8. and not with cathedral service and
music, after the pompous traditions and inventions of Prelates and their
Canons, as some infer. For the Image of God is renewed in all righteousness
and holiness of the truth; Ephesians. 4.24.
and if God would not that we should be again in bondage to the rudiments,
which himself ordained in the ceremonial law, Christ having nailed them to
his cross, much less to those which the pope and church of Rome, or other men
have invented or established: It were good that Princes and their chaplains
would think of that, Ezra. 7.21.
whatsoever is commanded by the God of heaven, that is in matters of religion,
let it be diligently done; where mark, he says not commanded by Kings; for
why should there be wrath against the Realm of the King and his Sons? That
is, either for neglecting Gods command, or urging inventions of men: for
therefore we are willed not to think of men, and their power, above that is
written. 1 Cor. 4.6.
It is the necessity of conformity imposed upon Ministers that furnishes
them, as it did the Papists, with arguments to defend traditions, humane
precepts, and Canons against this truth, and so to make a fearful war against
God. Which I observe not so much of them, who having subscribed, follow their
ministry, preach the word, and never speak of English traditions, hopeing God
will reform them, as of those that defend and preach them; Isa. 1.
never thinking that God may say unto them, who required these things at your
hands? What Gospel is this? How does it help the Kingdom of God? What
knowledge, what fai h, what holiness of the truth does it work?

They yet strive to justify these ordinances, and all the power of the
prelates, 1. Cor. 14.40.
saying, the Apostle says, Let all things be done decently and in order:
therefore Synods may ordain diocessan Bishops, and all such Canons as are in
England, and doubtless the will of God is, that they should be obeyed. I nswer
the Apostle by this decency and order, can not mean any thing that shall
overthrow any of the ordinances of God, or make his word of none effect in any
particular. He speaks it of things before mentioned in his Epistle. Chap.
11.21. Chap. 12.
There were diverse who did eat their suppers when they came to the Sacrament,
one is hungry and another is drunken: this was not decently and in order. If
any man hunger let him eat at home. The holy Ghost gives diverse gifts of
wisdom, knowledge, healing, faith, prophecy, tongues, etc. to diverse members
of the same body. If the one of them should say of the other, I have no need
of thee: this were not to do things decently and in order. He wishes them to
covet the best gifts, rather to prophecy then to speak with tongues; that men
praying, or prophesying, should be uncovered, Chap. 14.
that women should be covered, and not speak in the church: and above all, he
there speaks of prophesying one by one, and of others holding their peace,
and judging or trying the Spirits: And so of these, and the like things, then
in use, Rev. 2.24.
he says let all things be done decently and in order. As for these new
inventions of Bishops and Synods, Christ himself says, I will put upon you no
other burden, but that which ye have already hold fast till J come; And shall
men think that they may do it? Are there any true Christians that will not
see that the offices of d^ocessan Bishops, who burden the church with sup rsti
ious rites, are not de jure divino, not of God, but of men? That they w re
raised to this height and power, after the example of the Bishop and church of
Rome, who in those first ages was imit^t^d by the most? So truly is she called
the mother of fornications and abominations of the earth; That they, being
armed with power, serve chiefly to suppress the truth in these and other po
nts, to get and have dominion over men's faith, bring in Arminianisme or other
like errors, forbid confutation of them, exalt humane traditions, Romish
inventions and ceremonies, and like Egiptian taskemaisters to burden the
churches with them, make ministors that they dare not see these evils, least it
should hinder their preferment, or they should be deprived of their liveings,
or silenced for speaking against them, whilst they see that others flatter or
extol them, and they serve thousands for a religion, and insteade of that
which Christ ordained, as also for a cloak of popery, mocking and persecution.

It will be said the Canons and ceremonies are not imposed as matters of
faith, but of order, and are counted things indifferent; and therefore innocent,
and not so hurtful as you make them. I answer 1. So were they at the first in
the Roman church, but they grew into greater authority, and so do these among
thousands in England, as slight a matter as some make of them. If things
indifferent and innocent, why are they pressed with such power? For they are
more urged and observed by many then the Gospel: In whose minds these imposers
and preachers of ceremonies only leave Christ a name, while like usurpers, they
carry away the power of a King and kingdom: and therefore an offense against
them is more punished, and more skorned by such popelings, newters and
temporisers, then an offense against the Gospel: who yet in all these things
count themselves the better subjects, the better Christians. 2. That in the
book of Articles, which is of matters of faith, ministers are made to
subscribe to this, that the church has authority to ordain these things: that
must be by some power given them in Gods word, and that is as much as to make
them matters of faith and necessity. For that is in effect implied: If, as they
say, God have given every national church this authority, then his will is that
these things should be religiously observed and obei^d, and to break them is
sin. Thus they are or ought to be of faith: Romans 14.23.
for whatsoever is not of faith is sin. But, as we proved, the Papists take
many of these ceremonies, and even the office of diocessan Bishops and
Archbishops from the heathen, and from the daily encroachings of prelates,
therefore how should the subscribing to them, in this tyranie, be of faith and
no sin? especially seeing they do many ways turn from God?

I deny not, but that some things that the Apostles used are indifferent, and
may be altered for time and place, as preaching and administering the Sacraments
in the night and in men's howses. Act. 8.36.
This may be done in the day and in Temples. Philip and the Eunuch went both
down into the water, others need not to do so. But such things altered, or
added by Synods, ought to be very few, and such only as necessity, and not
pretended conveniencie require. For so say the Apostles and Elders, Act. 15.22
28.
with the whole Church at Jerusalem: It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us
to lay upon you no greater burden then these necessary things. Mark they say
necessary things. I grant that some things the Church has altered are
necessary in some Churches, as that the whole body should not be dipped in
Baptism, nor men forced to stand uncovered in such cold countries, as Russia
and Sweden, while Moses and the Apostles are read, as they did of old, and as
now they do in prayer, and singing of Psalms: other order may be taken for a
Reader to read the Scriptures and begin the Psalms, also for the manner of
collecting alms, setting up a pulpit with water for Baptism, and a table
conveniently placed on the communion day: for at other times there needs none.
But under pretext that the Church has this power, it is most absurd to say, it
may give authority to diocessan Bishops and Archbishops, their courts, power
and proceedings, the oath ex officio, their fining, imprisoning, suspending,
silencing, and so many ceremonies, Altars, canons, customs, and traditions, as
are in England, more then were in the Apostles time, or then are in the
reformed Churches of France, Germany, Belgia and other countries; and whereof
there is no necessity, but much mischief, as being many of them Popish and
snares tending to popery, tyrannical, and causing grievous schisms.

Which if Queen Elizabeth did not abolish; consider how she found the land,
what policies and tempers she used, how she suffered, as King Edward had done,
Cand. lib. 1. p. 16.28 and 77.
the same service in English, which was before in Latin, some vain things
omitted, Popish Priests to hold their liueings, if they would but take the
oath of supremacy: that there were therefore but 80. in the whole land that
refused it; how the Judges, and many of the nobility, Judges in Parliament,
were still Papists for many years after her coronation, as the Reader may
find in Camden: withal that notwithstanding all these tempers, which she
thought those times required, she so loved the Gospel and was so far from
being an enemy to the reformation of Geneva, that she, as a means under God,
established it in Scotland, France and the Netherlands, her forces did it.
Again consider that the best acts that ever any King of Judah did, in the
reformation of religion, were no excuse for his or their leaving the high
places untaken away, that provincial and diocessan Bishops, their seas,
pomp, power and traditions, are like those high places: And lastly consider
what way, or wherein, do these things edify and further the Kingdom of God,
the saueing knowledge of his truth, and the true preaching of his Gospel,
whereby it is wro^ght? for the same is the power of God to salvation, and that
by which he has brought many nations, and the very thoughts of the heart to
the obedience of Christ. 2. Cor. 10.5.
Have the hierarchy, ceremonies and ordinances likewise been the overthrow of
popery, and mighty weapons to cast down the strong holds thereof, and to
convince and overcome Papists, or other heretics and wicked livers? or do
they not rather strengthen the Papists in their religion, and make them say,
the Bishops know well enough that the Romish is the true religion, for all or
the most of these things were taken from the Church of Rome? And this was the
reason, that not only diverse Priests kept their liueings, but for the first
eleven years of Queen Elizabeth, most of the Papists came to Church; L. Cook
de Iure Regis Ecclesiast. fol. 34.
knowing that conformity to the service and ceremonies do not make a
Protestant: that they, and even the hierarchy it self, were of a Romish
invention and custom.

All which shows that things were not rightly founded in the English
reformation, as in the reformed Churches of France and Germany: where if any
would leave the Church of Rome, and become a protestant, he comes to the
Elders of the Church, is well instructed and informed by them; after he comes
into the public congregation, all men looking upon him with love and joy, as
upon one that comes to be married; he is asked questions to this purpose 1.
Whether he hold the Doctrine of the old and new Testament to be of God and
sufficient to salvation 2. That in the Sacraments the signs are called by the
things signified. 3. That the Pope of Rome is Antichrist and the Church of Rome
the whore of Babylon, the mother of fornications. These and the like: to which
he haueing publicly assented, there is no doubt of his sincerity: If they had
a parliament of Protestants, they need not fear his fidelity, nor any man's
else among them: for all men make this profession, unless they be borne and bred
in it, and then they do it by Catechism: which things Church Papists will
never do; neither will the Pope dispense with them to do so: whereas in
England, where neither at the first, nor ever since, there was ever any such
profession, if a man be but conformable to the Church in owtward ceremonies,
take the oath of allegiance, and communicate, he passes for a Protestant, he
may be chosen into any office of the common wealth, be a Parliament man, and
yet in his practice a Church Papist, an Arminian, lukewarne, a semie-Papist, or
a temporiser: no man dares account him such: yea he thinks that he ought to be
more regarded then the most sincere Christian, whom he calls a puritan. Thus
the hierarchy, service and ceremonies are shelters, and cloaks to diverse
Religions, cause infinity factions and divisions; and are therefore very ill
for the service of godly and just Princes: And this is the reason, Note.
that there has come so little good of late Parliaments, yea so much hurt,
their members, being by this means of diverse religions, and some of them
ready to side with the strongest, as being themselves of a corrupt or none at
all, like many of them that bear sway and have voices in the election of
knights and Burgesses: every one would have them of his own Religion and
faction: which was the reason that the Duke and his adherents found so many
friends among them, and had so many Prelates and Clergy men to cloak and
defend his doeings. It is strange that men will not see, that an imperfect
reformation in the Church of England, is the veil and shelter to cover and
defend these and many other corruptions; which if the presbiterie had been
restored could never have stood with the name of Protestants, or good Subjects.
Sir Robert Cottens advise shows that the Land did greatly suspect the Duke
and others of Popish practiset: Ye see the hierarchy brings out such
Protestants: And is it not so in the great parishes and corporations of
London, and indeed almost of all England, wherein commonly such Protestants
bear office, and all the sway?) Yet they held with the Prelates, and the
Prelates with them, which was thought enough to pass them for Protestants,
though they were suspected of treachery to the Churches beyond the Seas: where
they say, the English can never be at true unity among themselves, much less
with other Protestants, while the hierarchy stands: under which as under
Daniels tree such and so many kinds of Beasts do shelter themselves: Dan.
4.21.
and therefore the parliaments labored in vain against these factions, as
also against the Appealer, D. Iackson, Cosen and his coosening devotions; the
Bishops for their own ends, taking part with them all, would in these cases
have all the power, like the Pharisees that shut up the Kingdom of God, not
entering in themselves for the love of it to work a due reformation, and yet
hindering others that would. This is the order they preserve, and these, and
the like, are the fruits of maintaining their hierarchy.

The most zealous members of the parliaments, loath to be accounted puritans,
thought to uphold the hierarchy and canons, and yet to reform, and prevent
these things and so to make the hierarchy, canons and ceremonies, which
indeed are Popish, bring forth fruit unto Christ. Diverse great divines,
being capable of Bishopwricks or other preferments, are of the same hope;
never considering that not only gifts, but even the expectation of them,
blind the eyes of the wise; that many in the ancient Church of Rome, and some
of the Fathers themselves had the like hope, but were deceived, making their
account without Christ, who tells us, ye shall know them by their fruits. Do
men gather grapes of thorns, Mat. 7.26.
or figs of thistles? Christian fruits of Antichristian inventions. The
goodness, or corruptnes, of the tree in known by the fruit. In the English
reformation, diverse of the Protestant tenets were ingrafted into these Popish
plants, which is the reason, that some Bishops have brough out some fruits to
the Protestant Religion, or rather to both Religions: For the Episcopal office
it self, that is the stock and body of the tree, and the branches of it,
court, canons and ceremonies, being Popish, must needs bring forth Popish
fruit. The very Greek Bishops, though dissenting from the Romanists, have
done it in the like things, in ambition, superstition, traditions, factions,
and errors, the greatest difference being about the supremacy (which some
of them have aimed at) purgatory and a few other things: and yet at last they
were brought to subscribe to those in the council of Florence.

As heathen Altars, idols and people, being suffered among the Isralites, were
a snare unto them Judge. 2.2. so must it needs be with these popish offices,
altars and ceremonies, left among protestants: The parliaments therefore should
have struck at the roots and stocks of the trees, wh ch bring out such fruits
in matters both of the church and common wealth: and better they never did, nor
never can bring forth in any nation: It is a just plague God has sent on the
Clergy, because like the Angels they kept not their first estate of
presbyters, nor receive the love of that ordinance. For now since the death of
the Apostles prophets and Evangelists, by the Testament of God all degrees of
Clergy men that since crope in, are not branches of Christ the vine, he gave
some to be pastors, Teachers and Elders, but never any to be diocessan Bishops.
Such as are not content with the callings and offices that he has given for
his church, but aspire to others, that make them Lords of Gods heritage, they
abide not in him; Ioh. 15.^ 5, 6.7, 1.
and as he says As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide
in the vine, no more can ye except ye abide in me. Even as he is the word, he
is the vine, and his ministers are the branches, by which his fullness is
spread abroad, wherefore he says, If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth
as a branch, and is withered. He says, abide in me, and I in you, and shows
what that is, If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you; and that as well in
matter of office and ceremonies according to his ordinances, as in other
things: Herein is my father glorified that ye bear much fruit; so shall ye
be my Disciples, as if he said otherwise not. Bishops therefore that have not
their callings of him, of his Testament, are branches of some other trees, not
of Christ Jesus the vine; and that makes them bring out such fruit, as they
do.

It will be said, if kings may not give Clergy men such honor and power, as
Constantin, Justinian and other Emperors gave them, where is their
prerogative? And if councels may not give them such authority, as the council
of Nice, and other Synods of those times, gave them; where is Christ's promise
of the Spirit? To the first I answer, we are willed to give unto Caesar the
things that are Cesars, Math. 12.21.
but unto God the things that are Gods: This, as we have showed, is a thing
that is Gods: And who then would think that Christians, if they may be so
called, would ever teach that Kings, or Synods may g^ve a power to Prelates,
that shall make any of the ordinances of God of none effect, most of those
prelates, Antichrists, and one of them the grand Antichrist? Kings indeed are
nursing fathers to the church; but that is then, to see that their people be
fed with the sincere milk of the word of God, and not with the traditions of
men, or leaven of the Pharisees; Isa. 52.2.
which being not the bread of heaven, satisfies not. Yet Prelates are ever
buzzing Princes in the ears with their prerogative in what they have
established. They may as well reason thus. 2. Chro. 12.11.
Iehoram made high places, and so caused men to commit fornication: He
compelled Judah thereto: therefore Kings may s t up diocessan Bishops and Sees,
which are high places, never ordained of God, and so cause fornications, and
compel men to their obedience: 2. King. 16 ^0.
Ahaz saw an Altar at Damascus, sent the fashion of it to V^^ah the Priest,
made him make such a one, and offer on it. therefore Kings may set up Altars,
cause such things, and diverse others, taken from the heathen, Jews, or
Papists, to be used in their churches. Jeroboam set up golden calves,
Nebuchadnezar a golden Image, and caused all to worship it: ergo Kings may set
up these golden Images the B shops, and cause them in all their power,
traditions and ceremonies to be obeyed, that is worshipped. Christ's Bishops
would rather say, Kings are commanded to write them a book of the law, not to
depart from it, as God wills Iosha, but to mediate therein day and night,
that they may observe to do according to all that is written therein: Ios. 1.2.
therefore they may not make their subjects worship the Beast and take his
mark: not though he pretend that they are the things of the Spirit, either
invented or confirmed in councels.

If Christ, by whom Kings reign, be the King only wise, the best and noblest
King, as he is the word and wisdom that rules his; then it is the greatest and
best prerogative, to be renewed into his image, and seek his kingdom, seeing
the father says, Psa. 2.
J have set my King upon my holy hill of Sion, to rule all nations in all
matters of religion, be wise now therefore o ye Kings etc. Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.24.
Now his Image is renewed in knowledge, righteosnesse and holiness of the
truth. Mark, not holiness of men's inventions and traditions, but holiness of
the truth. The rudiments of the world, as Paul shows, bring men into bondage
and ignorance; Gal. 4. Ioh. 8. Chap. 17. Chap. 14.
but the knowledge and obedience of the truth and continuance therein, as
Christ also says, makes men free and Sons of God: which is the greatest
honor that can be. He says, Thy word is Truth: I am the Truth. His name is
called the word of God. Such as yield to Gods word, yield to this truth, they
truly bow at the name of Jesus, and do him homage, as the King of Kings.
Princes are rightly called Gods Deputies, and truly honorable, when they
labor to bring men to this true holiness. For there is no true holiness, but
the holiness of the Truth. No man can serve two Masters, not God and Mammon:
much less Christ and Antichrist, who command and teach contrary things. But
Christ is the Truth. And every one, says he, that is of the Truth hears my
voice. Ioh. 18.37 Chap. 10.
To be of the Truth then, is to be a true Christian. My sheep hear my voice,
and they follow me, and a stranger they will not follow. This stranger is one
that brings false doctrines, or for doctrines the traditions and inventions
of men. His servants ye are to whom ye obey: He says not to whom ye pray,
but to whom ye obey: Romans 6.16
Him ye serve and worship. whether Christ or Antichrist, God or any other
potentate.

The Papists, and all, that teach or observe for doctrines commandments of
men, will say we worship and follow Christ. Indeed his is the kingdom the
power and the glory. But as he is the eternal word and wisdom of God, Ioh.
12.26
he says If a man serve me, let him follow me, that is to hear, believe and
obey me, and me only, as I am God with the father and the holy Ghost, or as I
only am the word made flesh that reveal the father: for thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, Mat. 4.
and him only shall thou serve. And above all in this, in believing his word
only, who can not deceive nor be deceived. Otherwise though thou pray unto him,
and use all external devotions, he will not account that service, or following
him, but following a man knows not who, what, or wherefore for how shall they
call on him in whom they have not believed? Romans 10.14.15.
And how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? there can
therefore be no true serving him, without hearing and believing, nor no hearing
to salvation without hearing of him, nor indeed without obeying or following,
for therefore it is added, But they have not all obeyed the Gospel. Some obey it
not at all, as Jews: others would serve God and Mammon, others Christ and
Antichrist; others Gods word and the precepts of men: but this is not to obeie
the Gospel, to follow Christ, to worship him aright: for he says In vain
they worship me, who teach for doctrines the commandments of men. Thus do
they who teach that diocessan Bishops should be received and obeyed, Mat. 15 9.
which make Gods word of the presbiterie of none effect, and this they also do
by other their traditions and precepts, which not only cross the Gospel in
other things, See the crown of a Christian Martyr.
but serve men for a religion, and so make the word of God of none effect. And
while they hold that Gods will is that they should be obeyed, that is in effect
to teach them for doctrines: they are no longer things indifferent, but
necessary; or rather presumptions that turn from the truth, Mar. 7.8.
and make men lay aside the word of God: for laying aside the commandments of
God, ye hold the tradition of men. As if he said, ye cannot hold the tradition
of men, but ye lay aside the commandment of God, as we find true in matter
of the presbiterie and other things. Again, No man has seen God at any time:
Ioh. 1.18.
the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the father, he has
declared him. All things are delivered unto me of my father: and no man knows
the father save the Son, Mat. 11.27 Ioh. 15.15
and he to whom the Son will reveal him. But he says to his Apostles, All
things that I have heard of my father, J have made known unto you so he has
fully declared him. And the Apostles have declared unto us in the new
Testament, all the counsel of God. If therefore the Son, Act. 20.27
have not revealed these traditions and precepts of men, in his Testament, it
is a great presumtion to say they may be imposed, or that Gods will is that
they should be obeyed. For because Christ only is the word that reveals the
father; therefore that only should be taught, which he has revealed by his
Apostles and Evangelists: but he has not revealed these precepts of men, and
therefore he says In vain they worship me, who teach for doctrines
commandments of men. As if he said, rejecting God and his word, ye worship
him whose traditions ye receive, Ioh. 4.
and that with, the greatest and trewest worship. The true worshippers shall
worship the father in spirit and truth. Viz. in obeying the truth, and yealding
themselves to be wholly governed by it, as by a perfect and necessary rule,
which requires not a difference of meats, or such trivial things: but
righteousness, and peace, Romans 14, 16.18.
and joy in the holy Ghost. He that in these things serves Christ, is
acceptable to God: He is a true worshipper. For so Paul says After the way
that they call heresy, so worship I the God of my fathers, believing all
things that are written. To believe the Testaments and no more, Obejed.
is the true worship: This must needs be the worship used by them who are
said to worship in the Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimony: Rev.
11.1.19.
because there was nothing seen in it, but the Arc of his Testament: they
believed and obeyed all things that were written therein, and no more. 1. Sam.
15.22.
To believe and to obey is better then Sacrifice, and to hearken then the fat
of rams. It is the best service and worship, as the very Jesuits prove from
this place: Ignati. de obed. virtute. sect 5
and thereby condemn themselves, who give this best service to their
superior, by believing and obeying him, as one that can not be deceived:
though they cannot perceive, but he commands things contrary to God, and so
make him their God. Thus the Pope sits in the Temple of God as God, or as men
say most master in things: and thus papists worship the Beast and his image.
For his servants ye are to whom ye obey. And yet this worship in matters of
religion is only due unto God, whose word alone is the spirit that gives life:
yea men have more or less, the Spirit of prophec^e (...) ^^^uld be obeyed, as
they speak according to that word: and th^^^fore the Angel says worship God:
for the testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of prophecy. Rev. 19
His testimony and no other. For the church is subject to Christ not to the
preceps of men This testimony ye ought to believe and obey, Ephesians. 5.24.
as Paul did, in beleewing all things that are written, and so to worship God
in Spirit and truth. For the Father seeks such to worship him.

The Papists then in receiving and teaching for Doctrines precepts and
traditions of the Pope and Church of Rome, so contrary to the word, do
certainly give them this true and great worship which only belongs to God: and
so are like them, who changed the truth of God into a lie, Romans 1.25
and worshipped and served the creature more then the creator, who is blessed
for ever. Thus they are said to worship the Beast and his Image. Many think
that some such thing is done by those in England that defend and teach the
authority of the Bishops, their hierarchy, Canons, decrees and ceremonies,
because many of them are popish, and more pressed by many, then some points of
the Gospel. And though diverse do not do this with a purpose to set up
popery, unless in a few things, neither can be persuaded that the hierarchy
is a limb of the Beast, yet the obedience to it in these things, if they, or
it, be not of God, is a worship to it, and a serving the creature more then the
creator, which indeed is much more done by the Papists to the Beast and his
Image. And here by the way it is a thing worthy observation, that if in the
primative ages of the church, under the first Christian Emperors, some were
touched with some of the popish opinions, as very few were, and those only in
some things: yet they did neither maintain them against such light of
doctrine, as is manifested now a days, nor give their false doctrines and
interpretations for laws, as they have done in these later ages, and since
the council of Trent: which is the thing that makes them and their followers
so abominable. Therefore after one Angel having an everlasting Gospel to
preach had cried fear God, Rev. 14.6, 7.8.9.
and worship him: and that the second had denounced the fall of Babylon; by
which two, seeming to be wicklife Luther and their followers, came great
light of doctrine, The third Angel followed them, and denounced eternal
damnation to every one that should after this time worship the Beast and his
Image, and receive his mark. And because some would rather suffer martyrdom
then do it, that is added. Here is the patience and the faith of the saints.
verse 12.13
Here are they that keep the commandments of God and the faith of Jesus.
Blessed are the dead which henceforth die in the Lord, or as others read for
the Lords cause.

Here then we may see their impiety and danger, who continue not in the
word, but either more or less receive and profess the Doctrine and superstion
of the Pope and Church of Rome, which is not taught in the holy Scriptures,
they receive the mark of the Beast, and worship him and his Image. To receive,
and have which mark, is to receive or have an impression of the Popish
Doctrine and Religion, in part or in whole, either in profession, which is to
have the mark in the forhead; or by defending or helping the same by some
means, which is to have the mark in the right hand, as will appear by
showing how men have the Seal, or mark of God. The eternal word and Wisdom
of the Father is his express Image, with which the elect are sealed in their
forheads, by saueing knowledge and profession thereof, with faith and full
assurance. Which is when they receive the Doctrine of the holy Scripture, and
it leaves such an impression in them, that they profess they will receive it
and no other, under any pretense of the Spirit, unless it follow from the same
Testament of Christ: who to show that the Holy Ghost brings no other Doctrine,
he, the truth, calls him the Spirit of truth, and says, He shall not speak
of himself: Ioh. 16.13
But he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you. He shall bring all
things to your remembrance, whatsoever J have said unto you. So he leads
into all truth. And he shall show you the things to come, that is touching the
general Apostacy under Antichrist, and such other things in the Revelation.

Councels therefore do vainly pretend the Spirit, if they speak not according
to the Testament of Christ. The word was made flesh: Ioh. 1.
the Disciples saw the glory thereof in his Doctrine and miracles, full of
grace and Truth. This cannot be said of the canons and inventions of men. Of
his fullness, says John, have all we received: Grace and Truth came by Jesus
Christ. Whosoever brings not this word, 1. Ioh. 2.24.
this truth of God, is a deceiver. But the anointing which ye have received of
him abides in you, and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same
anointing teaches you of all things, and is truth and is no lie. Idaicus
takes Christ to be the anointing here meant; and Lorinus on the place gives
good reasons, why the word is said to be the Anointing. Indeed the Spouse
says to him, Thy Name is an ointment powered forth. Cant. 1.3.
Now we know his Name is called the word of God. And indeed this eternal
word seems to be the anointing meant, because he says, it is Truth and is no
lie: And Christ that word, because he adds, and even as it has taught you ye
shall abide in him, or it: in the anointing. And now little children abide in
him, that when he shall appear we may have confidence, and not be ashamed
before him at his coming v. 12. to judgment: for the word shall judge us at
the last day, Ioh. 12.48.
and Christ is that word, as Augustine proves on that and many other places of
John's Gospel. As many as received this word, this eternal Truth, to them he
gave power to become the Sons of God, eue^ to them that beleoue in his Name;
whose name is called the word of God: Therefore he says to them that believed
on him. Ioh. 8.31.36.
If ye continue in my word, the^ are ye my Disciples indeed, and ye shall know
the truth and the truth shall make you free: and shows the same truth to be
the Son that makes Sons and free, saying If the Son therefore shall make
you free ye shall be free indeed. This comes of the saueing knowledge of Gods
word. 1. Ioh. 3.2.
Therefore John says Now we are the Sons of God, and it does not yet
appear what we shall be: that is because we know but in part: But when he
shall appear we shall be like him: for we shall see him as he is. And every
man that has this hope purifieth himself, even as he is pure. Thus, as Paul
says men put on the new man, Ioh. 17.
which is renewed in knowledge after the Image of him that created him, and
that saueing knowledge is the cause of loueing and obeying him, and of
purifying of a man's self, as he is pure. Therefore it is that Christ says, M.
Downam Guide to Godliness cha. 5. Romans 10. Psa. 119.27.33.34.
this is eternal life to know thee, and him whom thou have sent. Saueing
knowledge as one says, being the ground of obedience, and the root of faith
and all other graces For how shall they call upon him in whom they have not
believed? and how shall they believe on him of whom they have not heard? Or
have no knowledge. Divinely therefore says David Make me to understand they
way of the precepts, so shall I talk of thy wondrous works, Give me
understanding, and I shall keep thy Law. And therefore Augustine says that we
may love things unseen, but not unknown. For to show that the first
conversion of a Christian is wrought by illumination, knowledge and a lively
faith that follows thereupon, Christ says to Paul, Act. 26.18
J send thee to the Gentiles, to open their eyes, and to turn them from
darkness to light: that is from the power of darkness, to the Son of light,
as he adds from the power of Satan unto God. Ephesians 2.2. chap. 4.18.
Wherefore he shows that the Gentiles in times past walked after the Prince
of the power of the air, and were aliened from the life of God, because their
understanding was darkened, through the ignorance that was in them, because of
the blindness of their heart: that being aliens from the common wealth of
Israel, and strangers from the covenants of promise, they were at that time
without Christ, having no hope, and without God in the world. Hence it was
that they, being past feeling, gave themselves over to work all uncleanness
with greediness.

Which ignorance and blindness, is so great a sin, and so great a cause of
sin, that the Psalmist says, Psa. 79.6.
power out thy wrath upon the heathen that have not known thee, and upon the
Kingdoms that have not called upon thy name. And the Apostle says, that the
Lord Jesus shall come from heaven with his mighty Angels, 2. These. 1.7 8.
in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God: That is, because
they care not for this great favor he vouchsafes to reveal himself, in
revealing his word in these and other things unto sinful men, that by
receiving the love and knowledge of his eternal word and truth, they may be
made Sons and friends of God, and to obey him better then they have done.
For as Joseph by the favors his master showed him, was taught to deny to
sin with his mistress; So this great grace of God, Tit. 1.11.
bringing salvation has appeared to all men, Teaching us that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly righteously and godly
in this present world. So that the more saveing knowledge there is in a man,
there will be the more faith, piety, righteousness and holiness of the
truth. The Angels in heaven, do Gods will better then we, because they know
him better rhen we: and we shall do it better, when we know him better, when
we shall see him as he is. Therefore Peter says Grace and peace be multiplied
unto you, through the knowledge of God, 2. Pet. 1.2.3. Chap. 3.18. Exodus 34.6.
and of Jesus our Lord. Therefore when Moses desired to see and know God, he
showed himself in these words, The Lord, Jehouah, strong, merciful,
gracious, long suffering, abundant in kindness and truth, reserving mercy for
thousands, forgiveing iniquity etc. This being a sum of the Gospel. And
therefore also Paul prays for this, as one of the greatest blessings that can
be, that the Father of glory may give unto you the Spirit of Wisdom and
revelation in the knowledge of him, Ephesians. 1.17.
the eyes of your understanding being enlightened, that you may know what is
the hope of his calling: and what the exceeding greatness of his power to us
ward that believe: That we may be filled with the knowledge of Gods will, Col.
1.9.
in all Wisdom and spiritual understanding. Knowing as was showed, that this
works sanctification, that the Image of God is renewed in knowledge; Ephesians.
4.24.
and thereby in righteousness and holiness of the truth. Not holiness of
men's inventions and traditions, but in holiness of the truth. Which is when
they are confident, that they need not that any man teach them, but as the
same Truth teaches them of all things, and is truth and is no lie. That while
Prelates teach other things, it is more then needs: That we should all
speak the same thing, to avoid divisions: but that must be the Testimony of
God, 1. Cor. 2.1
which the Apostles declared unto us, otherwise divisions cannot be avoided.
For men must contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the Saints,
holding i^ fast; and when they profess as much, that is to have the Seal name
or mark of God in their forheads.

For (...), a Character or mark, comes of (...) which signifies to make a
deep impression. Letters are therefore called Characters, because those
elements we first learn, leave a strong seal in our memories: So does the
Doctrine of God in the heart and Soul, where he promised to write it. Ier.
31.33.
I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts: So
does he his promises, whereby we are made to believe and obey, and
consequently sealed with the mark, or Image of God. Ephesians. 1.13.
In whom also ye trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth: in whom also
after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that Holy Spirit of promise. Thus
the Lord seals men by the ministry or his word, and cooperation of the Holy
Ghost. God, says Paul, 2. Cor. 3.3 6 17.18.
has made us able ministers of the new Testament, not of the letter but of the
Spirit which gives life, and consequently seals. Now the Lord (that is
Christ the word) is that Spirit. Namely which we administer to the Soul and
understanding, and which seals: Wherefore he adds, That is the word of the
Lord.
we all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord are
changed into the same Image; and consequently sealed therewith. And that seal
is in their forheads, when they profess it, and that they will receive it,
and no other: So it is said Hurt not the earth, nor the Sea, nor the trees,
till we have sealed the Servants of our God in their forheads. These are
such as receive the Testimony of Christ, and no other Doctrine, unless it
follow from the same. Such, behoulding Romish superstition, prophesied in
Sackcloth; yet could not be hurt by the locusts, the Monks and Friars; all
their tales of purgaterie affright not them: They have the Fathers name
written in their forheads, because the word is called his name, and expresses
him, as an Image on a Seal does him whose Image it is. I have manifested thy
name unto the men which thou gave me, Ioh. 17.6.8.11.
that is thy word, as it follows I have given them the words which thou
gave me, and they have received them. Keep through thine own name those
which thou have given me: That is through thy word: 1. Pet. 1.5. Heb. 1.2.
who are kept by the power of God, that is by the word of God, by which all
things were made and are vpheld. Now then this eternal and divine word, by
which the world was made and is vpheld, is called the Fathers Name, as being
his word, the brightness of his glory, and Character of his substance, that
is, his express Character, which expresses him, and wherewith we are sealed:
which Character or word the Son is; therefore they are also said to have the
Sons name on their forheads. Reu. 19.
Now on his head were many crowns and a name written, v. 12. which showed what
he was; and his name is called the word of God. Of which therefore, and for
which all Kings should hold their crowns, and not of the Pope, nor for his
traditions and service. Thus John says He that continues in the Doctrine of
Christ he has both the Father and the Son; 2. Ioh.
the Father and his word. Therefore it must needs be the mark of God, Reu.
19. Chap. 15.6. and chap. 11. Reu. 21.17 Chap. 22.
which he had, who says J am thy fellow Servant, and of thy brethren which
have the Testimony of Jesus. And that is also proved by this, that he is one
of the seven Angels that comes out of the Temple of the Tabernacle of the
Testimony, that is out of the Church millitant against Antichrist and his
adherents. And if he come thence, he is certainly one of them that worship
therein, keep his sayings, and contend for the truth: which things men do. He
is a man: for so he says J am thy fellow Servant, and of thy brethren the
Prophets, and of them that keep the sayings of this book; that have the
Testimony of Jesus. As all those must needs have, that have the mark of God:
they are such as continue in the word, such as are the true Church, because
they continue in the word, defend and ma ntaine it and no other, as the Church
does which is called the pillar of truth. 1 Timothy 3 15
And not as some in England do, who serve for little else then to defend
their own ambition, canons and ceremonies, and yet would be called the Church
of Christ. If one of these, through flattery, grow so great in favor with
his Prince, as to rule all as he list, to turn Religion into Popish complement
and ceremonies, to mould it after his own humor: If therefore many out of
fear, flattery, or hope of favor follow and justify him, is he the Church?
not he, nor he and all his flatterers. If he could bring four, or five, or all
the Bishops to his Religion, are they the Church? They might see that so the
Church of Rome came to be corrupted; That these in the Temple of the
Tabernacle of the Testimony are only the true Church, because they continue
in the word, and will receive no other: that the same must needs be the mark
of the true Church, which is here the mark of true Christians.

These, as we have seen, are set out by the Jews the first Testament, who
neither in doctrine, nor ceremonies, might receive any thing which God had not
commanded, but were to hold in all things to his first ordinances and
institutions: Crown of a Christian Martyr.
wherein when they failed, they were plagued: and that it would be so with
Christians, if they changed Christ's ordinances, or let in any innovations has
appeared by his constant comparison, to the seven Churches and others, of
Churches compared to a Jerusalem, and an harlot, to the Temple of God, and the
Synagogue of Satan, to the inner Temple, and the court without: he will not
yeald these later to be Jews, that is Christians; because of other Lords,
they hold other Laws in Religion, in order, in ceremonies and other things:
they do not hold fast the word and ordinances which he left, without receiving
innovations or inventions of men: therefore they are not of that part of his
Temple, which he allows to be accounted his Church, but of the court without,
which is given to the Gentiles; Reu, 11.
that is to Antichrist and others, who in Gods account are as Gentiles, such as
in diverse things will not hear his word, but make it of none effect with
their dominion and traditions. They hold some Christian truths, but not all:
Those in England, that are defenders of the hierarchy, or Arminians, hold more
then the Papists, yet not all. Christ will not yeald some to be Jews, who
perhaps failed in fewer things: Judge therefore I pray you, whether they be not
of that sort, or like them, of whom Christ speaks, Chap, 2,
which say they are Jews and are not, of the true Temple and are not viz. not
of those secret parts of the Temple. 1, King. 8, 8,
As there was nothing in the Arc save the two tables of Stone, so there is
nothing in the church of Christ, in this Temple, but the Testimony of Jesus
and his government the Eldership; no Popish dominion nor traditions: If, there
had, John who took exact measure of it, and saw it opened would have revealed
it in his Revelation: but there was nothing else seen save that, and them that
worship therein: Who therefore must needs be those that from the heart receive
and obey that word, and no other; for there is no other there. This was then so
great an honor that John was ready to worship him that was such a one, as if
that were the best nobility to be thus stamped and sealed with the Image of
God, and in all doctrines and Laws of Religion, Act. 17.11
to have recourse to the Law and to the Testament, like the men of Berea, to
see if the Teachers taught according to this word. And yet in England, he that
is such a one is in contempt called a Puritan, hated and scorned, and that by
the Prelates themselves; who therefore despise all that are of this Temple;
Because indeed if diocessan Bishops, their power, canons and ceremonies, be
not according to this word, they that are of this Temple care not for them.
Ephesians. 6. Phil. 1.27.
They have their loins girt about with the Truth; they stand fast in one
Spirit, with one mind, striveing together for the faith of the Gospel; they
have the testimony of Jesus, as here one of them says, they continue in his
word, and so are Disciples indeed: They confess and profess this word, and
so have his name and mark on their forheads: to which the binding of the law,
to the hand and forhead, did point in a figure: Deuteronomy. 6.8.
and both that, and this, do show that in matters of religion, the Lord is our
Judge, the Lord is our King, the Lord is our lawgiver. 1. Tim. 1.17. Phil. 3.16,
He is the King only wise. Every man had need to believe and receive this; and
to say with Paul, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing:
for this ye see is the mark of a Christian.

And by the Rule of contraries, the mark of Antichrist must needs be an
impression of that his doctrine, law, and superstitious rites, which is more
then the word revealed, or against the same: the profession and observation
thereof is the mark, as the observation of the heathenish rites is called
(...), 2. Mac. 4.20.
the character or mark of the Grecians. The Pope would that all men should
receive defend and profess his doctrine and superstitious rites, and so should
receive his mark in their right hand and forheads. For in the forhead that is
by profession and in the right hand, that is by operation, as the ordinary
gloss expounds. Antonius also and Lyra teach that A character or mark is a
certain manner of liveing according to the law of any, Ag^tho in epist. inter
acta sextae Synodi constantinop. Bonifac. 8. in extran. de mayor. and obed.

Clement. in lib. 5. ad nostru^ in gloss. D. 18. c. si qui sunt.


whereby men are distinguished from others. So the Pope causes all men to take
his mark, for he says, Every soul that would be saved must confess the
form of the Roman tradition. We affirm, define, and pronounce that it is
altogether necessary to salvation for every humane creature to be subject to
the Pope of Rome. Hereunto agrees that gloss, It is evident that the church
is therefore one, because in the universal church, there is one supreme head,
to wit the Pope, whom all that are of the Church are bound to obey: He
incurreth therefore the sin of paganism, whosoever renounceth obedience to
the sea Apostolic. Thus he causes all to take his mark. If a man would know
a little better, what the mark is; he may see the same in the Popes new creed
of the Trent faith, as it is propounded by the Bull of Pius 4. and that act of
the council of Trent, wherein it was ordained, That the Bishops shall in the
first provincial council receive the decrees of the Synod of Trent, promise
obedience to the Pope, Histor. of the council of Trent. lib, 8. p. 808.
Anathematise the heresies condemned, and every Bishop hereafter promoted shall
do the same in the first Synod: and all beneficed men, who are to assist in
the diocessan Synod shall do the same therein. Those who have the care of
universities and studies general, shall endeavor to make the Decrees to be
received in them, etc. and shall take a solemn oath herein every year. All
both small and great, Priests and people, take this ma^ke in the forhead, who
profess the Romish or Trent faith; To take it in the hand, that is to
maintain it (in part or in whole) by wit, sword, power, purse or otherwise,
whether openly, as professed papists, or more privately, as disguised wolves, in
the sheep clothing of a protestant out side, false brethren, such as
creeping in unawares, do more or less practice the bringing in of popery and
division, or flatter those that do: which is the root of all other
ungodliness, presumptious sinning, licentiousness and corruption, and indeed
of turning the grace of God into laciviousnesse, prevarication, and following
the way of Balaam for reward, as S. Jude observes in a like case: Jude 3. to
12,
and therefore wishes men to contend earnestly for the faith which was once
delivered to the saints: which shows that the only way to preserve that good
which remains; and reform all things that are amiss is to contend for that
purity and simplicity in doctrine and discipline, which God by his Apostles
ordained in his Testament: for therefore against all these innovators,
flatterers and mockers, he says, Verse. 17
but remember ye the words which were spoken before of the Apostles etc.
building up your selves in your most holy faith: keep your selves in the
love of God: And others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire; hating
even the garment spotted by the flesh: much more then the mark of the Beast
and all appearance of it.

As for the number of the Beast, which is the number of a man, and his number
666. some find it in the word Romanus, written in Hebrew characters, and that
is the number of a man, being the name of one of their Popes. But John wrote
in Greek, Irenae, advers. haer^s. l. 5.
and to the Greek churches: therefore the name Lateinos written in greek
letters, which was the name of a King in Italy, is more probable: because the
Beast is latin, and so are his body and members, and as Ireneus also notes,
The most true kingdom has this name: for they are latins which now reign.
And we know that the Dragon which then reigned was to give his throne to the
beast. The word LATEINOS as King James observes, suits well with the Romish
church, praemon. page 94.
Romish faith and latin service. The later as I take it, being especially
meant in this place; as being brought into the church by Vitalian, and so by
the second Beast, who also first set up organs in churches and other
ceremonies, and that about the year 666. Now whereas he causes, that no man
might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name of the beast,
Platina in Vitalian.
or the number of his name: This shows, that if a man will live in peace
among them, he must profess the Trent faith. Some Papists will not do this.
For as some in England are content to seem to be protestants, yet are church
papists, popish or newters: so are there and ever were, some in Spain, Italy
and Rome, who are content to seem to be Papists, yet in their hearts abhor
the Trent faith, and yet are not professed and perfect protestants; (though the
Inquisitors when they find in any point punish them for such) as wanting
liberty, and means of knowledge. Now if such will not take the mark, help,
profess and defend the Trent faith, yet must they have the name of the Beast,
be called latin, or Roman, Catholics, that is vniversals, of him the universal
Bishop. Or catholic.
If one be loath to take his name, yet if he will buy and sell, he must at least
have the number of the Beast come to the latin service, and use some latin
ceremonies, hear the singing men etc. as church papists have this that they
come to the English churches, though they have no protestant religion in them:
only they like well of the hierachie, traditions, cathedral service and many
canons, knowing whence they came and whither they tend: even to his kingdom and
service who obtained of the murderer Phocas to be called universal Bishop.
For this being about the year 606. shortly after, he got the power of that
title, and then from thenceforwards Romish customs, though never so
superstitious, were observed for laws. Antonius of Valtelina, a Dominican
friar, in the council of Trent said, Histor. of the counc. of Trent. l, 6. p.
548.
That it was plain by all histories, that anciently every church had her
particular Ritual of the Mass, brought in by use and upon occasion, rather
then by deliberation and decree; and that the small churches did follow the
Metropolitan and greater, which weere near: The Roman rite had been to
gratify the Pope received in many provinces. But, as he proved by a book
called Ordo Romanus, that of Rome had also had great alterations, both in
ancient and later times, within 300 years. Insomuch that the vestments and
other ornaments of the Ministers and Altars, as appears by books, Statues
and pictures, are so changed, that if the ancients should return into the
world, they would not know them: Therefore he concludes that to bind all to
approve the Roman Rites might be reprehended as a condemnation of antiquity,
and of the uses of other Churches. Nevertheles the English Prelates, having
retained many of them, and diverse other Romish customs in their canons and
hierarchy, do bind all that are in their Churches to approve and use them;
and yet will not be persuaded that this is to worship the Beast, or in part to
have his mark: Because say they it is not done on purpose to serve or flatter
the Pope or Church of Rome. Ioh. 16, 2,
Christ says it shall come to pass that he that kills you shall think he
does God service, yet that does not let, but that therein such a murderer or
persecutor does serve the devil and his ministers, I would they that are so
zealous to maintain humane authority, in traditions and ceremonies; would but
lay these things to heart. And withal, that it will not serve them to say,
Fully.
they are fully satisfied with those reasons which master Hooker has given,
in his book of Ecclesiastical polity; or D. Burgess in his books against
D. Ames, or any the like Authors, if the Testimony of Jesus be against them.
All Fathers, all Authors, all councels, all reasons, in such cases, are nothing
to the Testimony of Jesus. On which argument, I shall need to say the less
in this Treatise, because of late diverse works have been published that
convince them of error: in such cases as the curtain of Church power. The
Curtain of Church power.
A fresh suite against humane ceremonies in Gods worship, by that learned and
godly witness D. Ames, a little before his death: Also the crown of a
Christian Martyr. A work which he that loves the Lord Jesus, and the safety
of his own Soul, has reason to examine, because the will of God, in these
cases, is therein infalliblie proved; 2. Pet. 1.2.
and as the Apostle says, Grace and peace is multiplied to men, through the
knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord. Out of whose Testimony, it is there
manifested, that as the true Jews, the true Christians, so the true Jerusalem,
the true Church, consists of those that keep the commandments of God, and
the faith of Jesus, that hold fast or defend the Doctrine, Discipline and
ceremonies, which he left; Whence it must needs follow, that by so much as men
maintain, or approve, the inventions and presumptions of men in Gods service,
by so much are they fallen into the sins and fornications of Babylon, whereof
one is still the root seed or spring of another; the lesser wedges and cracks
make way for the biggar; the smaler thieves, thrust in at a window or hole,
open the doors to the greater: Therefore though some say, so long as the
Gospel is well preached in some Parishes, why should we stumble at strawes, or
trouble our selves with trifles? yet we shall find, that in corrupt waters,
men that think to go but up to the ancles, and no de^per, do often before they
are aware of it, step up to the knees, then to the loins, and at last over
head and ears: and so in superstition, ignorance, and error: A few sparks
neglected do often kindle a great fire, and as the Apostle says A little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump? Gal. 5.9.
How then dare men defend stains and corruptions to be small matters?

And what are these small matters and trifles, which they say men do so
vainly and foolishly stand upon? The Lord by his Apostles ordained Elders in
every church by election, Act. 14.
made them Bishops, overseers of the flock, to feed the church, to hold fast
that which Christ left, to govern according to his ordinances, and keep the
church as a chaste Jerusalem from the inventions and presumtions of men: That
men should yet set up diocessan Bishops, who by bringing in a world of
superstition and tyranny into the church should make these of none effect, and
the church to become a Babylon, are trifles with them. They are trifles with
them, that diocessan Bishops should have the power to admit into the ministry,
and to places of cure, whom, and upon what conditions, they will, to enforce a
conformity and subscription to their hierarchy and ceremonies; though it be
proved, that they take their hierarchy, surplesse, coapes, Altars and other
things from the Romanists, as they from the heathen, that their cathedral
service, and many of their canons, are taken from Babylon; as likewise their
power in their offices and courts, to impose the oath, ex officio, to silence,
suspend, imprison and deprive of cure and ministry, for non-conformitie in
these things: to enforce all to use a form of prayer, which is nothing but the
mass in English, in some things refined, but not in all; the surplesse and
other popish customs being still retained: And though it be proved that the
Papists do much glory in it, that these things strengthen them in their
religion; that D. Iackson and other Arminians, have alleged it with such
authority; as men use to allege the Scriptures; that some things in it seem
to approve such opinions: that such things do, by such means, get into the
place of the Scriptures; yet all must still be maintained: and that though it
be also proved, that this form of prayer and ceremonies, do often serve
drunkards, adulterers, profane mockers, mere civil wordlings, usurers,
oppressors, and a world of earthly men, for a religion: though they have no
true love to the preaching of the word, to knowledge, faith and the like
graces, but scorn and persecute such as have, yet if they can but pretend love
to the common prayer, they are ready to count themselves the better Christians,
the better subjects; they may the sooner be chosen parliament men, or into any
other office of the church or common wealth: and so they may come to bear
greatest sway in protestant churches, who are church papists, ignorant in the
spiritual government of Christ, and other divine things, or great enemies of
the reformed religion: That non residents, double benificed men, and dumb
ministers, make this their color and defense, that they have in their
churches the common prayer, and all the ceremonies; that Bishops and Princes,
whose example the greater part are subject to follow, do more favor these,
then painful and conscionable ministers; knowing that their canons allow many
to have two liveings: Because also they find, that such men, will either
defend their hierarchy, and all their doeings, or connive at them: That what
soever the word of God say, yet if they can but get the authority and aid of
Princes, in any matter, they may silence all that withstand them therein: that
by this means they magnifying the power of Princes, and Synods, may get them
into the place of the Pope, to defend any thing, and make it pass for lawful
in religion: And lastly that all these things may serve church Papists and
other persecutors for a color, that if they come but to the church, speak
well of the service and ceremonies, who dare say they are not converts and
protestants, under color of helping Bishops against puritans, they may
undermine the protestant religion, if not betray it abroad, yet do by it at
home, as Iehu did by the religion of Baal, make men think they are for it,
when their devise is by degrees to change and destroy it. These, and many such
evils, being the branches and fruits of the hierarchy and ceremonies, are the
trifles they talk off: wherein men ever heap to themselves a multitude of
teachers, according to their own affections, and grow so hardened by custom,
that they will not see with their eyes, nor hear with their ears, any
arguments, that, faithfully drawnen from the Scriptures, might convince and
convert them: but stopping their ears against the voice of the charmer,
charm he never so wisely, that curse seems to be on them, which was laid on
the Jews for like sins, say unto this people, ye shall hear indeed, Isa.
6.9.10
but you shall not understand, etc. For if because of these things, men desire
to follow the reformed churches, and have things reformed according to the
ordinances of the new Testament, and the churches in time of the Apostles: this
they call foolish nicenes, scrupulositie, and factious, straining at gnats and
trifles: and if any, by this means, be brought to hear the voice of Christ,
and to leave them; they take on like a Bear robbed of her whelps: and least
Princes and many others should do the like, they presently look on their
hierarchy, as on a city besieged: they fortify it with men, with stout
champions, and with words of man's wisdom or power; with feigned words, rewards
or threats, they guard men's ears from hearing the testimony of Jesus, that
daily lies in battery against it. Men should therefore doubt that those, which
they count small alterations, may do great mischief; and that the devil will
be ready to work it out of the least digressions from Christ's institutions;
and rather then fail, under color that some good either has, or may, come by
them.

But howsoever, be they never so small matters, the order and ceremonies God
ordained must be observed, they may not be changed: for churches are willed to
hold fast that which they had received and heard. Rev. 3.3.
The devil that made the Jews to sin in one extreme, seeing christians take
heed of that, makes them to sin in another. Many Jews stood all upon
ceremonies, and observing of small matters, as tithing of mint annise and
cummin, and observing outward sacrifices, ceremonies and shadows, they let
the substance go: so do some Christians, that stand and plead earnestly for
the ceremonies of the primitive church, and that so continually, that they
seem to neglect the substance of religion; yea so indiscreetly, that they
rather seem to harden, and strengthen the Adversaries, then by good reasons to
convince them. Many hear this gladly, and with both their ears: But their
own fault, in the mean while, is as great, or greater: and these are two
sorts. 1. Some stand all, as they say for the substance of religion, and
letting the ceremony go, do in effect say, it mattered not for that, men
might change, or alter it at pleasure: Christ, taxing them both, says of the
greater, and weightier things, These ought ye to have done, and not to have
left the other undone. Mat. 23.
Neither indeed can it be said, that the presbiterie or the ceremonies of the
Gospel, are small things and not of the substance of religion, but might be
changed. For though it be true, that, if it be asked, what shall we do to
live for ever? we must have most respect to the fruit of the tree of life:
yet if we will be Jews indeed, christians indeed, such as have right to the
tree of life, we must think we can not have it, unless we take it with its
proper bark and leaves; we must not say the bark and leaves are not of the
substance of the tree, or but small matters: for the very leaves of the tree
are for the healing of the nations; Rev. 22.
therefore no small matters, nor changeable: and the sap and nourishment,
which brings true fruit, goes up between the bark and the stock, so that,
it may not be cut away or changed, as Babylon changed both the one and the
other, and so lost her right to the tree of life. Her members and followers did
not keep their garments undefiled, they did not walk with Christ in white;
they were not righteous as Zachary and Elizabeth, who walked in all the
commandments and ordinances of the Lord; Luke 1.
they did not so keep Gods commandments, as to have right to the tree of
life. If, as they say, they are small matters, they are the easier kept.
Speaking of men's devised hierarchy and ceremonies, they say, keep and observe
them, as ye would preserve the life, fruit and ornament of a tree; if these
be broken off, the tree will die, all true religion decay and wither: christ
may say, Hypocrite, out of thine own mouth I will condemn thee: why then do
ye not look to preserve the tree of life among you, the new Testament, and the
fruit of righteousness, by preserving or restoring the bark and the leaves,
the presbiterie and ceremonies of the Gospel? when these were broken and
changed, men lost their right to the tree of life, and the fruit of it, and
in stead thereof were nourished with corruption, superstition, ignorance, and
error: And so it will be where ever the restoring of these things is neglected
or scorned, and the first humane inventious and presumptions maintained. There,
while such things are made trifles as abovesaide, all things must needs grow
worse and worse. For Christ says, Luke 16.
He that is faithful in the least, he is also faithful in much; and he that
is unfaithful in the least, he is also unfaithful in much: and indeed,
because men receive not the love of the truth in such things, God gives them
over to strong delusions to believe popish and Arminian lies in greater: they
will not hear of Christ's reigning over them in the presbiterie, in the first
ordinances and ceremonies; therefore God gives them over to the rule of
Prelates, Lords of Gods heritage, such as daily burden men with popish power,
and ceremonies, and so get dominion over their faith, as daily experience
begins to manifest in England.

2. Hence it is, that as many Jews were so zealous of ceremonies ordained of
God, that they let go the substance, and made them the greatest part of their
Religion. So others, now adays, stand all for a hierarchy of Diocessan
Bishops, and their traditions and ceremonies, devised or confirmed by men, some
within two or three hundred years after the Apostles, and some since: when, as
if the former had been too plain and simple, if not insufficient, other more
solemn and magnificent were thus invented, that should be of great use, and
have notable significations, whereby you might be edified, if you will believe
them: They are so zealous of these things, that they let the substance go,
and make them the greatest part of their Religion, which therefore must needs
be a fault much worse then that of the Jews, and bring forth worse fruit:
because the one were ceremonies ordained of God, the other devised by men: Ier.
6.16.
And yet in zeal of these, they tell us, this is the old and good way, and
abusing that place of Jeremy, say we should walk in it, and are to be
reproved if we will not, as if these were the leaves and bark of the tree of
life, and all tree Religion would be lost, if these be not observed. But a
liar must have a good memory. For when on the otherside, we tell them, the
Apostles ordained Elders to be Bishops in every Church, to rule by the word,
and that this ordinance was to be, as the bark to the tree of life, that
between the same, and the stock of the tree, the sap might pass so, as the
fruit of righteousness might be brought forth, and the propper leaves of the
tree, kept green, and in esteem, that this tree, had its propper leaves, the
new Testament its proper ceremonies, in the primitive age: In Churches then
established, Christian Religion was complete; Col. 2.5.
things were done decently, in such order, and with such due ceremonies, as
was Paul's joy to behold; they scoff us with noveltie, and say they were never
since the time of Christ, or his Apostles. But by their leaves, this scoff
proves them to be the old and good way that shortly after began to be changed
to another, framed and ratified by the depths of Satan, as they spoke: That to
the Bride is granted to be araied in pure and fine linen, Reu. 19.
white and clean, by being reduced to this old way, to this old righteousness
of the Saints, by walking in all the commandments and ordinances of God, Luke
1.
as Zachary and Elizabeth did; and indeed as not only the Churches of
Smyrna, and Philadelphia, but diverse in Sardis did, who held fast that which
Christ left, Reu. 3.
without receiving other: seeing the best of men's inventions and presumptions
are but stumbling blocks, ^om. 14.^^.
and occasions laid in men's ways (by the cunning of Satan) to make them fall
to greater presumption and superstition, as both has appeared, and will yet
further appear, by those which are received in England: and therefore indeed
to draw the Bride, and all others, to the purity and simplicity of the first
Christians, it is added; for the fine linen is the righteousness of the Saints:
Reu. 19.
The first government, the presbiterie, the first ceremonies, with the old
order in choice of ministers, are then restored: It is then granted to the
Church to come to this righteousness of the Saints. Whatsoever is spoken of
them, and their Churches, and ordinary orders, these are all the true
sayings of God, to be observed. Humane inventions, will worship, and
presumptions in Gods service, as lies devised by men, are to be rejected. Reu.
22.
And therefore it is added, Blessed are they that do his commandments (he
does not say men's, but his in opposition to theyres) that they may have right
to the tree of life: as if he said, otherwise they can have no right to the
tree of life, nor to enter through the gates into the city: but do remain
without among dogs, sorcerers and others: they are there so called, because
they neither are, nor will we be arrayed in that white linen, which is the
righteousness of the Saints, such as those in Smyrna, Philadelphia, and some in
Sardis, who held fast that which Christ left, but are enemies to such
righteousness, and yet do vainly believe that they are holy, and as good
Christians as the best because they love common prayer, and some other things.
If God had ordained that very form of prayer, as he did the Jewish
sacrifices; yea if it were so great a part of true religion, that, as these
sacrifices, it were often put for the whole: yet they, in other things changing
the ordinances, and breaking the everlasting covenant, must know, that of such
it is said, Pro. 15.8.
The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to the Lord. But the prayer of the
righteous in acceptable to him: Their prayer only is his delight: that of
others is abomination to him: Much more, if in this their sacrifice their
fear toward God be taught after the inventions and precepts of men; with
sopperies and ceremonies, which he commanded not: these make their
sacrifice, whereby they think to please God, abominable.

The Church of England speaking of ceremonies devised by man, why some be
abolished and some retained, Preface to the book of common prayer in fol.
Ephesians. 4.15.21.24.
confesses that Christ's Gospel is not a ceremonial Law (as much of Moses Law
was) but it is a Religion to serve God, not in the bondags of the sign or
shadow, but in the freedom of the Spirit. They might have added, being content
only with the ceremonies of the Gospel, and to grow up unto him in all things
which is the head, even Christ: If so be ye have heard him and have been
taught by him as the Truth is in Jesus: Fot so ye put on the new man, which
after God is cceated in righteousness and holiness of the truth. But they add,
being content only with those ceremonies, which do serve to a decent order a
godly Discipline, and such as be apt to stir up the dull mind of man to the
remembrance of his duty to God, by some notable and special signification,
whereby he might be edified. And never considering that the church of Rome, who
invented or established and imposed them says the like of all other her
ceremonies, they wilfully take the cross in baptism to be of this nature, and
therefore say, we sign him with the sign of the cross in token that
hereafter he shall not be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ crucified,
and manfully fight under his banner against sin the world and the devil,
and to continue Christ's faithful soldier and Servant unto his lives end. (In
the times of Antichrist, God indeed requires these excellent duties of all
Christians, but not this signing) as if being thus signed, he should be the
less ashamed to confess the faith of Christ crucified, and more manfully
sight under his banner, then others that are not so signed; and as if this were
a ceremony and sign which would make him do that duty of a Christian the
better, which Christ requires when he says, Rev. 2.
him that overcomes etc. For neither the Bishops, who make all to be thus
signed, nor the English in general, have proved more constant confessors and
soldiers of Christ then the presbiters and their people in France and
Germany: they have not more denied themselves in sins and worldly lusts of
covetousnes, ambition, vain honor, dominion and the like, they have not more
striven against popery, Arminianisme, ignorance and error; nor in these late
wars for the defense of Christ's religion and members, they have not more
stirred up their Princes to follow Christ: for they have not done it
themselves, nor suffered others that would, both in these and in matters of
the presbiterie: So they make men take a pretended sign of such a confession
and warfare, yet will not suffer them to do the thing pretended to be
signified, but scorn and persecute them that do: They therefore whom for
these things, they call puritans do truly bear the cross of Christ fot the
Testimony of Jesus; while the Prelates, who in the mean, live in pomp and
pleasure, only impose on others, and take on themselves a beggarly sign with
the hand, ordained, as they think, in great Wisdom: which yet does never a
whit the more stir them up to their duty, as is pretended. For in these
cases, they mock and oppose the reasons of Christ's Soldiers the reformists,
and have rather sided with such against the parliaments, as were rockoned
treacherous and very corrupt in religion; and therefore it is but a mockery,
and, as other things, only carried out by humane Laws, terror and authority.
They have not in these cases observed that the foolishnes of God is wiser then
men; that he says let no man deceive himself. 1. Cor. 1.25. chap. 3.18.
If any man among you seems to be wise in this world, let him become a fool
that he may be wise: for the Wisdom of this world is foolishnes with God: He
takes the wise in their own craftiness. The Lord knows the thoughts of
the wise that they are but vain, as we see in this particular. For God gives
a better blessing to them which do not seek to stir up men's minds to such
duties by signs; but by the Scripture, which is sufficiently proffitable for
doctrine, 2. Tim. 3.16.17.
for reproof, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
persect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. What need then is there of
these beggarlie devises? Signing with the sign of the cross does not do
this, though they give such a reason of it. Much less can they prove that the
use of coapes and hoods in service, Altars, organs, singing men, whom few or
none understand, or Antemes, whereof no such specious reasons can be given, as
being in savor heathenish, or Jewish, or popish, are apt by notable
significations to stir up men to their duties to God. For they are rather
offenses or stumbling blocks, making men to fall to heathenisme, Iudaisme or
popery in some things: They cannot justify them by the old Testament: for that
serves as well to prove that sacrifices and other Jewish ceremonies should be
still observed, which to say were to lay a great stumbling block, seeing they
are all abolished, and we are to use no more then the new Testament allows.
Howsoever the English, as ye see, have not better done their duties, but more
failed, then the reformed churches, who have none of these things. Now
therefore whereas they also say, Vbi supra.
That some ceremonies entered into the church by indiscreet devotion, and such a
zeal as was without knowledge, and for because they were winked at in the
beginning, they grew daily to more and more abuses, which for their
vnproffitablenesse, and because they much blinded the people, and obscured the
glory of God, are wortly to be cut away and clean rejected, we see that
these are such, that the sign of the cross is of this nature, and by
themselves made ridiculous: Romans 14.13.
Such is their Wisdom. They do not in this case observe that rule, that no
man put a stumbling block or an occasion to fall in his brothers way. And so
also in matter of the surplesse: By their rule, this is also apt to stir up
the dull mind of man to the remembrance of his duty to God, by some notable
signification, whereby he might be edefied. And therefore they bring Scriptures
for it. Reu. 6.9.
They that were slain for the word of God, and for the Testimony which they
held, had white roabes given unto every one of them. It is therefore say they no
hurt to impose the wearing of white, seeing peradventure in the Church of
Martyrs this was devised to stir up the dull mind of man to this duty. Chap.
15.
The seven Angels come out of the Temple, having seven plagues, clothed in
pure and fine linen: They as we saw, have the Testimony of Jesus, the mark
of God; and indeed nothing is pure and white without it, And so have those
also, of whom is said, Chap. 19.
The armies which are in heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed in pure
and white linen. Which is not only meant of those, that help to get the
victory over Rome and the Beast by the sword, but of those also that do it by
the word of God: all these have white roabes. I answer, all this does not
warrant the Bishops to impose on men a sign of this, much less, as our
Bishops do; and yet in diverse particulars abovementioned, they, as the Popish
Bishops before them, do not suffer them to do the thing signified: therefore
it is but a Popish trick, and a mockery to make men retain, and wear that
which at first was invented, and is at this day used with superstition by the
Papists. They cannot say these are the fruits of the Spirit. For the fruit of
the Spirit is in all goodness and righteousness and truth. Ephesians. 5.9
Mark in Truth: not then in ceremonies, signs and shows. They say, white is
a note of purity, innocence, victory, and gladness: and so indeed it is:
yet, as we have seen, they are far enough from that white linen, or purity,
which is the righteousness of the Saints there meant: And indeed, they are not
more innocent, victorious and pure, then other Protestants, that do not wear
the white garment, but rather more Popish and corrupt. They do not now,
neither in Doctrine, discipline, nor manners, so hold fast the word, as the
Saints did in some of the seven Churches: Men Popish may not only come to
their communions, but even known drunkards, fornicators, Profane mockers of
religious excercises, and other like wicked men.

It was an ordinance of the ceremonial Law, Exodus 28.2.40.
thou shall make holy garments for Aaron thy brother, for glory and for
beauty: And for Aarons Sons, thou shall make coats and girdles, and
bonnets, for glory and for beauty. These, being commanded, might then stir
up the dull mind of man to remembrance of his duty: for God then taught them
by ceremonies and shadows: But now they cannot, such Laws being abolished,
and the truth clearly preached; to use them is great presumption: and to
devise others, for glory and for beauty, more then were in time of the
Apostles, whether they be surplesses, coapes, or Rochets, and the like, is far
greater presumption: and namely to choose rather to be edified, by shadows of
humane invention, then by the clear and all-sufficient Truth of God, revealed
in Christ: yea, to deceive our selves, because the surplesse, we see, does
nothing stir up men's minds to do the duties of those, who are said to wear
white, as the seven Angels, the bride, and those that follow Christ, on white
horses. For among others, the presbiters sit round about Christ's throne in
white raiment, Reu. 4.4.
which sets forth the purity of their order; yet Prelates, and their
defenders, are so far from following that government, that they cannot abide to
hear of it. This therefore pretended to be done to edifying, is but like the
dog in the fable to catch, and make others catch, at the shadow, and let go
the substance: they will not suffer men to take the mark of God in some points.

It is in the case of Evangelical precepts, as in that of the ten
commandments; the best do many times of infirmity break them; and so sin
against the Testimony of Jesus, which also has many rules; and therefore
these that wear the white roabes, having no doubt some stains of
infirmity, are feign to wash their roabes, and make them white in the blood
of the lamb. Reu. 7.14.
Now the fault of the Prelates is not of this kind; but as when a man breaks
any of the commandments. And teaches men so, though he be zealous in all the
rest, yet this is abominable before God, Gal. 3.1.
that therein he will not obey the Truth, nor hear of it; O foolish men who
has bewitched you that ye should not obey the Truth? If the question be asked
to those of the Church of England; the answer is ready, Surely the honors and
proffits of this world. For as the Galathians did not obey it in some
particulars, no more do these in others. Many not only of the Romish, but
even of the English Ministers that are conformable have in other things the
Testimony of Jesus, and in many points hold it with zeal against Heretics,
but in the matter of the presbiterie, the power that God gave to each Church or
congregation, and things that are against the hierarchy and ceremonies, they
change and break the ordinance of God, and teach men so. Such is the fruit
of the hierarchy, it makes, men fear and flatter the Prelates, and have the
truth of God in respect of persons; Pro. 28.23
and as the Scripture says, to have respect of persons is not good: for, for a
piece of bread that man will transgress. Much more, that he may get or hold a
liveing; and most of all for a Bishopwrick or denarie. They do not in this
case observe that precept of the old and new Testament, Zach. 8.16 Ephesians. 4.25.
speak ye every man the truth to his neighbor. The Bishops do in this case,
as the Papists do in this and others, they will not so much as suffer Princes,
much less other men, to hear of the Presbiterie, and the grounds and reasons
that show it ought to be maintained, but scorn and persecute those that seek
or defend the truth. So they withhold the truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1.14
and change it into a lie. They hold that though God ordained the presbiterie,
gave each Church power to choose their minister, and him to receive the gift
by laying on of the hands of the presbytery, to excomunicate etc. Yet as the
Church was enlarged, another government might be ordained, and now he is better
pleased with their hierarchy, traditions and ceremonies, that is, that we
turn again to weak and beggarlie rudiments, be again in bondage to them, to
observe days and times etc. And so that he ordains or allows these. Yea
some of them change the truth of God into a lie, while they wilfully take that
to be spoken of diocessan Bishops, which is spoken of the presbiters. And
being driven from that, for want of more divine warrant, they are ever telling
men of the Queens injunctions, of the statute and proclamation, and the peace
the English have since enjoied, knowing that men dare not speak so boldly
against these, as themselves do against the presbiterie ordaind of God;
without any fear, that he may say unto them, will thou disanull my judgment,
Job. 40.8.
to establish thy own, or the inventions of men? will thou condemn me, that
thou or they may be righteous? What good do ye to your Kings, by flattering
them with the empty name of a prerogative in things so many ways against me,
and good government? Can they get any good by that, or by making Israel to
sin? Do not you your selves run away with the wordly proffit and honor of
it? Have I not manifested how the church of Rome became the great whore? Gal.
4.25.
and showed you of a new Jerusalem that is to come down from God, as a bride
prepared for her husband and arraied in white; which is, when the church gives
the kingdom in all things unto her God, when she is neither defiled, burdened
nor in bondage under precepts and inventions of men; that the Jerusalem which
is from above, is free, and will ye yet be in bondage, and plead to bring
others to such bondage? Will ye yet give the Kingdom and dominion to men in
these things? Will ye pretend your selves to be spiritual, Bishops, ministers,
or Christians for me, and yet mock at this Jerusalem, at this bride, and those
that desire to see her so adorned? ye have no such affections, ye do not put
them on, as a wedding garment, but to terrify and crucify them that do, or
would, ye thunder in talk of proclamations, Statutes and inventions, like them
that with trumpets, drums, or the like things, made a noise when they
sacrificed their children unto Idols least their cries shoud move pity and
remorse. All your pretenses and thundrings are for Kings and councels, for
their prerogatives and laws in these cases. Let others prove what they will
for me, these must make them speechles now, what ever make you speechles
herafter for not having on a wedding garment. Ye talk of faith: but show me
your faith by your works or affections in this cause. Will true faith stand
with opposing and scorning me in these things? Whom do ye despise, against
whom do despite and make war in all these things?

Herein they have no way to avoid Antichristianisme, but to say with Cardinal
Cusanus that the understanding or sense of the Scripture goes with the
practice of the church, C. Cusan. ad Bohem. epist. 2. and epist. 7.
and so in effect that Gods mind is changed in these things: or which is all
one, that notwithstanding his ordinance of the presbiterie, he has left the^
to Princes and councels, they might ordain diocessan Bishops, traditions and
ceremonies. Now is it not a great dishonor to God, to say that his mind is
so changed that they might ordain them, and so change the government? For
while they say they ought to be obeyed in all these things, they withal tell
us, that Gods will is that it should be so: which is in effect to corrupt the
word of God, and to say his mind is in these things mutable. One of the first
and greatest heresies was that of Ebion, who as Eusebius and Irenaeus show us,
Histor. Eccles. l. 3. c. 24. Iren. adve. haeres. l. 4. prolog.
denied Christ to have been always God, and the word and wisdom of God, and
refused part of the new Testament. And of them indeed Irenaeus says, They
blaspheme against the Lord, severing and dividing Jesus from Christ, and Christ
from the Savior, and again the Savior from the word, and the word from the
only begotten. Now if the Bishops do not sever the Savior from the word, and
the word from the only begotten, yet it is an heresy somewhat a kin to this, to
change the truth of God into a lie, to refuse part of the Testament, touching
the presbiterie, and to say that the same ordinances about this, and the power
of each church to choose ministers and excommunicate, called the power of
Christ, are not now his word and ordinances, nor the power of Christ to be
followed of all churches: that these things might be taken from them, and given
to one in a diocese, which is indeed to take them from Christ, who has
trusted the churches with them: that they are things indifferent, that councels
and Kings might change them, or set up others that turn from the Truth, and
are so contrary; that his will is that these should now be obeyed and
followed, and not those which himself ordained: which is to say his will is
changeable. All this, being in effect affirmed by them, is downright the mark
of the Beast. For so papists argue in the same cases, and in those of Images,
communion in one kind, the primacie and the like. And yet we know that the new
Testament, and all the ordinances thereof are from everlasting, yea eternal
and unchangeable Mat. 13.35. Romans 16.35. Ephesians. 1.9.11.2. Tim. 1.9. Ioh. 12.48.
and Ioh. 1.1.2.3. 1. Cor. 2.7. and Heb. 13.8.
And so the Apostle says Jesus Christ yesterday and to day and the same also
for ever. Thus they that in the Revelation wear white, hold fast the
testimony of Jesus: The Bishops neither do so, nor suffer others that would,
but with flaterie and threats make many preach, and write in defense of their
power, traditions and ceremonies, and so to make war against the lamb. Bishops
themselves therefore had need of one in these cases to open their eyes to
turn them from darkness to light; 2. Tim. 3.8
and from the power of Satan unto God. For as Iannes and Iambres withstood
Moses, so do these also resist the Truth; men of corrupt minds: and by their
tyranous imposing of these things, cause divisions and offenses, Romans 17.
contrary to the Apostolic doctrine, and therein serve not the Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own belly, and with fair speeches deceive the hearts of
the simple. I would they that are counted both learned, and wise, were not as
commonly deceived by their flatteries and false glosses.

They likewise make men bow toward the Altar, and at the name of Jesus, not at
other names of Christ, or God his father, and kneel at the receiving of the
Sacrament, as if they did more reverence and obey Christ the word, then others
that do not these things; though as we showed, it is but a popish, and a late
devise: And yet they themselves can not bow to Christ in his ordinance of the
presbiterie, and the power he gave to each church, nor endure to hear of it,
but hinder others that would: Can they be Christ's Bishops? When Elijah heard
the voice of God, he wrapped his face in his mantle, for the reverence that he
bare to Gods word. When the Spirit of the Lord came upon Iehazel, 1. King.
19.2. 2. Chro. 29 14.18.
so that he spoke the word of the Lord, Iehoshaphat bowed his head with his
face to the ground, and all Judah fell before the Lord, worshipping the Lord.
2. King. 20.19.
And when a sentence was pronounced against Hezechiah for his sin, yet he
said, Good is the word of the Lord that thou have spoken. And John so
reverenced the word of God that he was ready to worship the Angel that showed
it him; who thereupon said, see thou do it not: worship God. All these and
the like places show the great reverence that is due to the word. It is, the
name of Christ, Rev. 19.
His name is called the word of God. A name that could never be given to any
other, a name above all names: and therefore this is that name of Jesus, at
which every knee should bow: where yet it is not so much meant of bodily
worship with the knee, as receiving the word with faith and obedience: obeying
the truth is the true worship. Those that do not this, are called stifnecked,
such as will not bow. And such are the Bishops, Act. 7.
who yet in the mean mock God with a beggarlie sign of such obedience: which
therefore is not apt to stir up the dull mind of man to a remembrance of this
duty to God, but is a mere complement, a show: And indeed this and other
their ceremonies, insteade of doing good, serve thousands for a religion, or
a show of one, and in place of that which God commands.

For brevitie sake, I omit to speak of other cathedral ceremonies, and to
observe the like popery, tyranie and abuse in many of their canons, courts
and customs as is showed in the Curtain of church power, Curtain of Church
power.
certain it is, that many have little religion besides, and that many who
defend them, do it on purpose, to make them inductions to other popery, and
because they are fit maskes to cover their popish, or profane practices. So
that being thus grossly abused, they may, and by their own rule ought to be
taken away and clean rejected. But they will have nothing reformed, or
changed: yet they themselves, as others before them, have changed the ordinance
of God, which is a most adulterous fact: and therefore whereas some say, if we
go about to alter, or reform any thing, we shall never be quiet, till all
be brought to Annabaptisme, or Brownisme. I answer this is, as if one should
say, you may not turn a woman from popery or adultery, for fear she turn
Annabaptist. They should therefore deal plainly with us, and say, to maintain
their hierarchy, the greatness of a few Prelates; their pomp, their coaches
and palaces, the truth must be suppressed, the church and common weal
corrupted, and the whole world disturbed. Mic. 3.11.
The heads thereof judge for reward etc. yet they lean upon the Lord, and say,
is not the Lord among us? None evil can come upon us. Her prophets are light
and treacherous persons: Zepha. 3.4. Eze. 22.26 Haba. 1 3.
her priests have polluted the sanctuary, they have done violence to the law.
There are that raise up strife and contention. Therefore the law is slacked, and
judgment does never go forth: for the wicked compass about the righteous:
therefore wrong judgment proceeds. They so wrest the truth to maintain
their hierarchy and traditions and will not see the truth of God in these
things, that almost all men after their example turn prevaricators. Mic. 2.^.
O thou that art named of the house of Jacob, is the Spirit of the Lord
streitened? are these his doings? do not my words do good to him that walks
uprightly? Therefore trust ye not in lying words, saying, the Temple of the
Lord, Ier. 7.4.
The Temple of the Lord are these: as the English cry, the church, the church,
The church of the Lord are these Bishops and their defenders. Chap. 18.18.
For the law shall not perish from the Priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor
the word from the prophet. The Lord answers such proud men, How do ye say,
we are wise, and the Law of the Lord is with us. Chap. 8, 8.9.
They have rejected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is there in them? for
from the least to the greatest every one is given to covetousnes; from the
prophet to the priest every one deals falsely. For they have healed the hurt
of the daughter of my people, sleightlye; saying, peace, peace, when there is
no peace. They are wicked in these things; Isa. 57.21.
and there is no peace to the wicked says my God.

And therefore whereas some say; there are still some good preachers, yea some
that are conformable. I answer, so were there in those first ages after
Constantine. But the zeal of these Canons and inventions did more and more
take up men's minds, and eat out the other. It is true in this case, as in
that of riches: The church has brought forth riches, dignities, diocessan
dominion, Canons, ceremonies, cringes; Altars; masses, etc. The daughters have
devoured the mother in Romish churches, and so they will in England, if God
prevent it not. And therefore whereas others say, so long as we may have the
Gospel well preached in some parishes, why should we trouble our selves with
these things? I answer ought not such men to take care, that the Gospel may be
continued to them and their children in that purity and simplicity, wherein
it was left by the Apostles? Which, as ye see, can not be, Ier. 2.35.
if those things be not reformed: for they turn from the Truth, yet thou
say, Because I am innocent, surely his anger shall turn from me.
Constantius could never have spread the Arrian heresy, so far as he did, but
by the help of Bishops. For a Bishop being like a King, or a Pope in his
diocese, the most will out of fear, or flattery, follow him, as he does the
Prince or mighty favorite, what ever his religion be, because he can either
raise him to more honor, or trouble him. And therefore it may be said of the
hierarchy, ceremonies and ordinances, and their defenders, If they be not
with Christ and his kingdum, in these cases they are against him; Mat. 12.30.
and if they gather not with him, they scatter and help the Adversaries. For
in these times those that are Christ's seek to get the victory over the Beast,
and over his mark. Some by preaching or writing, Rev. 15.2.
others by their laws and swords, and others by their professing, and
contending earnestly for the faith which was once delivered to the saints:
others by their prayers, and other honest endeavors: While on the other side,
Papists and popelings contend as earnestly for the observation and authority of
trad^tions and ceremonies; which is the mark of the Beast, though they
covering the matter, call them the unwritten word of God.

Bellarmin in his 4. book of the unwritten word of God Chap. 2, makes three
sorts of traditions. 1. Divine, which were spoken by Christ, but not written; 2
Apostolic, spoken by the Apostles, but not written. 3. Ecclesiastical, which,
he says, are introduced from ancient customs by the Prelates, or by the
people, and creepingly by the silent, and vnquestioning agreement of the
people, have gained strength of law. And indeed have at one time or other
been confirmed by councels. A man may here see, what mischief followed the
first vnquestioning agreement and consent of the people. For of this sort, as
the fountain of all the rest, is the authority of diocessan Bishops, their
power in their Courts and Canons, excommunicating, imprisoning etc. and ruling
both the ordinary pastors and people with force and cruelty in diverse things;
which, as was showed, did creepingly by the silent and vnquestioning agreement
of the people gain the strength of law, and supplanted the presbiterie
ordained of God, and the power of each congregation in choosing their minister
and excommunicating the refractarie; and so made of none effect that law of
Christ, Tell the church, the presbyters and people. Ezech. 34.2. to. 12.
And then the diocessan office served not to feed the flock of God, but
themselves: the flock became a prey to such Shepherds: yea diocessan power,
being thus invented and established, became a snare, and net, as the Prophet
said to the Priests, and house of the King. For then followed their
traditions, the distinction of meats, Hos. 5.1.
the observation of holy days, feasts and fasts, wearing the surplesse, and
more then six hundred years after Christ the latin service, singing antemes
by the sound of the organs, setting up of Altars, bowing to them, and at the
name of Jesus, building, guilding, adorning, and consecrating of cathedral
churches, endowing them with great revenues, signing themselves with the sign
of the cross, setting up Images in churches to a religions use, and likewise
candles, invocation of Saints, and praying upon beads; the Popes succession in
Peter's chair, single life of Priests, purgatory, and persecution to those
that would not believe these and the like things. All which were introduced
from ancient customs, by the Prelates or people, and creepingly gained
strength of law one after another; and in short time served men for a religion;
the defense of the first making way for all the rest, as men do now begin to
perceive in England; where, as the hierarchy it self, so diverse of these
things, being popish, are preached by Bishops and others, and begin to get the
strength of law, and naturally to make way for the rest, and indeed to serve
men for a religion, if God prevent it not: 2. Cor. 11.3.
So soon does the Serpent through his subtlety beguile men, and corrupt
their minds from the simplicity that is in Christ, for as we showed, they
do not tend to edification, as is pretended, but to destruction, seeing
Bishops by them do rule men with force and cruelty Ezech. 34.4.

The word of God, and such observations as rightly arise from it, do truly
edify, so do the Sacraments, to men that know the truth: the inventions and
ordinances of men, having but a show of godliness, and Wisdom, are but
beggarly rudiments, yea turn from the Truth: Col. 1.23. Gal. 4.8. Tit. 1.14.
And yet so things go, as if the authority of the Prelates, which puts all men
to silence, or makes them flatter, might give them the strength of Law, and
make men believe that Gods will is, that they should be obeyed, which is in
effect, to make them his unwritten word: For his will is his word. But this is
as the unwritten word, the Papists talk of; and ye see they do but talk of
it: For they confess these things were introduced from ancient customs, and
creepingly by the silence of the people, who were urged to conformity by the
flattering and menacing clergy, and loath to be counted Schismatikes,
Refractarie and Puritans, they gained the strength of Law, some sooner, some
later, but all in a like manner, as being the inventions of ambition, will
worship, superstition and tyranie: to which God gave them over, because like
the Angels, they kept not their first Estate, Romans 1.20
they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, they did not abide in
the truth, nor in these cases received the love thereof; but as the flattering
defenders of the English hierarchy and traditions, they scorned and mocked all
that opposed them, and sought purity in Religion, as fools, Schismatikes, and
hypocrites, that strained as they say, at gnats, and made schisms about
trifles: this mocking was that which gave all manner of corruption strength and
in crease as it does in England. Where he is reckoned a wise able divine that
knows how to scoff such men out, Gal. 5.9.
as Papists did. A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump: They thus corrupted,
were given over to believe lies.

This aversion from the creators word, was a conversion to the word of
creatures, to the decrees of men, in Synods and councels: Ier. 2, 13.
It was a forsaking of the Lord, the fountain of liveing waters, and hewing
them out broken cisterns that can hold no water: And because they did not take
the mark of God, to contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the
Saints, and seek to get the victory over the Beast, and his Image and mark,
as all Christians should, God gave them over to take the mark of the Beast, to
worship him and his Image, and to drink of the golden cup, which the great
whore holds, full of abominations, Reu. 17.
and filthiness of her fornication: Such honor, offices, dominion, power,
worship ceremonies and Religion, as God never ordained. But what cared they, so
they could but, by their flattery and false glosses, get the consent and
help of Princes, and make them believe this was to defend the Church, which
either as they did, or omitted, God would prosper or punish them: For thus they
made Emperors and Kings take pleasure to assist them: and so as the Prophet
says, Hos. 7.3.
They make the King glad with their wickedness, and the Princes with their
lies: And so indeed did the false Prophets in Ieremies time, and likewise in
the time of Ahab and other Kings. And therefore the Angel seeing the great
wickedness of the whore of Babylon in these things, and the destruction that
was ready to fall on her for them says, Reu. 18.2.3.
Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of
deuls, and the hold of every foul Spirit, and a cage of every unclean and
hateful bird: for all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication. (viz. to which God in his wrath gave her and them over) And the
Kings of the earth have committed fornication with her (enforcing her Laws and
errors on th^ire subjects) and the Merchants of the earth are waxed rich
through the abundance of her delicacies: that is, which she had need of for
the maintaining of the pomp of her Prelates, ceremonies and Tempels; The
merchandise of gold, and silver, and precious stones, and of pearls, ver. 12,
and fine linen, and purple, and silk, odours and frankencense etc.

Now observe this committing of fornication with her is of two sorts. 1. When
Kings and States give their power and strength to the Beast and Church of
Rome, fighting his battles, and enforcing her Laws, customs, and errors on
their people. 2. When they commit some of the same evils, or the like, though
not all, as she does: Kings commit fornication with her, who do it in some
things, though not in all: Yea though they do them not in obedience to her, or
to please or serve her. Henry 8. denied the Popes supremacy, yea, was at
difference with the Church of Rome, in some things, yet still committed
fornication with her in other things, by houlding and maintaining diverse other
of the Romish Laws, errors and customs. Any man holds the Doctrine of
Balaam, that lays a stumbling block before the people, though it be not the
very same kind of stumbling block; which Balaam taught, but some other. To be
guilty of Ierobams sin was not always to set up calves: but he departed not
from the sins of Jeroboam, who by any other invention, or presumption, made
Israel to sin. Some follow the way of Kaine, Jude 11.
some perish in the gainsaying of Corah, and some are cast away by the
deceitfulnes of Balams wages, though not in the same particulars, nor in the
same manner, but in a like. So do some Kings commit fornication with Babylon,
who maintain any of her presumptions, or any like them. The Greek Churches,
from the year 607. that the Pope had obtained to be called universal Bishop,
have separated from the Church of Rome; denying not only the supremacy but
even worshipping of Images, and some other Romish errors: Yet in retaining the
hierarchy of diocessan, Provincial, and Patriarchall Bishops, the mass, and
diverse other Romish customs, errors, and ceremonies, both before the year
607. and since, they have committed fornication with her. While in these
things their fear toward God is also taught by the traditions and precepts of
men, they have cause to fear, Christ will not find them to be of his
Jerusalem, but of Babylon the great, not of his true Church, but of the
Synagogue of Satan: For he reckons all to be of the one or the other. The
second council of Nice taught and commanded worshipping of Images: And then
the Greek Emperor with his mother Irene and many Greeks, committed
fornication in that particular with Babylon. M. Moulin observes how absurd and
weak the reasons of thar council were: Buckler of the faith, in preface,
Yet if Kings and councels once maintain such errors, how weak and foolish
soever their reasons be, many are soon ready to follow and flatter their
pernicious ways: So likewise in matter of the Lords day, or any other
commandment of God, if they give allowance to Profane or break it; you do
in vain tell their flatterers of Gods Law: they will stop your mouth, or cry
you down with urging the Laws of men, the Kings injunctions, or the like
shifts, the common refuges of the most superstitious and Profane men: How
absurdly do such in their much magnified common prayer say, Lord have mercy
upon us and incline our hearts to keep this Law, when they thus allow and
defend the breach of it?

It is a very poor honor to maintain a power and Prerogative in such cases
against the Lord, and his ordinances and Servants: Kings do at last take
these things into consideration, when after the new Jerusalem is manifested,
they bring their glory and honor to it. They then begin to see that the
government is on Christ's Shoulders; that men ought to observe his ordinances
only in matters of Religion: that for want of holding this firm, many
abominations have entered into churches and nations: That all these evils
follow that error, that the church has power to ordame, change or abrogate
ceremonies, without any necessity, like that, where, in some countries, by
reason of their coldness, the body is not dipped in Baptism, but sprinkled.
For when Prelates have once got this conclusion to be received, that we are
bound to the ceremonies and institutions of the church, so that whosoever does
wittingly neglect them is guilty of disobedience, and breach of the first
commandment; as it pleases them to infer; they can not rest there: but then
they get more ground of us, and taking it for granted that themselves are the
church, they say we are to ascent to the opinions of the church in
controversies of faith, and may not forsake their definitions, although they
do not agree to our own particular opinions therein. And that they will call
our own particular opinions, which, though it have the testimony of Jesus,
agrees not with theires; men that by their seeking after wealth, honor, and
authority show that they are of this world: And when they have also got this
tenet to be once received, they can, at the pleasure of any that may, advance
them, introduce any error of the Romish church, or other wicked men, and by
their power carry it out against the most learned and zealous. They will
boldly affirm the office of diocessan Bishops to be of divine institution:
That the Sacraments confer grace ex opere operato: so of other things, wherein
they will under one pretext or other, forbid refutation of such errors:
knowing that if they can but get the countenance of Princes, though never so
ignorant in such things, the most will out of fear or flattery follow them,
and the rest will be forced to hold in their heads; and so they easily get a
dominion over men's faith: such shameful lukewarmenes, error and temporising
does the defense of the hierarchy and ceremonies bring forth, and so great a
stumbling block are they to make men fall to other Romish corruptions and
errors: which indeed are the natural fruits of that tree. Councels and Kings
do not think of those things, why tempt ye God to put a yoke upon the neck
of the Disciples, Act. 15.10 Romans 14.13.
which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear. Judge this rather, that
no man put a stumbling block or an occasion to fall in his brothers way. But
as if these precepts did not bind them, they put heavy yoakes on the necks
of Christians, and manifest stumbling blocks in men's ways, as Babylon has
done and therefore no marvel if the Angel say, The Kings of earth have
committed fornication with her. Of whom therefore, and their flatterers, God
may demand, as sometime of the Jews what iniquity they or their fathers had
found in him: what want of wisdom or perfection in his Testament and
ordinances, that they were gone from him after their vanities and inventions.
It is true, that when Kings are entertained into cities in triumph, they are
often pleased with their magnificent pageants and shows, because they are new
inventions: but God is not as man: He has in all things prescribed us a form
of worship and service, he has given us a tree of life, that has its propper
leaves: and therefore Kings and Magistrates should know that men's inventions,
how ancient soeever they be, are dangerous: that they are not Governors
against, or besides, but under God in their dominions, to see his will
performed: and withal that they are so much the more justly called Gods, and
truly honorable, as they rightly seek to do, and have all things done,
according to his revealed word.

When on the other side they enforce on their people men's inventions, and
countenance defenses of them, which are not of the truth: for no^ lie is of the
truth, noe error, 1. Ioh. 2.21. Ioh. 8.
and therefore not of God, but of him that is the father of lies; it is not
God, but Satan that has a throne in them: they maintaining these things, in
ignorance and obstinacy, do not make the Church in their dominions a
Jerusalem, but a Babylon, as See the crown of a Christian Martyr.
the Testimony of Jesus in the Revelation does abundantly manifest: And seeing
the Kings of the earth do in this commit fornication with her: Such as are
Jews indeed, Christians indeed, will rather suffer any thing then be
enforced to serve God after such inventions and precepts of men. Here is the
patience of the Saints, Rev. 14.
here are they that keep the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.
There are many in great Britain and other parts, who have left Babylon in
many of her abominations, but not in all. Some of these are very zealous
against other errors of Babylon, and yet either defend a hierarchy,
traditions and ceremonies, which are Romish, or else are cold against them;
because they are maintained by Kings and convocations of Prelates: who by
their power keep these men from the knowledge of Gods will in these cases,
who otherwise were like enough to follow it, if they might be suffered to see
the proofs thereof. Because these men are not wholly out of Babylon, therefore
that voice of God is surely addressed to such, come out of her my people, Chap.
18.
that ye partake not of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.
Which certainly is not only spoken to such favorers of the Protestant
Religion, as live in Italy and other Popish Kingdoms, but to those also, who
have left Babylon in many things, but not in all, and so seem to have one
foot out of her, and another in her. The voice cries to these, because the
Lord knows, that unless they can say to God in sincerity of soul, Psalm. 119.
with my whole heart have J sought thee, o let me not wander from thy
commandments: I hate vain inventions, but thy Law do I love, they are not
Jews indeed, they neither have right to the tree of life, nor can enter in
through the Gates into the new Jerusalem, but do indeed remain without, with
dogs, sorcerers etc. Rev. 22.14.15. And if they had no care of their Souls,
yet in regard of those plagues of Babylon, whereof they may partake in this
world, they have cause to leave her follies, and come out of her: For her
sins have reached unto heaven, Rev. 18.
and God has remembered her wickedness. Certainly in these late wars of
Germany and other parts, he has begun to avenge it, and to show that the sixth
vial being powered out, such are the effects of it. Great rewards does God
offer to him that overcommeth, and that questionles as well by war, as
spiritual weapons. He that is called faithful and true, Chap. 19.
does in righteousness judge and make war against her that sits on many
waters: and so do these that fight his battails. To them that voice cries,
Reward her as she has rewarded you, and double unto her double according unto
her works. In the cup etc. For she says in her heart, I sit as a Queen and am
no widow, and shall see no sorrow: Therefore shall her plagues come in one
day, death and mourning and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire:
for strong is the Lord who judges her. Notwithstanding that she seems daily
to strengthen her self by plots, devises and friends, by Jesuitical and
Spanish practices; yet fall she must. Many think this cannot yet be, because
England does not yet set against her, as if God could not fulfill his work
without the aid of lukewarm helpers, Ioh. 18.
and newters: Christ says, Every one that is of the truth hears my voice:
Therefore if English Prelates and others that bear sway there, do not hear
it in these things, they have cause to doubt that they are not in all things
of the truth, nor quite come out of Babylon. I wonder how they can evince unto
themselves, that they are not of Babylon the great, nor partake of her sins,
who have no more zeal against her. Marvel not that they do not desire to
have swords drawn against her, who scarce endure that the sword of the Spirit
should be unsheathed against Babylon, much less against those tenets of their
own, which are Romish and Antichristian.

The ministers of the french and dutch churches, though they be not wholly
excercised in points controverted, which were no wisdom, seeing there are many
other points of faith and salvation, wherein the people are also to be built up
and fortified; yet they scarce make a Sermon, but in something or other, they
confute popery, and establish the people in the truth, as God requires. If
English Prelates have not made this course to be in a sort forbidden, yet men
say that by discountenancing of such preaching, they have at least put it out
of fashion, as foolish and unprofitable; while in the mean, they are
contented and desirous that men should preach and contend for the authority of
their hierarchy, traditions and ceremonies, if not for Arminian tenets. (A
thing that pleases papists, who look for fruit of them, knowing them to be
popish) yea many are so foolish, as to love and praise this kind of preaching,
and to loath the confutation of it, as God complained of the Jews, Ier. 5.31.
The prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means,
and my people love to have it so: and what will ye do in the end thereof?
That is, when destruction comes on you for it. It is strange that men will not
see that this their preaching and contending, for humane inventions and
errors, is to offer strange fire, and the entrance and way to all corruption,
as it was in the Church of Rome; whose superstition and errors crept in by
degrees, and by degrees did eat out true Religion. It will be said, it has
not yet done so in England: both the city and country have many zealous
Christians, yea many that are conformable. I answer, true, yet they are very
few in respect of the rest, and such as bear the Sway: who count zeal against
popery, puritanisme, and are ready to say with them in the Gospel, Ioh. 7.48.
Act. 28.20
Have any of the Rulers or of the Pharisees run this course? but this people who
knows not the Law, are cursed. Because they walk not after the high Priests,
the Bishops. For as concerning this sect, we know it is every where spoken
against. And howsoever these called puritans, whether they be conformable, or
peaceable reformists, are such as will be religious, whether the Bishops like
it or not, as some Jews would be Disciples for all the high Priests Elders and
Pharisees: therefore this is no thanks to Bishops, no fruit of their
government: who like better of civil and ceremonious men, such as pretend love
of common prayer, though they have neither knowledge, true love of the word,
nor affection to defend religion against Papists and their practices, and like
hypocrites do but pretend a love to prayer: For in those prayers they say that
in knowledge of him stands our eternal life. Grant us in this world
knowledge of thy truth: And yet are enemies to this knowledge, and the means
of it, preaching, hearing, conference and reading of some good books. They
pray for increase of grace to hear meekely his word, receive it with pure
affection, and bring forth the fruits of the Spirit: Yet their life and
actions show that they are so far from loveing these things, that they mock and
persecute all those that do, as knaves and hypocrites: Yet in some cases, as
God says of such men, Isa. 58.
they seek me daily and delight to know my ways, as a nation that did
righteousness, and forsook not the ordinance of their God: they ask of me the
ordinance of justice: they take delight in approaching to God: They fast, and
like the Bishops look God should regard them for it. But though men be never
so religious in observing some of Gods ordinances, if they despise or neglect
the rest, or any of them, Deuteronomy. 15.21. chap. 17.1.
the Lord hates that Religion, as a lame sacrifice. Their hands were full of
blood, and in other things they had transgressed the Laws, changed the
ordinance and broken the everlasting covenant: Isa. 1.11.12.13.14.15,
therefore he says to what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices to me?
I am full of the burnt offerings. Bring no more vain oblations: incense is
abomination unto me: New Moons, Sabbaths and appointed feasts, my soul
hates. And when ye make many prayers J will not hear. He counts all this
but complement all religion; and would not hear them in these things, though
he had commanded them; who would not hear him in others. Like the Prelates who
say well, that in baptism we promise to forsake the world, and all the pomp
and vanity thereof: Yet can not be persuaded by Gods word to cast their
crowns their offices, and the pomp and vanity of them, at the feet of
Christ, though it be proved that they are not of God, but of men, of the world,
Romish and do much mischief: but insteade of confuting, they persecute such
as plead Christ's cause in proveing these things, terryfying all men of that
profession, more then any other with their power in the high commission, as
the Papists do Protestants with the iniquisition; striveing to make them
hateful to Princes, and yet keep their proofs from their eyes, as if they
were worse then the tenets of Papists and Arminians, which are not so straightly
prohibited, nor so narrowly looked unto. B. London march. 6. 1632.
Yea a great Bishop in a sermon before the King, charged one that writ for the
presbytery with Arianisme; whether truly or no, I know not; for he namd not
the man, nor the book; for fear least his proofs of the presbiterie should be
looked into: So much do they bewray the rottenness of their cause, that will
not endure touching, nor to be looked upon: and in the mean call upon men to
frequent common prayer, be obedient and conformable to their mother the Church
etc. Being willingly ignorant, that when of old, some began to find fault with
the increase of superstition and tyranie in Romish Prelates and Canons, they
reckoned them Schismatikes, willed men to seek peace, stirred them up to love
of common prayer, conformity in ceremonies and external devotions, building
of Churches etc. Whereby ignorance increased, and the truth was daily more and
more betrayed and sold, till it was too late to reform them.

Princes and noble men could not do it: because they, being nourished in this
ceremonious, and superstitious part of religion, fell themselves into
ignorance, and so into many quarrels and noisome lusts, like the Prelates, one
growing dissolute, another vsu^ping, another circumventing, killing, warring;
as in France between the Kings and the Duks of Burgundy and other Princes: In
England between the howses of york and Lancaster, the Kings and Rebels: they
had not a Gospel truly preached to order and aw them: so they could not see
that all these errors in the Clergy, and indeed in themselves, came from
altering the presbyterall government, and giveing such authority to Bishops,
who for their own ends were ready to side with any of them.

So Protestants in other countries have observed, that when the Palatinate was
loosing, the churches in Germany, France and other parts in great misery;
yet the church of Prelates, and their adherents in England, did little help
them, but rather hindered such as would, siding with the Duke and others,
charged by the parliaments, to practice secretly for the popish party, or a
newtralitie, under color that they were conformable to the English discipline,
and therefore Protestants: but at the best, that is indeed, such as the
hierarchy brings forth; either newters, or men of a mixed religion, partly
popish in the hierarchy, Canons and ceremonies, most followed and maintained,
and partly protestant, in some points of faith, more coldly defended by the
most, who also seemed to think it dangerours to maintain ancient and honest
priveliedges, as free elections, free speaking and parliamentarie power in
searching out, and reforming corruptions in church and common wealth; both the
one and the other being, by some factious, cunningly accounted a puritanicall
zeal, and a trenching upon the prerogative of Princes: when indeed the
prerogative, themselves sought to maintain, was only that of corrupt Prelates
and favorites, who have abused our Kings with such incensings and whisperings,
as the protestations of the parliaments labored to manifest. It is no need to
tell how they were prevented, or that thereupon great divisions followed both
at that time and since, especially in religion: The Prelates not enduring that
the house of Commons should meddle with it, nor with the most notorious
delinquents that did but favor their party, who thus strove to help and
uphold one another, what ever became of the cause of Christ at home or abroad.

Gal. 5.9.
Not to mention what boldness and corruption this has since bred in other
inferior bodies and government. A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump. The
french and other Protestants say these are the fruits of maintaining the
hierarchy and ceremonies, which are Popish, and so serve many for a cloak of
popery, or treachery, or Arminianisme, or prevarication, or persecution, or
newtralitie, or what a man will: whereby the English have been brought into
great contempt, their peace thus attained, being scorned, as savouring of
corruption, or Newtralite, in Religion, and as more helping to support, then
ruin Babylon, and her chief fort and wall, the house of Austria; and as thus
having lost their honor both abroad and at home. The Bishops could cover
all this, and turn the fault upon the puritans, that would not flatter, as
themselves did. And yet in all this, like the Romanists, they bluster with the
name, authority and wisdom of Christ's Church, whether they be truly of it or
the world.

The name Church, if the Greek word be considered signifies coetus evocatus,
a company, or people, called out, Coetus evocatus.
as Israel out of Egypt, or men out of darkness, ignorance, or worldliness.
How few are thus called out of popery, temporising and earthlinesse? I know
diverse Ministers that have subscribed are in all other things of the reformed
Religion, and thoroughly called out of popery, save only that for fear of
loosing their liveings, they dare not see one part of it, in the case of the
hierarchy things that are against the presbiterie: But consider the Church of
England, as the Bishops, that govern it, account it, in themselves and their
adherents, in a Synod, called the Church representative, and maintaining their
power, canons and ceremonies with the fruits and practices of them, who can say
it is coetus evocatus? Much less if you understand it of half a dozen of
Prelates that are courtiers, and in a manner ruling all, are followed and
flattered by many temporising Clergy men, and a world of ignorant gentlemen
and people. And what if one corrupt Bishop get into such favor as to rule all
the rest, shall he like the Pope account himself the Church? Not only all
these ill fruits, but all that are in the Church of Rome came from altering
that order of Bishops which the Apostles left, by setting one presbyter of a
great city over the rest, and giving him first a little authority, as
President of their council, and then a little more, till he came to be
accounted the sole Bishop of a diocese. And therefore as cunning Clarks, as
they make themselves, our savior may in these cases say of them, If you were
blind, Ioh. 9.41.
if ye did confess your blindness; if ye had not the light of Gods word to
show it to you, ye should have no sin; But now ye say we see; chap. 101.
therefore your sin remains. He that enters not by the door into the
sheepefold, but climeth up another way, the same is a thief and a robber. I am
the door. As he is the word of the father, that reveals him, so is he the
door. If a man come with any other Doctrine then the word revealed, or enter
by any other way to be a Pastor, or Governor of the Church, then such lawful
election and mission, as is ordained in the word; if he enter by any other
rule, office, authority, or title, then such as the word allows, he is a
thief and a robber that comes not but for to steal, a hireling, as the
Pharisees were. They complain of lecturers, as unlawful, yet none must
complain of them. Men will not see these things, This peoples heart, Mat.
13.15
says he, is waxed gross and their ears are dull of hearing, and their
eyes have they closed etc. When Christ comes he will distinguish the sheep
from the goats, and know them by this mark, as himself says. My sheep hear
my voice. If ye continue in my word, then are ye my Disciples indeed, my
sheep indeed; otherwise not. This is as well true of them, that are at
Synods, as at Sermons, both the one and the other being but conventicles, if
they continue not in the word, but teach or receive for doctrines precepts of
men.

A diocessan Bishop would, like a player, seem to be that which he is not,
namely a Bishop of the new Testament, when yet he makes them of none effect,
and so is an hypocrit by his office, one that says not against him that would
have presbyters restored, this man is against Gods ordinance, but against the
Doctrine of our Church, a custom, or a canon of a council, and therefore an
hipocrit: but if Christ, shall say to this usurper depart I know you not, I
ordained no such offices, no such canons, who is then the hypocrit? It is true
indeed that among the many orders of the Popish Religion, diocessan Bishops
and their officials are the most ancient: and that secular Priests, which
anciently were presbyters, did before the Nicene council differ little from the
presbiters Christ ordained, save that Bishops had wrunge most of the government
out of their hands: but when loosing power in excommunication, they also
became subject to the Bishops, and to be governed by their Laws, Rules and
canons, as they all by the Pope, they left and lost Christ's mark, and took on
them the mark of the Beast: But then as they had made the presbiterie of none
effect, so the Regulars supplanted them.

There are many orders of these Regulars or Monles, who, having obtained of
Boniface 4. and others after him, to have the administation of the word and
Sacraments, got the hearing of men's confessions, and by degrees stole from
Bishops and Priests all that reputation, which they had with the people, and
became the stoutest champions of the papacy in all the designs thereof, as is
at large proved in Plesses his History of the papacy, progress. 51. etc.
These were the Augustines, Benedictines, Iacobines, Heremits, Carthusians, but
especially the Dominicans and Franciscans, Cordiliers, and Capuchins, and last
of all the Jesuits and fathers of the Oratorie: These and others have all
their several Rules, and so are several Religions: Yet they all have the
mark of the Beast: They all hold of him, and for him, not of Gods word, nor
for it, And so ye have seen also that English Bishops and their officials,
Deanes, Prebends, Subdeanes, Archdeacons, petty canons and the like, do not
hold their authority and right in their orders, to execute their offices,
from Gods word, but from other rotten principles; and have taken them from the
custom and authority of the Pope and Church of Rome, or from a child, or a
woman, Edward 6. or Queen Elizabeth; and that to hold them upon any such
humane authority, or to say the word of God gives leave so to hold them, is to
change the truth of God into a lie, and to worship and serve the creature more
then the creator. For of Christ's Testament they do not, nor cannot, hold them.
If they say from the Nicence council, we have seen the weakness of that hold
in this particular; and indeed that, as well many of the ancient, as of the
later, councels have in many things been carried by men's private interests and
practices, as appears, among other Testimonies, by an Epistle of Bishop
Jewel, annexed to the History of the council of Trent: and further that
Bishops had not then their courts, and such power as afterward, and as they
now have in England, where in the Reformation, it was set up in the same power
the Popish Bishops had enjoyed, if not in greater, because they were freed from
the tyranie of the Pope: and lastly that none of all these have the Testimony
of Jesus for their orders, offices and Rules: They are not of that Temple, or
Church militant which John saw; but of the owter court, though nearer the
Temple and Altar then the Papists. For all that are of that Temple have the
Testimony of Jesus, as well for their offices as Doctrines, which you see
none other have but presbiters, Pastors, helpers and Deacons: Not excluding
such Majestrates and people as are of the reformed Religion: these church
orders and no other have his mark, who when he is ready to power out his last
plague on Babylon, and other cities says, behold I come as a theife: Rev.
16.15.16.
Where I think he means in that last plague against all Antichristian
adversaries, and in the voices, thunders, the exceeding great earthquake and
hail, and the fall of Babylon, which are of it, accompany it, or follow soon
after it, as Revel. 2. Repent or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will
fight against them with the sword of my mouth. For then it is that the Angel
cries, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation
of devils etc. Then Babylon comes in remembrance before God to give her the cup
of the wine of the fircenesse of his wrath: and therefore he adds, Blessed is
he that watches and keeps his garments, least he walk naked, and they see
his shame, that is in lusts and ignorance, or worshipping the Beast, or his
Image, or receiving his mark, in part or in whole. For they that would not do
this, though they may come into trouble for the witness of Jesus, and for the
word of God, yet these seven plagues take not hold of them, Luke 21.36
they watch and are thought worthy to escape these things; they reign with
Christ, and have part in the first resurrection. Rev. 13.
God therefore sends us to see when this vial is powered out, or at least to
hear that voice, It is done, or that Babylon is fallen, is fallen etc. Which
seem to follow close after the pouring out of the seventh vial that it may
drive us to repentance before such lamentable judgments fall on us, at least on
all them, who pertaking with her in her sins are sure to receive of her
plagues, a thing that is not enough regarded by many in England.

Christ also comes as a thief in the last day. And then when he shall look on
the souls of many, who have had voices in Synods, upon the souls of many a
preacher, of many an officer, and many a hearer, and shall see there is little
in them, but the Canons and ceremonies of the pretended church, and a reverent
opinion of them, because of their pretended antiquity; or if they have
knowledge and zeal in many other things (as the Papists have in some) they
withal have zeal and ignorance in these, and their fear toward him has
been taught by the precepts of men; do you think he will ackowledge this for
his mark, or that it may stand together with his (as some think it may in
Papists, who hold the Christian faith and truth in many things) and that he
will not rather say unto them, who required these things at your hands? And not
rather to abide in the word, and suffer your ways to be reproved by it, Ioh.
18.37
for every one that is of the truth hears my voice; he watches and keeps
his garments; that ye would not do in these things, but persecuted them, that,
having the mark and testimony of Jesus, would have drawn you to it: but ye
have mocked at their arguments, and rejoiced to see them prohibited and
trodden under foot, so wretched is the condition of many of the Prelates and
their defenders in England.

And indeed nothing does more show the Rottenness of their cause, and that
they are not of God, then their forbidding of books, written in defense of
Gods ordinances, about the presbiterie, and power he gave each church in
election of presbyters, excommunication, etc. wherein they have been such
cruel adversaries, that they have, by suppressing all books and preachers that
do but touch on these points, left men no means of defending, or knowing, the
truth in such cases, like the Philistines, who suffered not a Smith in the land
of Israel, saying, 1 Samuel 13.19.
least the Hebrews make them swords or spears. This thing alone shows, that
so great power, as Bishops have in the church, can not be of God, and that it
serves chiefly to suppress the truth, and forbid the defense thereof in
these things, and in those others, about Gods free grace in election, free
will, perseverance of the saints, or any thing else that either they do now,
or may hereafter prohibit in doctrine, discipline, or ceremonies, as in like
manner the church of Rome did in one thing or other, till at last she became
full of abominations and filthiness: the first steps whereof were the
establishing and increasing the power of Bishops against the presbiterie, etc.
which gave them power to effect their pleasures in these and all other things.
About the year 400 a council in Carthage did forbid to read the books of
the Gentiles, but allowed them to read the books of the Heretics; the Decree
whereof is amongst the Canons collected by Gratian. Histor. of the counc. of
Trent p. 472.
This, says a learned Author, was the first prohibition by way of Canon: for
in the church of Martyrs there was none. The books of Heretics, containing
doctrine, condemned by Councels, were often forbid by the Emperors for good
government: So Constantine forbad the books of Arrius; Arcadius those of the
Eunomians and Maniches; Theodosius those of Nestorius; Martinus those of the
Euticheans, and in Spain King Ricardus those of the Arrians: But this is no
warrant for Kings, or Prelates, to forbid those which are written in defense of
the presbiterie, or any of Gods ordinances. It sufficed the Councels and
Bishops to show what books contained damned or Apocryphal doctrine. Idem.
So did Gelasius in the year 494. and went no further, leaving it to the
conscience to avoid them, or read them to a good end. After the year 800. as
the Popes of Rome assumed a great part of the politik government, so they
caused the books, whose Authors they did condemn to be burned, and forbad the
reading of them. Notwithstanding one shall find but few books forbid in this
sort, till this age. Martin 5. does in a Bull excommunicate all the Sects of
Heretics, especially Wicklifists, and Hussites, not mentioning those who read
their books, though many of them went about. Lev. 10. Condemning Luther, did
with all forbid his books upon pain of excommunication. After Popes did the
like. The Inquisitors made Catalogues of those whom they knew. Philip King of
Spain was the first that gave a more convenient form in the year 1558.
making a law that the Catologue of books, prohibited by Inquisition, should be
printed. After this example Paul 4 caused an Index, composed by that office to
be printed in the year 1559. At last all they pleased were fetched into this
number, to deprive men of all means of knowledge. A better mystery was never
found then to use religion to make men insensible. So do English Bishops, who
though they follow not the same form, yet they use another as rigorous and
prevalent: They have the licencing and censuring of books in these cases, and
so are both Judges and parties; they can scoff suspend, fine, imprison;
silence and degrade whom they please; yea men in these cases go in jeopardie
of their liveings and lives: by which means, as by the weapons of their
warfare, they must needs obtain their cause, as the Romanists have theires;
so like are they in some things to Babylon the mother of Harlots, Ioh. 8.43.44.
and to those Jews, to whom Christ says: Why do ye not understand my my
speech? even because ye cannot hear my word, ye are of your father the devil,
and the lusts of your father ye will do: he was a murderer from the
beginning, and abode not in the truth: he is a liar and the father of it. And
because I tell you the truth, ye believe me not. He that is of God hears Gods
words: ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God.

Judge therefore whether it be not with good cause, that some English, who hold
with the Geneva and french reformations, have said that the English hierarchy,
dominion, and practice of the Prelates, and many of their canons, customs,
courts, and ceremonies, are popish, and a part of the mark of the Beast; not
so much in those, who have of infirmity subscribed, yet do not defend them,
as in them that maintain these things, scorn them that do not, and will not
see the mischiefs that follow; that in these cases men cannot without great
trouble freely speak, or write the truth to convince them: that they bring
forth popish fruits, flattery, superstition, ignorance, non residencie,
ambition, profane mocking, newtralitie, Episcopal tyranie, wicked policies,
Arminianisme and the like; and that therefore they ought to be abolished: That
these evils do so increase through their power and practices, that they may
justly fear, that Christ will one day show them to their cost, that this
maintaining of them against the reasons and proofs of them that in the
reformed churches hold the ordinances of God, is not to savor the things that
are of God, but those that are of men; not to have the mark of God but rather
that of the Beast: that at least some of them are in diverse respects Popish, and
tend to popery; and that therefore, if to maintain that they ought to be
obeyed, be neither directly nor indirectly to worship the beast, and his Image,
or take a part of his mark, yet they have their original, and first
authority, from her, who taxing the offices and ordinances of Christ of
insufficiency for the government of the Church, is the mother of fornications
and abominations of the earth, that the mystery of iniquity began to work
in these things, and when they are utterly confuted or taken away, it will
begin to cease working. Rev. 16.17.
In that their last plague, this voice will be heard, It is done: That while
Christ is thus spoken against in his officers and ordinances, the hearts of
many are discovered, that they stand not so much for the truth of God, as the
traditions of men: That they in England, who make these things indifferent,
innocent and trifles, do cover with a covertng, but not of his Spirit, they
full of wrath, do not favor the pouring out of the last vial, much less pray
for it: though it be a great mercy to his people, and only full of wrath, to
his enemies. That the Kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, which all
Christians should seek, does suffer more prejudice by such temporising and
daubing, then by the malice of such as are the professed enemies of religion:
That they have hereby so vpheld the power and rigor of the Prelates, that men
begin to cry out, that under color of maintaining their authority, they
shake the defense of Religion against Papists, and bring in the defense of
Altars, Images, and such precisenes in ceremonies, that we are like to be
coosoned of our Religion, and loose it in the fire of humane inventions,
diocessan power, superstition, avarice, ambition and persecution, as by the
same means, and the like, the Church of Rome lost the love of the truth, and
was given over to strong delusions to believe lies, unto the everlasting ruin
of many millions of Souls; which is an evil so great, and so sure a root of
all evils, that the Church of England, and all the Souls therein, should
rather seek to prevent it by watchfulnes and due reformation, then by mocking
and scorning the reasons of reformists, as groundles opinions, full of
curiosity, schism and puritanisme, to discover their own shame, and keep
the way broad to her own corruption and ruin; or at least to the corruption
and destruction of many thousands of Souls, who live in the pale of that
Church, and covering themselves under the veil of conformity are Popish, or
newters, or mere civil men, or Profane, or persecutors, and will not be made
to see, that in this manner the church of Rome began to be Babylon.

And yet in the mean by her prosperity, and deliverance from heathen
persecutions, she judged her self to be beloved of God, and that he was well
pleased, with the authority of her Prelates, traditions, inventions and
ceremonies; as Philip King of Spain, hardly escaping a danger at sea, said,
Histor. of the counc. of Trent lib. 5. page 417.
he was delivered by the singular providence of God to root out Lutheranisme,
which he presently sought to do, as English Prelates think God has long
preserved them in their pomp and power, to root out reformists, called
puritans, and judge of the favor of God toward them, and their hierarchy and
traditions, by the deliverances from the Marian persecution, the Spanish
invasion, and the long time of peace and prosperity they, the Church has
enjoyed, when all other Churches have been under the cross. A strong
evidence, say they, that God was therewith well pleased (which is the argument
of them that burnt incense to the Queen of heaven: for then, say they, we had
plenty, and were well and saw no evil) Not considering that in the Spanish
invasion and the powder treason, the axe, for some sins was laid to the
root of the tree; that though God, seeing some in that land did seek the
truth, and mourn for the abominations that were done therein, did in mercy
spare the same, yet his mercy and long suffering leads to repentance: That
Rome and Italy, from the time of Constantine to the inundation of the Goths
and Vandals, enjoyed as great peace and plenty, and no doubt glorified her
self therein, that her hierarchy, traditions and ceremonies, which then had
not done much more hurt to the Kingdom and truth of God, then the English now
have, were pleasing to God, seeing while other Churches were plagued, she was
at rest. Athanasius and Basil travailing in the East, and groaning under the
burden of the Arrians and other miseries, writ to the Bishops of Italy and
France, Basil. Epi. 70. Epist. 78.
It being impossiblo, say they, that they should be ignorant of our miserable
estate, so well known through out the world: Therefore they redoubled their
letters, conjuring them to inform the Emperor of these troubles in the East:
from whom, and not from Damasus, they hoped for redress. But in the mean,
the Churches of Rome, Italy and France, being in prosperity, neglected
their afflicted brethren, Epist. 10.
and were no comfort to them: For if the Anger of God, says Basil, continue
still upon us, what comfort will the pride of the west afford us? who neither
do know, neither yet will have the patience to be rightly informed of the truth
of things etc. we have, says he, venerable brethren set our eyes upon you;
but our hope has proved vain: etc. And yet this thirteen years long do we
continue in this war. Which in effect has been the complaint of the french
and German Protestants to the Prelates of England, from whom they have found
as little pity, and help in their distresses: The arm is often let blood to
cure some part of the body. 1. Pet. 4.17
If judgment, as it often does, begin at the house of God, what shall the end be
of them that obey not the Gospel? Therefore seeing in the English reformation,
many Popish things were left unreformed, she has cause to fear, it will be
said of her, as sometime of Judah: Ier. 3.10,
Yet for all this her treacherous sister has not turned unto me with her whole
heart, but fainedly, says the Lord. But let the Church of England therefore
take heed, that she do not now glorify her self as foolishly, as the
Churches of Rome and Italy then did, Rev. 18. Chap. 3.
and now do, to say, J sit as a Queen, and am no widow and shall see no
sorrow, or like Laodicea who said; I am rich and increased with goods and have
need of nothing, and knew not that she was wretched, and miserable and poor,
and blind and naked. When the last plague is ready to be powered out, Christ
says Behold I come as a thief: That is to judge and plague such secure ones:
And indeed as now, so in those days, the Churches of Italy were in greater
pomp and prosperity, then any other Christian Churches, but withal their
fear toward God was more taught by the precepts of men, there was more
superstition and Ecclesiastical tyranie; therefore they were not more happy,
but indeed more miserable, as the spiritual misery does far exceed the
bodily and temporal.

Is it not so in the Churches of great Britain, in comparison of other
Protestant Churches? I am afraid, that as in that Italian ease and rest, there
was a flood preparing for them, which soon brake out in the inundation of the
Goths and Vandals, and many strong delusions, wherein they still remain
insecuritie: So there may be some other a brewing for the Churches of England
and Scotland: As I can not conceive what they shall be: For that is a secret in
the power of God, who only holds such cups of affliction and punishment in
his hand, tempers them, and when he pleases makes a nation drink the dregs
of them: So I cannot see how such evils should possibly be avoided without a
serious and effectual repentance and reformation. Let not men deceive
themselves to think, because the Prelates preach some good things, that
therefore all both is, and will go well enough, For so, you may be sure, did
the Prelates of Rome and Italy in those times: as Hierom says, There is the
confession of Christ: Hiero. ad Marcell. Viduam.
but there is also ambition and tyranie. They had the knowledge of God in many
things, and taught it, but in matters of the presbiterie, and the contraries,
Prelates, canons and ceremonies, they could not abide it; nor that Emperors
and Princes should come to the knowledge of it. They geered, scorned and
persecuted such as labored to bring them to that which was once delivered to
the Saints: cunningly putting their own fault upon their adversaries, making
them hypocrites, filthy dreamers, Jude. 8.11.12.
such as speak evil of the things they know not, and are as Jude speaks,
Clouds without water, carried about with winds, raging waves of the Sea, and
wandering stars: Such as can make a man an offendour for a word, Isa. 29.21.
and turn aside the just for a thing of naught; and calling them heretics, or
schismatikes, seemed to show mercy to them that they punished them no more.
Hos. 6.4.5.6.
But their mercy was as a morning cloud. They sacrificed to God of their
own inventions and will worshhip: But, says he, I desired mercy, and not
sacrifice, and the knowledge of God more then burnt offerings: But they like
men have transgressed the covenant, there have they dealt trecherously with me.
The Italians doing it in matters of Ecclesiastical government and traditions,
it was the root of all evils, spiritual and temporal. And is it not so in
England, and Scotland? of whom God may also say, as sometime of Israel and
Judah, Ephraim what should I do unto thee? O Judah what should J do unto
thee? For thy mercy is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it goes away
I pray God that the churches of England and Scotland, being in sins like
these, and indeed like those of Italy, in the times of Damasus and Syricius,
be not also like them in punishments, spiritual and temporal: and that as
Jeremy says, in a like case, because they were not ashamed when they had
committed abominations, as in these particulars of Bishops, Ier. 6.15.16.
traditions, and ceremonies; wherein though the voice of God have cried both to
the one and the other. Stand ye in the ways, and see and ask for the old
paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest unto
your souls; and has often by his servants proved the presbiterie to be the
old and good way: yet be it never so old, never so good, they say, non
ambulabimus in ea, we will not walk in it. I have conceived some hope of the
churches and people of great Britain, that they will also now at the last
begin to leave the church of Rome in these things, which are part of her sins
(and the root of them all) lest still pertaking with her in them, they also
receive of her plagues: and therefore I thought it my duty, so far as God has
enabled me, to do mine endeavor to make them see the things that belong to
their peace. The Lord of his mercy stir up and enable men to further so
necessary a work, and grant unto us that we being delivered out of the
hands of our ennemies, may serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of our life. Luke 1.74.
Now unto him that is able to do abundantly above all that we can ask or
think, according to the power that works in us, unto him be glory in the
church by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages world without end.

AMEN.

