THE CONDVIT of Comfort. Containing sundry comfortable Prayers, to the
strengthening of the faith of a weak Christian. By Abr. Fleming. The fifth
Jmpression.

Printed at London by A. M. and are to be sold by Fr. Grove at his shop without
Newgate. 1624.

To the Christian Reader.
TO avoid all doubt of deceit (Christian Reader) which might be thought to lie
lurking under this glorious title, The Conduit of Comfort, we will make an
Anatomy of this Encheridion, or Manuel, opening the very body, and laying out
the bowels thereof before the eyes of thy judgment. Note therefore every
member, for thy full satisfaction, as follows.

The Anatomy of this Manuell.
The Conduit of Comfort. The Contemplation of a Christian. The Lords Prayer
expounded by Sentence, and Example. The Common Creed expounded by Sentence, and
Example. The Ten Commandments. expounded by Sentence, and Example.
The Appurtenances to this Conduit.
The Cesterne is Conscience. The Pipe is Peace. The Lock is Love. The Key is
Knowledge.
THE CONDVIT OF COMFORT.
A Morning Prayer for a Family
MOst gracious God, and omnipotent Father, which do from the Throne of thy
grace behold all the wickedness of mortal Men; pardon we beseech thee our
most lamentable and grievous sins, and wash them away by the precious blood
of thy most blessed Son Christ Jesus, who dyed to save us sinful men, of
which sort we are the most miserable and wicked. We give thee most hearty
thanks (O Lord) that thou have brought us safe to the beginning of this day,
and raised us from the sin of Sloth and Ignorance; and grant (O Lord) that
we may so spend this day that it may be most to thy glory, and the comfort of
our own Souls; give us grace most heavenly Father, that we may follow our
vocations whereunto thou have called us, and that we may do always those
things which may be righteous in thy sight; Grant these our humble petitions
most heavenly Father, and all things necessary for us, for thy dear Sons
sake Christ Jesus, to whom with thee and the blessed Trinity, be all Honor and
Glory both now and for ever more, Amen.

An Evening Prayer for a Family.
OH Everlasting Lord God, and merciful Father, we thy poor and wretched
Creatures from the bottom of our hearts, give thee most humble and hearty
thanks, that of thy mercy thou have vouchsafed to nourish us with thy
goodness, and by thy power preserved us from all dangers and perils that might
have befalne us this day, yea and at all times of our life heretofore: We most
humbly beseech thee in the merits of thy Son Christ Jesus our blessed Lord and
Savior, not to respect our unworthiness, but in his grave to bury our
misdeeds which we either wittingly or ignorantly have done. Especially those
sins which this day we have committed against thy divine Majesty, either in
thought, word or deed. O Lord be merciful unto us, and forgive us the evil
that we have committed, and supply the good which we have omitted; Lord
restore what we have lost, lighten our darkness, and alter the whole course of
our minds, that nothing may be wanting in us to the setting forth of thy
praise. We beseech thee (O Lord) according to thy goodness, to defend us this
night from all perils and dangers: keep us from fearful dreams and vain
cogitations: preserve our bodies from eternal death, and our souls from
everlasting damnation. Grant these things O Lord, and all other thy graces
requisite for us, even for thy Son Christ Jesus sake: In whose name we conclude
this our unworthy prayer, in that form of prayer which he in his Gospel has
taught us saying, Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for the obtaining of Grace.
In this wicked world,
O Christ whiles I live,
To govern and guide me,
thy spirit of grace give.
WOrship, Praise, Honor, Glory, and Majesty, be given unto thee, O God, my
Creator; to thee, O Christ, my Redeemer, and to thee, O holy Ghost, my
Sanctifier; for all the blessings of thy grace most plentifully powered upon
me: for my election, my Creation, my Redemption, my sanctification, and for
all other thy good gifts and benefits: beseeching thee (O sweet Savior,)
that as by thy bitter death and passion, the power of sin was suppressed, the
concupiscence of the flesh subdued, the wickedness of the world assuaged, and
the maliciousness of Satan quenched; so it would please thee to ouer-shadow
me with the Shield of thy favor, that I a painful pilgrim, and weary
wanderer in the world, may pass my pilgrimage in peace of conscience:
comforting me with the hope of thy promises, which wilt and can refresh the
fainting soul, and restore it when it is attainted with any dangerous disease.
O Christ, my Phisician, so prepare the thoughts of my heart unto thee, that I
may be swallowed up in the contemplation of Heaven, and heavenly joys, not
regarding the vanities of this world, which are but baits and snares to
entangle us, and to make us loathsome in thy sight. Give me grace (O thou Son of
David) to live in the world, as ready to leave the world. Let the world
continue as thou did make it, even a servant for the maintenance of men:
and not a soueraign to rule and have them at commandment. And because thy
Kingdom, O Christ, is not of this world, give me (I beseech thee) such a
renewed heart, such a sanctified soul such a godly desire, and such an earnest
endeavor to do thy will, that I contemning this wicked world, with all the
transitory pleasures of the same, may reign with thee in thy kingdom,
purchased for the faithful, even by thy precious Blood, Death and Passion:
Grant this, O Christ, my Mediator, at the appointed time of thy good will and
pleasure. Amen.

A Prayer for thankfulness to God for his gifts.
For Wisdom and Wealth,
with other gifts more,
Lord, give me the grace
To thank thee therefore.
Jesus Christ, thou which art the Wisdom of thy Father, I thy poor creature
sometimes a slave to sin, and a firebrand of Hell: but now a child of
election and grace, (as I hope and constantly believe,) give thee hearty thanks
for thy goodness, diverse and sundry ways testified unto me. And because it
has pleased thee to be so bountiful, as to endue me with Wisdom, whereas
thou might have made me a senseless and unreasonable creature; beside
that, blessed me with worldly wealth: I beseech thee, be so gracious unto me,
as to show me the way how to use this Wisdom to thy glory, and the comfort of
other: not boasting therein, because it is thy free gift: nor abusing it,
because it is thy blessing. Also (O sweet Savior, and Son of the eternal
God) because wealth without thee, is but wretchedness: riches, poverty, and
all earthly pleasures, but mere miseries: I beseech thee, to shine into my
heart with the bright beams of thy Spirit, that I may like a faithful
Steward, not only dispose and lay out the talent, which thou have lent me: but
also increase the same: making thy glory the mark whereat to direct all my
doings: and thy word the rule to keep me within the compass of thy will. O
Christ hear me, O hear me sweet Savior,) which art the Well of life, whereof
whosoever tastes, he shall never see Death: Hear me, O gracious Redeemer,
and let me feel inwardly the fruits of my faithful prayer, Amen.

A Prayer for Love, and Unity with all men.
To live in love,
all men among,
Give grace, O Christ,
to old and young
LOrd Jesus, thou Pattern of true and unfeigned love: yea, of love leading to
life everlasting* without whom there can be no love or concord among men: I
beseech thee, to hear the prayer of me thy poor servant: and that which I
ask in spirit, vouchsafe to give me of thy free mercy. And because love is the
fulfilling of the Law, and the seal of salvation to the consciences of all
Christians. Furthermore, for so much as thou have commanded us to do good to
all men, which cannot be, unless love be the lamp to give us light: I beseech
thee, to fill my heart with that love; yea, to pour that love abundantly into
the hearts of all, both old and young, that we may first and principally love
Almighty God the Father: thee, O Christ the Son, and the holy Ghost, with
such a love as is loath to turn the favor of God into displeasure, his
gentleness into rigor, his mercy into judgment, and his forbearance into
vengeance. Secondly, to love my Sovereign Prince, whom I am bound in
conscience to obey: to love my superiors, to love mine equals, to love mine
inferiors, to love mine enemies: Finally, to love all, and hate none, that by
this means I may dwell in God the Fountain of love: who of mere love for the
salvation of the soul of man, sent thee (O my Savior) into the world to
suffer death up on the cross, even in the face of his enemies and persecutors.
Grant this, O Christ, to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be all
praise and glory for evermore, Amen.

A Prayer for the hearing and true understanding of the word of God.
To hear thy word,
and live therein,
Us to renew,
O Lord begin.
LIghten my heart, O Lord GOD, with the lamp of thy holy and blessed word,
which is the weapon of every true Christian soldier, and the sword of the
spirit, to cut off all the temptations of the Devil, the world, and the flesh,
if it be used according to thy will, O Lord which art the giver and author of
the same. And for so much, O Lord, as thy word is the rule, whereby we are
bound to direct all our doings: and the square, whereat to frame the whole
course of our life: I beseech thee, to circumcise my heart, that all carnal
cogitations and thoughts expelled and driven out, I may betake my self wholly
unto the reading, hearing, studying, and following of thy word, which is the
food of our souls: the comfortable bread, which kills hunger and the
pleasant drink, which quenches thirst: not the hunger and thirst of the body,
against the which, it has pleased thee to provide most healthful remedies:
but the hunger and thirst of the soul, which are no way else assuaged, but by
the virtue and heavenly working of thy word. This word, O Lord, vouchsafe to
make flourish and fruitifie in us, that thereby we may be won to the
worshipping of thee, in true fear, unfeigned faith, and perfect holiness of
life, through Jesus Christ our Savior, Amen.

A Prayer to God for forgiveness of manifold and grievous sins.
My heart unclean,
Lord circumcise:
And make my soul
thy sacrifice.
IN sin, O Lord, was my conception, in sin my education, in sin the whole
course of my life. Nothing is clean and unspotted in me: nothing is sound,
nothing perfect, nothing holy, nothing sanctified. I am full of sin and
iniquity, my thoughts and desires are attainted with sin: my labors and
handy works are defiled with wickedness, my words and communications are
tempered with the leaven of iniquity: my heart is corrupt and putrified; there
is nothing sound in me, but all mine entrails are infected, and poisoned with
sin, the high way to everlasting shame, death, and condemnation. O miserable
wretch that I am, to whom shall I run for succor: To whom shall I make my
sorrows known: Before whom shall I power my plaintes: Art not thou the
Samaritane, which with the oil of mercy souplest my festered wounds: Art not
thou the good Sephearde, which bring home the straying Sheep to the
sheepefold: Art not thou the good Captain, which fightest in defense of thy
Soldiers: O, yes Lord, thou art even he: and doubtless, had not the oil of
thy mercy healed my filthy Botches: had not thy hand fetched me home to the
flock: had not thy love and grace over shadowed me in danger, I had rotted in
my filthiness; I had perished in my wandering, and I had been utterly
overthrown in combat. O Lord my God, circumcise my heart, and cleanse it from
all evil thoughts, devises, imaginations, and consentes to sin. Sanctify my
soul, renew my spirit, and garnish me with the garment of regeneration, that
I may become a sweet smelling sacrifice before thee a sacrifice of acceptable
incense, a sacrifice of holiness, and righteousness: so shall I praise thee in
the assembly of the just, and extol thy glorious name among thy people. Amen.

A Prayer for to be settled in the Truth.
Thy Truth send down,
Lord from above,
And give me grace
the same to love.
ACcording to thy loving kindness, O Christ, hear the prayers of thy servant;
and that request which Hope inboldeneth me to make, vouchsafe in mercy to
grant. And because the Devil is the father of all falsehood and lying; and thou
the fountain of all truth and righteousness; as thou say of thy self; I am
the Way, the Truth, and the Life: therefore I beseech thee (O gracious God and
Savior) to plant in me the Truth; without the which, all entrance into
heavenly joy is stopped up: and to banish out of my heart, (which by nature is a
nest of wickedness) all manner of sin, resisting the Truth. And for so much
as Truth is a pearl of price, and a Jewel of great value to the godly, the
ornament of the faithful, and the treasure of the true Christian: therefore I
beseech thee, O Christ, give me grace, to thirst after truth, and to hunger
after the taste of that heavenly food: that my desiring soul may be
succored, and my longing heart refreshed even with the fulness of ye same. And
whereas by nature we are bo^dslaues of sin, and by that means utter enemies
of truth: we beseech thee notwithstanding, to make us partakers of mercy, and
not of judgment: remembering that thy death and bloodshed paid the price of
redemption for all mankind. Thou God of truth, hear my prayer, and let the
suite of me thy poor Servant, come before thy presence: and that which I have
asked with boldness, vouchsafe to grant of thy special goodness, Amen.

A Prayer to lead our life according to the will of God.
To do thy will,
teach me, O Lord,
And let my life
thereto accord.
MOst mighty, most just most merciful, most loving, most tender and dear
Father; for so much as there is no way to heaven, but by doing thy will: we say
with humblenes of heart, as Jesus christ thy Son, and my sweet Savior has
taught: Fiat voluntas tua, sicut in Coelo, and in Terra; Thy will be done in
earth, as it is in Heaven And, because it is thy will, that we should walk in
holiness and righteousness before thee, all the days of our life; we beseech
thee, to be the Schoolmaster of our Souls and Spirits, that thy Wisdom
instructing and teaching us, to make a difference between good and bad, we may
follow the one, and forsake the other: considering, that the doers of thy will,
and not the knowers of the same, shall be partakers of the promises of life and
salvation. For thy Son Jesus Christ's sake, my only Savior and Redeemer,
grant this request (O most gracious God, both unto me, and to all thy people.
Amen.

A Prayer to fast, and abstain from sin.
To fast from Sin,
is Christians joy:
My heart thereto,
O Lord employ.
LOrd God, maker of heaven and earth, Judge of the quick and the dead; thou
that by wisdom see all things, and by thy providence orderest all
creatures; we beseech thee, to cast thine eyes of care and compassion upon us
miserable sinners, who from the day of our birth, have lived in wantonness, and
all kind of wickedness, thereby kindling thy wrath and Justice against us to our
confusion. O let us yet at length, have our eyes opened, and see the
brightness of thy glory, which the blindness of our minds, will not suffer
us to behold. Let us not pamper our selves in security, living out of rule,
and abandoning all godliness; which is a kind of surfeiting in iniquity, and
ouercharging our hearts with heaps of abominations: but let us become new
Scholars in the School of Christianity, walking warily, redeeming the time,
loving light, and detesting darkness. O Lord, vouchsafe to be mindful of us
thy creatures, and of thine own glory, which art our Creator. Teach us to fast
aright, not superstitiously, in abstaining from this or that kind of meat,
using a vain order in diet, and differences of meats: but as thine holy ones
have in times past, fasted the true Fast, which thou in thy Word requirest: so
grant, I beseech thee, that I, and all people, may fast after the same fashion:
to fast from sin and wickedness, that the flesh may be brought into subjection,
and the spirit quickened. Grant this, O Lord, for thy Sons sake, Jesus Christ
my Redeemer and Savior. Amen.

A Prayer for grace to forsake evil, and to follow that which is good.
From Heaven* O God,
send us thy grace,
Ill to forsake,
and good t'imbrace.
Almighty God, I beseech thee to give me true understanding and knowledge,
not only to confess thee a most merciful Father, but also an upright Judge;
favoring thy children, which live within the compass of thy Commandments:
and punishing offenders, which run headlong into all mischief, not once
looking back to the written Tables of the law. And, because it stands not
with the frailty of man, to fulfill the sum of the law; upon the breach
whereof, condemnation does ensue: we beseech thee, to enrich our hearts with the
treasure of thy Grace, that we waxing wealthy therewith, may be able to
withstand all the assaults of Satan, our subtle adversary. Moreover, good
GOD, for so much as this Grace of thine, is the badge of thy fatherly affection;
and guydeth the thoughts, the words, and the deeds of every Christian: we
beseech thee, to shield us with the same, that we may follow, and stand
steadfastly in that, which is acceptable in thy sight; renouncing the Devil,
and his works of darkness: and betaking our selves body and soul, to the
healthful guiding of thy grace. Amen.

A Prayer for the assistance of the Holy Ghost.
The Assistance of
the Holy Ghost,
Sweet Jesus spread
in every Coast.
MOst comfortable Savior, most victorious Captain, most triumphant Redeemer,
most merciful Mediator, Jesus Christ, thou beloved Son of the eternal God
spread abroad the brightness of thy Majesty, to the consolation of all
people. And, for so much as without thee, the whole world is nothing else but a
solitary Wilderness, destitute of faith, hope, charity, love, gentleness,
compassion, forbearance, and all other works of Christianity: we beseech
thee, to be a gracious God, as thou art an omnipotent God; that where thy power
is seen, thy mercy may likewise be perceived. Let not thy creatures continue
in ignorance of thee their Savior, but so assist them with the present aid of
thy comforting Spirit and the holy Ghost, that they may see in what by-ways of
destruction and dangers they trauerse. Let thy holy Ghost be their lodesman,
let the holy Ghost be their teacher, let the holy Ghost be their right hand,
and their left: let the holy Ghost be to them all in all; that they being thus
inspired, and filled with the power of thy sanctifying Spirit, may feel in
themselves a spiritual inclination and working, all desires of the flesh being
cut off, and cast away: and may also be received into thy sheepfold, and be
reckoned among the number of the faithful. Grant this, O Christ, thou tender
Savior of our souls. Amen.

A Prayer against Wrath and Malice.
From hateful heart,
and fraught with ire:
Save us, O Lord,
we thee desire.
Bountiful God, which have given us commandment to love all men, and to hate
none: to be angry, but not to sin: to be displeased a little, but not to let
the Sun set upon our wrath: we beseech thee, to purge our hearts clean
from all hatred, from all envy, from all malice, from al uncharitableness,
from all untowardness, from all bitterness, from all quarrelling, from all
misreporting, from all backbyting, from all reuengement seeking: sinally, from
all the motions of a wicked spirit. Let love banish hate, let friendlines
displace unkindness, let charity remove ouerthwartnes, let forbearance
dispossess maliciousnes: al which are most shameful sins, and so hateful
in thy sight, O God, that he is no Christian, but an Antichristian; no child of
bliss, but of Baall, no heir of Heaven, but of Hell; no vessel of election,
but of reprobation; no partaker of joy, but of woe; no soldier of the Church,
but of the Synagogue, in whom they bear rule. And therefore (most gracious God
(root out of our hearts all such weeds of wickedness, that we may become new
griftes of righteousness, through Jesus Christ our Savior, Amen.

A Prayer for obedience to the keeping of Gods Commandments.
To live within the rule of Law,
keep us, O Lord, in fear and awe.
EVerlasting God, whose name is so glorious, that it passes the capacity of
man, to give it due advancement: we beseech thee, of thine infinite goodness,
thou sovereign Lawgiver, to arm our hearts with the full furniture of
obedience, that we may first and principally fear thee, which art our
Creator: and in thee, thy Son our Redeemer: and in both the holy Ghost, our
Comforter. This if we do, (as it is not unlike we shall* if thy grace govern
us) our wills and wits shall be brought into such subjection, that whatsoever
duties earthly Magistrates bind us unto by Law and commandment, (so the same
be not to thy dishonor) there shall want no readiness in us to fulfill and
accomplish. Vouchsafe therefore (O heavenly Father) to keep us in thy fear,
to limit us within the bounds of true obedience, both to thee, O our GOD, and
also to our superiors and betters, that whatsoever is required of us in the
way of godly submisson and reverence, we murmur not thereat, but do our
endeauours therein, with all zeal and earnestness. Amen.

A Prayer for true and hearty repentance.
Repentance for
our foul misdeeds,
Grant us, O God,
whose grace exceeds.
WE wretched outlaws O Lord God, cast our selus along before thy mercy seat,
beseeching thee to inspire our minds with perfect wisdom, and to arm us with
the true and lively knowledge of thy Law: that both in body, and also in soul,
we may walk the way of thy Commandementes and Testimonies. So govern us by
thy Grace, O God, and so conduct us by thy loving kindness, that being
thoroughly informed, and reformed to thy Law, we may be stricken inwardly with a
godly fear, and Christian trembling of transgressing thy precepts, which thou
have appointed unto us, in this dark and palpable time of security, and
wickedness, (when all people and nations for the most part stumble at the
blocks of their own sins) to be a lantern to lighten our feet, and the
day star to direct all our doings. And though we can not of our selves,
(such is the infirmity of our nature, and weakness of our flesh) but fall into
the snares of sin: yet, we humbly beseech thee, (for thy beloved Sons sake
Jesus Christ our Savior,) to touch our guilty consciences with the finger of
thy grace, that through a sorrowful feeling of them, we may by faith, take
sure and fast hold of the staff of thy promises, who made a vow to have mercy
on the ssnner, repenting him of his lewd life, and forsaking his iniquity.
Grant this, O God, for the comfort of thy chosen, and for thy Sons sake Jesus
Christ our Mediator, and Advocate, Amen.

A prayer to the Lord, to turn his wrathful displeasure away from us.
Thy wrath, O Lord,
remember not,
Though such desert,
my sins allot.
IVdge me not, O Lord, in the heat of thine indignation: O consume me not in
the fury of thy rage. I confess, that mine offenses cry out for vengeance,
even as a dry and sandy soil gapeth for rain. Howbeit (O most merciful
Father) remember thy mercy, and let not sentence pass in judgment to my
condemnation: my sins have laid out my lot, even thy vengeance, O Lord, I
cannot say the contrary: but thou have Mercy in store, which pleads against
Justice; so that thy Wrath (I hope) shall not overthrow me, though my
wickednesses (like waves) ouerwhelme my soul. O Lord, hear my prayer, and for
the honor of thy name, turn from me the punishments which thou have denounced
against me in judgment. I am a worm, and no man; yea, the offscowring of
men, a wretch, and forsaken, an outcast, and an alien from the Common wealth of
Israel: my sins have made a separation of thy favor from me: but the death
of thy Son has put out the handwriting, and broken down the partition wall
betwixt thee and me. And therefore I come with boldness and confidence to
thee, hoping to taste the sweetness of thy Mercy, though I have deserved the
sharpnes of thy Justice. As thou will, O Lord, so be it. Amen.

A Prayer for a clear and quiet Conscience.
A Conscience clear
from all unrest,
Grant us, O God:
whose name be blessed.
LEt the light of thy countenance shine upon us, (most merciful Father,) let
the comfort of thy spirit drop into our hearts, let thy favor and loving
kindness be unto us a pauilion in the warfare of this life. Be thou unto us a
gracious God, and a Father inclined to compassion: that whereas the horror of
our sins, and their haynousnesse, together with the manifoldnesse of our
offenses, kindles in us a kind of fear unto death, disquieting our
consciences, and raising up within us accusers to give in evidence against us,
for the violating and breaking of thy commandments: it would please thee,
like a Father, tenderly to deal with us as with thy children, and not like a
severe Judge to handle us, as guilty persons, giving us over, and leaving us to
the spoil of our mortal enemies. Our conscience indeed, lays daily to our
charge, that we have played the back-sliders, that we have not kept us within
the compass of thy holy precepts, that we have withstood thy heavenly will,
and like stubborn rebels, denied thee the honor due unto thy Name:
nevertheless (O Lord God) cast us not off into confusion, neither leave us to
continual torment, and vexation of conscience for our sins: but look upon
us with the eyes of mercy, that the terror of conscience which we feel for
sin, may be turned into rest and quietness: least if it happen otherwise,
we be driven (with Judas) into desperation: From the which we beseech thee to
deliver us, for the honor of thy name (O GOD Almighty, Amen.

A Prayer to be Zealous in the hearing of the word of God.
To hear thy Word,
and love the same,
Vouchsafe, O Lord,
our hearts to frame.
Loving Father and gracious God, for so much as thy word is the rule of life, and
the high way to happiness, we beseech thee, to kindle in us an earnest desire to
hear the same, and that not only with the outward ears of the body, but with
the inward ears of the heart: which is the hearing in deed, whereby profit and
comfort is gathered. Thy Word is the Sword to cut down sin; thy Word is the
weapon which thy Ministers use, to conquer the kingdom of Satan: It is the
felicity of the faithful in this life: it is the stumbling block of offense
to the wicked: yea, to the uncircumcised Philistine, it is the savor of death
unto death: but to the circumcised Israelite, it is the savor of life unto
life. Vouchsafe therefore, (O bountiful God) to kindle in me the fire of
zeal unto thy word, that I may so esteem and count thereof, as of the
chiefest treasure of a Christian in this vale of misery, having mine ears
always open to hear it, and my heart ready to receive it: my tongue plyant to
speak of it, and my mind earnest to meditate in it: so shall I reap such
profit thereby, as thou have prepared for them that come reverently thereunto.
This, and all things needful for this life, grant (O most merciful Father)
for thy Sons sake our only Mediator and Advocate. Amen.

A Prayer for a patient Mind in trouble.
In trouble, Lord,
to thee we call,
A patient Spirit
to give us all.
IN all afflictions and tribulations (O GOD Father of all mercy and
consolation) we beseech thee to look upon us. and in the bowels of compassion
to mittigate and assuage our miseries. And as it has pleased thee of thy
fatherly pity, to call us to thee the running River of all refection and
comfort; so we beseech thee, even then specially to hear our cries and
lamentations, when we lie groaning under the heavy burden of affliction and
trouble. Thou have commanded us, to make our mean unto thee, saying; Call upon
me in the time of thy trouble, and I will hear thee. O bountiful and gracious
God, do therefore with thy servants according to thy word: and as thou art
faithful in thy promises; so I humbly beseech thee, that I, among the rest of
thy people, may feel and taste the sweetness of thy favor and grace; which is
the most sovereign succor that can be, in all necessities and distresses. To
thee therefore which art the rich treasure, of all goodness, and the healthful
welspring of all perfect peace, we approach; submitting our selves before thy
face, and craving at thy hands the spirit of patience, wherewith, as with an
unpeaceable target being defended, we may constantly abide and wear out any
kind of cross and tribulation, waiting the good time of thy pleasure for our
deliverance. Amen.

A Prayer in time of Prosperity, or Adversity.
If Poor, or Rich,
O Lord, we be,
Teach us to know,
all comes from thee.
Almighty GOD, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which made Heaven and earth,
the sea, and all the wonders of the Deep: we confess, that thou art the
author of al things, and that upon thee the whole estate of man does depend:
humbly beseeching thee, of thy goodness, to guide us so far with thy grace,
that if we see our selves blessed with the Wealth of this world, which wins
worship and credit among people: or oppressed with poverty, which breeds
contempt and abasement: we may notwithstanding, neither by the one wax proud or
insolent: neither yet by the other become mistrustfull, or desperate: but
referring all to thee, which distributest thy gifts to thine own liking upon
the trial of thy servants, we may learn this; that as thou art able to make
the rich poor, and the poor rich: so in thee it is, to give every man an
inward knowledge and assurance of thy will, whatsoever estate it has pleased
thee to place him, or them in: the which inward knowledge, I beseech thee,
power into my spirit, that as well in poverty, as in riches, I may glorify thy
name: using my riches as thy blessing, in sign of thy careful providence; and
not repining, but well contenting my self with poverty, as thy chastisement,
to keep me under awe and obedience: thy will, and not my will, O Lord, be done
and fulfilled. Amen.

A prayer for patience in time of loss of Goods, or Lands.
The loss of Life,
of Goods, and Lands,
O gracious God,
is in thy hands.
MOst mighty God, and merciful father* from who^ all good things do proceed, as
tokens of thy kindness: and all punishments for sin* as signs of thy
displeasure: which give life, and take away the same again at thine
appointed time: which inrichest thy servants with goods of sundry sorts, and
changest their condition in a moment: which blessest thy creatures with Lands
and Possessions, and turnest all in an instant, into extreme need and
nakedness; as thou did deal with Job. that perfect pattern of patience: We
beseech thee, to inspire us with an understanding heart, that we may so live,
as willing to die: that we may enjoy our goods, as not grudging to forgo them:
and that we may hold us to our Lands, as not loath to loose them; considering,
that as they came from thee, so in thee it is to dispose them as thou will,
either to blessing, or to cursing. O gracious God, let us not grow in
forgetfulness of the life to come, by too much loving this present transitory
Life, which is but a shadow, a smoke, and a dream. Let us not be drowned in
the desires and delights of worldly goods, least we neglect the riches of
Paradise; which nothing can purchase, but Faith in the blood and death of
Christ: let us not wed our wills and wits to Lands and Possessions, which
are but momentany maintenances* least in ouerliking them, we loose the sweet
inheritance of the holy land, Jerusalem, not built with hands, but glorious and
triumphant: whereto bring us, O God, for his sake that bought us, Jesus Christ
the righteous, Amen.

A thanksgiving for Meat, Drink, and Clothing.
For Meat and Drink,
and Cloth to wear,
We praise thy name,
O God, with fear.
LORD Jesus, the Redeemer of all mankind, which vouchsafedst to shed thine own
heart Blood upon the Cross, for the salvation of our souls, which else
through sin had miserably perished; we praise thee, we magnify thee, we
worship thee, we glorify thee, we give thanks to thee, for thy great
kindness, for thy tender love, for they zealous affection, and for thine
exceeding goodness, in caring for us, in loving us, in tendering us, in
susteining us, in relieuing us, and in supplying all our wantes and
necessities. Thou numbrest all the hairs of our head; and without thy will,
they wax not one less. Thou give us food and nourishment, to comfort and
strengthen our bodies. Thou give us Garments of sundry wearing, both for the
safeguard of health, and also for comelines. Thou give us Houses to harbor
in: and whatsoever we stand in need of, thou of thine abundant grace, pourest
the same most plentifully into our bosoms. Thou feedest the young Sparrowes,
thou cloathest the Lillies of the field, thou garnishest ye trees of the
Forest with green leaves, thou inrichest the secrets of the earth, and the
sea, with precious treasure, and is it like, that thou will not have an eye to
man, a creature fashio^ed after thy own image and likeness, for whom all
these things were made and created? No, no, thy love is everlasting, and thy
mercy exceeds all measure. They shall lack nothing, that pitch the pauilion
of their pilgrimage upon thy Providence: which that we may ever do, and so be
blessed with abundance; we beseech thee, give us thy Grace, so shall we laud
and magnify thee with heart and voice, for evermore, Amen.

A Prayer for aid and help in all extreamities and need.
Help us, O Lord,
in all our needs:
And guide our thoughts,
our words, and deeds.
ALl glory, honor, praise, dominion, and thanks, be given unto thee, O King
everlasting, which have made me a reasonable creature, furnished me with
discretion and judgment, endued me with knowledge and understanding, and
bestowed upon me benefits of most singular excellency. Like glory and thanks
be given unto thee, for thy providence and care for me, vile creeping worm of
the earth, who in comparison of thee, am much worse than stinking doung, and
filthy offscowring of the earth. Thou daily assistest me, thou continually
regardest me, thou evermore defendest me from dangers, both bodily and ghostly:
for had not thy hand ouershadowed me, I had sunk long since in mine own shame
and confusion. And because, Lord, manifold are the calamities belonging to this
life, hurtful to the outward man, and noisome to the inner man, I beseech thee
stretch out the shield of safty in full breadth over me, that I may walk
without fear, not troubled with wicked thoughts, not tempted with evil
words, not provoked to deeds of darkness: but keeping my feet in the path of
light, looking always to the lamp of thy word, which shines unto sinners
sitting in the shadow of death, and leads the righteous and true repentant to
life everlasting, Amen.

A Prayer against slanderous and evil tongues.
From evil Tongues,
which poison spit,
Vouchsafe, O Lord,
thy flock t'acquit.
MOst truly spoke thy servant Saint James, (O my sweet Savior,) that the
Tongue being but a little member, was notwithstanding a world of wickedness.
Which to be so, thou know in thy secret counsel, and thou thy self had
proof thereof, whiles thou keptst thy standing in the fair of this life. It
pleased thee therefore to instruct and teach thine Apostles before hand, what
they should be subject unto in time to come: namely, to backbitings, slanders,
acursed speeches, tauntes, and controlments: yea, to reuilings, buffettings,
and imprisonments. For if they spared not the Lord and Master, much less will
it sink into their hearts to favor the Servants; whom they hate unto the
death, for their masters sake. From evil Tongues therefore, O Lord we beseech
thee, to save us: not from suffering the bitterness which proceeds from
them; for we are content to taste that which thou have tasted before us: but
from offending in our tongue, which oftentimes wounds the very soul. O Lord,
give us grace, to set a watch before our Tongue, that we trip not in our talk,
and hurt not only them, against whom we are maliciously minded; but also our
selves, whom we cannot but greatly annoy, whiles we seek, either in thought,
word, or deed, to wreake our wrath upon others, considering that thou have
reserved all vengeance to thine own self. O Lord, be gracious unto us; and as
thou art the Shepherd of our souls, feeding us in the sweet pastures of thy
grace: so we beseech thee, to keep us from all manner of spiritual diseases:
us (we say) which are thy people, and the sheep of thy pasture. Amen.

A Prayer for Peace in time of War, or other vexations.
In time of War,
to pray for Peace,
A zeal in us,
O Lord increase.
BOuntiful Savior, thou Son of the eternal God, thou God of peace-vnitie,
and concord: thou that in stead of Peace, plaguest men with War, tumultes,
and vprors: We beseech thee, to prolong peace and quietness amongst us; not
only peace between people and people, but peace of Conscience, that precious
peace; which who so wants, he is no member of the Commonwealth of
Christianity. Not only for this peace of mind, but for the other also of
body, we beseech thee, O Lord, frame our hearts aright to pray unto thee:
knowing that by Prayer, that thing is obtained at thine hands, which is not
else where to be sought. And because thou art the Author of peace, without
whom the whole world is set on War: we humbly beseech thee, to prosper that
peace, which thou have planted in all Christian kingdoms, which because thou
have for our sins sake, taken from us for a time, sending us in place
thereof, Wars and Tumults: We give thee thanks notwithstanding,
acknowledging the same to be a punishment laid upon us for our sins, and
specially for abusing that Peace; the benefit whereof, whiles we might have
used to our true comfort, we turned the same (as we feel by due proof at this
present) into bitterness. Nevertheless, to thee we come, and before thy face
we fall, not only praying for the withdrawing of War, and the restoring of
our former Peace: but also beseeching thee, to kindle and increase in us a
zeal to pray* not only for Peace, but for all other thy good Gifts needful
and belonging to this life: to the honor and glory of thy name Amen.

A Prayer for deliverance from Foes spiritual and temporal.
From fear, and force,
of all our Foes:
Preserve us Lord,
and them depose
EVerlasting God, whose right hand is the shield of safeguard to the faithful:
we beseech thee, of thine unspeakable goodness, to look upon us, who are
incompast round about with enemies, not only of the body, but also of the
soul: Of the body, as with swearers, backbiters, slaunderers, fighters,
brawlers, quarellers, murderers, etc Al which, we that are Christians, account
our Foes, insomuch as they are the enemies of Christ thy beloved Son, and
sworn adversaries of thy holy Gospel: Of the Soul, as with Satan, sin, the
flesh the world, the Devil, Hell, death, and damnation: and that which we
through our weakness, cannot fulfill, do thou by thy strength, supply and
bring to pass, that we may not only be defended from their force, but that
they, and every of them, feeling the weight and greatness of thy power, may lie
vanquished under foot, and cease their further assaults: for Jesus Christ's
sake, our only Savior and Redeemer, Amen.

A prayer of a penitent soul ouerburdened with sin.
A silly soul,
to sin in thrall,
For mercy, Lord,
to thee do call.
WOunderfull, wise, and exceeding righteous art thou in thy judgments; O God, a
punisher of the ungodly, and a just rewarder of the faithful. O look upon me
silly soul, overwhelmed with wickedness look upon me, O Lord. and deliver me.
For I am in thrall: yea, in thrall am I unto sin, the wages whereof is death.
O succor me, succor me: Oh assist me, assist me: Oh save me, save me.
Bitterly I complain and am sorry for my misdeedes, heavily I lament for mine
iniquities, unfeignedly I repent me of my life wickedly led. Appease thine
anger. O God, assuage thy wrath: Oh let me be reconciled unto thee. Cast me
not away, whom thou have created: let not Satan triumph over me, whom thy Son
has redeemed. Be gracious, O be gracious, (most merciful Father) and let the
moystning river of thy Mercy, quench the boiling furnace of thy Justice, that I
being comforted in this life with assured taste of thy clemency, may glorify
thy name, with consent of heart and voice; and that by mine example, others may
do the like. Grant this, O God, in Christ thy Son, mine only Savior, Amen.

A Prayer to be freed from all Vices.
From Vices all defend us,
Sweet Jesus, and amend us.
Jesus Christ, thou immaculat Lamb, which wast slain for the sins of the
whole world, that by thy death, we might all be delivered from death yea, from
eternal death, due unto us by deserte of sin. And because this world is like
a Wilderness replenished with wild beasts, or rather Monsters (vices I mean,
devilish and damnable, as pride, adultery, flattery, idolatry, blasphemy,
disobedience, stubbernesse, extortion, vsuries, hypocrisy, dissimulation.
envy, rancour, malice, murder, letcherie, surfeiting, wantonness, and an
infinite number of the like hellish rabble) whereto we are daily endangered;
insomuch, that oftentimes we are ready to be deuowred. Stretch out (O sweet
Jesus) the arming sword of thy Spirit, cut them off by the wast, that they may
have no power to assault us: and after this conquest wrought in us, frame us
anew, by the word of regeneration, that our lives being amended, we may (like
Sheaues of pure Corn) be bound up, and brought into thy Barn. Hear our
Prayers, O Christ, and let our cries come unto thee, for thy name sake, Amen.

A Prayer against vain delights, and worldly pleasures.
From vain delights,
Lord turn mine eyes,
And save my soul,
in loss which lies.
LOrd God, Creator of all things, illuminate my heart with the Lamp of true
understanding and knowledge; that although mine outward eyes slumber and sleep
in the shadow of death: yet the eyes of my soul may he kept waking in the way
of life. Direct me, O Lord in thy fear, and guide me by thy grace: turn mine
eyes from all vain delights of this world, preserve me from all the sweet
entisme^ts of the flattering flesh; fortify and strengthen me against all the
crafty temptations of Satan. And whereas my soul lies upon loss, and is not
like but to be lost, if if be left unto it self I beseech thee (O Father of
mercy, and God of all consolation) to take upon thee the safety of the same,
that neither Satan my subtle adversary; nor the flesh, ye alluring harlot; nor
the world, that foul ill fauor'd monster, may prevail against it: but by thy
power may utterly be vanquished put to shame and confusion. Grant this, O God*
for thy sons sake, Jesus Christ my Savior. Amen.

A prayer of a penitent sinner lamenting his former life so ill spent.
My life misse-led*
I do lament,
And of my sins,
I me repent.
Look on me, (O heavenly Father and gracious God,) with thy favorable
countenance, and in the fulness of thine everlasting compassion, comfort me,
which am swallowed up with heaviness. And though my Sins surmount in thy
sight, the Sands of the Seas; yet I beseech thee, have an eye to thy Son Jesus
Christ, whom thou did send into the world, to take upon his shoulders the
whole burden of our sins; and by his death, to make satisfaction unto thee
for the same. And albeit, O Lord, by my deserts. I am the child of wrath, of
death, and condemnation: yet notwithstanding, I beseech thee, O God, give ear
unto the voice of my Mediator Christ Jesus, who makes continual intercession
unto thee, not only for me, but also for all such as constantly believe in him,
and make him the sure ground work of their salvation. Look not Lord upon my
deformities, but upon his innocence: not upon mine iniquity, but upon his
righteousness: not upon the multitude of my misdeedes, but upon the
manifoldnesse of thy mercies. Remember the bleeding stripes and wounds of thy
Son my Savior, in whom alone, by the increasing of a lively and justifying
faith, I am a new creature, regenerate, and made clean; not with Water, but by
Grace: thy Mercy, O Father, being the fountain of this Heavenly benefit. O
hear the prayer of thy poor servant, and for thy Sons sake Jesus Christ
grant my petition. Amen.

A Prayer of a sorrowful sinner, laying his heart open, praying for a firm
faith.
My heart, O Lord,
wide open I lay,
And unto thee,
for Faith I pray,
I Beseech thee (O Father of endless mercy) to look upon me thy poor creature:
poor indeed, and desolate; naked and bare of spiritual riches. I lay my heart
wide open before thee, which has no good thing dwelling in it. Lord, I beseech
thee, plough it up with the Plough of thy Spirit, and sow therein the seeds of
a true Christian faith, such a faith as may have attending and waiting upon it
Hope and Charity, as handmaides. Also, O Lord GOD, I humbly beseech thee, that
as thou have made me thy Steward, and put me in trust with a Talent of thy
blessing; namely, Riches, worldly Wealth, and transitory Treasures: so I may be
furnished with the instrument which is able to inform me how to employ the same
aright, even faith: not an idle faith, barren, and unfruitful; but a busy
faith, flowing full of good works; that thereby I may be as a City builded
upon an Hill, amiable and beautiful: and like a Lantern of light unto all
men, who seeing my good works may glorify thee, O Father: to whom all glory
belongs both in Heaven, and in Earth. Amen.

A Prayer desiring mercy and forgiveness.
Of thee, O Lord,
Mercy I crave,
For Jesus sake*
his life which gave.
AS thou art a gracious God (O thou Judge of Israel,) as thou art faithful in
thy promise, and just in thy word: so I beseech thee, deal favorably with me
poor sinner, who bend the knees of my heart before thee, craving that with
tears; which if I obtain not, alas what shall become of me but death and
damnation? In thee is my hope, in thee my trust, in thee my confidence: let me
not be ashamed, let me not be forsaken, nor confounded: but for thy son Jesus
Christ his sake, who suffered a reproachful death, in the face of his sworn
and deadly enemies; have mercy upon me, have mercy upon me, upon me miserable
soul; on whom unless thou have mercy, Satan with his whole power, is ready to
ouerrun me. In time therefore, O Lord, help me; in time assist me, in time
succor me, or else I am a castaway, and the child of reprobation. Let thy
mercy stand between my sins and thy judgment: for Jesus sake my sweet
Savior, succor me miserable sinner, who never cease crying: O Father, which
art in Heaven, O our Father which art in Heaven, have mercy, O have mercy Lord
in time. Amen.

A Prayer, to be prepared against the hour of death.
Lord at my death,
the jewel chief,
Which I desire,
is true belief.
MOst mighty God, and merciful Father, as thou have created and made me of
the mould of ye earth, and inspired into the gross lump of my body, a living
and quickening soul: so, O Lord I beseech thee, to indue me with such knowledge
and understanding: yea, with such an earnest zeal, and burning desire of thy
heavenly dwelling, and immortal mantion, that I may loath this life, which is
but a span long: and thirst after death; which is the entrance to endless joy
and happiness. Also, O Lord, I most humbly beseech thee, when it shall please
thee to visit me with sickness, or otherwise to call me out of this life, that
I may feel working in my heart, an unfeigned Faith, and a true Christian
Belief, whereby even in the nipping agonies, and pinching passions of death I
may lay fast hold upon Jesus Christ my Savior, hoping in him to live, who by
his death purchased everlasting life, for all the faithful. O hear my prayer,
O God, and let my cry come unto thee, for Jesus sake: unto whom, with thee, and
the holy Ghost, be all laud, honor and praise, for evermore. Amen.

A Prayer to lead our lives according to the law and will of God.
Give me, O Lord,
a mind and will,
To love thy Law,
and it fulfill.
Loving Lord, and most merciful Father, thou that art righteous in thy works,
and just in thy judgments: faithful in thy words, and true in thy promises:
make me (I heartily beseech thee) always plyant (like Wax) both in mind and
will to love thy Law, and to live after the same. Give my heart the clear
light of true Christian knowledge, that I having the eyes of my soul broad
waking, may discern between light and darkness, Christ and Beliall, God and
the Devil, Hell and Heaven, the Flesh and the Spirit. Guide thou, O Lord, all
my goings by thy grace, that all my thoughts may rest upon thee. Govern thou
my will, and all mine affections, that they may keep within the limits of thy
holy Law and Commandments: that all my endeavor may be directed to the
accomplishment and fulfilling of thy Statutes and Ordinances, so far forth
as my weakness can wade through the rough waves of this most wicked world. let
thy spirit lead me to do those things that please thy divine majesty, that at
the last day, when thou shall sit upon the Rain bow, treading the Clouds of
the skies under thy feet, and compassed round about with legions of Angels,
Cherubim and Seraphim, armies of Saints, and holy Martyrs, I may be received
into the number of the elect, and enter into possession of that inheritance,
which neither Gold nor Silver, but the precious Blood of thy beloved Son, my
sweet Savior Jesus Christ, bought and purchased: Grant this most merciful
Father, for thy mercies sake, which are unmeasurable: and for thy kindness
sake, which is unsearchable, and for thy tender love sake, which is
unspeakable, Amen.

A Prayer to keep our tongue from speaking ill.
From an ill tongue.
Lord make me clean:
To great and small,
good fayrh to mean.
ALmighty God, which can not away with a double heart, and to whom an evil
tongue is foul dishonor; give me grace, (I beseech thee) to speak nothing
but that which is true, right, and just; not hurting any with my tongue which
thou have given me to do all men good, and to use as an instrument for the
sounding forth of thy praise and glory. And be, cause a lying and an evil
Tongue, draws the soul into death and destruction, put back (I beseech thee)
from my lips, all guilefull speeches, all deceitful communications, and al
lying words. Moreover, because thou. O Lord, art truth it self, and therefore
delightest in truth and innocence, give me grace always to enure my tongue
unto truth, abhorring all such talk as may offend thy divine Majesty, and
diminish the honor due unto thy holy name. Let thy sanctifying Spirit take
charge over my heart, that I may do good unto all, and hurt unto none:
uttering yt with tongue, which I mean in heart, purposing as well in deed as
in word, nothing but good faith and true christianity. Grant this, O God, for
Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

A Prayer to fast, and pray aright.
To Fast aright,
teach us the way,
O Savior Christ,
we humbly pray.
MOst bountiful Jesus, most sweet Jesus, most loving Jesus, which by thine
example did teach us to Fast aright, not after the painted fashon of
Pharisees and Hypocrites; but according to the plain manner of unfeigned
Christians: I heartily and humbly beseech thee, to give me grace, to exercise
my self in godly Fasting and Prayer that the man of sin, may be subdued and
brought under: that my heart may be cleansed from all sin and
unrighteousness, that my thoughts and cogitations may be scoured from
corruption and filthiness: that my words may not smell of Heathenish
unholiness and wickedness; that my deeds may not be leauened with beastly
wantonness: but that the course of my whole life, may be seasoned with the
sauorie salt of sanctification, that whatsoever I think, whatsoever I say, or
whatsoever I do, it may carry with it some sign of the true Fast; namely, the
fast from sin: unto which fast, whosoever apply themselves, they are sure to be
thy children, and are builded upon a steadfast hope, to inherit that place of
endless happiness, which thou boughtest with thy precious blod. This fasting
(I beseech thee) O sweet Savior, give me grace to exercise; so shall my
sinful flesh be kept in awe, as a servant, and my Spirit shall bear rule
over it, and keep it in subjection. This, O Christ, and whatsoever else is
necessary, vouchsafe of thy goodness, to grant unto me thy poor creature, who
ask it even in zealous and hearty prayer. Amen.

A Prayer against wilful sins and snares of Satan.
From wilful sin,
Lord save us,
That Satan may
not have us.
Be unto us a brazen wale (most merciful Father) against all the assaults of
sin, specially preserve us from wilful offenses, and from transgressing of
very malice, which is a wheting of thy wrath against us, and a kindling of our
own confusion, without hope of mercy at thy heavenly hands. O Lord, let us not
be so far estranged from obedience, as of set purpose to run into contempt
of thy glorious name: let not our hearts become so flintie, as to be void of
all feeling of sorrow for sin: yea as to be emboldened to heap sin upon
sin, to our utter shame. We know this is Satan's seeking; we are assured this
is the Devils drift, we cannot be ignorant that this is Belsebubs intent,
thereby to have us wiped (in thy wrath) out of the Book of life, and so he to
have full sway over us, as children of condemnation; But thou, O Lord, art
merciful, thou art gracious, thou art careful over us: defend us therefore
from all sin, and chiefly from the sin of wilfulnes and malice, for the
honor of thy name. Amen.

A Prayer for the fear of the Lord, and love of his word.
Increase in me.
O Lord, thy fear,
That to thy word,
I may give ear.
Eternal God, and omnipotent Creator, whose word laid the foundation of the
whole world, and furnished the same with all things behoofefull for the
maintenance of man: we humbly beseech thee, increase in us a loving fear of
thee, and thy word: that whatsoever we are enjoined and commanded to do
therein, we may rather neglect life, lands, goods; and all precious
possessions, then to leave it undone: knowing, that by hearing thy word, we
understand thy will; which who so keeps, they are assured in spirit, to be
thy faithful servants* So fill us therefore, O God, with this godly fear,
that we stopping our ears, and waxing dull against all worldly vanities, may
be ravished in heart and mind with the sweetness of thy word, wherein the
comfortable promises of life and salvation are contained: that we may exercise
our selves therein day and night: that we may reverently use it, as the
healthful food of our souls: that we may bring up our children and servants,
in the knowledge of the same: being fully persuaded, that there is nothing in
the world comparable thereunto; for it exceeds al treasure, and when al
things are consumed, thy word shall continue in glory, brightness, and
perfection. O Lord, hear our prayers, and for the honor of thy name, hear
the suites of thy poor servants, even for thy beloved Son his sake* Jesus
Christ our Savior: unto whom, with thee, and the holy Ghost, one Deity in
Trinity, be all laud, honor, praise, dominion, power, glory, and majesty,
both now and world without end. Amen.

The Contemplation of a Christian.
The misery,
of every man,
Through Satan's guile,
by sin began:
But Christ vouchsaft
man's thrall t'asswage;
His power suppressed,
old Satan's rage.
WHen Sin had blemished the happy estate of our first Parents, their whole
race felt the smart of their punnishment, and are at this day subject unto
misery.

Iniquity made a gappe for many calamities, sundry kinds of sicknesses,
manifold maladies, and infinite tribulations: which we had never tasted, if our
first Parents had not offended.

Lamentable is our case, by their means: for the Lord of life has punished
their sins in their posterity, by degrees of generaons, throughout many ages.

Little hope of health is in our selves: nay, there is in us no hope of
salvation at all: for by the subtlety of Satan, sin got dominion over us,
and by sin, death.

Justly therefore are we subject to so many miseries; and in that we feel the
heavy hand of God laying load upon us, it is for our offenses, and our
disordered life.

According as our deserts have been, so GOD has dealt with us: nay, he has
handled us far better then we deserved; who by nature are the children of wrath
and confusion.

Most mercifully has he looked upon us, and of his plentiful compassion, he
sent his boloued Son Christ Jesus into the world, that he by his bloodshed,
might work our releasement.

Like reprobates and condemned persons, we had been plunged into the deep pit
of hell, had not the death of Christ made full satisfaction for us, and wrought
our Redemption.

A Lion of the tribe of Judah, a bra^ch springing from the stock of Iesse,
pitying us poor desolate souls, by the virtue of his power suppressed Satan's
rage.

Marvelous mightily did he vanquish the Devil, our mortal enemy; who intended
our destruction and utter overthrow, had not he in time brought our deliverance
to pass.

Be joyful therefore, all nations, and lift up your heads: extol this Lamb
of God; whose innocence took away our iniquity: and whose heaviness, was
our happiness.

Everlasting praise and thanks be ascribed unto his name, by whose death, we
are received to life: yea to eternal life: O praise his glorious name for
ever. Amen.

Death over us
possessed such power.
That means he sought,
us to deuower:
But Jesus Christ
did set us free:
To whom all praise
and thanks give we.
We are justly subject unto death: for death is the reward of sin and
iniquity.

Iniquity has changed our order of creation, which was perfect and Angeilcal.

Life unto us, through sin, is turned unto death, and the mercy of God into
judgment.

Lord have mercy upon us; for in us there is no hope of health: for Death has
power over us.

Increase of new calamities do light upon us daily; and we see our selves
forsaken.

Among our enemies we walk continually, even in the face of the Flesh, the
World, and the Devil.

Miserable were we, if Jesus Christ, with the shield of safety should not
ouershadow us.

Little should we differ from the children of wrath: nay, our case were as
comfortless as theirs.

A most merciful Savior, art thou, O Christ; A most merciful Redeemer, and
Advocate.

Make us thankful unto thee for thy goodness: for thou did set us free from
all misfortune.

Blessed be thy name, and great be thy glory, through out all the world, for
this thy kindness.

Early and late, thou art to be praised: yea, in ye assemblies and
co^gregations of the faithful and righteous, thou in thy greatness, O God,
shall be gloryfied, Amen.

The World is vain,
and all therein;
Yea, man is vile,
because of sin:
Yet Jesus Christ
redeemed all,
To Death, and Hell
that were in thrall.
WOe be to this world, for it is as vain as smoke: yea, it is more vain then
vanity it self.

In riches, there is shame: and in pleasure, there is punishment, because of
sin and iniquity.

Like a dream is the life of man: his days are but a spanne long, and his
time tarryeth not,

Like a Fancy, or a Maygame; which has but an hours delight and recreatio^.

In the world there is nothing more common then wickedness: in the world there
is no goodness.

Al are bent unto mischief and villainy: the sons of men have set their
hearts upon evil.

Mighty men, and poor slaves, all have trodden the path of sin: and vanity
is in all their ways.

Like Sheep without a Shepherd, they are gone astray: and had been lost, if
Christ had not helped.

All were in the mouth of Hell gates, and had sunk in their own shame and
destruction.

Miserably had they perished, if that good shepherd of our souls had not
taken upon him our deliverance.

Bring Frankincense unto his Altas (O ye people) praise him, who is praise
worthy, for his power and magnificence.

Enter into his Temple and Sanctuary, sing songs all with one consent to the
honor of his name, for all the benefits and goodness, which he has
plentifully bestowed upon us at all times: and let all the faithful answer, and
say, Amen.

Gods providence is wonderful:
He shows himself most merciful
In all our ways defending us,
And by his grace amending us.
WIthout the assistance of Gods spirit, miserable were the condition of all
mankind: yea, most miserable.

In sin we are conceived, in sin we are brought up, and the whole course of
our life is full of iniquity.

Like a menstruous cloth, so is our conuersotion in the sight of God, and his
holy Angels.

Like a filthy and loathsome Sink, so is our behavior before the face of the
faithful.

Judgment is more meet for us, then mercy: yet it has pleafed God, to deal
with us in mercy.

And that does daily experience testify: for we see manifest proofs of his
providence.

Meat and clothing, and whatsoever is necessary toward the maintenance of
man, he has given us.

Like a Father, he tendereth us, and esteems us as Children, begotten a new
by free Grace.

As a Henue hoouering over her Chickens; so does he defend us in all our ways,
day by day.

Mercy is on his right hand: Mercy goes before him; and upon Mercy, is the
seat of his Majesty built.

Be glad therefore, and clappe your hands, all people: for God is gracious and
favorable.

Evermore shall his praise be in my mouth; I will talk of his goodness even
among mine enemies: yea without ceasing, I will extol and praise his name.
Amen.

The holy Ghost does sanctify,
Such as in faith does fructify:
The wicked still wax worse and wors,
And run into Gods heavy curse.
WOrship and honor, be given unto God the holy Ghost, by whom we are
sancctified unto life everlasting.

Infinite is thy working; in holiness he does renew the flintie heart, and
makes it relent at Gods judgments.

Least Satan should triumph over us, therefore has he vouchsafed to cleanse and
purify our spirit.

Let us therefore ascribe unto him all honor: for through sanctification, we
are made heirs of salvation

Iniquity defiled our souls: but through faith increasing in us, we felt an
inward reformation.

And having our eyes opened, we saw our filthiness; and by the gift of grace
became new creatures.

Many were the enormities which reigned in us; but the holy Ghost purged us of
all, and set us free.

Long wandered we in bywayes of wickedness but are now restored again unto
righteousness.

As for the ungodly, they have no part of this sanctifying Spirit: but daily
wax worse and worse.

Much like unto such as GOD has cursed in his wrath and denounced sentence of
death against the^.

Be glad, O ye just: for you are they whom God loves, and in whom he
magnifieth his own name.

Excellent and wonderful in working is God the holy Ghost: who with the
Father and the Son, be praised and magnified for ever. Amen.

It is not wealth,
to have at will,
That can us keep,
and save from ill:
Gods grace it is
which works that:
Let us rejoice,
therefore thereat.
WHat is the Wealth of this world, but Wind? and what Riches, but the shadow
of Smoke?

In Wealth to trust, is to trust to a broken reed: and in Riches to boast, is
to boast in a thing of naught.

Lay wealth to the grace of God, and what is it? Even filthy Dunge, and a worse
thing.

Lay Riches to Gods Grace, and what are they? Even painted shows of transitory
vanities.

In Wealth therefore glory not; for there is in it, no power to preserve from
the evil day.

And of Riches brag not, for in them is no hope of health in the dangerous time
of trouble.

Make the grace of God, the perfect joy of thy heart, and trust thereunto, as
unto a Brazen wall.

Look for safety from thence, in the perilous season: for the grace of God is
a strong refuge.

Arm thy soul therewith, as with Iron-plate Armor: so shall the assaults of
thy adversaries do thee no harm.

Make thy move unto the Almighty in the time of tribulation: and he shall
furnish thee with his grace.

Be thankful unto him, when thou have received it: and show not thy self in
any case unkind.

Every day praise him for his goodness, and extol his greatness among the
multitude: for he is good and gracious to his chosen: O magnify and praise him
all people. Amen.

To love to live,
in peace and ease,
The Lord of life,
does much displease:
Let such as lack,
and comfort crave.
Thy helping hand,
in hazard have.
WHen God has blessed thee with abundaunce of Benefits* so use them as God
may be well pleased.

In peace pamper not thy self: for that is the way to minister cause of
courage and loftiness to the flesh.

Look unto the Lord, who has given thee these good gifts: and become not
slothful with ease.

Life comes from the Lord: and whatsoever belongs thereunto, it proceeds
from his goodness.

In prosperity, be mindful of adversity: and let not the plenty of thy
peace make thee proud.

A Father of the fatherles, show thy self in necessity: and shut not up the
sluices of mercy against the poor.

Make not thy Money thy God: and hoord it not up for thine own profit only,
not regarding others need.

Let not the poor lie comfortless: let not them starve and perish, whom it is
in thee to help.

Apply thy self to works of mercy: and stretch out thy hand to them that are
needy and succourlesse.

Move not God (who gave thee these gifts) to wrath; least in his anger, he
turn all to thy shame.

Beware therefore, and let Wisdom rule thee in thy ways: so shall thou not
offend, or do amiss.

Extol thy Creator, and say, that he is gracious and merciful: a loving God,
and a most bountiful Father unto his Children. Amen.

Look ere thou leap,
and use thine eyes:
Else shall thou show,
thy self unwise;
The simple sort,
with council aid:
Thus ought thy talent
out be laid.
Wisdom is the blessing of God, and it is much more excellent then Gold,
Silver, or precious Stones.

In time of necessity, it is a present remedy, and a sufficient refuge in
peril and ieobadie.

Little avails worldly policy, where this Wisdom wants: O happy is he,
whom God has armed therewith.

Leave riches, forsake honor, set pleasure at naught to come to the enjoying of
this preacious treasure,

Immortality follows this wisdom: and such as have it are sure to grow in
estimation and fame.

Ask it of him, who is the Well of Wisdom, from whom it comes, even the
Lord God Almighty.

Make not thy boast thereof, neither apply it to thy private profit: but
extend the same to the succor of the simple.

Learn this lesson, That it is but lent unto thee of the Lord: thou art the
Steward thereof but for a time.

Abuse it not, lest it turn to thine own confusion: for as it is the gift of
God, so will be he honored therein.

Make it not an instrument of folly, least God overthrow thee in the vanity
of thine own mind.

Be a counselor to the unlearned, and teach the idiot understanding: so shall
thou glorify GOD in thy wisdom.

Enterprise nothing unadvisedly: in all thy beginnings, proceedings, and
endings, remember God. Amen.

If thou be poor,
hold thee content,
It is a cross*
which God has sent
Remember Job,
a man most just,
From stately seat,
cast down to dust*
WIth thine estate not to be contented, it is to repine and murmr at the
appointment and ordinance of God.

In poverty be not desperate: but fix all thy hope upon the rock of Gods
providence: for he is faithful.

Lament thy sin, and be sorry for the same: consider also with thy self, that
poverty is Gods chastisement.

Let not poverty therefore so pull thee down, that thou should thereupon
mistrust the Lord God to be merciful.

It is a cross laid upon thee in this life, to keep thee in subjection, and
to make thee know thine own estate.

A happy child art thou, that can reform thy self, and amend that which is
amiss in thee, by his fatherly correction.

Mark the example of Job, a man so just, so faithful, and so righteous, that
the Devil of Hell could not prevail against him.

Look upon him, how he was tormented, how he was brought low, being sometimes
placed in exceeding great prosperity.

All the blessings of God, belonging to this life, he had them in abundance:
yet all turned into need and beggerie.

Miserable was his estate yea, most vile and filthy, in the face of the world:
yet God cast upon him a careful eye.

Be mindful of these things; for profit insueth thereupon: and in thy
poverty arso learn to be patient and meek.

End not thy days in despair as the wicked do: seek not by vnpatience and
violence, to prevent Gods appoynment: tarry the time which thy Creator has
ordained; it is thine, mine, and all our duties, to yield our wills to Gods
will. wait his leisure therefore whose name be praised for evermore. Amen.

Love every man,
owe no man grudge:
God sits above,
as sovereign Judge:
He sees all things,
above, below:
And every where
an eye does throw,
WRath is the way to vengeance: a foul and devilish vice disallowed of God,
and horrible among men.

It is a Fire which consumes, a Canker which eats, a Mouth which fretteth:
the mark whereat it shoots, is Mischief.

Let not thy heart lie open thereunto, least the Devil thereby getting
entrance, possess thee, and carry thee headlong into confusion.

Lay apart all occasions of grudge; hate no man, love al men: knowing this,
That Love is the fulfilling of Gods law.

Judge ill of none, think well of all: for God reserueth judgment and
vengeance, unto himself.

Against thine enemies use not violence: but rather in charity (as thou art
commanded) use forbearance.

Make the best of that which is amiss, for therein thou shall show thy self
meek: howbeit, wink not at wickedness.

Look up unto Heaven, and think upon him that sits above* seeing and marking
the thoughts and deeds of all men.

All things are manifest unto him; yea, whatsoever we do in corners, he sees
as plainly as at noone day.

Mock not thy self therefore with thine own imaginations, neither be thou
seduced in the vanity of thine own fantasies^

Be not forgetful of him, who uttered this voice: Heaven is my seat, and the
Earth my footstole.

Everlasting praise be ascribed unto his name glory, majesty, and power,
belongs unto him, for evermore. Amen.

In that we have,
the world at will,
And take delight,
to follow ill;
Neglecting God
in holy word:
Against our souls,
we whet a sword
WHat does it profit a man to be Lord over the whole World, and yet to be the
servant and slave of sin.

It is even as if we should mingle poison with sweet dainties, and in tasting
them, to swellowe down our own death.

Let not thy mind therefore, be drowned in ye vain delights of this world:
but use them as they are made, even with modesty.

Lay not inwait for them, to enjoy them with excess: least they turn thee to
destruction and utter undoing.

In the Rich man, view a pattern of wantonness: who forgetting mercy, felt
the heat of Gods heavy judgment.

Amidest the scorching flames, he lay crying without comfort; because he abused
the benefits of Gods creation.

Making them instruments to serve his beastly appetites, neglecting in the
mean time, all deeds of Christian charity.

Let not us be so ravished with worldly pleasures* that we forgetting GOD,
should disherite our selves of th'heauenly inheritance.

As the rich man did, who in the midst of his banqueting viandes, and pleasant
melody despised the poor.

Most mortal enemies to our selves are we in so doing: and stopping our ears
at the word of God, we weaue our own woe,

Because the word of life, through our default, is made unto us the sword of
death, which does strike down to hell.

Eternal God, and most merciful Father, illuminate our understandings,
inspire us with heavenly knowledge, lighten our wits, and give us grace to be
spiritually minded, that we may use thy gifts, blessings and benefits, to
the glory of thy name. Amen.

A day there is,
when all shall rise,
Out of their Graves,
in wondrous wise:
The elect of God,
long for that day:
Come, come, O Christ,
come soon, we say.
WRetched were we, if there were not an other World, besides this wicked
World, transitory and corruptible.

In a miserable case were we, if the children of God, (whom we hope our selves
to be) waited in vain for another world.

Lamentable were our lot; yea, accursed our condition, if our happiness were
not the life to come:

Look we in wast for the coming of our Christ? No, no; he will come at the
sound of the last Trumpe from Heaven.

In majesty will he come, to judge the whole world, and to give general
sentence against the wicked and unrighteous.

All shall rise out of their graves, and shall see him with their bodily eyes:
the just to their joy, the ungodly to their pain.

Many legions of Angels shall attent upon him, and shall show the brightenesse
of his glory, majesty, and celestial power.

Lord Jesus; thy chosen children long to see that day: yea, they labor and are
in travel, until that day of comfort come.

Abridge and shorten these troublesome times, wherein thy children are set at
naught, and hasten the day of their resurrection.

Make speed, sweet Jesus, come quickly, that the kingdom of Satan may be
overthrown, and the powers infernal suppresed.

Be mindful of thy faithful flock, which wander up and down in this
wilderness, like Lambs among venomous wolves.

End the days of this our mortality, and let us hear that sweet voice:
Come ye blessed, possess the Kingdom, prepared for you from the beginning of
the world. Amen, Amen.

The Seven Petitions of the Lords Prayer, with a brief exposition thereof,
drawn out of holy Scripture.
Our Father, which art in Heaven.
Doubtless thou art our Father: Although Abraham be ignorant of us, ( or
would refuse us, to be his children,) and Israel know us not: yet thou, O
Lord, art our Father, and our Redeemer: thy name is for ever. Esaias. 63.16.

There is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, which
is above all, in power, (and through all) by his providence,) and in us all,
(by his grace,) Ephesians. 4.5.6.

The Lord is in his holy palace, the Lords throne is in the heaven, his eyes
will consider the poor, and his eie-lids will try the children of men. Psalm.
11.4.

The heaurn is my throne and the earth is my footstool, (such is the
greatness of Gods Majesty,) Esaie. 66.1..

But our conversation is in Heaven, ( in mind and affection,) from whence also
we look for the Savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ. Philip. 3.22.

1. Hallowed be thy name
Our help is in the name of the Lord, which has made Heaven and Earth. Psalm.
124.8.

The Lords name be praised from the rising of the Sunn, to the going down of
the same. Psalm. 113.3.

Kings of the earth, and all people; Princes and all Judges of the World:
Young men, and Maids: also, Old men, and Children, let them praise the name of
the Lord; for his name only is to be exalted, and his praise above the earth
and the heavens. Psalm. 148.11.12.13.

2. Thy Kingdom come,
THe kingdom of God is not meat nor drink; but righteousness and peace, and joy
in the holy Ghost. Romans 14.17.

But rather seek ye after the kingdom of God, and all these things, ( which
are but accessaries, and common as well to the wicked, as the godly,) shall be
ministered unto you. Luke. 12.31 Fear not little flock, for it is your Fathers
pleasure to give you the kingdom, (which is the chefest thing that can be
given. ( Luke. 12.32 In my Fathers house are many dwelling places: I go to
prepare a place for you, (So that there is not only a place for Christ, but
for all that are his.) John. 14.2.

3. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven,
IN the roll of the book it is written of me, I desired to do thy good will,
O my God: yea, thy law is within my heart Psalm 40.7.8

That servant that knew his Masters will and prepa: red not himself, neither
did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes. Luke 12 47.

For this is the will of God, even your sanctification: and that ye should
abstain from fornication, ( And dedicate your selves wholly to God) that every
one of you should know, how to possess his vessel in holiness and honor:
(His body that is profaned by such filthiness.) 1. These 4.3, 4.

And fashion not your selves like unto this world, but be ye changed by the
renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is the good will of GOD, and
acceptable, and perfect. (Whatsoever is not agreeable to Gods will, is evil,
displeasant, and imperfect.) Romans 12.2.

Wherefore, be ye not unwise, but understand what, the will of the Lord is.
Ephesians. 5.17.

4. Give us this day our daily bread.
BEhold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, ( he works that in
mercy, which man by no means can compass,) and upon them that trust in his
mercy: to deliver their soul from death, and to preserve them in famine.
Psalm. 33, 18.19.

The eyes of all weight upon thee, and thou give them their meat in due
season: thou openest thine hand, and fillest all things living with thy good
pleasure. (Gods providence stretches both to man and beast.) Psalm. 145.15.

Man shall not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of the
mouth of GOD. (The order that God has ordained to maintain his creatures by,
is here meant) Deuteronomy. 8.3. Matthew 4.4.

The chief thing of life, is water and bread, and clothing, and lodging to
cover thy shame. Eccles. 29.23.

Two things have I required of thee: deny me them not before I die. Remove
far from me vanity and lies, give me not poverty nor riches: feed me with
food convenient for me, least I be full, and deny thee, and say: Who is the
Lord? ( For Riches make men forget their Maker.) Or least I be poor, and
steal, and take the name of my God in vain Prou. 30.7.8.9.

When we have food and raiment, let us therewith be content. 1. Tim. 6.8.

5. And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us.
Forgive thy neighbor the hurt that he has don to thee: ( for man ought not
to seek vengeance,) so shall thy sins be forgiven thee also when thou
prayest. Should a man bear hatred against a man, and desire forgiveness of
the Lord: He will show no mercy to a man which is like himself, and will he
ask forgiveness of his own sins: Eccles. 28.2.3.4.

Judge not, and ye shall not be judged: condemn not, and ye shall not be
condemned: forgive, and ye shall be forgiven. Give, and it shall be given unto
you, a good measure, pressed down, shaked together, and running over, shall
men give into your bosom. For, with what measure you meat, with the same
shall men meat unto you again. Luke. 6.37.38.

Love your enemies, do well to them which hate you. Luke. 6.27.

There shall be judgment merciless, to him that shows no mercy: and mercy
rejoices against judgment: (and fears it not.) Iam. 2.13.

6. And lead us not into temptation.
BE sober and watch; for your adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks
about, seeking whom he may devour. 1. Pet. 5.8.

In whom the God of this world, ( even Satan,) has blinded the minds, that
is, of infidels, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, which is the
image of God, ( in respect of his office,) should not shine unto them. 2. Cor.
4.4.

Whenever a man hears the word of the kingdom, and understands it not,
the evil one comes. ( even the Devil,) and takes away that, which was
sown in his heart. Mat. 13, 19.

The Prince that rules in the air, even the spirit that now works in the
children of disobedience. Ephesians. 2.2.

Love not the world, ( as it is adversary to God:) neither the things that
are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in
him, etc. 1. John. 3.15.16.17.

We know that we are of God, and the whole world lies in wickedness, ( al
men, as of them selves, lie as it were busied in evil.) 1. John. 15.19.

Know ye not that the amity of the world, is the enmity of god? Whosoever
therefore, will be a friend of the world, makes himself the enemy of God.
Iam. 4.4.

For all that is borne of God, overcomes ye world: and this is the victory
that overcomes the world; even our faith. Who is it that overcomes the
world, but he which believes that Jesus is the son of GOD: 1. John. 5.4.5.

That the righteousness of the law, ( that, which the law requires,) might be
fulfilled in us, which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit: For
they that are after the flesh, savor the things of the flesh, ( their will,
understanding, reason, wit, and all, is fleshly.) The wisdom of the flesh is
death, it is enmity against God: They that are in the flesh, can not please
God. Romans 8^4

7. But deliver us from evil. Amen.
Help us, O GOD, of our salvation, ( seeing we have none other Savior,) for
the glory of thy name, and deliver us. Psalm. 69.8.

In the day of my trouble, I will call upon thee, for thou hear me. Psalm.
86.7.

There shall none evil come unto thee. He shall give his Angels charge over
thee, to keep thee in all thy ways: they shall bear thee in their hands,
that thou hurt not thy foot against a stone. Because he has loved me, ( Gods
protection promised,) therefore will I deliver him, I will exalt him, because
he has (known my name. He shall call upon me, and I will hear him: I will be
with him in trouble: I will deliver him, and glorify him. etc. Psalm.
91.9.10.11.12. etc.

O Lord, give us grace to learn this, and live thereafter, Amen.

The belief of a Christian, commonly called the Apostles Creed; divided into
twelve Articles and expounded.
1. I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth.
Hear, O Israel, the LORD our God, is Lord only. Deuteronomy. 6.4.

Blessed be GOD, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
mercies, and the God of all comfort. 2. Cor. 1.3.

Thou Lord in the beginning have stablished the earth, and the heavens are the
works of thine hands. Psalm. 102.25. Heb. 1.10.

Have we not all one Father: Has not one GOD made us: Malach. 2.10.

By the word of the Lord were the heavens made and all the host of them by the
breath of his mouth. Psalm* 33.6.

2. And in Jesus Christ, his only Son our Lord.
THere is but one GOD, which is the Father, of whom are all things, and we in
him: And one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. 1. Cor.
8 6.

If we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with
another, Christ with us, and we with our selves,) and the blood of Jesus Christ
his Son, cleanses us from all our sins. 1. Ioh. 1.7.

Who has delivered us from the power of darkness and has translated us into
the kingdom of his dear Son, in whom we have redemption, through his
blood, that is, the forgiveness of sins. Colos. 1.13.14.

This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Math. 3.17.

3. Which was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary.
But when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a
woman, and made under the Law ( or subject to the law,) that he might redeem
them which were under the Law; that we might receive the adoption of the
sons Galat. 4.4.5.

And the Word was made flesh, ( Christ was formed, and made man, by the
operation of the holy Ghost, without the working of man,) and dwelt among us,
and we saw the glory thereof, as the glory of the only begotten son of the
Father, full of grace and truth. Ioh. 1.14.

The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, ( This was spoken to Mary,) and the power
of the most high shall ouershadow thee:) it shall be a secret operation of the
holy Ghost:) therefore also, that holy thing which shall be borne of thee,
shall be called, the Son of God. (He must be without sin, which must take
away sin.) Luke 1.35.

Behold, a Virgin shall be with child, and shall bear a Son, and they shall
call his name Emanuel, which is by interpretation, God with us. Matthew. 1.23.
Esaie. 7.14.

When Marie was betrothed to Joseph, before they came together, ( before he
took her home to him,) she was found with Child by the holy Ghost. Math. 1.18.

4. Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, buried, and descended
into Hell.
FOr Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow
his steps. Who his own self bare our sins in his body, on the tree, that we
being delivered from sin, should live in righteousness, by whose stripes we
are healed. 1. Pet. 2.21.24.

They scourged Jesus, they stripped him, they put upon him a Scarlet robe, ( to
deride and mock him, because he called himself a King,) they gave him Vinegar
to drink, mingled with Gall, ( to open his veins, and so to hasten his death:
this was given him hanging upon the cross,) they crucified him between two
thieves, they cast lots for the parting of his garments they set a scornful
writing over his head, they reviled him, and ceased not, till he gave up the
Ghost- Matthew. 27.26, 28, 29, 30, 34 35, 37, 50.

So Joseph took the body, and wrapped it in a clean Linen cloth, and put it
in his new Tomb, ( Christ's burying does so much the more verify his death and
resurrection,) which he had heawen in a rock, and rolled a great stone to the
door of the sepulcher, and departed. Matthew. 27.59 60.

I know that ye seek Jesus, which was crucified: he is not here, for he is
risen, as he said. Come, see the place where the Lord was laid. etc. Matthew.
28.5.6.

God made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin, ( a sacrifice for sin,)
that we should be made the righteousness of God in him, (By inputation, when
we shall be clad with Christ's righteousness.) 2. Cor. 5.21.

He destroyed, through death, him that had the power of death, that is the
Devil: and that he might deliver all them, which for fear of death, ( and
Gods anger,) were all their life time subject to bondage. Heb. 2.14.15.

Christ has abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light,
through the Gospel. 2. Tim. 1.10.

Death is swallowed up in victory, O death, where is thy sting: O grave, where
is thy victory: 1 Cor. 15.55.

5. And the third day he rose again from the dead.
Jesus Christ was delivered to death for our sins, and is risen again for
our justification, (to accomplish and make perfect our justification*) Romans
4.25.

Go quickly; and tell his Disciples that he is risen from the dead: and behold
he goes before you into Galilie, there ye shall see him: lo, I have told you.
(The Angel assures the women, that come to see Christ's Sepulcher, of his
resurrection.) Math. 28.7. Mark. 16.6.7. Luke. 24.6. Joh 1, 20.1. Act 1.21.22.

But now Christ is risen from the dead, and was made the first fruits of them
that sleept: (by his resurrection, being the first, we are all assured of our
resurrection.) 1 Cor. 15.20.

Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will rise it up again. (This he
meant of his body, which should die, and did rise again the third day after
his death.) John. 2.19.21.

First of all, I delivered unto you that which I received, ( or, learned by
Gods word,) how yt Christ died for our sins, according to the scriptures,
and that he was buried, rose again the third day, and was seen of Cephas then
of the twelve, ( though Judas wanted, yet they were so called still:) after
that, of more then five hundred brethren at once, etc. 1. Cor. 15.3.4.5.6*

6. He ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the Father
Almighty.
ANd it came to pass, that as he blessed them, he departed from them and was
carried up into heaven. Luke. 24.51.

So, after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received into Heaven, and sat
at the right hand of God. Mark. 16.19.

And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was taken up, (
whereby they knew certainly whither he went,) for a cloud took him up out of
their sight, Act. 1.9.

It is Christ which is dead: yea or rather, which is risen again, who is also
at the right hand of God, and makes request for us. Romans 8.34.

7. From thence he shall come again to judge the quike and the dead.
THis Jesus: which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come, as ye have
seen him go into heaven: (even the true Redeemer, to gather us unto him.)
Acts. 1.11.

And when the Son of man comes in his glory, and all the holy Angels with
him, then shall he fit upon the throne of his glory. Math. 25.31.

And then shall they see the Son of man coming in the clouds, with great
power and glory. Mark. 13.26.

And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift up your
heads, for your redemption draws near. (The effect of that redemption shall
appear, which Jesus Christ has purchased.) Luke 21.27.28.

8. I believe in the holy Ghost.
Go therefore and teach all nations, baptising them in the name of the Father,
and the Son, and the holy Ghost. Matthew. 28.19.

But the Comforter, which is the holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my
name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance,
which I have told you. John 14.26.

This holy Ghost, is called sometime, The spirit of truth, proceeding from the
Father, (because he works the truth in us.) John. 14.17 and. 15.26. some
time, the Spirit of the Father, speaking in his Ministers. Matthew. 10.20.
sometime, the Spirit of the Son. Romans 8.9. sometime the good Spirit. Psalm.
143.10. sometime, an holy Ointment. 1. John. 2.20. sometime, a Comforter. John.
14.16. and 15.26. and 16.7. sometime, the earnest of our Inheritance, (The
holy Ghost is the gage or pledge of our second redemption, which shall be at
the possession of our inheritance in heaued. ( Ephesians. 1.14 sometime, the earnest
of the Spirit in our hearts. 2. Cor. 1.22.

No man can say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost 1. Cor. 12.3.

9. The holy Catholic Church the Communion of Saints.
CHrist loved his Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it,
and cleanse it, by the washing of water, through the word, ( Baptism is a
token of the Churches consecration,) that he might make it unto himself a
glorious Church, not having spot or wrinckle, ( because it is covered and clad
with his righteousness and holiness,) that it should be holy, and without
blame. Ephesians. 5.27.

I am the Rose of the field, and the Lilly of the valleys: like a Lilly among
the thorns, so is my Love among the daughters, etc. ( Christ prefers his
Church above all other things) Cant. 2.1.2

For other foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ. 1. Cor. 3.11.

Know ye not, that ye are the temple of God, and that the spirit of God
dwells in you: 1. Cor. 3.16. In this Church are many members, but one body in
Christ Romans 12.4.5. 1 Cor. 6.15. Let us follow the truth in love: and in all
things grow up into him, which is the head that is Christ. Christ being head o^
his Church. nourishes his members, and joins them together by joints, etc.
( Ephe. 4.15.

Christ is the head of the body of the Church Col. 1.18.

Now rejoice I in my sufferings for you, ( or your commodity,) and fulfill the
rest of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, ( for Christ suffers daily in
his members, as partaker of their infirmities and therefore a revenger of their
injuries,) for his body sake, which is the Church, Coloss. 1.24. (the
edification of the Church is here meant.)

There are many members, but one body. 1. Cor. 12 20.

Now ye are the body of Christ, and members for your part. (For all Churches
dispersed throughout the world, are diverse, members of one body.) 1. Cor.
12.27.

God is not the author of confusion, but of peace; as we see in all the
Churches of the Saints. 1. Cor. 14.33

10 The forgiveness of sins.
WHose sins so ever ye remit, they are remitted: and whose sins soever ye
retain, they are retained. John. 20.23.

He that shall believe, and be baptized shall be saved: but he that will not
believe shall be damned. Luke 16.16

It behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise again from the dead the third day:
and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name
among all nations. Luke 24.46.47.

And GOD saw their works, that they turned from their evil ways: ( the
fruits of their repentance proceeding of faith, planted by the Prophets
preaching to the people of Niniueth:) and God repented of the evil that he had
said, that he would do unto them, and he did it not. Jonah. 3.10.

Stand in the ways, and behold, and ask for the old way, ( wherein the
Patriarchs and prophets walked, directed by the word of God, signifying, that
there is no true way, but that which God prescribes,) which is the good way,
and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls. Ierem. 6.16.

11. The resu^rection of the body.
FOr since by Man came death, by Man came also the resurrection of the dead. 1.
Cor. 15.21.

Behold, I show you a secret thing, We shall not all sleep, but we shall all
be changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye at the last trumpet: for
the trumpet shall blow, and the dead shall be raised up incorruptible, and we
shall be changed. ( When the Lord comes to judgment, some of the Saints
shall be alive, who^ he will change, even as if they were dead; so that this
change shall be to them in stead of death. 1. Cor. 15.51.52.

The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shoute, and with the voice
of Th'archangel and with the trumpet of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise
first Then shall we which live, and remain, ( even we which are alive, or
shall be then found living,) be brought up with them also in the clouds to
meet the Lord in the air* and so shall we be ever with the Lord. (In this
sudden taking up, there shall be a kind of change of the qualities of our
body; which shallbe as a kind of death.) 1. These. 16.17.

And he shall send his Angels, with a great sound of a trumpet* and they shall
gather together his elect, from the four winds, and from the one end of the
heaven unto the other, etc. Matthew* 24.31.

And though after my skin, Worms destroy my body, yet shall I see God in my
flesh: whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold* and none other
for me, though my reins are consumed within me. ( Jobs full hope, that both
soul and body should enjoy the presence of God, in the last resurrection. Job.
19.26.27.

I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last day. (The
words of Martha to Jesus, concerning dead Lazarus. The error of the Sadduces,
(men marvelous quidditiue) concerning the resurrection, is here confuted.)
John. 11.14.

12. And the life everlasting, Amen.
I Am the resurrection, and the life, ( Christ restores us from death, to give
us everlasting life,) he that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall
he live. And whosoever lives, and believes in me, shall never die. John
11.25.26.

I am the living bread, ( which give life to the world,) which came down from
heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever; and the bread
that I give you, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.
John. 9.51.

Thou have the words of eternal life. ( Then without Christ, there is but
death: for his word only leads us to life. Joh. 6.68.

This is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son,
and believes in him, should have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at
the last day. John. 6.40

Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my word, and believes in him
that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but
has passed from death unto life. John. 5.24.25.26.

The hour shall come, in the which, all that are in the graves, shall hear his
voice, and they shall come forth, that have done good, unto the resurrection
of life: but they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of condemnation.
John 5.8.29.

Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal life. Ioh. 5.39

If thou knew the gift of God, ( Christ meant himself, who was sent of his
Father, to convert the woman of Samaria,) and who is he that says unto thee,
Give me drink, thou would have asked of him, and he would have given thee
Water of life. (which is the love of God in his Son, powered into our hearts
by the holy Ghost, unto everlasting life.) John. 4.10.

Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him, ( even spiritual
grace) shall never be more a thirst, ( shall never be dried up, destitute, or
forsaken:) but the water that I shall give him* shall be in him a well of
water, springing up into everlasting life. Ioh. 4.14.

Come ye blessed of my Father, ( for our salvation comes of the blessing and
favor of God,) inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from the foundations
of the world. ( Note the certantie of our predestination to salvation. Matthew.
25.34.

And these shall go into everlasting pain, ( which follows men's fantasies,
neglecting the will of God, and his commandments,) and the righteous into life
eternal. Math. 25.46.

And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake, ( all shall
rise at the general resurrection,) some to everlasting life, and some to shame
and perpetual contempt. Dan. 12.2.

And they shall come forth that have done good unto the resurrection of life:
but they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of condemnation. John.
5.29.

For the Lamb,) Jesus Christ our Mediator and Redeemer, (Which is in the
midest of the throne, ( being very God,) shall govern them, and lead them unto
the lively Fountains of waters. He shall give them everlasting life.) Apo.
7.17.

O Lord give us grace, to believe this, and to live thereafter. Amen.

The ten Commandments of Almighty God, called: The two Tables of the Law.
The first Table. 1. J am the Lord thy God, thou shall have none other Gods but
me.
Hear, O Israel. The LORD our God, is the only Lord: Thou shall therefore
love the Lord thy God, with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with
all thy mind, ( or thought,) and with all thy strength. Mark. 12.29.30

Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Math.
4.10. Luk, 4.14.

I am the Lord thy God, thou shall have none other Gods before my face (God
binds us to serve him lonely, without superstition, or idolatry.) Deu. 5.6.7.

I am the Lord your God, ye shall keep my Sabbathes, and reverence my
Sanctuary: I am the Lord. Leuit. 26.1.2.

Come, let us worship, and fall down before the Lord our maker (We must wholly
give our selves to the service of GOD.) Psa. 95.6.

All the Gods of the people, are Idols: but the Lord made the Heavens. (Idols
therefore, or whatsoever made not the Heavens, are not God.) Psalm. 96.6,

2. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Jmage, nor the liknesse of any
thing that is in heaven above, nor in the earth beneath nor in the water under
the earth; thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them: For J the Lord
thy God, am a ielous God, and visit the sin of the fathers upon the
children, unto the third and fourth generation, of them that hate me; and show
mercy unto thousands, in them that love me, and keep my commandments.
NO man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son of God, which is
in the bosom of the Father, ( he is most dear and straightly joined to his
Father, not only in love, but also in nature and union.) he has delivered
him. (God was made visible, as it were, in Christ.) John. 1.18.

God is a Spirit, and they that worshipe him, must worship him in spirit and
truth,) God being of a spiritual nature, requires aspirituall service, and
agreeable to his nature. Ioh. 4.24.

For so much then, as we are the generation of God we ought not to think, that
the Godhead is like unto Gold, or Silver, or Stone, graven by art, and the
invention of man. Act. 17.29.

The worshipping of Idols, which ought not to be named, in the beginning, and
the cause, and the end of all evil. Sapi. 14 26

The inuenting of Idols, was ye beginning of whoredom: and the finding of
them, is the corruption of life. Sapien. 14.12.

Better therefore is the just man, that has none Idols: for he shall be far
from reproof. Baruc. 6.72

Confounded be all they that serve graven Images, and that glory in Idols:
worship him all ye Gods. (Let all that is of estimation in the world, fall
down before the Lord.) Psalm. 97.7,

Thou shall make thee no gods of Metal. Exo. 34.17

Babes, keep your selves from Idols. (From every form and fashion of thing,
which is set up for any devotion to worship God.) 1. John. 5.29.

3. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain: for the Lord
will not hold him guilt less, that takes his name in vain.
Ye have heard how it was said to them of old time. Thou shall not forswear
thy self, but shall perform thine oaths to the Lord. But I say unto you,
Swear not at all, neither by heaven, ( all superfluous oaths are deba^red,)
for it is the Throne of God: nor yet by the Earth, for it is his Footstool:
neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great King. Neither shall
thou swear by thine head, because thou can not make one Hair white or
black: But let your communication be, Yea yea: Nay, nay: ( let simplicity and
truth, be in your words; and then ye shall not be so light, and ready to
swear:) For whatsoever is more then these, comes of evil. ( when one
speaks otherwise, then he thinks in heart, it comes of an evil
conscience, and of the Devil. ( Matthew. 5.33.34.35.36.37.

This is the curse that goes forth over all the whole earth. etc. And every
one that swears, ( he that transgresses the first Table, and serves not God
aright, but abuses Gods name) shall be cut off, as well on this side, as on
that: I will bring it forth, says the Lord of Hoasts, and it shall enter, etc.
into the house of him yt falsely swears by my name; and it shall remain in
the midst of his house, and shall consume it, with the timber thereof, and
stones thereof, Zach. 4.3.4.

Accustom not thy self to swearing, (for in it there are many falls:)
neither take up for a custom, the naming of the holy one (for, thou shall not
be unpunished for such things.) For, as a servant which is often punished, cannot
be without some scarre: so he that swears, and names God continually, shall
not be faultlesse, etc. ( Read the Chapter, it is notable.) Eccles. 23.9.10.11.

4 Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day Six days shall thou labor
and do all that thou have to do but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the
Lord thy God. In it, thou shall do no manner of work, thou, and thy son, and
thy daughter, the man-seruant, and thy mayd-seruant thy cattle, and the
stranger that is within thy gates. For in six days, the Lord made Heaven, and
Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore
the Lord blessed the seventh day and hallowed it.
IT is lawful to do well, ( or do a good deed,) on the Sbbath day Matthew. 12
12.

The Sabbath was made for Man, and not Man for the Sabbath: wherefore the Son
of man is Lord even of the Sabbath. Mar. 2.27.28.

If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, ( If thou refrain thy self
from thy wicked works,) from doing thy will on my Holy day, and call the
Sabbath a delight, to consecrat it, as glorious to the Lord and shall honor
him, not doing thine own ways nor seeking thine own will, nor speaking a vain
word: then shall thou delight in the Lord, and I will cause thee to mount upon
the high places of the earth, ( I will advance thee, and make thee honorable,
(and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy Father, ( and bless thee with
plenty of all things, to thy full contentation:) for the mouth of the Lord
has spoken it. Esai. 58.13.14.

Keep the Sabbath day to sanctify it, as the Lord thy God has commanded.
Since God permits six days to our labors, we ought willingly to dedicate
the seventh, to serve him wholly. The keeping of the Sabbath, consists not
in our selves, but it comes from above, even from God the author of the
Sabbath.) Deuteronomy. 5.12.

The second Table 5. Honor thy Father, and thy Mother that thy days may be
long in the la^d, which the Lord thy God gives thee
Honor thy Father, and Mother: ( And) He that cursoth Father, or Mother let
him die, (without any hope of pardon) Mat. 15 4. Mark 7.10.

Honor thy Father, and Mother, ( which is the first Commandment, with
promise,) that it may be well, with thee, and that thou may live long on
earth. ( The Promise is conditional, for if we neglect the duty to us
enjoined, we make the Promise void, and of none effect, Ephesians. 6.23.

The Lord will have the Father honored of the Children, ( for he has so
commanded,) and has confirmed the authority of the Mother, over the Children,
Who so honors his Father, his sins shall be forgiven him; and he shall
abstain from them, and shall have his daily desires, ( God will be so gracious
unto him, and so guide him, that he shall not do amiss:) And he that
honors his Mother, is like one that gathers treasure. Eccle. 3.2.34

6. Thou shall do no murder.
Ye have heard that it was said to them of old time, Thou shall not kill; for
whosoever kills, shall be culpaple of Judgment, ( or subject to punishment:)
but I say unto you. Whosoever is angry with his brother unadvisedly, shall be
culpable of Judgment, ( for God knowing his secreat malice, will punish him.)
And whosoever says unto his brother, Raca, ( Idle brain, a biword spoken in
contempt, and despite,) shall be worthy to by punished by the Counsel, ( by
Judges thereto appointed.) And whosoever shall say, Fool, shall be worthy to
be punished with hell fire, Matthew. 5 21.22.

Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you,
and pray for them which hurt you, and persecute you: and unto him that smites
thee on the one cheek, offer also the other, (Rather endure more injury, then
revenge your selves.) Luke 7.27.28.29.

7. Thou shall not commit Adultery
Ye have heard that it was said to them of old time, Thou shall not commit
Adultery: But I say unto you, that whosoever looks on a Woman, to lust after
her, has committed adultery with her already in his heart. (Chastity is
required both in body and mind.) Math. 5.27.28.

Flee Fornication. Every sin that a man does, is without the body: but he
that commits Fornication sins against his own body. (He more polluteth
and defiles his own body, then he that commits any other sin.) 1. Cor.
6.18.

Know ye not, that your bodies are the members of Christ: shall I then take the
members of Christ, and make them the members of an Harlot: God forbid. 1. Cor.
6.15.

Marriage is honorable, ( and a remedy ordained of God, against
incontinencie,) among all, and the bed undefiled but: Whoremongers and
Adulterers, God will judge. Heb. 13.4

8. Thou shall not Steal.
THou know the Commandments: Thou shall not steal Mat. 10.19

Why rather suffer ye not wrong: Nay, ye your selves do wrong, and that to
your brethren: ( hatred grudges, wrongful dealings, and desires of revenge,
etc. are forbidden.) Know ye not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
kingdom of God: Be not deceived; neither adulrerers nor thieves, etc. shall
inherit the kingdom of God: and such were some of you etc. 1. Cor. 6 7 8.9.10

Let him that stoale, steal no more; but let him rather labor, and work with
his hands, the thing which is good that he may have to give unto him that
needs Ephesians. 4 28.

9. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.
THese six things does the Lord hate: yea, his soul abhors seven. 1. The
hauty Eyes: 2. a lying Tongue: 3. Hands that shed innocent blood: 4 an Heart
that imagines wicked enterprises: 5. feet that be swift in running to
mischief, (that is, affections which carry a man away in such sort, that he
can not tell what he does.) 6. a False witness: 7. him that rayseth up
Contentions among brethren, (or neighbors.) Prou. 6.16.17

Wherefore, cast off lying, and speak every man truth unto his neighbor; for
we are members one of another Ephesians. 4.25.

A wicked witness mocketh at judgment, and the mouth of the wicked,
swalloweth up iniquity. (Takes a pleasure, and delights therein. as
gluttons and drunkards, in dilicate meats and drinks) Pro. 19.28.

A false witness shall not be unpunished: and he that speaks lies, shall
perish. Prou. 19.9.

10. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors wife nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor
any thing, that is his.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, even so do to them: for this
is the law and the Prophets. (The whole Law and the Scriptures, set forth and
commend charity unto us.) Matthew. 6.12 Luke. 6.31. Tob 4.15

To love a man's neighbor as himself, is more than all burnt offeringes and
sacrifices. (Than all the ceremonies of the Law, wherein Hipocrites put great
holiness.) Mark. 12.31.33.

Let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with those
things that ye have Heb. 13 5. Godliness is great gain, if a man be content
with that he has. (Religion is the true riches (1. Tim. 6.6

A foolish man's foot is soon in his neighbors house: but a man of experience
is ashamed to look in. Eccles. 21.22.

Follow not thy lusts, but turn thee from thine own appetites: for if thou
give thy soul her desires it shall make thine enemies that envy thee, to
laugh thee to scorn. Eccle. 18.30

Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey it in
the lusts thereof. (The mind first ministers evil motions, whereby man's will
is enticed: thence burst forth the lusts, by them the body is provoked, and
the body by his actions does solicit the mind, therefore we are commanded, at
the least to rule our bodies.) Romans 6.12.

Sit not at al with another man's wife, neither ly with her upon the bed, nor
banquet with her, least thine heart incline unto her, and so through thy
desire, fall into destruction. Eccl. 9 11.

Give me thy vineyard, that I may make me a garden of herbs thereof, etc.
(Achabs inordinate lust, after Naboths inheritance, sharply punished.) 1. Kin.
21.2.4.6 etc.

If mine heart has been deceived by a woman, ( to lust after her,) or, if I
have laid wait at the door of my neighbor, let my wife grind unto another
man and let other men bow down upon her. To abuse her. Job. 31.9.10

The leprosy therefore of Naaman, shall cleave unto thee, and to thy seed for
ever. (To be an example to all such, as by whose covetousness, Gods word might
be slaundered,) because Gehazi was the servant of Elisha the Prophet, named in
Scripture, The man of God.) 2. King. 5.27.

Lord have mercy upon us and by the operation of thy holy Spirit, incline our
hearts to keep these Laws Amen.

The necessary appurtenances belonging to this Conduit.
The Cesterne to this Conduit.
A Cesterne to this Conduit,
of Comfort must have,
The water thence flowing,
vnsoyled to save.
Of this unprovided,
no Christian should be,
The nature and virtue
thereof, if they see;
And therefore neglect not,
so precious a thing:
Which (beside other benefits)
Gods blessing does bring.
A Cesterne is,
required here,
To keep this Conduit-water
clear.
For precious Pearls,
and Ointment sweet,
Must places have,
for them most meet.
Have care to keep
thy Conscience clean,
This is the Cesterne
which I mean.
It must be swept,
it must be scowrd,
Before this water
in be powrd.
Pure wine which has,
a fragrant in all,
Into a Pot,
not sauouring well
The Wine will change,
the virtue gone,
This hurt does follow
thereupon:
Even so a Conscience.
soyld with sin.
Corrupt and cankred
all within,
With devilish thoughts
ungodly lusts,
Vile avarice,
in wealth which trustes:
Neglecting God,
the well of wealth,
And unto his.
the horn of health.
A Conscience staind,
and blemished thus:
If we perceive
to lodge in us,
The grace of God,
ecclipsed is,
So that we must,
needs do amiss.
For le^ us learn,
and bear away,
Our conscience does
our deeds bewray:
And lays load,
with heave and shoue,
At us before:
the Lord above.
And as in Courts,
where Judges sit.
The custom is.
not to acquit,
Vh'offender of
his foul offense,
Except there come
in evidence:
And make his cause,
upright and good,
Dischargd is he,
truth understood:
Even so it fares,
with every one,
whose sins to such,
excess is grown,
That in themselves,
their conscience sits,
And Serpent like,
against them spits.
Ten thousand thousand
sore complaints.
And with sharp torments,
them attaines.
Thus does their conscience
them arraine,
And to confess,
does them constrain,
All such misdeedes,
as they have done:
So that into
Gods curse they run:
Which threatens death
and hell to such,
As of this world
have made so much,
That truth contemnd,
lies under foot:
The plants thereof,
rent up by root,
Gods word, and will,
is set at naught.
An evil conscience,
this has wrought:
A conscience void
of Gods good grace:
Not hell it self,
so ill a place,
This is the worm.
which ever gnawes
The corsiue salve,
which sharply draws:
This is the fire
which fiercely burns
And all our joys,
to torments turns.
In such a place,
no rest can dwell
And why? it is
a very Hell
O well are they,
that live upright,
Pleasing the Lord,
with all their mi
Keeping his law,
hearing his word,
(To cut down sin,
the spiritual sword.)
For why? all such.
shall feel within,
A conscience clear,
from spots of sin:
And pu^ifide.
it may persume,
The fragrant flowers.
and sweet perfume,
Of godly prayer,
unto the Lord,
To sacrifice,
with hearty accord.
This is the Cesterne,
(mark it well)
Of dregs or leeze,
which must not smell:
For if it do,
this Conduit spout,
No drop of comfort,
yields out,
A conscience pure,
therefore possess,
And things amiss,
with speed redress,
Least this sweet Conduit:
being shut,
From hope of comfort
thou be put.
In sum, if thou
Gods child wilt be,
And would that prayer,
should comfort thee.
Prepare thy heart,
thy mind apply:
Thy conscience seek
to sanctify.
Amend thy life,
embrace that is good,
And fire thy faith
on Christ's blood:
Then shall thy prayers
sweetly smell,
Before the Lord,
and like him well:
And thou shall have
thy hearts desire,
And unto hope
of health aspire.
Which grant, O God,
unto us all:
To whom by faith,
for grace we call.
That we may pray;
and praying please
Thy Godhead, and
thy wrath appease,
O people we,
thrice happy then:
Grant this O God,
Amen, Amen
The Pipe to this Conduit.
A Pipe to this Conduit,
by level is laid,
where through pleasant liquor
of life is conuaid:
This Pipe, and the Cesterne.
are joined in one:
Both must be embraced,
or both let alone;
Which that with re^oycing
each christian may do,
The Almighty by prayer,
must be sued nto,
THe Pipe is peace,
more worth then Gold:
A Jewel for
no riches sold.
It is not peace
twi^t King and King,
(Although this be
a precious thing:)
For where in peace,
Kings wear the Crown
There all dissension
is cast down:
There people live
in hearty love
There is no cause,
to fend and prove,
Their high estates
such duty have,
As their degrees
and callings crave:
The Inferior knows,
and understands,
What their superiors
state demands:
The baser to
the better bows,
And service due,
likewise allows.
There is no grudge,
there is no strife.
Where people pass
in peace their life.
The seeds which we
in soil do sow.
Spring up, and spread,
increase and grow.
Unto our charge,
we have an eye,
Our labors do
our lackes supply.
We worship God.
His name we fear,
And to our Prince
true hearts we bear.
Among our selves
in love we live
These are the fruits,
which peace does give
But yet the peace
which does surmount
All precious things
that we can count,
It is not peace,
twixt man and man:
Which no long time*
continue can:
It is that peace,
which brings bliss:
Their precious peace,
perpetual is.
The author of
This peace, is God:
Who for our sins,
with us was od,
For as we know,
through Adams fall,
To God his wrath,
We were in thrall:
So that hereby
this gain we got,
Even death for life,
(ah hellish lot:)
Our own misdeedes
deserves death:
And God, who gives
life and breath,
Suppressing peace,
became our foe:
And from the heavens
aloft, did throw
His thunderbolts
of fearful threats,
And in his heat,
his sword he wheats:
Even warrior like,
to strike us down,
(For man does melt
when God does frown.)
Thus with the Lord,
we were at ods,
Ours was the smart
the vengeance Gods:
Which whiles it did
endure and last,
All hope of peace.
was gone and past:
Till he from heaven
beholding us,
With wrethednesse
enclosed thus:
Provided in
this heavy case,
T'amend our state,
by his good grace:
This he vouchaft
to bring to pass:
(A wondrous work
of his it was:)
From mercy seat,
he sent his Son,
At whose corruption.
peace begunn.
God did ordain,
that Christ should die,
Upon a Cross
reard up on hie:
By loss of life,
to purchase peace.
True Christian comfort,
to increase:
Among the Jews
betrayed, he fell:
One of the twelve,
presumd to sell.
For thirty pence,
his Masters life:
The loss whereof,
abolisht strife.
The Jews did lay
on him their hands,
His limbs and joints
they bound with hands:
They scoft and mocked
him too too bad:
Their wish and will
on him they laid:
Upon the Cross
he made his end,
His soul to God
he did commend.
This sacrifice
God highly pleased,
And this his rigorous
rage apeasd.
Here reconcilement
first began,
And peace was made
twixt God and man.
The price of this
most perfect peace.
Which Christian comfort
does increase:
Declares thereof
the dignity:
This peace remaynes
immortally
This peace confirmd
twixt God and us,
And true atonement
sealed thus;
That through this Pipe
of peace, may spout,
And pleasantly
in streams run out,
Such comfort as
in thee do dwe^l,
Which are the fountain
and the well,
The Conduit and,
the lively spring,
Of every good
and healthful thing.
Thus (Lord) if thou
vouchafe to work:
Ingratitude,
which loves to lurk
Whithin our hearts
them to possess,
Shall banished be
by thankfulness,
and we shall praise
Jehovah then.
Grant this, O God,
Amen, Amen.
The Lock to this Conduit.
A Lock to this Conduit,
of right does belong,
Provided of purpose,
substantial and strong.
Of this Lock it is needful,
Christ's sheep to have skill,
That opening this Conduit,
their hearts they might fill,
With true joy and gladness,
with peace and with rest,
And all kind of comfort,
that we can request.
FIrst love the Lord.
who formed thee.
And like himself
created thee.
Love Jesus Christ,
who thee redeemd:
So precious he
thy soul esteemd.
Love him, whose love
with loss of life,
Twixt God and us,
cut of the strife.
Love him above
all earthly treasure:
And lone with love,
most kindly measure,
Love thou his Saints,
and holy ones.
As of his Church,
the lively stones:
Whose head is he,
his members they:
Who hates his Saints,
do him betray^
Love thou Gods word,
his Gospel hear,
Therein of life
are rivers clear:
It is the pearl
whereby was wrought
A wonder worthy,
daily thought.
love unto all
thy neighbors bear.
And let thy love
shine every where:
To all and some,
to friend and foe:
To them that seek
thine overthrow.
Love all hate none;
to christ commands:
Herein the Law
consistes and stands.
Love Strangers well,
no gaudge them bear,
Remembering once,
we strangers were.
Though Denizons now
by Gods good grace*
His love restord
us to this place.
Love virtuous life,
and goodness seek,
And like to Christ,
learn to be meek.
Love lowliness,
and spit at pride,
Gods spirit in such,
will not abide,
Love to forgive.
and to forbear:
This is a sign
of Christian fear.
Thy brothers fault,
though worthy blame
Dissemble thou
and hide his shame.
Thus armd with love,
thou may be hold.
Sin, Satan, Death,
our enemies old
Shall not have power
to do thee harm,
God is thy help,
he is thine arm:
This is the Lock.
which thou and I,
And every one,
(before we die)
Ought set upon
our hearts and minds,
Where treasure lie,
of sundry kinds.
Which Lock if we,
do seek to have,
It is not Death.
nor yet the grave,
Thou shall abridge
our heavenly bliss,
In Christ our Conduit,
kept it is.
Of all therefore,
this is the sum,
If to this Conduit
we will comme:
And thence fetch comfort
at our need.
(This is) if we
to pray proceed:
And ask of God,
the things we want,
Beseeching him
the same to grant:
For Jesus sake,
his only Son.
By love this work
must be begone.
Which if we have,
then sure we may
Before the Lord,
approach and pray:
For otherwise,
all that we do,
Is sin and death
belonges thereto.
This lock of love.
O grant us then,
Sweet Savior Christ.
Amen, Amen.
The Key to this Conduit
A Key to this Conduit,
of Comfort pertaines.
Whose use and due service,
whosoever disdaines,
Aloof from this Conduit
them selves let them keep,
Christ is not their Shepherd,
nor they of his Sheep.
This Key therefore learn we,
to use, and possess:
Our Shepherd Christ Jesus,
then may we confess.
FIrst, ^now thy self
but flesh and blood.
Nay, nay; but art
thou half so good?
Know rather this,
thou art but dust,
From Earth thou camst,
to Earth thou must.
Know thine estate
by Adams fall,
Exild from life,
to death in thrall:
To sin a slave,
to Hell a pray:
Know this, and cast
all pride away,
Know thou thy self
a blast of wind,
And hearst about
a lofty wind?
Know thou thy state
to be but naught,
Thy life a thread
but slightly wrought,
And set up
the Peacocks plume,
As though nothing
should thee consume?
This knowledge
but fond and vain,
A better knowledge
does remain:
A knowledge which
from God proceeds
This knowledge guides
our thoughts and deeds:
This knowledge shows
(as in a Glass)
That sin in us
had brought to pass,
Eternal death.
and endless pain
In Hell where damned
souls remaine^
This knowledge, learnes
us likewise this:
That albeit
we did amiss.
And kindled Gods
consuming ire:
Yet Christ his blood
has quenched that fire:
So that this knowledge
marked well,
May be supposed
to excel
All earthly things.
which pass away,
As Flowers in h^ate
of Summers day,
This knowledge, leads
us to the Lord,
And makes our wills,
with his t'accord
Know God aright,
know Christ his son:
Know thou the thing
he will have done:
Know him that made
the heaven and earth,
And fed thee since
thy day of birth:
Know him that gi^es
thee in thy need,
Convenient Victuals,,
thee to feed:
Know him in Christ,
his Son first ^orne,
The savior of
our souls forlorn:
Know God the Father
only wise,
Know him in heart.
with faithful eyes:
Know him, whom heaven
and earth obey,
Whose word ordained
both night and day:
The world, and all.
that is therein,
Are lessons where
we may beginn,
To learn to know
him as he is:
The God of peace,
and endless bliss:
None other knowledge
is required:
By this, great numbers
have aspired
Unto the top
of joyful state:
Such knowledge never
comes too late.
Know that to stand
in fear and awe,
Are means and ways,
to keep the Law.
This knowledge is
the very Kay,
Without the which,
we can not pray:
No comfort can,
this Conduit give:
Look for no liquor,
whiles we live,
Unless this Key,
of Knowledge come.
That is (in brief,
to show the sum,)
Except we know
the Lord of Host,
And Christ his Son.
and the holy Ghost:
Our selves, our wants,
and daily need:
And pray, in hope
that we shall speed*
Our prayers turn
to little good.
(Let this be learnd,
and understood.)
True knowledge, Lord,
Give us therefore:
Which is the Key,
to open the door
Of perfect Prayer,
gushing out,
With comforts sweet,
like to a Spout,
Beginning at
the Conduit head:
(For at the Fountain
it is feed.)
This Knowledge, grant
us, Jesus, then,
Say people all,
Amen. Amen.
The Sum, or Conclusion.
Possess a good Conscience,
in running thy race:
Seek peace and atonement,
with Gods divine grace:
Let Love be the Jewel,
and joy of thy heart:
And Knowledge instruct thee,
to learn what thou art:
Then enter Gods Temple,
and there humbly pray,
In hope what thou crauest,
to carry away. Amen.
FJNIS.
Graces to be said before and after Meat.
Before Meat
O Lord God heavenly Father, Creator and feeder of all living creatures, we
humbly and heartily thank thee for these thy creatures as pledges of thy
favor, for the nourishing of our bodies, beseeching thee to sanctify them unto
us, and us unto thy self, that we receiving them as from thee, our souls may
also be nourished and fed with spiritual Manna from Heaven. Amen.

After Meat.
We thank thee, O Lord God Almighty, for satisfying and feeding us with thy
blessing at this, and all other times: sanctify and bless us, we beseech
thee, with thy holy spirit: and grant that we being refreshed with these thy
cretures, may follow our lawful vocation in thy fear and true obedience, that
when soever we die, we may die in thy favor. Amen.

Before Meat.
Bless these thy gifts,
most gracious God.
From whom all goodness springs:
Make clean our hearts,
And feed our souls
With good and needful things:
A thankful heart renew in us,
According to thy will:
Above our strength,
Lord prove us not,
But save us from all ill. Amen.
After Meat.
We thank thee, most gracious God, for this thy feeding our thirsty Bodies:
so vouchsafe to feed our silly souls with the bread of eternal life: that
after this life ended, we may ascend where Christ is gone before us. Amen.

FJNIS.
The chief Points, or summarie Contents of this Book.
FIrst, a Prayer for Morning and Evening. A Prayer* A Prayer for the obteining
of Grace. For tha^kfulnes to God for his graces and gifts. For love and unity
with all men. For the hearing, and true Understanding of the word of God. To
God for forgiveness of manifold and grievous sins. To be settled in the truth.
To lead our life according to the will of God. To fast, and abstain from
sin. For grace to forsake evil and to follow that which is good. For the
assistance of the holy Ghost. Against wrath and malice For obedience to the
keeping of Gods commandments. For true and hearty repentance To the Lord, to
turn his wrathful displeasure away from us. For a clear and quiet conscience.
To be zealous in the hearing of the word of God. For a patient mind in
trouble. In time of prosperity, or aduers^tie. For patience in time of los of
goods or lands A thanks giving for meat, dainke, and clothing. For aid and
help in all extremities and need. Against slanderous and evil tongues. For
peace in time of War, or other vexation. For deliverance from foes spiritual
and temporal. Of a penitent soul over turned with sin. To be f^eed from al
vices. Against vain delights and worldly pleasures. Of a penitent sinner,
lamenting his former life so ill spent. Of a sorrowful sinner, laying his
heart open, praying for a firm faith. Desiring mercy and forgiveness. To be
prepared against the hour of death To lead our lives according to the Law, and
will of God. To keep our tongue from speaking ill. To fast and pray aright.
Against wilful sins and snares of Satan. For fear of the Lord, and love of
his word.
The Contemplation of a sinner. The seven Petitions of the Lords prayer, with
a brief exposition thereof, drawn out of holy Scripture. The Belief of a
Christian, commonly called, The Apostles Creed; divided into twelve Articles,
and expounded. The ten Commandments of Almighty God* called; The two Tables of
the Law, expounded by sentences and examples. The necessary appurtenances
belonging to this Conduit: and first, of the Cesterne to this Conduit is
Conscience. The Pipe to this Conduit of comfort, is Peace. The Lock to this
Conduit of Comfort, is Love. The Key to this Conduit of Comfort, is Knowledge.
Godly Graces to be said before, and after meat.

FINIS.

