THE REVVARD of the Faithful.

MATH. 5. 6. They shall be satisfied. THE LABOUR OF the Faithful.

GENES. 26. 12. Then Isaac sowed in that Land. THE GROUNDS of our Faith.

ACTS 10. 43. To him give all the Prophets witness. At London printed by B. A.
for Benjamin Fisher, and are to be sold at the sign of the Talbot in
Paternoster row. 1623.

To the right Honorable and Religious, Sir Roger Townshend, Knight Baronet; all
grace and peace.
Honorable Sir,
BENEFITS, they say, are always best given, when they are most concealed, but
thanks when they are made most known. Give my private estate leave therefore
to borrow the Art of the Printer, which is the public Tongue of the learned,
to express my self (though with no other learning then what your kind
respects have taught me) most grateful unto you: who indeed am bound, though
principally, yet not only to your Honored self, but totj Gentj tuae, to the
worthy Lady your mother, the religious Knight, Sir Nathaniel, your second
Father, and without thought, not beyond my desire, to your most noble and
learned Uncle, the Right Honorable Francis Lord Verulam, Viscount Saint Albones
my free and very Honorable Benefactor, whose Gift, as it was worthy his
bestowing, so was it speedily sent, and not tediously sued for; Honorably
given, not bought with shame, to one whom he never knew or saw, but only heard
kindly slaundered with a good report of others, and opinion conceived by
himself of sufficiency and worth. For by your Favors I confess, my estate
is something, but the sense of my poverty much more increased. For if we may
believe Neros wise Master and Martyr; There is none so poor, as he who cannot
requite a benefit: but I am glad your Estates will be always beyond any
retaliating kindnesses of mine who could not, indeed, with out doing you much
injury, wish my self able to make you amends.

As therefore Aristippus came to Dionysius, so do I to you. (...) Having
received what I wanted, to return what I had. Though in truth this small
p^esent may be better said to be given by you to others, then by my self to
you, who thought it worthy of more men's reading then your own, which I pray
God it may be. Surely if there be any worth in it, it is in the dignity of the
matter, and the fitness of it, for our nature and times. The matters are the
Grounds, Exercise and Reward of the faithful, Heavenly Light Bodily labor,
Spiritual rest. The first of which brings with it light for our Souls; the
second, Health for our bodies, and the third for them both eternal
Blessedness. But in our times there is three Virtues are so great strangers,
in which there are so many evil hearts of unbelief, all standing ready to
depart from the living God, that we had need to offer a holy violence to our
nature, and to fall out with our times, that fall so fast away from God, or
else it is to be feared least the tide and stream of them both carry us not
into the rivers of Paradise, there to be landed upon the mountains of our
salvation, but into the rivers of Brimstone, whether all are wasted that depart
from GOD: as himself tells us; Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire.

And so much the more need had we, that live in this last Age of the world, to
look to the infirmity of our natures and diseases of the time: because
natural infirmities are always greatest Tyrants in our Age, and it is no
otherwise in this old world, then in old persons: If we were borne weak
sighted, it is a venture but in age a great dimnesse, if not a total
blindness do not befall us. If a lame hand by nature has disabled the
actions of our youth; the hand which in youth could do little, will do
nothing in our age; if we have traduced a personal inclination from our parents
to any vice, it is a grace if that inclination grow not to an affection in our
youth, and in our age to a habit. So fast grow the ill weeds of Nature when
Nature it self decays in us.

Now we cannot be ignorant that in the very Spring of nature, these three
strong infirmities were seeded in us. The first upon the effacing of Gods
Image, a dim eyesight or darkness in our soul: the second a lame hand or
idleness in the body, which grew when Mortality first broke in upon us, and
left our nature consumed of that firstborn strength it then flowrished with:
bringing in upon our labor an accursed sweat, upon our sweat, weariness, and
consequently faynting, and languishing the whole body with unrest, and disease:
The third upon the loss of our heavenly inheritance, an inclination and
affection of the whole man to such a happiness, as we cannot build for our
selves, out of the beauty and delights lights of this world: which Solomon
happily alluded unto Eccles. 3. 11. where speaking of Humane happiness, to
rejoice, and do good, that is, to eat and to drink, and to enjoy the good of
all our Labor, verse 13, (Which questionless is therefore lawful, because it
is there said to be the gift of GOD) he tells us, that, God has made every
thing beautiful in his season, and has set (...) Coelum, the world, as it is
translated, or the desire of perpetuity in their hearts, so that no man can
find out the work that God makes from the beginning to the end. Whereas it
seems to me, Solomon allowing us this Humane felicity, as good in it self,
yet secretly accuses it (by reason of the immoderate affection, and desire of
perpetuity we cast after it) for blinding the eye of our consideration so
far, as thereby we cannot find out the work that God makes from the
beginning to the end: which doublesse can be no other then his work of our
Redemption, purposed from all eternity in CHRIST our Lord who therefore as
himself is called (...), the first borne of all creatures, so his day is called
Nouissimus Dierum, the last of all days, he only being (as himself
witnesses) (...) and (...) and the Frst, and the Last, the beginning of all
things, and the end of all things. Colos. 11. and in this work only consists
the knowledge of our perfect happiness wherein is both perpetuity and
sufficiency, which work of Gods, most men therefore cannot find out, because
they acquiet their desires with this humane felicity, and lie down under
Issachars blessing, which indeed, is but a cursory and viatorie happiness,
serving us only for the time and by the way.

These then are the three great diseases of our souls, bodies, and persons;
Blindness of Spirit, Idleness of Body, Love and rest in the world; which the
beginning of the world, made by corruption, natural; and the Age of the world,
by the second nature, and of custom, has made delight full to us. And truly,
if our own experience did not teach us how most men in our days placed
themselves in these infirmities, and with what delight we are ignorant, idle,
and enamored of the world: yet the Oracles of GOD would plainly evidence it
unto us, wherein we shall find it prophesied of this last tempest of the
world, that it should be full of seducing Spirits to infidelity, of idle
busy bodies, of lovers of pleasures, more then lovers of GOD, To cure which
three great diseased of our natures, and our times I have sent abroad by your
persuasion (and therefore have burdened you with the Patronage of it) this
short Praescript, which I pray GOD may work by the power of his Spirit
soundness in us. To the riches of whose grace, I most entirely commend you,
and rest

Your Worships in all hearty affection and Christian service GILES FLETSHER.

THE SEVERAL ARGVMENTS.
I.
THE difference of our Saviors opinion concerning good and happy men, from the
wiser and vulgar sort of people among whom he lived. 1 How Righteousness and
Grace are the food of our souls. 17 What is the fulness where with those souls
that hunger and thirst after Righteousness shall be satisfied. 46 A short
enticement to the Heavenly ambition of Gods Saints. 95
II.
EVery Creature that would be preserved by the blesing of GOD in his Calling
must labor for it. 130 A faithful Minister is a great Labourer. 155 The
several Heads of observation arising from Isaacs Labor. 163 It is good
Husbandry to be a Religious man, and one of the ch^ldren of Abraham. 176 Why
the godly are many ^imes poor, and how the wicked, are often rich in this
world. 198 God will have his Children, though never so reli^ious and rich, use
the ^eane, as well as other men, (...) obtain his blessings. (...). 227 God
never bestows upon (...) the rest of glory, that take no pains to make it
sure to themselves by the means of Grace. 247 Husbandry has always been an
ancient and commendable means of life. 258 A just reprehension of evil
husbands, who either straggle out of their Callings, or have unlawful,
unprofitable, or no Callings at all. 281
III.
The wisest of the Heathen, and all Creatures are Gods witnesses. 303 How we
may infallibly find out the true Word of God, which may lead us to the
knowledge of him, our selves, and our own supreme happiness. 320 The
several Prophesies concerning the birth, life, death, and Resurrection of the
Savior of the world. 337 A free Reprehension of all fashionable Agrippaes in
Faith; and farther motives to make them become thorough Believers. 371 A just
inuectiue against all false blind, and dumb Prophets, who are indeed no true
Witnesses of the Lord. 389
THE REVVARD of the Faithful.
MATTHEW. 5. 6. They shall be satisfied.
I. The difference of our Saviors opinion concerning good and happy men, from
the wiser and vulgar sort of people among whom he lived.
Our Savior when he came to be the true Light of the World, had a hard task
to make his Light shine in the dark understanding of such, either grossly or
affectedly ignorant men, amongst whom he lived: who either hold many common
errors for unquestionable truths, or if they were of the wiser sort, many false
lights, and appearing truths for certain Rules, and unerring principles of
their belief. The false lights, which had a fair shine of truth to varnish
them over with; were these, and such like.

That he was a right honest and religious man, that offered no man wrong. That
was kind, and loving to those that deserved well of him. That would never
forswear himself, either to benefit his own estate, or to hurt another man's.
That if he were affected to a married woman, kept himself from Adultery with
her. If he were never so angry* yet brideled in his rage, that it broke not out
into murder. That when his Parents were in want, honored them with
maintenance: That made long Prayers; gave great Alms; fasted often; paid the
Tithes duly; and so far honored the very ashes of the Prophets; that he
built their Tombs being dead, to keep alive their memories and names. This was
the Pharisees Starre-light. Al which the common People who lived in the shadow
of those ceremonious times, and night of their own ignorance, held for great
and beautiful lights, truths most credible, and worthy to be believed and
followed of all: but when the Sun arose, this starlight soon dis-appeared;
and our Savior makes it plain in this, and the sequent Chapters. That al
those were but the outsides of truth, which an hypocrite might disguise
himself, and face it with, as well as an honest man; nay that all of them,
except they were circumstanc't with those times and places, and done after that
manner and form they ought, were, for all their fair looks, but shining
faults. Or rather, as nothing is more deformed in the sight of man, than such a
defective monster in Nature, who should want half of his parts, (imagine one
abortiuely cast out, with one leg, one eye, half a nose, etc.) so in the
sight of God, who looks to the inner man, this semihonesty, which wants the
better half and inside of it self, cannot but appear most prodigious and
misshapen.

For our Savior counts that no Christian virtue, Not to offer wrong: For so
they which return wrong for wrong, offer no wrong, they do but vim vi
repellere, strike blow for blow; but the Virtue was, to suffer wrong with
patience, and not only to abstain from offering wrong with violence; So to love
those that are desertfull, has no virtue in it: for not to do so, were to do
them injury; but to love the ill-deseruing, to love our enemies, to love our
persecutors, this indeed is the grace of a Christian.

And what if our estates allow our poor Parents the honor of maintenance? If
our hearts withdraw from them the honor of obedience, of holy imitation, of
filial reverence, do we think we have performed a sonnelike part to them, or
the duty of a Child?

Again it is no Virtue to keep a man's self from perjury; for he that never
forsweares himself, may yet be a common swearer: but to set a Watch before
his lips, that they should never unadvisedly swear at all, that was the Virtue.

Besides, what was it to keep himself from Adultery and Murder, if he had
adultery in his eyes, lust in his heart, if he were enraged with anger, and had
dipped and stained his thoughts in blood? God who is a Spirit, looks to the
issues of the Spirit, if thou desire revenge, if thou lustest after a woman,
thou art before God guilty both of adultery, and of blood. And so much alms,
and often fasting, and due payment of tithes, what goodness have they, if the
alms must be trumpeted abroad, and the fast must set a sour face upon the
matter, and the tithes must be boasted of, and laid as it were in Gods dish,
when he comes to pray before him in the Temple, as though God who gives him
all, were beholding to him, for restoring him the tenth part of his own? To
conclude long prayers and building the sepulchers of the prophets, which of all
other were their most colorable virtues, were they not indeed crying sins in
the sight of God, when they were (I say not only vtterd arrogantly in every
corner of the street, that they might be seen of men, and not closeted up,
for GOD alone to see them) but when under pretense of long prayers, they
devoured widows houses, and under color of building the tombs of the
Prophets which were dead, they had no other intent but with the more safety,
and less suspicion to slay the son of God, who was then alive among them,
the Prince of the Prophets.

Look then as beautiful and fair fruit to see too, yet if it be rotten at
the core, when the outside is pared off, has no such goodlynesse within, as
outwardly appeared, but very rottenness at the heart: or to use a more proper
similitude, As a piece of smooth and rotten wood, if it be set in the dark
and seen only in the night, makes a great blaze, and shows to be a very
lightsome body: but as soon as the day rises, it forfeits the flame, and the
rottennes of it is plainly discovered: so was it with these appearing truths
which the Pharisees obtruded, and thrust upon the dark understandings of the
common people, for most heavenly lights and lamps full of glory: they were all
but vizards of truth, rotten opinions, lies with painted faces.

And as these were the false-lights that dazeled the eyes of the wiser sort of
people, so there were, beside these, certain common errors, which went abroad
as most received, and granted positions and verities, which all men believed,
as: That they had good cause to rejoice, who had every man's good word for them,
and many friends in the world, whom they might trust to; That rich men were
happy, For they lived at hearts ease. That they lived the most comfortable
lives in the world, that were always merry hearted, and were ever laughing. To
name no more. That it was a most wretched estate not to have sufficient meat
and drink, but to live always as in a famine, in hunger and thirst.

But our Savior, as before he extinguished their false, and pharisaical
lights, so in these, he opposed himself against their popular, and common
errors. And therefore he says not (as they) Rejoice because ye have many and
great friends in the world, and because you have every man's good word for you
but the plain contrary Rejoice, and be exceeding glad (what? when you have
many friends that speak well of you, and do you good, no but) when you have
many enemies that shall revile you, and persecute you, and say all manner of
evil against you falsely for my names sake, verses the 10. 11. And blessed
are, who? the rich in estate? no but the poor in spirit, ver. the 3. And not
they who were merry hearted, and always laughing had the most comfortable
lives: but blessed are they that mourn verse the 4. For they shall be comforted.
In a word to land my self at home upon the present words. That not they which
abounded with all things, and could say to their soul as Dives did. Luke the
12. Soul eat, drink, and be merry: for thou have much goods laid up for
many years, were blessed: but blessed are they that hunger, and thirst after
righteousness: For they shall be satisfied. For the truth is. It was a most
absurd, and improper soloecisme of speech, when the rich fool (so our Savior
calls him and therefore I do him no wrong) bid his soul eat, and drink those
goods, that he had laid up for his body to eat, and drink. For the soul
with such food could never have been satisfied, but those souls only shall be
replenished and filled, that hunger after the kingdom of Heaven, and the
righteousness thereof. For as righteousness here, so the Kingdom of God
hereafter, as grace here, so glory hereafter, are the only repaste to banquet
a Soul with. First therefore let us see.

II. How Righteousness and Grace, are the food of our Souls.
THat is properly called the food of any thing whereby it is inwardly preserved
from consumption, corruption, and death. And therefore as the Body has
something to preserve it for a time, which is bodily food, so must the Soul
have some spiritual repast to perpetuat, and preserve it for ever. For nothing
beside a divine nature can be of it self aye during. Let us therefore because
this paradox to a natural man will seem strange, go with him to his own
art, the art of nature. There we shall find these two Sanctions published, as
received trueths of all, first, ^isdem alimur ex quibus constamus, Every nature
is nourished by that, whereof it is first made, and the second is Simile
nutritur a simile. Like is nourisht of like. Now it is a speech of our Savior
which it may be every man remembers, but few men mark, when after forty
days fast in the wilderness, he was tempted to satisfy his hunger by making
bread of stones, he answered. That Man lived not by bread only, but by every
word that proceeded out of the mouth of God. Which speech though a profane
Ignorant will perhaps derisonly scoff at, as thinking it impossible to live by
words, yet such words as proceed out of the mouth of God have more vital
sweetness, and nourishable sap in them, than all his corn, and oil, and
wine have. Was not the whole world made by the word of God? Was not the soul
of every reasonable creature made by the same word, and so imbreathed into the
body of the first father of our humane nature? and is now still infused into
every one of our bodies, when they are perfectly instrumented, and made fit for
the soul to dwell ^? This a natural man cannot deny in reason, because they
of his own ^ribe Socrates, Plato, Aristo^le and all wise men ever confessed it,
not only to use their own words, (...) and as some of them speaks (...). a
foris ingredi, and ^aelitus aduenire: But prove it by necessary demonstration.
I will use ^ut one argument (before I proceed) to evidence it, because religion
shall not be beholding to a natural man for her ground work: which Justin
Martyr one of the first penmen of God after the time of the blessed Apostles,
who was called by all men for his depth of Learning (...), uses to eui^ce the
opposers of this truth in his time.

All things, says he, arose first either out of the power of nature, or
fortune, of God. Out of a power of nature they could not. For tell me (says
the father) whom could nature by her power first bring forth. Could the fruits
of the earth, or the fowls of heaven, or the trees of the forest, or the
beasts of the field, or the Citizen of the world, man, issue first from the
womb of nature? but where I pray should nature find seed (...) some the earth,
but from the fruits of the earth before growing, where should she seek for
eggs to breed her ^owles with, but from ^owles already bred? whither should
she go to gather her akrons, but under the oak before flourishing? what need
^nfinite knotts? It is not in the power of nature to bring forth a man but he
must first be borne a child and of whom should that child be borne, had not
there been already in nature both man, and woman? nature then we see, could not
by any power in her produce the least creature, but she must needs have her
semniall causes; and whence are they seeded but from things already being?
Much less could chance: for what is fortune but only something in nature
whereof we know not the cause? If a man digging in a field, find a mine, we call
this fortune: but a mine must be first there by nature, before any can find
it there by fortune. And therefore fortune that comes always after nature,
cannot be the cause of nature. It follows then, that the whole world, and the
souls of men proceeded neither from nature nor chance: but from the power and
wisdom of God himself who is as much more powerful then nature, to call out
his work perfect in his kind at first, as he is more wise then fortune, to
adorn his work with the most graceful order with out any chaunceable or blind
confusion. This then being either granted, or extorted from a natural man,
what follows hence? Truly this. That the soul of man does consist by the
word of God. Secondly, That the soul of man, being only able of all
creatures visibly in heaven, or earth to conceive, and understand a divine
being, which our experience teaches us, must needs be a spiritual substance
like God himself, and created after his image. For this in reason and nature
is a selfe-credible truth. That no Creator can raise the power of his action
beyond the sphaere of his own actiuity. A stone cannot live. A plant cannot
see. A beast cannot understand a divine nature, because it has no such
receptiuity, no such active, and divine power in it, as to take into it an
insensible object. For then it should work extra sphaera^, beyond the pitch of
a sensible being: man therefore only who has such an eye of understanding in
him, whereby he is able to live (as it is said of Moses Heb. 11. 27.) as seeing
him, who is invisible, must needs be fashioned and formed in the similitude of
the invisible God. For, what creature worships a divine power, sanctifies holy
days, and Sabaoths, observes solemn feasts, and assemblies, offers sacrifices
of prayer, and praise to God, but man only? Upon whose soul does the law of
God naturally reflect it self in the knowledge of that which is good, and the
conscience of that which is evil, but only upon man's? What nature in earth
observes the different motions of the heavenly bodies, and admires the
methodicall Wisdom of God in them, or thinks upon his covenant of mercy,
when he sees the token of it shining in the waterie cloud (sweetly abusing the
same waters to be a token of his mercy, which before were the instrument of
his just revenge) but only man's? whose eye looks beyond the bright hills of
time, and there beholds eternity, or sees a spiritual world beyond this body,
esteeming that far discoasted region, his native countey, but only man?
Which divine thought we shall not find in the hearts alone of the children of
light, that have the stars of heaven shining thick in them (Hebr. 11. 16.)
but in the minds of heathen men, that lay shadowed in their own natural
wisdom, out of which the banished Consul of Rome Boethius could sing. Haec,
dices, memini patria est mihi,
Hinc ortus, hic sistam gradum.
O this my country is, thy soul shall say,
Hence was my birth, and here shall be my stay.


And of which Anaxagoras, living a stranger among the Athenian Philosophers,
and being chid for regarding so little his native soil, by one that asked him,
why he minded no more his own country, answered (...). o (says he pointing up
to heaven) I am exceeding mindful of my native country.

Now to apply all this discourse home, man we have proved was created by the
word of God: man only was formed in Gods image and similitude. And who then is
the word of God, but the Son of God who the express image of the Father, but
the Son, Ioh. 1. 1. Heb. 1. 3. Since therefore our souls consist by the
Word, Christ and every thing is preserved of that it consists, as Nature it
self teaches; since our souls are made after the image and similitude of
Christ, and every thing is most agreeably nourished by that it is most
assimilated unto, is it not even in reason an irrepugnable Truth, that our
souls must needs be nourished and preserved by the power of our Lord CHRIST,
who is Gods Essential Word, and Image?

And here by the way (but I speak of it only incidentally as it falls into
discourse) we may see as the high dignity so the causall difference between
the reasonable soul of man, and the living souls of bruit beasts. For do but
look into the book of the generation of creatures, and you shall see there
Man's soul was immediately breathed into his body by God himself, and was
created after his Divine image: but the Living Souls of bruit beasts were
educ't out of their elementarie wombes, and those bodies which were most like
themselves: For so says our Lord God, Let the Earth bring forth every living
thing according to his kind, and it was so: and so the sea was commanded to
bring forth issue according to his kind, and so it was: which is the reason
the living souls of beasts fall again into the same matter out of which they
were first taken, and of whose kind and likeness they are, as our corruptible
bodies do. Dust thou art, and into dust thou shall return: but the divine and
reasonable Spirit of man returns to God that gave it, as Solomon speaks,
Eccles. 12. 7. being immediately created by him, and of his own similitude and
kind, and so breathed into the body: which is indeed the true and prime cause
of the immortality of our souls. So that they, being created immediately by the
Word and breath of God, out of nothing, and not arising from any praeexistent
matter, cannot possibly be corrupted into any other nature, or annihilated by
any other word, except we childishly suppose some word more powerful then the
Word of God himself.

I have now proved that our souls all consisting by the word of the Father
which is Christ, and being imag'd most like unto him, they must needs (as every
thing else is by their like) be preserved, and nourisht by Christ, whose image
they are, and who may therefore with greater truth, and reason be called, the
food of our souls, then our earthy diet can be the food of our bodies:
because he is every way, both in respect of himself, and us, more
preservative, then to bodies any bodily sustenance can be. For, that makes us
continue by being destroyed it self, and destroys us too, if it be taken in
excess, and though it be never so often used, yet soon after we shall hunger
again, and thirst again: neither can it repair our nature in the headlong
ruins of age, so fast but that we must every day forfeite a little spoil to
mortality which it can no way possibly recover, and in conclusion, unable to
hold out any longer, it must yield up the whole body as a pray to death. But we
cannot drink too much of our spiritual rock, nor eat too much of our
heavenly Manna, which after we have feasted our hearts with, we shall find noe
more hunger, or thirst; feel noe more injuries of age, or time; fear noe more
spoils of mortality, or death. Neither is the soul nourished by this divine
food, as the body is, by wasting that whereby it self is preserved, and
consuming that to maintain it self, whereby it self is kept from corruption:
but as the sight of al eyes is preserved and perfected by the light of the
Sun, whose beams can never be exhaust, so our spiritual life is nourished
by the participation of the life of Christ, which is indeed (...), annona
cali, the flower of heaven, never engrost by possessing, nor lost by using, nor
wasted by nourishing nor spent by enjoying but has that heavenly, and
vnconsumable nature in it (being to nourish immortal souls) that it
preserues, all without decaying it self, it diuides it self to al without
loss or diminution of it self; it is imparted to all, and not impaired by any
of those replenished souls, that banquet upon it.

Now if the quaere be made how our souls are thus by Christ preserved from
their own corruption, and beyond their own natural life, to a life Celestial
and divine, there can be no other answer given, but by being implanted into
the life of righteousness which fontally is in him. As if the branches of a wild
olive being cut off from the real stock where it grew naturally, should be
kept from withering and corruption by ingrassing it into the stock of a sweet
and flourishing Oliue-tree. So our souls being created in natural
righteousness and holylinesse by God, and being soon after by our fall cut
off from that life, and so remaining in the state of corruption and decay,
would soon wither and dye totally, were they not eftsoons reymbark't and
stock't again into the Tree of life, from whence they suck a more divine life
of righteousness, then that they were created, or now live in. For the natural
righteousness though it were in the kind of it perfect, yet it was of a short
continuance, (as nature left to it self always is) and our habitual
righteousness, though it continue for ever, yet it is very imperfect, like the
twilight of an evening, or the first break of day in which the shadows of
earth, and the light of heaven are confused; and therefore the soul of man
unable to live perpetually by any of these lives which were defective, could
have no way been preserved from his own corruption, but by the participation
of this divine Righteousness of Christ, which is infinitely more durable then
Adams natural, and more perfect then our poor habitual righteousness either
is, or ever could have bin Neither let it seem strange to any that the Soul
which dies by unrighteousness and sin, should be said by grace only and
righteousness to receive again life, and preservation.

Hence are those scripture phrases so frequent You are dead in your sins, ye
are strangers from the life of God, and of the wanton and sinful widow, (...)
she was dead being alive, that is, dead to God, and the righteousness of
Christ, and alive only to nature, and the corruption of it. Hence again on
the contrary the Just man is said to live by the righteousness of faith, (Hab.
2. 4. Heb. 10. 37.) and therefore this life, which we could not acquire by our
nature, because it is eternal; God is said in he first Epistle of Sa. John 5.
11. to have given it to us; and least we should trouble our selves to know
where this life was found out for us, it is added in the same place. And this
life is in his Son. Thus Saint Paul speaks Col. 3. 3. that ^ur life is hid
in Christ, and that it was no more he that lived but Christ that lived in him,
Galat. 2. 20. thus he tells the Corinthians that we were made the
Righteousness of God in Christ. 2. Cor. 5. 21. and 1 Cor. the 1. the 30. that
Christ was made of God unto us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption, and therefore twice the Prophet Jeremy tells us that, This is his
name whereby he shall be called. JEHOVAH- tsidkenu, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.
Ie. 23. 6. and 33. 16. For as verily as our sins took away his life, so
assuredly shall his righteousness preserve ours, in which because we have a
double state, one in our apprehension of it by faith, the other in our
comprehension of it by vision, and intuition, therefore here the Saints of god
are said to be blessed only in their hunger, but hereafter they shall be happy
in their fulness, here God only feeds them with a sufficiency of grace, there
he fills them with such a satietie of glory in which their souls, with the
greatest excess, without the least surfeit, shall be feasted for ever. For God
is not like old Isaac, that has but one blessing for his sons, and therefore
as we must learn of S. Paul, with our sufficiency to be content, My grace is
sufficient for thee: so let us with him strive, at least in our most heavenly
thoughts, get awing and ravished into the third heaven, then to behold

III. What is the fullness wherewith those Souls that hunger after
Righteousness shall be satisfied.
THE fullness here meant is nothing else but a perfect expletion of all the
natural desires of Soul, Body and Person, according to the uttermost
receptiuity of them all, which their own proper and most agreeable objects,
wherein every desire rests it self wholly acquitted, and filled. For instance
nothing can arrest the understanding of man, but that which is absolutely true,
or rather Truth it self. For that is the most proper and agreeable object to
our understanding: and who is that but Christ our Lord? I am the Truth says
our Savior: Nothing can satisfy the reasonable will of man, but only that
which is perfectly good, or rather goodness it self: and who is that but
only God? For as our Savior speaks, there is none good but God; nothing can
fill the restless affections of man, but only those fountains of pleasure,
that have in them neither defect nor end, such as can be found no where here.
And where are they, but at the right hand of God only? Psalm. 16. 11. In thy
presence is fullness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore:
the first takes away all defect. In thy presence is fullness of joy: and the
second admits of no end: at thy right hand are pleasures for ever.

And this is the first fullness or saturity of the soul: the second is of the
body. And the natural desires of the body are life, health, and beauty. Now
where can we find life, but in that Country which is the land of the living,
whether no death is suffered to approach; or whether should we go to meet with
indeflowrishing and unattained health, but where there is no sorrow, no pain,
no sickness at all? And that is no where, but only in the Holy City, which S.
John calls the new Jerusalem, Revel. 21. 4. There shall be no more death
neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain, but as the
two glories of the Old and New Testaments, David and S. Paul speak, God shall
deck his Saints with health and we shall put on incorruption and immortality
in those Courts of Honor.

And thus as the soul and body have their natural desires: so the whole person
of man desires naturally as close an union with the Divine being, as it is
possibly capable of: secondly it desires glory and honor, being one of the
beams of GODS countenance, which he casts upon his most noble creatures. For
there is a spark of Divinity in Glory, which makes all men, I had almost said
all creatures naturally appetent of it, according to the size they have
measured them out by God, to vessel it up in. Cupido gloriae nouissime exuitur
etiam a sapiente, says the wise Historian, many to give life to their Honor,
having lost their own. And this holy Ambition, as it deriues it self to
another world, so it is in man both a natural and lawful desire, within the
expectation of which, the whole creature stretching out the neck of it, (as S.
Paul most significantly speaks, waits for, and sighs for, and (like a woman)
is in a dolorous travail for to be delivered, (...), into the free liberty of
glory, granted to the sons of God. The last hunger both of soul and body as
they are united, is of divine society and friendship, and therefore as the
Philosopher calls man (...), a sociable Creature, so the Apostle would have us
(...), to associate our selves (at least in our traveling thoughts) with the
Citizens of Heaven, who as for number they are infinitely more, so for nature
are far more illustrious and blessed, then our under companions that live
here below, centred with our selfs in this little point of earth are. For God
himself being a Divine Spirit, and those Palaces of glory being far more
extensiue and spacious, then our narrow regions, how can there but be, as David
and Daniel both witness, ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousand
thousands of ministering Spirits to wait upon their high and transcendent
Sovereign, the King of Spirits Royal: and therefore S. Paul reckoning up our
heavenly companions, Hebr. 12. 22. begins with an innumerable company of
Angels, so that this desire shall abundantly be satiated and content.

But of heaven we that are on earth cannot say much. For though Satan took our
Savior up into a high mountain, and thence showed him all the Kingdoms of
the earth, and the glory of them in a moment of time, Luke 4. 5. which shows
of how small moment they are, that in one short instant and article of time
could suddenly give a blaze, and so vanish: yet there is no mountain high
enough, nor any time long enough, but eternity to vnuaile the glory of the
Kingdom of Heaven, which God purposely (no doubt) has concealed, that he
might know who would love him for himself, because all men could not but love
him for his glory, if he should let it fall upon our eyes, and display it self
in the divine beams of it. Yet as far as the eye of right reason, guided*
(like the wise men in the search of our Savior) by the heavenly stars of
light that shine every where in Gods word, may discover this holy land, let us
not wrong our sacred hunger of knowledge, as blindely to wrap up all in a
cloud, and to deny it this just satisfaction: which especially consists in a
threefold glorious union, wherewith God has promised in his Word to unite the
persons of the Elect to himself: which close with the Divine Being I mentioned
before to be the most ardent and natural desire of our whole person, and that
wherewith the whole man is most delighted, satisfied, and filled.

First therefore we are united unto Christ as unto our Head, and so we make
but one body with him; and this is a closer union then either children can be
united to Parents, for they are divided parts from their Father, but we are
united parts to Christ our Lord; or married couples can be united each to
other. For they being diverse bodies, are united but into one flesh, but we to
Christ are united into one body, and one flesh, as the Apostle speaks, we are
all set into his body, and are flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, (...),
as he with a most significant elegancy speaks in the 4. and 6. to the
Ephesians. And this is the first union of our persons with God by his Son Jesus
Christ, which makes us way and entrance to the two remanent.

The second union is whereby our persons are spiritually united to God by the
very Divine and Holy Spirit of God him self: so that this infinite, and
glorious, and everliving Spirit diffusing it self through every member of
Christ's mystical body, makes us of one spirit, and one soul, as it were, with
the Divine being; not by the union of essence and information, but of
inhabitance and participation.

The last union is that whereby the Divinity of God dwelling in us after an
unspeakable gracious manner, unites himself whole, although not wholly to us,
far beyond the possibility of any other creature in the World. For other
creatures have no power of uniting themselves so as God has. The reason is,
cause they are of so gross and if not corporeal, yet material being, that it
is impossible for them to make us partakers of their Essences, which have all
of them certain Characteristicall, and individual differences, whereby they
are incommunicable in their Natures to any other beside themselves. But we are
made (as S. Peter tells us) partakers of the Divine Nature after an eminent
manner; which though it cannot be plenarily expressed, yet it may be shadowed by
some weak resemblances.

The Rule whereby we may conceive of this union is, that Every thing the more
subtle and pure, and immateriall it is, the more closely it may unite it
self to another Creature. So the water will soake through another body, and
unite it self into every part of it by insinuating his supple joints into
every empty place and ouerture of the body, upon which it is infused, that it
will seem to make but one body with it: as in a vessel full of ashes; which
earth, being a grosser body cannot do. Again, the Fire being a more subtle
and refined body then the water will unite it self to the most churlish and
impenetrable body, after a very close and peruious manner; as to a stone, iron,
steel, or gold, which the water, being a more condensed, and less fine body,
can never pierce or soake into. Again, a spiritual substance will yet more
closely unite it self to a body, then this finest and most subtle of
corporeal beings: And therefore we may remember that Satan tells our Savior,
that a Legion of them, that is six thousand eight hundred and thirty (for the
Roman Legion consisted of 6100. foot, and 730. horse, though here I think
not this precise number but a great multitude is meant) did all couche and
lodge together in one poor possessed man. Wherefore, as we see if a hundred
candles were lighted up in a room, all the beams of them would be in the same
place united together, at least locally, though not essentially (which those
that are skillful in the Optics demonstrate by the several irradiations of
Light wherewith each of them vnconfusedly pass thorough one another) so it is
with spirits, a thousand of them may be locally united together without any
consequent absurdity, because their follows no penetration of dimensions, and
therefore filling no place at all, they cannot exclude one another from the same
place they are in, as bodies do.

Again, it must needs be confessed, that the Divine Nature of our Lord God may
yet more nerely close with his creature* in a strayter union, then any other,
because his essence is not only more good, and so more communicatiue of it
self, but incomparably more immixt and pure, then any creatures (besides
himself) can be. This being the prerogative royal of Divinity, to consist not
of Act and Power, or to be something after, which before it was not (as longer
lived, or wiser, or better, or more glorious) but to be Actus Purus, All Act
and Essence without any reference of time, or difference of quality. That is,
God is not as Man or an Angel may be; good, and true, and wise, and living;
but he is wisdom it self, truth it self, selfe-goodnesse, and selfe-life.
Now we know in formal Unions, that is always the closest that is most
communicable of it self, and of which the subject whereunto it is united, is
most capable. And therefore it must needs be, that God who is Truth, may unite
himself to the understanding, more closely, then a thing that is true:
because the proper object of the understanding is Truth, not a true thing; and
so to the will, because he is goodness it self, and life it self, and the
will is a more proper subject of life and goodness, then it is of a thing that
is good and living.

This is a retruse, and hidden, but in truth a very divine motion of the
gracious and formal union, whereby God pleases to impart his Divinity to his
Creature. For look as we see in the eye of a man the lively Image and form of
the thing it sees, (which makes me call this a formal union) shining evidently
in it, without which the eye could never see the thing: so it is in the
jntellectuall part of the soul. The thing which is understood must have the
jmage of it as clearly represented, and united to the understanding, as the
visible object is to the eye: and therefore it is a Truth famous in the
Shooles, Intellectus est omnia. The understanding is all things. Not all things
by the Essence of it, but by the similitude it has with it, in the act of
intellection.

And this is the very reason, why in spiritual things, as long as we live in
our Bodies, our understanding is so childish and Infant-like; because in this
blind and corporeal world, all Spiritual Essences are represented to it
forma tantum disparata, in some desperate, that is, unlike and different form
and shape, to that which indeed and in truth they are of (as if a Painter
should express the Sun by a spot of guilt, and should draw the Stars with
a little yellow Oakre, in his draught of the heavenly body) we cannot see their
own faces, nor get the true jmage of themselves into the eye of our
understanding. It was Gods speech to Moses, who had better eyes then any that
ever lived after him. Thou can not see my face, For there shall no man see
me, and live, Exo. 33. 20. Isay 64. And therefore as when the Angels of the
Lord have been seen among us, they appeared sometimes like beautiful young
men, as to Lot and the Sodomites; sometimes like Chariots of fire, as to
Elishaes servant; sometime with countena^ces shooting like lightning, Mat. 28.
3. so when God himself pleased to descend upon Mount Sinai, or upon our
Savior his son, his spiritual Essence, could never be seen, but himself
came riding down in the similitude of a Dove, and himself came down so
clowded, and guarded about with fire, that neither the persons, nor the eyes of
the Israelites could come near him. But when the morning of glory shall arise,
wherein our souls shall awaken from the heavy eyelid of our flesh, and the
veyle of our body shall first be removed, and after being depur'd from his
dross, be refined into a bright and spiritual body, we shall then see God as
he is, we shall see him face to face, we shall know him, as we are known of
him: Which nathelesse is not to be understood extensiuely, as if we should
comprehend God in the whole extent of his Divinity, but distinctly only and
truly: as when we see the Sea, we see so much of it, as can fall into our
sight truly, and know it distinctly from al other bodies, to be the sea: but
we cannot see all the Sea at once, because the object is of too large a breadth
and extension.

This whole discourse drives only to this issue. There is a union of blood
between Parents and Children, and this is a remote and very separable union.
And there is an union of one flesh between Man and Wife, and this union is of
a short continuance, and is soon parted by death. And there is an union of
Place, and thus Spirits may be locally united, who yet may be at extreme odds
and difference one with another. And there is an union of affection, and this
Friends are united with, and it is (alas too soon) alterable upon the change
of either. And beside all these there is a mystical, or virtuall Union of the
members with the head, and this the Church is united to Christ by, from whom it
receives the divine influences of all grace and favor. And there is a
Spiritual Union, whereby all the Elect souls and bodies are not only
inspired, and I may so speak, Spirited with the Holy Ghost, who rules and
swayes all the thoughts and actions of the soul, as the soul does all the
parts and affections of the body. And last of all, there is a gracious and
admirable Union of similitude, whereby we are made wholly conformable, and
alike to the Divine being, which is the most desirable and accumulate
blessedness of our Nature.

So that look as you see the very bright image of the Sun so reflected upon
the water sometimes, that the dull Element seems to have caught down the very
glorious body it self, to paint her watery face with, and looks more like a
part of heaven, then like it self; who in the absence of the Sun, is all
fabled with blackness, and darkness, and sad obscurity; but upon the first
beams of the heavenly body, is glazed with a most noble and illustrious
brightness; so is it with our whole man. For when God shall thus imprint and
strike himself into our dark being, O how beautiful shall the feet of Gods
Saints be? Esaias 52. 7. What a Diadem of stars shall crown their glorious
heads? Reuelat. 12. How shall their amiable bodies shine in Sun-like Majesty?
Mat. 13. 4. Neither let it be thought a vain audacity of speech, to say that
the countenance and face of Gods children shall break forth into beams of more
celestial glory, then the midday sun ever yet sent abroad into the World.
For as S. Paul tells us, they shall be conformed to the Image of his glorious
body; so he tells Agrippa, Acts 26. 13. At midday. O King, I saw in the way a
light from heaven, above the brightness of the Sun, shining round about me:
which was no other then the Light of the countenance of our Lord Jesus, which
sight as it struck blindness into the face, and thick scales into the eyes of
persecuting Saul, so it dressed the whole countenance of suffering Stephen with
a most Divine and Angelical glory: and had not the Light in reason been
greater then the Suns, it would have been like the Moon and Stars at
midday, wholly extinguished and invisible.

Neither let any man amaze his understanding with the manner how a Spiritual
substance can so sparkle, and be, as it were visible in the body. Saint Austins
comparison has life in it, in the expression of that point. Life in it self
is invisible, and cannot be seen, yet it so freshes the countenance, and
beautifies the eyes, that when the body wants it, and is dead, nothing looks
more dreary and ghastly then a Corpse does: We see not life in it self (says
the Father) but we see it shining in the brightness of the eyes, and smiling
in the liuelihood and cheerfulness of the countenance. And so it is with a
glorious body. God is Life, and, like Life, cannot be seen in himself by any
ocular aspect, but as Life in a Natural, so God in a glorious body is most
apparent, and plainly visible, and conspicuous, even unto our eyes.

But some perhaps will think this discourse of spiritual satiety (I call it
spiritual, not excluding the Body, but because our Bodies themselves shall be
then spiritual, as now our very spirits are in a manner carnal) to be fetched
rather out of the schools of Reason, then of Gods Word, and to have more
ground in Philosophy then Faith. For where in Scripture shall we read of any
such image of God to satisfy our Natures with? If we turn to the 17. Psalm
and the 15. verse, we shall there find the portion of the righteous excellently
described by David: who having before set out the men of this world (who have
their portion in this life) their dimensum, which is their belly full of
Treasures, abundance of Children, and their happiness to leave their substance
to their Babes, verse 14. he reflects his thoughts into his own breast, and
sings, As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness, I shall be
satisfied when I awake with thy Image. This made David's heart pant after the
sight of Gods face (for so the words originally signify,) Psalm. 42. 1. This
made him pray, Lighten mine eyes that I sleep not in death, and needs must
the eyes of the righteous be lightened, and then awaken, (when the wicked shall
have theirs shut up in eternal darkness) when they shall behold the face of
God, and shall satisfy with his Image their euigilant souls. We shall find
in Scripture besides this Image of God, that for aye blesses the souls of the
righteous, two other Images of the wicked world, and of wicked men, wherewith
the wicked strive to satisfy their souls; but as S. Paul (...) us the image
of the world does (...), loose continually his form and fashion: so David
tells us, Psalm the 73. the 20. that when God awakes, he shall despise their
image. The image of God satisfies the righteous, when they awake to their
reward; because there is substance, and truth, and goodness in it: but when
God awakes to the punishment of the wicked, their image is so far from bringing
with it any satisfaction of glory, that in the judgment of God himself (who
cannot but judge most uprightly) it is full of shame, most ignoble, and worthy
to be despised, having no substance, but only shadow; no truth, but only
appearance, no ground but only opinion to paint it self with: and therefore
look what difference of things there is in the sound judgment of one waking,
and the skipping and dancing phansies of a dreaming brain, so much and more
is there between the swelling images of secular glory, and the divine image of
God, when we shall awaken from those dreams, which the world, as long as she
can keep us in the cradle of our flesh, rocks, and pleasantly sings us a-sleep
in. And therefore David, having spoken of the death of the wicked, in the
former verse of the forecited Psalm, O how suddenly do they consume and
perish, and come to a fearful end! presently annexes: As a dream when one
awaketh, so, O Lord, when thou awakest, thou shall despise their image. But let
us leave this golden Image with all the dreaming World (with Nebuchadnezar) is
troubled with in their sleep, and is angry with all that will not fall down to
worship it; and return to that Image that deludes not dreaming, but satisfies
our awaking spirits.

As David speaks of his own, so S. Paul speaks of all the Elect souls of
God, Romans 8. 29. that they were predestined to be conformed to this Divine
image, and therefore in the 2. to the Corinthians, the 3. 13. 14. etc. he makes
his difference between the obstinate Jew* and the believing Christian, that
their hearts was still veild, and blinded with their old Mosaicall shadows, and
ceremonies; but we all (says the Apostle) having the veyle done away in
Christ, with open face beholding, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, or
changed into the same Image from glory to glory, even as of the spirit of the
Lord. So that as the Moon and the Stars, that having no in-borne or inherent
Light streaming from themselves, and yet gathering together into their burning
faces the beams of the Sun, freely sent abroad, and bestowed amongst them,
appear like so many little images of the great Lamp of day. So all the Holy
Lamps of Heaven, made for Gods service, have only the Light of Gods
countenance to kindle themselves with, which he out of his bounty casts abroad
amongst them, and they according to their several capacities, to fill up their
measures of glory, most ambitiously vessel up.

This being the Royalty of the Divine Nature, who is the spiritual son of
eternal Essences, that he, beyond all other, is most emissiue and
communicatiue of himself: For as Light is more visible then any color, and
sends out in the eradition of it, a more full and luminous species of it self,
then any other thing: because it is (as the Philosopher calls) (...) the color
of all colors: so God, who is the Light of all Lights, must needs in himself
be most visible, though neither it to the eye of an Owl, nor God to the sight
of our understanding, yet beetlebrowed, can so appear. But when (as David
sings) our souls shall awaken, and the youth of our bodies shall be renewed as
the Eagles; both they with the Divinity, and these with the Divine humanity
shall be transformed into the same image of glory which they shall behold in
him. And though now they blinke at Sunshine, yet then where the body of
glory is, thither shall the spiritual Eagles be all gathered together, and
there feed, and fill the righteous hunger, and thirst of theirs.

And this is the fullness of glory our Savior means to satisfy them in
heaven with, who on earth nourish in themselves the righteous hunger after
Grace. When the understanding shall be filled with truth, in which is no shadow
of error, the will with goodness, in which is no mixture of evil, the
affections with joy and delight in which shall be neither defect nor end; when
the body shall be satisfied with Life that knows no dying, shall be quickened
with health, that fears no sickness, shall be imbrightned with beauty, that
can neither be impaired with disease, nor impalled by death; when the whole
person shall be crowned with honor and glory, shall be leagued in friendship
with Angels and Saints, shall be united to Christ in body, to the holy Ghost
in Spirit, to God in a bright similitude, and likeness of his Divine nature:
in a word, when they shall enjoy (which this world is out of hope of) honor
without ambition, beauty without pollution, glory without pride, power without
injury, riches without oppression, all good without any end of possessing,
fear of losing, or sin in spending. Let us therefore quicken our drowsy
spirits with

IIII. A short incitement to the heavenly ambition of Gods Saints.
IT was a speech of the most ambitious Spirit in the world, in the excuse of
his high swelling thoughts, (...). If a man would do injury, it should be for
a Kingdom, piety was to be observed in less matters; as he thought: but the
truth is, he needed not have supposed it to be such a difficult thing to be
persuaded to do injury. For as the Philosopher speaks, Nothing is more easy
then to do another man wrong, and he gives the Reason why Justice although it
be so beautiful a Light in the world, that as he says of it, (...), neither
the morning, nor the evening star is half so Oriently beautiful, yet so few
men are in love with it, because it is the good of another, (...), we are all
naturally engrossers of goods for our selves, but we are loath, though justly,
to divide or part them with any other; and therefore with more reason the
religious man, who is the most ambitious creature under heaven, may whet and
edge his flaming desires to go through all the sweat and labor of
righteousness with the same speech inuerted. (...)* If a Kingdom be the
reward of Piety, who would not be religious? But it is a miracle in reason to
see, that when there are three sorts of ambitious in the world: Sinful,
Natural, and Religious: how many, and those of the choicest wits, offer their
hearts, and sacrifice themselves, as whole burnt offerings to the ambition of
sin, and how few set their thoughts on fire with the holy ambition of Gods
Saints. And yet there is no difference between sinful, and sain^ly ambition
(for both would be like God) but that the first would be like him without
dependence, and would be proud in being so, affecting a divine similitude
beside the right means, and beyond the due measure; and the other is content
to climb by the valley of Christ's humility to this mountain of holiness.

The sinfully ambitious would have Gods glory, but not his goodness, his power,
but not his justice, the Majesty of his Kingdom, but not the manner of his
government. And therefore all those Angelical stars of Light, whom God in the
Morning of his Works made Heaven shine with, are now become through this
sinful ambition, wandering Stars, to whom is reserved the blackenesse of
darkness for ever. And this was it, that smote not only so many stars out of
heaven, but would have struck into hell the whole posterity of Adam, had not our
Savior snatched up some few of us into heaven with him: and yet how many
souls still scorche themselves in these flames? It was the imperious speech of
the Assyrian, Tyrian, and Roman Princes. I will be like the most high, I will
ascend into Heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God, Esaias 14. I
am God, Ezech 28. I sit a Queen (mening as the Lady and Commandresse of the
whole World) and shall see no sorrow, etc. Alas, how high this sinful ambition
would climb in thought, and indeed how low does it fall! It aspires to the
sides of the North, Esaias 14. and 13. verse. And verse the 15. it is cast down
into the sides of the pit. It would ascend into Heaven, verse the 14. and in
the next it is brought down to hell. It fancies to it self a high flight
among the stars and Angels of God. And lo the shadows of darkness are
moved from beneath, to meet it, and the dead ghosts are stirred up to salute it
with this derisory taunt. Art thou become like unto us? How art thou fallen
from Heaven, O Lucifer, son of the Morning. And these, perhaps great princely
and honorable Devils of Ambition may seem in comparison of the lesser, to
delude their followers with a kind of b^aue and royal misery. But in very
truth it is a sight full of wonder to observe the children of this generation,
at how small game in their spiritual riots, they will play away the salvation
of their souls. O the cheap damnation of sinners! With how seely baytes their
souls are angled into eternal perdition! A mess of pottage will buy away
Esaus birthright: A small vineyard will make Ahab sell himself to work sin,
and forfeit his kingdom and all his posterity to the wrath of God. A
fayre-look'd apple, pleasant to taste, will hook into the Lake of brimstone, a
whole world of beguiled souls. The Harlots beggarly bread and water, Prou. 9.
17. will get more followers then Wisdoms costly banquet and choicest wines,
though the bread be stolen and the waters hid. If GOD should live amongst us,
thirty pence would buy him. A cup of fornication is enough to make all the
Kings of the Earth wait upon the Whore, and the Beast. And can it, can it be,
Satan should hyre us to be the servants of sin with such small wages, and
God with a Kingdom should not move us to be his sons.

O let not Nature in wicked, and profane, and unreasonable Creatures go beyond
Grace in professed Christians. Balaam the Sorcerer would dye the death of the
righteous, the natural good will he bore himself, taught him to wish it. And
it is the observation of the Philospher: That all Creatures naturally desire to
draw and assemble themselves as close to the divine Being, as possibly they
can, which he makes to be the Reason why there is in them all, so vehement a
desire (which he calls of all other the most natural) of begetting another
like unto themselves; because not being able in their own bodies to be
everliving, they derive themselves to eternity by their issues, thereby (...),
as he says, partaker of the Divine being, as far as they are able. This is
therefore the reason why there is sown in our Nature, Tantus amor prolis, and
generandi gloria: but this natural and lawful ambition of glory in the
Creature is most lively expressed in the eight to the Romans, of which I spoke
in the former section. Let us therefore if the wicked desire the death, endeavor
to obtain the life of the righteous: if the whole creation groan and sigh, and
travel to be delivered from the corruption, whereunto our sin has imbondaged
it, into the glorious liberty of the children of God, at least, as S. Paul
speaks in the same chapter, groan with them, and within our selves, to be
delivered from our own sin, and to be made partakers of that glory which
God diuides among his saints.

Let us set before our eyes those Noble examples which the Scripture has
lighted up for us to look upon. For this is that heavenly Country which Gods
soiourners and Pilgrims here on earth seeing a far off, sweetly saluted,
Heb. 11. 13. and traveling as strangers thorough the world, esteemed only
worthy of their ambition. Thus Enoch walked with God before his death, and
therefore without death was translated to him: being, as S. Jude speaks, the
seventh from Adam, whom God, happily sanctified to himself with eternal rest,
because he was the Sabbath of Men. Thus Moses preferred the naked and solitary
wilderness, before the delights and treasures of Pharaohs Court; and was not
this the cause, because he looked (...) to the great recompense of the Reward,
by Faith seeing him, who is invisible, Heb. 11. 27. This made Daniel esteem
the Lions Den better then Darius Palace, and the three children adventure to
meet heaven in hell, God in the midst of a furnace infernally heated. This
made not valiant men only, but weak women, fearful by nature, but resolute
by faith, in the midst of all their tortures not accept deliverance, but making
their way through all the cruel mockings and scourgings, and bonds, and
prisons, and stones, and sawes, and swoords of wild persecuting Tyrants, pass
on to the Land of promise, without desire of living, or fear of dying, Heb.
11. 36. This made the old Auncient-bearer of Valens the Emperor, and elder
Souldior of Christ, Saint Basil in his Oration of him so much admires, that
signal Martyr Goelius tell the raging and menacing Prince, that he knew his
reward should be greater then his torment, and when the Emperor promised him
very great matters, to ask him smiling, (...): Whether he had any thing to
give him more worth then the Kingdom of heaven? In a word, this carried the
heart of old Simeon into such a holy ecstasy of religious delight, that earth
could hold him no longer, but he must needs, as it were, break prison, and
leap out of his old body into heaven. O what a desire of departure to it,
does a true sight of this salvation kindle! Lord, says he, now let thou
thy servant depart in peace, etc. for mine eyes bane seen thy salvation: As if
he should say, Lord, now the child is borne, let the old man die, now thy son
is come, let thy servant depart, now I have seen thy salvation, O let me go
to enjoy it. Now I have beheld the humanity of thy son, what is worth the
looking upon, but the divinity of such a person, which is able to make my young
Lord here even proud of his Humility. For so great a joy of spirit can never
be thrust up into so small a Vessel, as an old shrunke-vp body of earth is.
Since therefore I have testified of thy Christ, since I have made an end of my
dying note. and sung thee my Christmasse song; since I have seen thee, O thou
holy one of Israel, whom no flesh can see and live, what have I to do to live,
O Lord? What should I wear this old garment of flesh any more? Thou have left
thy fatness off, O thou fair Olive Tree, and the oil of it has made me
have a cheerful countenance: thou have forsaken thy sweetness, O thou
beautiful Vine, and thy fruit has warmed thine old Servant at the very heart.
Now therefore being thou have powered thy new wine into this old vessel, O give
the old bottle leave to break, O let me depart in peace; for I have enough, I
have seen, mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

These are high-wing'd ambitious indeed, whose thoughts creep not upon the
earth, nor whose Honors shall be ever laid in the dust: but that fly among
the Stars and Angels of GOD: that boast of their kindred with the Almighty,
and call themselves the Sons of God, Wisd. 2. whom our Savior has made the
favorites of Heaven, companions for his Angels, co-heyres with himself,
Temples for his Spirit; Parts of his Bodily and partakers of his Divine Nature;
whose kingdoms end not with their lives, but begin with their deaths; whose
pleasures, unlike to Ionathans honey, kill not with tasting; whose gains have no
firebrarnds like Sampsons Foxes, no hell in their tales; whose celestial
banquets are like the feasts of Cana, where their water is turned into wine,
and al their tears into joy, not like fair Absolons (a Type of worldly
courtesy) to his Brother Amnon, who when his heart was merry with wine, slew
him, and filled his wine-bowle up again with his own blood, ending all the
joy of the feast in tears and lamentation. Indeed as long as they live here
in their mortified flesh, especially if the times be clowdy, the world would
think their high minds and abject bodies very uneven matches. For who if he
had met with the ancient Citizens of Heaven, wandering about in sheepes-skins,
and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented (as the Apostle speaks,
Hebr. 11. would not have thought them the poorest snakes alive? But greatest
spirits wear not always gayest Arms, nor the best Soldier the highest
Crest. And therefore although a man would think the kingdom of Heaven much
dishonored by our Savior, when he auiles, humbles it in the comparison of a
small Pearl, and a little grain of mustardseed, yet indeed it is not
discountenanced, but discovered by the resemblance. For though the seed be the
smallest, yet the plant is the tallest of all the herbs that grow, such a
vital flourish is there in the little heart of it, that what Virgil speaks of
the Be, may well be applied to this vigorous grain, Ingentes animos angusto
in corpore voluit. Neither has the richest pearl of the Orient any better
outside then the dirty shell of an Oyster, which perhaps S. Paul alluded unto
in the 2. Cor. 4. 7. where speaking of Gods Saints, and this heavenly treasure
in them he tells us we have this pearl, (...) in no better than scalopshels.

Clean opposite are these glories, and delights, and this ambition to those of
our vnder-world. Gather all the roses of pleasure that grow upon the earth,
says not the Greek Epigram truly of them: (...),
(...).
The Rose is fair and fading, short and sweet,
Pass softly by her:
And in a moment you shall see her fleet,
And turn a bryer.


They look fairly, but they are suddenly dispoiled; whereas, contrary all
the flowers of Paradise (like the Church, Cant. 1. 5. 6.) sunburned and frosted
with the heat and cold of this tempestuous world, look black and homely, but
flourish inwardly with divine beauty, and are all glorious within. So that we
may well say of the Church as the Poet sings. (...)
(...).
She Is black: what then? so are dead coals, but cherish,
And with soft breath them blow,
And you shall see them glow as bright and flourish,
As spring-borne Roses grow.


The reason of which is, because the World wants (God purposely so ordering it,
least we should rely upon her Egyptian reeds) those two main iettes, to
sustain her crazie buildings with which the Courts of GODS house are most
gracefully pillard and vpheld, Selfesufficiency and Perpetuity. For who ever
saw all the goods even of this world meet together in one person, and
constantly attend him to his grave, Moral Virtue, and Knowledge, and Honor,
Friends, Riches, and Pleasure, Health, Strength, and Beauty, Which are therefore
insufficient, both because they are commonly seioyn'd one from another, and
have in themselves no satisfying nature. For what rich man desires not more
wealth? or what great man thirsts not after more honor? or what scholar
studies not for more knowledge. But let us grant what no man shall ever find,
Knowledge, Virtuous; Virtue, Honorable; Honor, Healthful; Health, Strong;
Strength, Beautiful; Beauty, befriended, rich, and pleasant; all these met
together to bless one subject. Yet because the Measure of them all is our
Life, and that is of so short a size as David speaks, Behold, thou have made
my life as it were a span long, and my days are even as nothing: (he says not
indeed they are nothing at al, but they are as near it as may be, they are
even as nothing, neither does he say, his life is a whole span-long, but as it
were a span long, the word in the original, signifies but a handbreadth) how
can they but, for want of perpetuity, fall all upon our heads, and without the
great grace of God; make us so much the more miserable by their loss, as
before in their possession we thought our selves more happy then other men.
Seek we, seek we therefore the sufficiency of Grace here, and hereafter the
perpetuity and fullness of glory will succeed. For as David speaks, Light is
sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart. The seeds of
them both are sown in our corruptible state, but in the state of incorruption
we shall reap the harvest. What if these joys cannot smile upon as with
their own faces, but are as S. Paul speaks (who had seen them) unutterable
in their natures; (as what tongues of Men and Angels can express musical
sounds to a deaf man? or describe the glorious Light, or divine Beauty, the
visible and celestial bodies flame with to him that is blind) yet let us assure
our selves the honor of our faith is so much the greater, by how much the
less we see to cause our belief, and though Thomas was blessed in his seeing,
yet he was chid for not believing but upon sight, with this comfortable
reprehension to us. Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have
believed. For sure as I said before, if the glory of GOD were not concealed, it
would never be known who would love him for himself, because all men would
love him for his glory.

GENES. 26. 12. Then Isaac sowed in that Land, and received the same year, an
hundred fold.
LEt us go on now from the spiritual harvest of our souls, wherein God grant
us to be all sharers, because heaven is the field: and the fruit we shall
thereby reap, will be eternal glory, to the harvest whereby our bodies are
sustained, and which maintains our life here: that if we be still earthly
minded men, and plow in all our hopes into these sandy furrows, yet when we
see in this story of Isaac, that it is Gods blessing only that clothes the
valleis so thick with corn, that they laugh and sing for joy (as David sings of
them, Ps. 65. 13.) we may, if not because he will banquet and replenish our
souls with Divine satiety that flourishes in heaven, yet even in mere good
husbandry that he may feed and preserve our bodies with the food that grows
out of the earth, become religious men, and such as wait upon Gods blessings in
the improuement of all the labors and sweat of our several callings. It will
be a good fruit of the earth, if we use it to carry our thoughts up into
heaven, there to honor God with praise, and thanksgiving for his blessing us
here.

In the general survey of which words, after we have divided them into Isaacs
labor, Then Isaac sowed in that Land, and his reward, and received the same
year an hundred fold, we will take hold first of this one observation.

I. That every Creature which would be preserved in his Calling by the
blessing of God, must labor for it.
FOr as GOD would have the World cost himself six days labor (though in one
moment he could have finished it) so he sets us to task, by his own example,
to our weekly stint: Six days shall thou labor, Exodus 20. 9. and do all
that thou have to do. Which is not to be understood as a Permission, but as a
Praecept: as though God gave us only leave, and not charge to labor. For he
says not, six days thou May labor, but six days thou Shall labor. If
our mouths will eat (as Solomon tells us, All the labor of a man is for his
Mouth, Eccles. 6. 7.) our brows must sweat for it. For as the Heathen had a
Proverb among them, Dij venaunt omnia laboribus. Their Gods, they said sold
all for labor: so we may truly say of GOD indeed: he has set the price of
all his earthly blessings to be sweat. In the sweat of thy brow thou shall eat
thy bread all the days of thy life, Genesis 3. Neither let the Master think
to wipe off all his sweat to the brow of his servant, as though (like our
Gallants) he were borne only to disport and pleasure, and his servants to
labor and toil for him. No, every Man is Gods Taskeman, and it is as natural
for us to labor, as it is for flame to ascend: so Eliphaz speaks of us, Job.
5. ver. 7. Man is borne to labor, as a spark to fly upwards, Indeed the
labors of men are different, some of mind, and some of body, some in the field,
some in the City, some abroad at Sea, and some at home: but labor will meet
a man every where, be he where he will. It is our portion under the Sun, as
Solomon tells us: Behold that which I have seen, says the wise man, Eccles.
5. 18. It is good for a man to eat, and to drink, and to enjoy the good of
all his labor, which he takes under the Sun, for it is his portion. So that
every one that would enjoy the good creatures of GOD (this subcelestiall
happiness which flourishes under the Sun) if he would eat and drink, or
enjoy any good, it must be of his labor, his own labor, not another man's;
for that is to steal another man's goods, and with his sweat to warm our own
brows. And so severe was the holy Apostle of Christ in this point (that Golden
and Elect instrument of Gods grace to us) who in labors excelled them all that
were hired into Christ's vineyard to work, that he would have him starued to
death, that to maintain his life would not labor: He that will not labor, let
him not eat, says the Apostle, 2 These. 3. 10.

It were unnecessary to add more out of the word of God, to acquaint us with
our duty of labor, the places to this purpose, and the Scripture in this
argument is prodigal. Thou shall eat the labor of thy hands, Ps. 128. 2.
Ephesians. 4. 28. Let him that stole* steal no more but rather let him labor,
working with his hands the thing that is good, that he may have to give to him
that needs. Where we see the Apostle ties not only every man to his
work, but would have him, though he labor with his own hands to get his
living, yet to give something to him that needs, and wants hands or feet, or
health, or strength, or liberty, whereby to labor. Look then as we see a
field, as long as it has any heart in it, if it be manured, and tilled, and
sown, and weeded, and well husbanded in every part, never deceiues the hopes
of the greedy husbandman, but paies him in his own seed with the most lawful
usury of natural, and very plentiful increase: which if it be never wrought
upon with the labor of man, but falls perhaps into the hands of the sluggard,
grows presently full of nothing but thistles and thorns, rank hurtful
weeds, as Solomon tells us Prou 24. 30. I went by the field of the sluggard,
and by the vineyard of the slothful man, and lo it was al ouergrowne with
thorns and nettles had covered the face thereof: so is it with the body of
man: If it be well and faithfully labored, it is fruitful both to himself,
his family, and the whole Commonwealth: but if it sleep away all his time in
idleness. he grows not only unprofitable, but full of noysom vices, and is
as the Poet calls him only, fruges consumere natus, a hurtful Vermin, good for
nothing but to live upon the spoil. Are not al things imbrightned with use,
and rustied with lying still? Let but the little Be become our mistress.

Is she not always out of her artificial Nature, either building her waxen
Cabinet, or flying abroad into the flowery Meadows, or sucking honey from the
sweet plants, or loading her weak thighs with wax to build with, or
stinging away the theeuish Droan that would feign hiue it self among her
labors, and live upon her sweet sweat? Ignauum, fucos, pecus a praesepibus
arcent. And shall this Little creature, this Natural good-houswife thus set her
self to her business? and shall we droane away our time in idleness, and
which always follows it, vicious living? Shall our fields labor so
faithfully to reward us, and shall we betray our whole lives to idleness and
sloth. Find me but one example in the World to countenance, and sample a man
in his idleness.

GOD himself is the watchman of Israel, that never slumbers and sleeps. My
Father works (says our Savior) and I work. The holy Angels are always
either ascending up unto God (as we may see in Jacobs ladder) that is, lifting
their thoughts upwards to honor him in their eternal song, Holy, Holy, Holy.
Lord GOD of Sabbath, etc. or descending from God to Men with his blessings, as
being his Ministering Spirits sent for the good of the Elect to pitch their
pauillions round about, and defend us from many spiritual and blind dangers,
which, alas, our souls never see. Not one of them all was seen to be idle,
or stand still.

Man himself (which is worthy our observing) even then, when he was first
paradis'd in the Garden of pleasure, yet had something to do in it, and was
not suffered to walk idly up and down like a Loyterer, or Idlesbye that had
nothing at all to do: but was set to keep it and dress it, Genesis 2. Labor
he must though sweat he should not, and business he had to do, though sweat
he should not, and business he had to do, though in the doing of it he felt
no weariness or toil.

And as these most noble creatures of God Angels and man were not suffered to
be idle, so if we look up to the heavens themselves, we shall there see
there that mighty body in continual motion, never standing still, but flying
about the world with incredible swiftness, that David's great Giant, who every
morning like a Bridegroom comes out of his Eastern chamber, and delights to
run the heavenly races God has set him, with all the less stars of the
glorious body, might shed their beams upon the Earth in the seasons of it, and
so bring forth herbs and fruits for the service of man and beast.

It is indeed a natural Truth, Omne Corpus natural quiescit in loco proprio.
Every natural body is quiescent in his own proper place: and yet we see
though all gladly rest in their own regions, and invade not the confines of
their neighbor Elements, yet they are always moving and coasting about in
their own orbs and circuits, thereby teaching us to labor every man in the
circle of his own calling, and not to busie-body out abroad with other new
works. The Air breaks not into the quarters of Heaven, and yet, we see, it
is always fanned from place to place, and never sleeps idly in his own
regions: the reason is, because otherwise it would soon putrify it self and
poison us all with the stinking breath of it, did not the divine providence of
God drive it about the World, with his Winds, that so it might both preserve
it self, and serve to preserve us, which otherwise it could never do.

And truly whether we ascend up into Heaven, or descend with David into the
deep, we may discern the whole Ocean, which is a far more sluggish element
then the Air, never rest, but ever moved either by the Winds, or by a proper
motion, whereby naturally it ebbes and flows to preserve it self sweet and
wholesome for those creatures that live in it, and withal that it might by
such inter-tides be the more serviceable to the use of man in the conueiance of
commodities from shore to shore. So that in a word, every thing moves for
man, and should man only himself be idle and stand still.

Give me but one example in the whole World of sloth, and restiue idleness,
but one, and I will give thee leave to keep Holy Day, and play away all thy
life without sweat or labor: only perhaps of a standing poole, and that grows
noisome that no man can endure it: or of some deformed Toade, and that is full
swollen with rankour and poison; or it may be of an idle Droane, and that
because it plays in Summer, dies in Winter: But if we look up to Heaven,
that will teach us to run the races God sets before us with joy and
gladness; if the holy Angels may instruct us, they will take us out a lesson
of faithful labor, both in our thoughts to God, and actions to men. All the
Creatures of God will set us a work by their examples. Choose therefore whether
thou will with thy vicious idleness be of a corrupted, and venomous nature,
and so die; or exercise thy self in the holy labors thy vocation calls thee
to, like the blessed Angels, and all other the more noble Creatures of God.

And that we may see reason why we should labor, we must know that it is
both a Divine and natural Truth, Deus and Natura nihil faciunt frustra: God
and Nature made nothing idle. It is for us the herds of the field, and the
fowls of Heaven, and the fish in the Seas labor to bring forth their young.
It is for us the weary Ox is yoakt to labor, and the Horse takes the bridle
into his mouth to ease us by his travail. It is for us the poor Silke-worm
spinnes her clew, and the thriftie Be gathers her honey to the comb: but as
all these labor for us, so it is our labor that orders and guides them, and
sets them all a work first. Indeed God has of his goodness made them our
servants, and put our fear upon them. The fear of you shall be upon all
Creatures, Genesis 9. 2. But it is not our parts to use their labors to make our
selves idle, but if we would have them labor for us, we must be
fellow laborers with them for our selves. And indeed two special reasons
would God have us labor for; one to keep us from the greene-sicknesse of
Idleness, which in truth is the immediate mother of all Sin, as we may see by
David's Tower-walke; and the other for the more full enjoying of our life and
health. For as it is labor that procures all things necessary for our life and
health, as meats and drink. clothing and housing: so it is labor that
preserues our health, by warming our blood, that it be not gellied with
unkindly colds into rheums and dispersing those ill humors which with idleness
would grow upon us, and by prepuring the body more delightfully both to receive
nourishment without surfeit, and without disquiet, rest, and sleep.

Ye see therefore there is both great reason for us to labor if we would
enjoy our health, and necessity if we would supply the wants of our own lives
and example, if we would follow either the command of God, or the pattern of
other the most honorable creatures God has made.

Now let not here the good husbandman because (he as Isaac) tills his ground
and sowes it, engrosse all labor into his own calling, and so thinking
himself only the true labourer, quarrel with all other professions as more
idle, and less necessary. Let the good husbandman have always his due honor
reserved him; but let not the good husbandman think all other men bad-husbands
because he is good, for he may be a bad man, though he be a good
husbandman, in so thinking. For as man himself is divided into several
respects of body and soul, estate and person; so every calling that is
lawfully employed in the providing for any of these, has in it true laboring
men. The husbandman indeed he sees the body, the shepherd clothes it, the
Architect houses it, and the Physician cures it. It were a labor but to reckon
up the several calling that labor about the body, and indeed would pass my
skill to name them: so about the estates of men, Judges and Lawyers, and
Notaries and Officers labor: and about the persons of men, Princes and
Magistrates labor, to keep them in civil order and government; and about the
soul of man the Minister of God labors. I cannot stand to evidence the labor
of all these callings: I will only make it plain because the calling of a
Minister is by some slighted, as a matter of no great pains and sweat. That

II. A faithful Minister is a great labourer.
I Would not willingly make comparisons between him and the husbandman, and
say his labor is beyond theirs: but this I may safely say, that God himself
compares him not only to a husbandman, but to show the greatness of his
labor, to every calling indeed that is most sweated with industry and toil.

I know all men think their own callings most laborious, but whether think
you it easier to plow upon hard ground, or upon hard stones? whether to commit
your seed; to those furrows that will return you fruitful thanks; or those,
that for your labor will spoil your seed, and requite you with reproach and
slander? whether to such ground as is good, and naturally opens her bosom to
drink in the dewes of heaven that fall upon her, and gladly receives the Sun
beams shed from God to warm and make fruitful the seed credited to her
womb, or such ground as never thirsts after the watering of Apollos, though as
Moses speaks (Deuteronomy. 32. 2.) his words drop as the rain, and his speech
distill as the dew; never can endure the light of heaven to shine upon it, but
lies always in darkness, and in the shadows of death? yet such ground
(stones I should have said) did the divine courage of Stephen meet with in
Jerusalem (Act. 7. 59.) such S. Paul wrought on at Lystra (Act. 14. 19.) such
Moses and Aaron and Joshua toyled upon in the wilderness (Number. 14. 10.) such the
Prophets (Matt. 21, 25.) such the Prince of the Prophets found in his own
inheritance, though he had before (as we see in Esaias 5. 2.) picked all the
stones himself out of it. (John 8. 59).

What one difficulty or danger is the roughest calling assaulted with, that
his is not. Does the plowmans labor know no end, but is it as the Poet speaks
of it: Labor actus in orbem, Quique in se sua per vestigia voluitur? So is his.
Does the Shepherd, the sunburned and frosted shepherd, watch over his flocks
by night, strengthen the diseased, set apart the sound, bind up the bruised,
seek out the lost, rescue those that are preyed upon? so does he. Marches the
soldier before the face of death? lives he among the pikes of a thousand
dangers? walks he through his own wounds and blood? So does he: but as the
ground this spiritual plowman tils is harder, so the wolves and Lions this
Shepherd watches against are fiercer, and the Armies he graples with of
another temper then such as are made like himself of flesh and blood; being
Powers and Principalities, spiritual wickednesses, and worldly governors, one
of whom could in a nights space strikes dead the lives of a hundred fourscore
and five thousand soldiers at once, all armed and embattayld together. Isay
37. 36.

Let all the Princes of valor that ever lived, bring into the field their most
tried and signal warrior, whose face and breast stand thickest with the
hononourable stars of brave adventures; if I do not single out to encounter
him one soldier that bears in his body the marks of the Lord Jesus, who
shall have broken through an Iliad of more dangers and perils, then he, let
Gath and Ascalon triumph over Sion once again, and let it be said that a
second and more noble Saul is fallen upon his high places, then ever yet fell
before. For we shall find him all the world over in labors more abundant, in
iourneys more often, in more perils in the city, in the wilderness, in the
sea, more often in watchings, and fastings, in hunger and thirst, in cold and
nakedness, in prison more frequent, and ofter in weariness and death. 2. Cor.
11. 23. etc. Let not him therefore that sowes the earth with his labor, slander
the spiritual tilth of our souls with lazy thoghts, alas! in the times of
peace, contempt is the greatest harvest we reap and in the tempests of
persecution, our blood is the first seed is sown in the Church. But enough of
this general theme of labor, Let us now go on to

III. The several parts of Isaacs Labor and Reward.
SOwing then is the matter or substance of his labor, and the circumstances
are three. First of person, Isaac a religious person sowes; the next of Time,
he sowes in a time of famine and dearth; the last of place, it is the ground of
strangers, the the land of the Philistims he sowes in. His Reward follows his
labor, wherein we look first upon Isaac, in the manner of the benefit, which
is by Receipt: he does not take it as a due, but receives it as a reward, he
makes not himself the Lord, but the Steward of Gods gift: and then we cast our
eyes upon God (as the eyes of all things look upon thee O Lord) who commends
the benefit by his celeritie in giving which was in the same year. Secondly,
by Isaacs necessity of receiving, it being now a needful time of Famine; and
last by the measure and size of returning his seed, which was not thirty, nor
sixty, but a hundred fold.

Now if we regard either the substance or the circumstances of the words, a man
would think (as the world now goes) that Isaac had neither reason, or need
to sow in such a Land and at such a time, as he did. For that he was
exceeding rich, is confessed of all, both by the gifts of Abimelech the King of
the Philistims which he gave him, and by the inheritance of his Father Abraham
which he left him: and therefore what need had he to labor?

We know it is the order of many men, if they have lived long in the Country
and by their labors have enriched themselves, they forsake the fields, and
betake themselves to the delights, and ease of the City: and again Citizens
when they are well feathered by their trades, they fly abroad straight to
purchase something in the Country, that they may there summer themselves in
their bowers and arbours of pleasure: they are all soon weary of their
labor, even as soon as they are enricht by it. Which though it be allowable
in men ancient, as the Poet aduises: Solue senescentem mature sanus
equum;Especially if not only Age, but some disease and weakness of their
bodies requires it: for so God dismissed the Levites at 50. years old from their
service at his Altar, yet it is not so in men, either able to labor, or
without labor unable to live. For here we see Isaac a rich man, and now past
threescore years old (as we may gather from the 25. verse of the former
Chapter) yet still labors and sowes his ground.

Again, let a man be but indifferently left by his Friends, though he do
live in the Country, yet he will (as he out of his young gentilitie will
please to boast) scorn to follow the Plow; he will keep perhaps a Cast of
Hawks, or a Kennell of Hounds, and he will call them and follow them day by
day; but that's all the calling he will follow. Questionless, Hawking and
Hunting are both lawful; but only to make recreations of, not to make callings
of. For he that makes the following of such sports his only calling, inuerts
and turns the order of God vpside down. For whereas God made all beasts
naturally to serve man, he spends his life in serving and following of beasts,
and so makes himself the servant of those creatures, of which God has made
him the Lord: weakly esteeming that the privilege of his estate and his
blessing above others, which Noah wisely laid upon Canaan as of all other the
greatest curse. A servant of servants shall he be: but Isaac thinks it no
disparagement to his Gentilitie to till the Earth: nor Jacob that was his heir
to follow Sheep, though perhaps my Lord Esau go a hunting every day an end.
Yet I think not Isaac was a Plowman, but I think he followed his servants
that were so, and in such labor there is no man, but shall find as much
wisdom as delight, and health.

Besides, if a man would labor upon the ground, one would suppose, being rich,
the ground should be his own, not another: what would one of our small heirs
say, should I now turn Farmour. I thank God I have been brought up after
another fashion, and have ground enough of mine own to live upon by other men's
labors. Well I make no question but Isaac was as well brought up as such idle,
out of calling Gentlemen, and yet he plowes, and sowes, not only another man's
ground, but the ground of strangers, where he could exspect nothing but hard
dealing, which indeed he found.

The last circumstance is of the time, which was a time of Famine; wherein all
men are most discouraged to sow, both because of their present want of that
seed they cast into the ground which might serve themselves, and because they
fear the year to come may prove as barren, as that which was past: Yet for
all this, Isaac though rich, neither thinks it too mean a calling for him to
till the ground, neither is discouraged from laboring, though he spent his
sweat upon the ground of strangers, and sowed in a most unseasonable time, and
what might the reason of this be?

First, Isaac was a religious person, and looked assuredly for Gods blessing,
which he found and therefore sowed. From whence we gather this instruction. It Is
good husbandry to be a religious man, and one of the children of Abraham,
that is, a faithful man.

Secondly, Isaac knew that he who meant to reap the fruit of Gods blessing,
must sow the seed of his own labor, in some lawful and honest course, and
therefore he sowed, whence arises this Observation, That as every man must use
the means, that would be profited by Gods blessings: so that Husbandry has
been an ancient and honorable means of life.

Thirdly, Isaac had Gods promise to bless him in the third verse of this
Chapter, even in this unlikely place, and therefore sowed among strangers, and
from hence we may borrow this direction. A Child of God makes Gods will the
rule of all his actions, though it seem never so repugnant to his reason.

And to conclude, Isaac had learnt by experience, that God was not ruled by
nature, but was the Ouer-ruler of it, and therefore though Famine should have
eaten up all the Land besides, yet he was sure God could preserve him, and
bless his seed, when the the fields of other men languisht with desolation,
and waste, and therefore he sowed then in the time of Famine, from whence we
we will learn this last instruction. God always glorifies himself in
preserving his Children by taking advantage of the most unlikely time that may
be to preserve them in. Let us now begin with the first.

IIII. It is good husbandry to be a Religious man, and one of the Children of
Abraham.
FOr though the wicked Mowles of the Commonwealth, that are always rooting in
the earth after profit, suppose they should lose much if they were troubled in
their bargains with the scrupulous vice of Religion (as they think it) yet by
their leaves, Godliness is great gain, as the Apostle tells us, and is
instated in a double portion by Gods own promise both of the things of this
life, and of the life to come. He gives meat to them that fear him, and is
ever mindful of his promise, sings David, Psalm. 111. 5. His are no
Court-promises prodigally made, and purposely forgotten; but so careful is God
after an especial manner to be out of debt to those that rely upon his word,
that in the times of dearth and famine, when all other are lankt, and shrunk
up with the leanness of the Earth; yet then (as it is in the fifth of Job, the
20. and 22.) God shall redeem thee from death, so as thou shall laugh at
destruction and famine. What though a man begin with little, as Jacob did, Yet
if thou seek to God betimes, and make thy supplication to the Almighty,
though thy beginning be small, yet thy latter end shall greatly increase, as
one of Jobs false friends truly prophesied at random of Gods purpose toward
Jobs estate. No matter therefore how wicked men are opinioned of Godliness,
who account it a very unprofitable, and most unthrifty virtue: the truth is,
it is far otherwise.

For Godliness is not only a gain without loss, but a great gain without
the least loss: but wicked gains are all like Samsons Foxes, they have fire
brands in their tails, that consume all their Masters good husbandry: For
they gain a little part of the world, and lose that in the end which is more
worth then the whole world, and such gains will profit little. For as our
Savior says, What will it profit a man if he gain the whole world, and lose
his own soul? So that indeed a wicked man gains only for other, but gets
loss for himself: for whilst he loses himself, his heirs enter upon all
his gains, and such are but silly gains God knows, and I would they knew so
to: but the gettings of a Religious man brings no such after-claps of grief
and sorrow with them, as Solomon tells us in 10. of the Prou. 22. The blessing
of the Lord, it makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it: but how
hurtful, and full of irremediable sorrow the goods are of unrighteous Mammon,
Saint Paul most excellently describes in the 1. Epistle to Tim. the 6. 9. But
they that will be rich (says the Apostle) fall into temptation, and a snare,
and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction, and
perdition. A man would have thought Temptations, and Snares, and Folly, and
hurtful Lusts, and Destructions, and Perdition had been misery, and sorrow
enough for a Covetous heart, a heart that will be rich, Quasi nolente Deo, to
be drowned in. But as Solomon says, God adds no sorrows to the riches he
gives, so Saint Paul adds more to those the world gives. For the lone of money
(says the same Apostle in the same place) is the root of all evil, which
while some coueted after, they have erred from the Faith, and pierced
themselves through and through with many sorrows.

All these mischiefs happen not to rich men, but to men that will be rich,
not to men that have money, but to men that love money, and set their heart
upon it. If riches increase, set not thy heart upon it, says David. A man may
have riches, but riches must not have the man, as Aristippus said of Lais the
Harlot, (...), otherwise they should not be Gods blessing, which they are,
Deuteronomy. 28. they would not be rewards of obedience, Psalm. 128. they would never
make us friends in Heaven, Luke 16. 9. we should never see poor Lazarus landed
by the Angels in the bosom of rich Abraham, Luc. 16. 22. Our Savior would
never have sent out his thunder of imbossibilitie against them, with this
lightning, How hard it is for them that trust in riches to enter into the
Kingdom of God, we should have seen Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Job,
David, Hezechiah, the rich Arimathaean, etc. either less religious, or more
poor.

Look then as good ground to the Seedsman; so the honest heart when the seed
of Gods benefits are committed to him, puts out all the grace of God to the
greatest advantage of his glory that he can, and is neither idle nor
unprofitable in his fruit-seasons. For he knows he must give account of every
idle word, how much more of many talents, or a whole life misspent in idleness:
but Gods seed brings forth in him either 30. or 60. or 100. fold, and Gods
talents are restored for two, five; for five, ten. Neither can it be
otherwise; for he is Gods own husbandry, and therefore to be a religious man,
and a child of Abraham, must needs be good husbandry, because it is Gods, who
will always bless his own grounds, and be sure to let his Sun shine, and
rain fall upon them, and water them, except sometime, that they may be more
fruitful after, he lets them for a while lie fallow, and for a year or so,
as David did, lie spared and broken up, without any outward show of fruit at
all.

Now because all men are reasonable, though some be not religious, let us see
whether there be not great reason for it; that Religion should be thought
good husbandry, and should enrich the man, that is a faithful practiser of it.
I am persuaded there is none but will confess, that he which is the best
disposed to get and to keep; and the least inclined to mis-spend goods well
gotten, is most likely to prove a rich man: the Poet ioyns both the ways of
thriuing in one verse: Non minor est virtus, qua^ quaerere, parta tueri.

Now if we would know what are the getting virtues, they are agreed upon to be
Labor and Diligence. Salomons little Ant will tell us how much is got by
Labor, if we go to her. Go to the Ant thou Sluggard, consider her ways, and
be wise. Prou. 6. 6. And Salomons self will tell us what is the fruit of a
diligent hand. Prou. 10. 4. A diligent hand makes rich: for as the Ant labors
much and wisely, (so the Poet most elegantly describes it. It nigeum campis
agmen, praedamque per herbas
Conuectat call angusto, pars grandia trudunt,
Frumenta obnixe humeris, pars agmina cogunt,
Castigantque. moras: Opere omnis semita ferret.


So the diligent hand loves to labor, and goes willingly through all the
vp-hils of thrift, as Solomon speaks of his good houswife. She perceives her
merchandise is good, therefore she works willingly with her hands: she is
early up at it. And is a wicked man of this disposition? It may be is
laborious, by reason of the nenecessity of his estate, and the strength of his
body: but is he constant in his labor, does he love it? Nay, will he not
presently break out into some excess or other, and so soon spend ill, what
was well gotten? O how hard a thing is it to see a good workman indeed, almost
in any calling not to have some one secret or known vice, that like a wicked
vermin consumes all his labors? but an honest and religious hand as it sets
it self to work in obedience to Gods command, and so gains his blessing: So
is it both constant in his labor, and provident to avoid the mispences other
men fall into. For as he is not drowsy in getting his living: so is he
neither drunken nor greede to spend it. He reme^bers Salomons counsel in the
23. of the Prouer. 20. Be not among wine-bibbers among riotous eaters of flesh;
for the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty, and drowsinesse shall
cloth a man with rags. Does not our experience teach us (as the French
Proverbs goes) That more men dig their graves with their teeth, then are
slain with the sword: that is, with their over greedy cramming themselves: but
a religious man is taught to satisfy his body with moderate, not to surfeit his
body with excessiiue diet. Do not we see many a laboring man boil his whole
body in sweat all the day long, only to quench the dropsy of his throat at
night with unreasonable swilling in his day labor turned into drink? but a
religious man as his hand are laborious, so he has a sober throat, drinking
only to refresh his body, not so, till the drink comes up where it went down:
the grape of necessity he freely takes always, and sometimes, but seldom the
second grape of delight, but the third of excess and luxry he never touches
or tastes of.

Besides, how many great estates and rich patrimonies may we observe by often
resorting to the house of an harlot, to have gone down into the chambers of
death, as the wise man speaks, and never to have seen any resurrection: but
the body of a religious man is a member of Christ, and therefore cannot be made
the member of an harlot, thereby to consume both himself and his estate. what
should we be tedious in reporting what we cannot not but know; That by gaming,
and pride in apparel, and haunt of ill company, many a rich heir leaves his
son a poor child, as he makes himself a poor man? All which rocks of
danger and ill hushandry Religion (the holy guide of our lives) never suffers
any that sail in Noah's Arc, I mean in Gods church for want of a right
steering their vessels to run foul upon. And therefore it must needs be
(Religion being the mother of frugalitie) good husbandry to be a religious man
both because the blessing of God is upon him, as we are taught by Scripture,
and because he is furnished with the virtue of honest getting, and kept by it
from the vice of unprofitable spending.

But perhaps a weak Christian will be ready to quarrel with this truth and to
object, That although Isaac, it may be had some thing left him of his father;
yet his father Abraham himself was but a poor man, being stripped of all his
friends, and the hopes of his own inheritance, and called out by God into a
strange country, when he was now seventy years old: and his son Jacob no more
worth the^ his poor staff. And that David was poor, and needy himself,
says as much in plain terms, I am poor and needy, being forsaken of father
and mother, til God took him up and forced, though after the best sort, to beg
maintenance of the rich churl Nabal; and though God himself say of Job, that
he was an upright man, and there was none like him in all the earth, yet is it
not a proverb as poor as Job. Besides, Matthew and Zachaeus and Joseph of
Arimathaea were all before rich men, but as soon as they followed Christ,
their riches left the^, and they became poor and religious men together; Again
was it not David's complaint in the 73. Psalm. That the wicked are not troubled
like other men, neither are they plagued like others, but their eyes stand out
with fatness, and they have more th^n heart can wish. And the prophet Ier. as
he succeeded him in time, so he followd him in his complaint. Ier. 12. 1.
Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee, yet let me talk with thee
of thy judgments. Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper: wherefore are
they happy that deal very deceit fully? That we may the better know then.

V. Why the godly are many times poor, and how the wicked are often rich in
this world.
WE must learn to distinguish rightly of the times when the children of God
are poor, and of the persons of wicked men, how they are rich. There is a time
of poverty, and a time of riches, and to say true, except Gods children were
first poor, how could Gods blessing enrich them after? So Abraham and David
and Jacob had their times of poverty, they were poor at first, but their end
was rich, and full of Gods blessing; where contrary, the wicked man is never
rich in the conclusion. So David tells us in the 37. and 73. Psalms, when he
went into the Sanctuary to see the end of these men, he saw the end of the
upright to be peace. Mark the upright man, for the end of that man is peace,
says the Prophet: but what says he of the wicked? The end of the wicked shall
be cut aff. So was the end of Dives in the 12. of Luke. He had no sooner sung
the merry Carroll to his soul of Soul eat, drink, and be merry, etc. he
had no sooner ended his Antheme, but the same night his soul was begd from him
and he could not get a drop of drink for it, he had provided much for his
soul, but he had not provided his soul a whit for God, and the therefore
spiritual furies did (...) soon begd away his soul from all the pleasurns he
had loaded his new built Repositaries to banquet it with, and in a moment
ingulft it into perpetual torment: for as Job speaks of the wicked Momento
descendunt in infernum; Pphylosophy teaches us, that there can be no motion in
an instant: but sin lies so heavy upon the soul of the wicked, that it is no
sooner out of his body, but it is descended in a moment to hell, and therefore
though it be said of Lazarus; and the Beggar died, and was carried by the
Angels into Abraham's bosom, yet it is no sooner said, The rich man died also,
but as if there had bin no time between his dying, and being in hell, it
straight follows. And in hell lift up hiss eyes, etc. O how suddenly (sings
the Psalmist) do they consume, perish, and come to a fearful end. Psalm. 73
18. The new translation turns it, how as in a moment, and indeed the original
is, Be-raga, in momento. So David's green Bay Tree, Psalm. 3. 35. (a tree that
ever bears leaves but never fruit, and therefore fit to shadow under the laws
of it a a fruitless professor) though he floorisht it for awhile, yet
suddenly David did but turn him about, and he could not find so much as the
place where he stood.

But let us grant Dives the happiness to die a rich man, which he shall never
do (for as the heathen sings of death, I ^uoluit humile pariter and celsum
caput.
Aequatque summis infirna.
Death and the Grave, make even all estates.
There, high, and low, and rich, and poor are mates.
Yet the riches they have, are not like Wisdoms durable riches, but God
blows upon them, not only cutting off themselves, and their remembrance as
sparks from the earth; but scattering their estates, and blasting their seed
and posterity: so that he perishes both sooner and oftener then other men. He
spends his days in wealth (Job 21. 13.) and in a moment descends into hell;
there how soon is his soul lost? His body is as chafe, that the storm
carries awey (ver. 17. 18.) there he loses his body as soon. And what
pleasure has he in his house after him, when the number of his months is cut
off in the midst, (ver. 21.) there perishes his estate. And to conclude, God
lays up the punishment of his iniquity for his children (ver. 19.) there he
dies in his posterity. So that, although he flatter himself with an opinion
of his riches, that it will keep him alive in his name, and memory, and
posterity, and houses, and lands, beyond the condition of other men (as David
tells us, Psalm. 49. 11.) that this is his very thought) yet to speak soothly,
as the last of the best, and the best of the last, Poets says of all moral
helps which Fabricius, and Cato, and Brutus, three of the most famous of the
Roman Worthies thought to eternize themselves by, Cume sera vobis rapiet hoc
etiam dies,
Iam vos secunda mors manet:
So may the ungodly rich more truly say of himself, and all worldly means,
whereby he hoped to perpetrate his life, and memory. The poor man dies but
once: but O that I
Already dead, have yet three deaths to die.
For, being dead in his body, he still remains alive in his soul, estate,
and posterity to suffer death, and therefore death is said to gnaw, and feed
upon him, Psalm. 49. 14. And it is worth the observing how soon his name rots,
which that it might fly into eternity beyond the names of poorer men, he so
feathered himself with houses, and lands, and children, and called them all by
his own name. And therefore our Savior in the Story of Lazarus, and Dives,
keeps the poor man's name alive to the worlds end, but industriously leaves
the rich man's name at uncertainty, with There was a certain rich man.

This is the first and maine difference of the times, but there is another. For
there are some times of persecution, and some of peace. When we therefore say
that a religious man is a Thriuer, we mean in the time of peace, when God
bleses the Land he lives in with quiet, and lets the beams of his Gospel
freely display themselves: but in the times of persecution, when clouds, and
storms arise; when the Ark of God is tempested about, and fails as it were in
the blood of his Children, it is contrary. For as before, the poor religious
man grows rich, with Abraham, and Jacob, and David, and Isaac; so in the times
of bloody persecution, the rich man, that is truly religious, voluntarily grows
poor, as Matthew, and Barnabas, and Zachaeus did. But their riches then left
not them for want of Gods blessing, but they to get a blessing of God, left
their riches to supply the wants of others. There is a time of War, and a
time of Peace, says the Preacher, Eccl. 3. a time to get, and a time to cast
away. Now it pleased God Isaac should live in a time of peace, and so should
have a time to get: but Matthew and Zachaeus, etc. were to live in a time, when
the whole world was at war with God, and that was a time to cast away. And as
God gets himself honor in enriching his Children in the times of peace; so it
is his good pleasure, that his Children by being poor sometime for his sake,
should get themselves glory from him.

I but will a poor Christian say. Now are peaceable times: and yet there are
still many rich wicked men, and more godly that are poor. So questionless,
there are many rich godly men, and more poor that are wicked. But to satisfy
this doubt also. I told you there is a second distinction to be used of the
persons of rich, and poor men. It may be thou art godly and poor. It Is well:
but can thou tell whether, if thou were not poor, thou would be godly?
Sure God knows us better then we our selves do, and therefore can best fit
the estate to the person. Why should thou think much to see Lazarus by
Dives his gates; God knows that was the way he was to ascend to heaven by, and
it may be he had never been comforted in Abraham's bosom, if God had not
brought him thither by affection, and by Dives his gate.

Rest therefore thy self content with that estate God has set thee in, that
is best for thee, if thou be a child of God, and it is not Gods order to
give thee his blessings to hurt thee with.

If I should see my child dissolutely affected to gaming, should I give him a
patrimony to dice away, or think it a kindness in me to nourish a vice in
him? If I had an ungracious brother, whose heart I should perceive so leagued
with some harlot, that he would lose his honesty, and spend his estate upon
her; should I not rather keep him honestly poor, then send him to perish with
my benefit, and make my purse his bane? What if he should weary me with
entreaty, and for the time think unnaturally of me, as foolish children that
have knives denied them, will cry; and a man in a burning fever, think much
when he is denied cold drink? Might he not think more hardly of me after,
when he comes to judge rightly, If I should have helped him then to have
destroyed himself? Exorari in perniciem rogantium saeua bonitas est. It is
unkind mercy to be entreated of any man to his undoing. And although this
benefit of God be something more obscure to the by-cause, thou see not thine
own future wickedness, yet it is no whit the less benefit in it self,
except thou think it a less benefit for a man sleeping to be saved from a
wild Beast, that would devour him in the dark, then it is to be so rescued
in the day, and when he now sees it, and is awake. Certainly God sees something
more then thou do, either for thy glory, or his own, or for the example of
others, why he denies thee riches, which if thou should enjoy, thou might
have cause after to complain of his goodness. For what a Heathen man in the
like case says of himself, and his Friend, may be more truly said of God,
and his children. Non committam vt possit quandoque dicere, Ille amando me
occidit. I will never give him cause to say one day of me, He killed me with
kindness.

But yet though I be poor, will thou say, why should a wicked man be rich? why
it may be (for ought we know) God may make him a good man before his death; as
he did Matthew and Zachaeus, the two rich Publicans, and great sinners; And will thou child with Gods Providence for giving him his temporal blessings, upon
whom he means to bestow his eternal: but if not: we know not whether by
riot, or mispence he may become poor before he die, and so God will punish his
sins with the loss of his goods.

But say he be not a rich man only, but a covetous man, and lives thriuingly
all his life, and dies in as great plenty as the most religious thriuer, why
should God suffer him to be rich by raking to himself other men's goods? Why
do not thou yet, being a Christian known that a covetous man, is the
poorest man alive. For must not he needs be poor, whom God himself does not
satisfy? do not envy him, he punishes himself with his riches sufficiently,
in thinking himself to be still and still in want. Yes, but we, thou will say
that judge rightly of him by his estate, think him all a rich man. I, but thou
do him the more wrong. For that which God makes his just punishment, his
riches, thou think to be his happiness, and Gods blessing upon him. Hear
not therefore what we or the world talk of him, but what the Wiseman, and the
Wisdom of God himself, speaks Eccles. 6. 1. for our judgment is many times
out of weakness, and the Worlds always out of opinion, but God judges ever
out of truth, and that when all men's shall fail, and heaven and earth must
pass away, shall, and must stand for ever. There is an evil which I have
seen under the Sun, and it is common among men. A man to whom God has given
riches, wealth, and honor, so that he wants nothing for his soul of all
that he desires, yet God gives him not power to eat thereof but a stranger
eats it. Does not God now most grieuosly punish this man with riches? were it
not a lamentable sight, and almost a cruel part of a Prince, if he should make
a covetous rich Miser spread a large Table for others, and should there make
him sit at it, till he were pined to death himself? This is the very state of
every covetous soul.

But indeed to say true. A covetous man that rauines and snatches at other men's
goods, is no more properly in Gods sight a rich man, then we would call him
that had stolen a great sum of money from another man, rich. We shall do him
no wrong if we call him a rich thief. For ye know we never reckon the goods
of thieves their own goods, because as soon as they are taken notice of,
their goods are all seized upon to the Kings use: And so many times as soon as
God sends out his pale Pursiuant to attach this covetous wretch, the goods
presently are disposed of all God will have them: some times it may be to his
honest heir, or perhaps to the destruction of such as inherit with his sin
his substance, as the rich Epuloes Brothers: but many times to the building of
Hospitals, or the erecting of Grammar Schools, or putting out of Prentises, or
redeeming of Prisoners, or founding of Colleges, or releeuing of maimed
Soldiers, or making of good ways, such as himself never walked in (or which
now is a rare point of piety) in doing some good to the Church of God, by
restoring to the right use, usurped and impropriate tithes, or buying them from
the dead hands they lie in, and laying them upon Gods Altar, that feeds not
under the Gospel any mortmaines, such as were the hands of the Roman Clergy;
but such as are more free, and active in the service of the Prince, and
Commonwealth, then any in the whole body politic of double their ability,
and strength. And truly the want of doing good in this one kind is the very
blush of our profession, most rich men never dreaming upon their deathbeds of
any such streine of piety, as being long dead in their minds to the Church,
before their dead bodies come to rest in it: Or releasing of captives, or
helping poor Ministers, or maintaining in the University poor Scholars, or
setting up in their honest Trade new beginners, or some other such good and
pious uses; and so they come all in conclusion to Gods Exchequer.

Leave then to slander the divine Providence of God in the dispensation of
these moueables (as we truly call them) by supposing them blessings to the
wicked, when in their needy superfluity, they want what they have, or when the
religious man is made better by their want, by thinking their want to him any
punishment at all. Be not envious with David, to see the ungodly man prosper a
while: but if Dives have a short and small portion in this life, as Abraham
tells him: let him have it; Alas! he has no other* Only wait thou upon the
Lord, and verily thou shall have enough.

Having now endeavored to heal the lame hands of such as are shrunk up and
withered with idleness and sloth, as our Savior himself when he came into
the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and found there one with a withered arm,
begun his Sabbath days work with making him stretch it out like the other:
because it is an ill sight to see one in the Church of God and in his Vineyard
stand idle, either in doing nothing or doing naught: Let us go on to the
following observation which is.

VI. That as God will have his children (though never so religious and rich,)
use the means as well as others to obtain his blessing; so that husbandry
has always been an ancient and honorable means of life.
I Know it is an usual quarrel with such persons whose ignorance and
profaneness are quarrel, to fall out with Gods Justice, because it has not
made them so rich as other men, and because they suppose al their happiness
both in this life, and in the other is already so predisposed of by God, that
there is nothing left for them to do, either for enriching themselves here with
the great me^ of the world; or hereafter for gloryfying themselves with the
felicity of Gods Saints in heaven. If God please to enrich them, he can do it
they say without their labor, as he did Job in the evening of his day: And
if he have ordained them to poverty, all their labor they say can never
enrich them, though they rise early, and go to bed late, and eat the bread of
carfulness. For except God build the house, the labor of the workman is but
in vain. Psalm. 127.

Again, if they shall be saved, let them live how they will, they know God
will save them, but if he means not to have them, all the means they can use,
they think but idle, and so they lie down in the secret decree of God which
being imbrested in Gods own bosom thoughts, they cannot possibly diue into;
and never look to the execution of Gods decree, which they may find in the
use of the means and in themselves, if by them the means be wisely applied,
and faithfully practiced.

This argument was very ancient, and first invented by heathen men, who thought
all things ruled by a fatal and stoicall necessity, which was wholly
unalterable, and never to be changed by any contrary endeavors, or by living
never so religiously and well. Which reason the wiser sort of men did
ordinarily style (...) the idle reason. And thus as when they are idle they
would have God do them good, so when they are evil they would have God bear
the^ harmless by making himself some cause him some cause of their sin.

Thus the Grecian harlot cast her adultery upon Venus and Jupiter in Euripides,
but was well schooled for it presently by Hecuba, in these words -- (...)
(...) etc.
Never honor your adultery so much, as to make the Gods the simple fathers of
it: no, no; my son Paris was the only Jupiter, and your own inflamed mind
the Venus that brought you to this shame, and us to this misety. Neither did
simple women only, but the wisest of the heathen Governors load their Gods
with their proper crimes: -- (...),
(...)
Says great Agamemnon, alas! It was not he that did them injury.
But Jove and Fate, and the night Fury.


But Jupiters answer is recorded by the same Poet: (...)
(...),
Men say their faults are ours when their own wills
Beyond their fate, are authors of their ills.
But how God in the co^production of an action, that is evil; for the evil in
it does no way casually concur, or by way of efficiency: but only by way of
directing, ordering, and limiting the prauitie of it: so that the most wicked
is beholding to God (whom he foolishly indicts as guilty, for limiting his
sin, and so lessening his punishment is a discourse something straggling from
our purpose, who are to enquire the means how to obtain his benefits by our
labor, and not the manner how he works in us, when we use his benefits
against himself, and by his goodness make our selves the more evil.

Let us know then that the wisdom of GOD does not bring in the end without
the appointed means, he has fore-determined. If the Decree of God have
measured thee out a fair portion in this life, he has set out means whereby
thou shall attain this inheritance, either by thy kindred, and so he blessed
Isaac; or by thy labor, and so he blessed Jacob; or by thy service and the
favor of great persons, and so he blessed Joseph; or by thy learning and his
blessing of thy studies, and so he honored Daniel. God ordinarily never
breaks off the end from the means, and therefore if thou think GOD will
bring about the end, though thou never use the means to attain it, thou
deceiuest thy self. For God, as in his goodness he ordaines the end, so in
his wisdom he appoints the means to bring the end to pass. Reason not
therefore so simply as to say; Whom God will enrich, though he be never so
careless, wealth shall be cast upon him; for that is a most inconsequent
speech, and savors too much of the idle Proverb, Give a man luck and cast
him into the Sea: but if thou would reason rightly, say; Whom God will
enrich, he will make him careful to use the means, whereby he may be
enriched. For, although sometime the means may be used without atchieuing the
end, God, it may be, for the punishment of the wicked, or the trial of his
children, making the means in-effectuall: yet the end cannot be attained
without the appointed means, it being a certain Rule both in Nature and
Religion. Deus and Natura non faciunt saltum. God and Nature make no Leapes:
they leap not from the beginning to the end, but by middle, and so so pass to
the end.

We may euidepce this truth by diverse Scriptures. See it first in our heavenly
inheritance* Romans 8. 29. Whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate; and
whom he did predestinate, them also he called; and whom he called, them he
also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified. And Romans 10. the
14. How then shall they call upon him, says the Apostle, on whom they have not
believed, and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? and
how shall they hear without a Preacher? and how shall they preach except they
be sent? So then before thou can be purpled in glory by the blood royal of
our dear Lord, thou must go through all these means, correquisit for thy
salvation.

Indeed Gods love is the beginning, and thy glory is the last end, the love of
God will bring thee to: but there be many means between the beginning and the
end, his love and thy glory. First, Gods love elects thee to be justified, and
to work thy justification he calls thee, and that thou may be called, he
infuses into thy heart faith in Christ, and that thou might believe, he
causes thee to hear the word, that thou might hear, his Prophets must
preach it to thee, before they can preach, they must be sent: So that in
brief, The Minister is sent to preach, he preaches that thou may hear, thou
hear, that thou might be called, thou art called to believe in Christ,
thou beleeuest that thou may be justified, being justified, thou art sure of
thy Crown of Glory, and this glory the love of God by all these means sets
as it were upon thy head. Between therefore our glory which is the end, and
Gods love which is the beginning and cause of it, many interiacent means, you
see, are cast between.

And shall God himself, that he may bestow upon us the exceeding riches of his
glory, go through so many means with us, and shall we think to grow rich
hereby doing nothing, without any means at all? Nay certainly, as Christ
would have the treasures of heaven, which he purchased for us, cost himself so
much labor; being excruciated with so many dolorous agonies, and such a bloody
sweat as to any other Creature in Heaven or Earth had been impossible to have
waded thorough: so he would have us purchase our temporal riches with our
personal labor.

No man is so simple as to think he shall make a good voyage, and have his
vessel return well fraughted, if he never set out at all any ship to Sea: no
man looks for a harvest that sowes no seed: none that keeps not a flock, or
plants not a Vine, to grow rich by his vintage, or to increase by his Lamb and
Wool. What is the Reason? Is it not because he knows the means that brings
about the end, and if one be awanting, the other cannot without folly be
expected. Why then should we not be as wise in all things, as we are in some? or
why should our folly look for Gods benefits, without the means used, when
Gods wisdom has appointed us only the use of the means to obtain his
benefits by? If there-therefore thou neither ask Gods blessing by prayer, nor
art laborious and diligent to make way for it by thy industry, nor waitest upon
his providence, and use thy own to obtain it, nor do by Faith receive
them as the goods of God, nor can retain by sobriety and temperance what
thou have received; never look that Gods blessing as long as thou sleep away
the seed-time of thy youth in sluggish and ungodly idleness, should bring thee
forth a harvest of his benefits in thine age: but expect, because thou do not
know that it is He that gives thee Corn and Wine, and Oil, and multiplies
thy Silver and Gold; but with the grosse-hearted Israelites offerest sacrifice
to thy Yearne, or committest adultery with thy ground, and so think the
fruit of her Womb the cause of thy wealth, or kissest thine own hand, or
applaudest thine own wisdom, as the Wise Stewards, or rather sole Lords of
all the goods, that God will return and take away thy corn in the time
thereof, and thy wine in the season thereof, and will recover his Wool, and
his Flax given to cover thy nakedness, as he said he would do, and did to
the ungrateful Israelites, Hos. 2. 8. 9. So for thy future estate, which I
mention only by way of digression, know assuredly,

VII. God never bestows upon any the rest of glory, that takes no pains to
make it sure to himself by the means of Grace.
Never let any use that idle sophistry against his own soul, as to say; I
know what God has appointed shall be done. If he will save me, he will give
me grace to use the means: if not, all my labor is but in vain. For all be
this Reason for the substance of it, in it self, be true, yet in regard of him
it is both idle and preposterous. It is idle, because the very dissolute manner
of such as thus reason, proves them altogether unholy and profane; such as
would feign put God to all the labor of saving them, whether they would or no,
without any consequent labor of their own. And if God will not take so much
pains with them, as in spite of their own idle dispositions, to work out all
their salvation, himself, then it secretly accuses him as a cause of their
perishing, when indeed it is their idleness, which will not undergo the
labor of living well, that makes them unfit, and in-disposed to receive grace,
and their own wicked and ill life, which is the cause of their eternal
punishment and death.

It becomes not us therefore to look first to Gods secret will (like the
ouer-curious inhabitants of Bethshemesh, whose irreuerent boldness God
punished with the slaughter of 50070. men, 1 Samuel 6. 19.) and so to our
punishment. For both these are yet hidden from our eyes; and then to Gods
grace, which is the means of our salvation, and our own vicious and impenitent
courses which are the means of our perishing. For this is preposterous; and by
the wicked figure of (...) confou^ds the sight of our understanding: but if we
would deal wisely with our souls, we must look to see that which is secret,
by that which is revealed, and that which is hid, by that which is manifest:
Now the Grace of God, if it be in us, reueales and manifests it self. -- Quis
enim celauerat ignem
Lumine qui se^per prodigitur ipse suo!
And our own desperate and impenitent life is known to our selves and others
sufficiently. If the Sun be risen, we shall find him sooner by his beams
upon the tops of the Mountains, then in the Orient of Heaven it self; and so
the Love of God is sooner discovered to rise in thy heart by the beams of
Grace it there shows abroad, then by the flame of it self that shines in his
own breast in Heaven. If then Grace imbrighten thy heart, thou may from
Grace assure thy self of Gods love, and thine own glory: but if thou find
in thy self an impenitent and incorrigible heart, thou may then justly work
upon thy self a sense of thy misery: I dare not say thou art sure of GODS
wrath, but I must say, except thou repent, and God change thy heart, thou art
yet in a fearful and lost estate; say not therefore thus. God has cast me
out from his favor, therefore my heart is obdurate, impenitent, incorrigible.
For this is to argue from that thou know not; whether God favors thee or
no: but thus rather. My heart is obdurate, impenitent, incorrigible, therefore
if I so continue, God will surely cast me out from his favor and presence.
And this thou may securely do, because thine own conscience is both a
witness and a judge of thy life, whether it be impenitent or not: Again, never
argue thus; God will save me, therefore I shall be sure to use the means;
for that is to dispute, ab ignoto: For who knows the will of God? but thus
rather I will be sure to use the means, therefore I am sure God will save
me, and this is to dispute (...) from things known. For who knows not
whether he use the means God has appointed him in his word to work out his
salvation by? which that thou may be sure of, he has given thee his
promise, his word, his oath, (Heb. 6. 17. 18.) his writings by his Secretaries
the Prophets, which are the conueyances of thy heavenly inheritance; he has
signed the^ with two indeleble seals imprinted into thy flesh by baptism, and
into his own by his Passion and death, the appointed infallible witnesses to
testify his deed. His spirit and thine own, thy faith and thy love (Romans 8.
16. 1 John. 3. 14. and 1 John 5. 10.) so that although thou be now on earth,
yet when thou have thy evidence for heaven so surely made over to thee, thou
can not but be most secure and sure of thy right and title, if thou have
once received them, and still keep them in thine heart, being regenerate and
borne anew. Use therefore the means GOD has appointed thee, and then attend
assuredly his promised blessing. For all such promises of GOD have some
condition or other always either implied, or expressed. If thou labor, God will
prosper thee, if thou use the right means God appoints, he will enrich thee;
only the difference between the conditions of spiritual and temporal
blessings is, that he has given many wicked men* power in themselves to
perform the condition required for these vnder-benefits, but the conditions of
glory, which are the graces of Repentance; Faith and Love he reserues in his
own power, to bestow upon whom only it pleases him: being not the Steward of
other men's goods, as Man is, but the Lord of his own. Sow therefore the seeds
of Labor, and of Grace in thy Youth, and look for a harvest in thine age of
sufficiency and glory.

But to return to the labor which Isaac employed his time in, which was
Sowing the ground, we may from thence learn, that

VIII. Husbandry has been an ancient and honorable means of life.
LET not good husbandry sowing the ground, and pasturage of cattle be counted
an abject and reproachful course of life, which has always been so ancient
and honorable a means to keep life in the world. It is true indeed, Man in the
nobility of his birth was not borne at first to this serviceable attendance
upon the earth: for both the heathen people had this tradition among them as
the Poet sings: -- nec non vllis Saucia vomeribus per se dabat omnia tellus:
And the word of God tells us as much in the first of Genesis, that the earth of
it self brought forth every seed after her kind, without the labor and
industry of man, and till for our sin it was accursed by God still continued
to be selfe-fertill and to feed her children without their labor. Man's
special vocation then being the study of the creatures, wherein he might
behold, as in so many small mirrours, the wisdom and power, and glory, and
goodness of God, which kind of divine meditations David's Psalms are every
where sweetly tuning to his Harp, as in the 104. and 19 Psalms etc. We were
all borne in our innocence students of divinity. That was the first vocation
of our humane nature, but the next was husbandry. For so the first borne child
of the nature, the strength, and heir of the world, that was a Ruler over his
brethren (as God himself calls him. Genesis 4. 7.) was a manner of the earth, and
his brother Abel a shepherd to feed his flocks.

Neither did the world many thousand years after shake off this honorable
simplicity of life. If we look into the 13. and 8. of Genesis, we shall
there find Abraham a great heardsman, to live after that fashion of life,
although his house were more like a Court then a Family, having 318. trained
servants, all men of arms to attend him, (Genesis 14. 14.) and being in the
estimation of those among whom he dwelt a great Lord, and mighty Prince, Genes.
23. 6. Not long after, Job (an Ismaelit as some of the Ancient think, but as
others with more ground of Scripture. 1. Chro. 1. Genesis 25. one of his seed by
Keturah) succeeded him both in the manner of his life, and in the dignity of
his estate: nor was it a miracle to see rich men's daughters (unacquainted with
new tires, and most fashionable dresses) busy themselves in laborious (and not
curious needle) work but it was ordinary in that old world to meet young and
beautiful Rahel tending her fathers sheep, and watering the flock, and
Rebecca with a pitcher upon her shoulder, drawing water both for her own use,
and to water the Camels of Abraham's servant, an office that our nice virgins,
who dress up themselves like so many gay silke-worms would think scorn of:
and in the second of Exodus, the 16. and 17. verses, we shall find in the
field seven daughters of the Prince of Midian filling the troughs to water
their fathers flocks, whereof Zippora, Moses wife was one. It was the answer
of the Patriarckes to Pharaoh (Genesis the 47. Thy servants are shepherds both
we, and all our fathers. Where we may see that Pharaoh himself had his herds
and flocks of cattle to feed abroad in his own crown lands, and royal
inheritance. And among the Princes of Israel was not Gedeon taken from the
threshing floor Judge. 6. 11. Moses and David from the Ewes great with young to
feed Israel Gods people, and Jacob his inheritance (Exodus 3. and 1. Sam. 16.
11.) may we not meet Saul after he was anointed king over Israel following
his Oxen. 1. Sam. 11. 5 and therefore the ancient phrase of the world, for
kings was the shepherds of people; so Homer usually styles Agamemnon, (...),
and nothing is more frequent in the stories of elder times, then to see the
greatest Princes of the world taken with Cincinnattus and C. Fabricius and
Curious Dentatus as they were following the plow to be the Consuls and
Dictators of Rome, which was then the Queen of Nations, and the Lady of the
world. And this not so much the necessity of their estates drove them, as the
honesty, delight, and natural sweetness of these country and fieldlabours woed
them unto. And therefore old Cato, after he had out of his censorious gravity
well rated, and scolded withal other pleasures, as the lascivious Mistress of
lewd youth, and the only harlots of the whole world, cannot in conclusion
dissemble his love to this same country Galatea (as Virgil calls this
field-life) but as soon as he begins to speak of it, Redeamus in gratiam cum
voluptate, says the rough Censour of the world, Let us be friends again with
pleasure; as confessing it to be, not so much a clownish labor, as the most
natural, and therefore lawful delight allowed a wise man. And therefore in
the youthful flourish of Rome we shall find it observed by Columella, that
their faires which the Romans call Nundinae (quasi nono die habitae) were kept
once only in nine days, because they would not leave their country houses to
be drawn into the idle troubles of the city more then needs must, and if
they were by exigence called to the Senate house for their advise, they had
public officers, whom they called Viatores, their country posts attending
such occasions: and when they gave any man extraordinary commendation, ita
laudabant (says the first Latin writer de re rustica) Bonum agricolam,
bonumque colonum, as for the general Trade (some fewer then, but now so many
deal with) of usury, the Roman Law was, says the same Cato, Furem dupli
condemnari, foeneratorem quadrupli, and with good reason is this Art of getting
by our money, not by our labor inueighed against of all such as commend
husbandry, as most unnatural husbandry, and contrary to the life they write of
being, as M. Varro speaks of it, most hated of those, who are beholding to it:
but for the certainty of gain, and the piety of the getter, and the safety
and health of him that uses it, and the apting the bodies of men military
services in the defense of the commonwealth those have euerbin accounted most
happy, says the same Author, Qui in eo studio, occupati sunt. By all which
it sufficiently appears that husbandry has bin both an ancient and honorable
means of life, before pride and the fashion began to be virtues of so
special request in the world, as they are now thought: and that all be in the
glory of Nature before sin had hlemisht the world, we were by creation all
divines and Priests of God, not to offer bloody sacrifices, but of praise and
obedience, (which should make us think honorably of that calling, which we
were al born to, except we would cast dirt in the face of our innocent nature)
yet presently after the soil of our sin had struck barennes into the womb of
our mother, and her breasts were dried up that suckled us, husbandry succeeded
to be the next vocation. The first call was of the mind: the second of the
body: the first of heaven, the second of the earth: the first to the glory of
God; the second for the necessity of man: and yet I think both of them may
make the same complaint for themselves, which Iunius, Moderatus Columela, does
for them, Sola res rustica quae sine dubitatione, proxima, and quasi
co^sanguinea sapientia est, tam discentibus egeat quam ma gistris. Only the
Art of husbandry, which doubtless is next and nearest a kin to wisdom,
wants both scholars and teachers, meeting very seldom with such religious
votaries toward them as the Prince of the Latin Poets was, who in his
Georgicks, or poetical Husbandry, breaks out into this godly wish. Me vero
primum dulces ante omnia Musae
(Quaru^ sacra fero ingenti percislsus amore)
Accipiant, caelique vias and sidera monstrent:
Sin has non possim Naturae accedere parts, etc.
Rura mihi, and rigui placeant in vallibus amnes.
Flumina amen, syluasque inglorias.
No, first of all O let the Muses wings
Whose sacred fo^ntaine in my bosom springs,
Receive, and landing me above the stars,
Show me the ways of heaven: but if the bars
Of unkind Nature stop so high a flight,
The Woods and Fields shall be my next delight.


Thus were the opinions of the old world, but it is a world to see now the
prodigious change of Nature, when not only most men count Husbandry a base
and sordid business, unfit to soil their hands with: but some, who thinks
his breast tempered of siner clay then ours of the vulgar sort, call such as
have spent their times in the studies of Divinity, no better then rixosum
disputatorum genus quorum vix in coquendis oleribus consilium admittit. It is
the speech of one Bartaeus, a Germane disclaimer, who was better borne the^
taught, and more eloquent then learned, against the Divines of his Country,
too busily wrangling as he thought, about the Paradoxes of Arminius, who I
fear will change, if not his false opinion of the cause, yet his profane
censure of the men, nisi ipse forte inter olera sit, quae in inferno sint
conquenda. Before our bodies were only instruments to serve our souls, and we
delighted our selves in the study of heavenly and divine knowledge; now our
souls drudges only upon the bodies service, runs only upon the fleshes
errands, neither is any thing more wearisom to it self, or more out of credit
in the world, then a soul walking and climbing up the holy mountains, from
whence comes our salvation, til it be out of breath after the knowledge of
heavenly things: before our labor for the body was soon dispatched, when we
all went naked, and the ground seeded it self, and brought forth a voluntary
harvest to feed us: but now all our labor is for food and clothing (as the
wise man tells us in his Proverbs) our nakedness was then our glory, it is
now our shame: it was a curse to till the earth then, it is now a blessing to
have earth to till: so that we have learnt to turn by the corruption of our
nature, our apparel that should cover our shame, to proclaim our pride: and
our Lands that should feed us by our labor, to the food of our luxury: In a
word, Religion was once the Lord of our Reason, and our Reason the directer of
our understanding, and our understanding the guider of our will, and our wills
the co^manders of our affections, and the affections (which the Philosopher
calls material reasons, because by them the soul rules our body) the
governors of our bodies, and our bodies the controllers of our desires and
lusts: but now Lust has snatched the reins into his own blind government,
and mad with Iehu, drives on the body, and the body the affections, and they
the will, and that the understanding to all unreasonable and irreligious
excesses: so that poor Reason carried headlong to the ruin of it self, sits
like a Waggoner, or rather like unhappy Hupolitus without his reins, and is
hurried by his wild horses whither soever they please: -- and frustra
retinacula tendens
Fertur equis auriga, nee audit currus habenas.


And from this disorder of man's nature comes it to pass, that in the yearly
fruits of the earth which wicked men reap, all the pains of Nature serve them
only to maintain the pleasures of their lust, who are always either misdoing,
or doing naught. Let us leave therefore the Commendation of Husbandry, and end
with*

IX. A just reprehension of ill husbands, who either straggle out of their own
Callings, or have unlawful, unprofitable, or no Callings at all.
IF therefore thou would call down Gods rich blessing upon thy estate, rest
thy self in that vocation God has set thee (as a Soldier maintains the
station his General places him in) and breaks not over the hedges, either to
idle courses or other folks business. When God meant to enrich Jacob, he made
him vigilant and laborious: when he meant to honor Daniel, he made him studious
and wise: when he purposed to crown David, he sowed in his Youth the seeds
of Religion, and Valor. God has always set the right means before the end:
do not thou therefore grudge and repine against God, and set up sails to
carry thee to some other coast then GOD has appointed. Delight not thy self
in planetary motions, but move constantly in thine sphere. It is indeed the
nature of al men to think other men's lives more happy then their own, Optat
ephippia Bos piger, optat ar ace Caballus.
Feign would the Ox the horses trappins wear;
And feign the Horse the Oxes yoke would bear.
The Country man admires the bravery of the Court, and the Courtier the
content of the Country. But take heed of this leuity of mind, go thou
always on in the known road God has set thee, otherwise though thou strive
never so much and (with the two lowing Heyfers that carried the Arc, 1. Sam.
6.) go on complaining vnchearfully in the way of thy calling, if thou
bear Gods Covenant with thee, God will carry thee thither, and thou shall
endure much misery by the way.

Jonas, we know was sent by God to Niniue, but he, because he knew God was
merciful, and feared more his own shame in being counted a false Prophet,
then favored Gods honor in sparing the Ninevites, when he should have gone
to Niniue, set up his sails for Tarshish, thinking most foolishly to fly him
that was every where; but God had soon sent his winds after him, to drive him
thither, whither he denied to go, and when they were not strong enough, but
he chose rather to lose his life, then to be thought, though for Gods honor,
a false Prophet, and would needs be cast into the Sea from his obedience to
God, GOD had provided a strong pursuiuant to waft him thither with incredible
speed, and to land him, whether he would or no, upon the shoares he fled from.
The Prophet thought he had been in the belly of hell, as he speaks of
himself in the 2. and 2. of his Prophecy, when he lay stewing in the stomach
of the Fish, and sailing under water to the coast God had sent him. Follow
therefore thou the vocation God has set thee in.

Only take heed that it be a lawful, profitable, and honest Calling. For some
there are, like the smoothe-tongued Parasite in the Comedy, that get their
living by flattering and lying lips, that traffic with their tungs for their
belly in spending their whole lives to find out merry tales and Beyond Sea
news to feed his ears that feeds them; and these with their Attique dialects
do so fleeke and smooth him up they live upon, that they make the rich fool
half besides himself with an opinion of his singular goodness, and rare
virtue; and so continue to blanch his foul life spent in riot and gaming, and
prodigious luxury, till they have made him as poor in his estate at length, as
before he was proud in his expense, and such harlotrie the young prodigal in
the Gospel met with; but such callings are neither lawful for him that lives
by the^, nor profitable for him that is fed upon, nor honest before God or men.
And therefore these voces ad placitum, that were all borne in the Family of
Gnatho must take heed lest their merry laughing and lying trade of flattery,
though it were always quaestus multo vberimus, since the beginning of the
world, when Pride first infected our souls to these later times wherein it is
prophesied, that men should be more then ordinary lovers of thmselues, and
proud, and boasters, be not only in conclusion punished with Seuerus his
smoke, that stifled a Flatterer to death with this derisory motto, Fumo
perijt, qui fumos ve^didit, but with Gods fire to, which will reward it with
the same fire it was kindled with, James 3. 6. Others spend their lives in
Callings ciuilly lawful, but such as are neither profitable for the
Commonwealth, nor before God just and honest. Such was the Trade of Demetrius
the Siluer-Smith, in the 19. of the Acts that made silver shrines for the
worship of the goddess Diana, that is, Little temples of silver, in which the
image of Diana sat, as it did in the great Temple: and such are all those
curious and puppet-dressing trades that serve for nothing else but young
Ladies, and Gallants to dress and pride themselves up in the superfluous
vanity of ouer-rich and fashionable apparel, fit indeed for the corruption of
the time, but unfit for uncorrupted persons; contrary to the Apostolical
Canon, 1. Tim. 2. 9. and the will of God, Zephany 1. 8. And among the crowde of
this rank, we may thrust in our idle Pamphleters, and loose Poets, no better
then the Priests of Venus, with the rabble of Stage Players and Balleters, and
circumferaneous Fiddlers and Brokers: all which, if they were clean taken out
of the world, there would be little miss of them.

Others bestow their time in Legal, and Callings useful to the Commonwealth,
but as they abuse them, neither honest, nor justifiable before God. Such are
our Tap-houses, and Gaming Innes, I mean not harboring and viatory Innes,
which questionless, in fit places, and where Justice is near at hand, if
rightly used, are not only lawful and profitable, but necessary and honest:
for to lodge weary Travelers, as Rahab did the Spies of Israel, or to let the
poor laboring man to have just allowance of bread and drink for his money
can be accounted no other then necessary relief: but for our Tippling Innes in
small and vntract Hamlets, without which our Country-Diuels of drunkenesse,
Blasphemy, Gaming, Lying, and Queaning, could amongst us find no harbor
(though perhaps in places of more resort they have credit enough to be
entertained in fairer lodgings) they are either the Devils unclean Warehouses
for his spiritual wickednesses to trade in; or in our plain world he has no
traffic at all.

The last sort of offenders against the virtue of honest Labor, are our
Out-of-Calling Gentlemen, who in husbanding their Lands, and ouerseeing their
servants, and governing their families, and in relieuing, aduising and quieting
their neighbors, and in giving good and religious examples themselves, may
find employment enough for Gods many talents, he has trusted them with. But
they, never thinking why they came into the world, when they should warm their
bodies with wholesome labor, take thought only how they shall boil them in
unclean lusts: when they should wash them with the sweat of some honest
Calling, they with vnwash'd and durty affections, swinishly wallow themselves
in unchaste and intemperate vices; making their Lands, given them to set them
a-work, the maintainers of their idleness; and their bodies, as Seneca speaks
of them, Cribra tantum Ciboru^ and po^uum: S^^es only to strain meats and
drinks thorough, and their servants, for want of skill, to command them, Lords
to dispose all their Lands as they please themselves. Such the Roman
Commonwealth was full of, in the declining periods of it, as all the stories
tell us: such the pride of Israel nourished just before the captivity of the
ten Tribes; Amos the 6. the 4. 5. and 6. verses; such the kingdom of Judah
unhappily swarmed with, immediately before Jerusalem was set down weeping by
the waters of Babylon, Ierem. 5. the 7. 8. Such always the body of every
Commonwealth (like ill-humours) is surcharged with (for the Divine patience
commonly waits for his size, till sin has filled up her measure) before he
gives it a purge, either by water, as when he baptized the whole world from
their lascivious running after strange flesh, or by fire, as when he sent hell
out of heaven against Sodom and Gomorrha: or before he lets out the inflamed
blood to quench the malignant heat of it, as we see in the Tribe of Benjamin,
Judge. 20. and after in both the Lands of Israel and Judah, in the forementioned
Prophets.

A rugged fellow and unmannerly would our Gallants, I dare say, think him, that
with the angry Roman writing in commendation of these country labors, should
chide them as he does, to their work, and vpbraiding their luxurious pains to
wait upon sin, after the vomit of much indignation, tell them, that they
would when they had sucked out all health and vital sap from their languish'd
bodies, bring themselves to that pass, vt in ijs nihil, mors mutatura
videatur: That they had need to be embalmed as well before, as after their
deaths: or should with the Taske-masters of Pharaoh say to them as they did to
straggling Israel, coasting about to gather straw and stubble for their Egyptian
works: Ye are idle, idle are ye, go now therefore and work, Exodus 5. 17.
Indeed they would think he knew good fashion, and civil carriage, that would
advise them to travel with the Prodigal into some far Country, there to
spend riotously all their goods upon Harlots, Luke 15. 13. or if he would
counsel them to live in the City, and frequent Maskes and Tauernes, and
Theaters; or if he encouraged them to the sports of hawking and hunting, and if
the weather were churlish and lowering, to carding and dicing; or if he would
wish them to follow the Court in the delights and reuells of it, not in the
honorable service and studies of one that means to fit himself for worthy
employments and actions, whether in War or Peace. But thou (O man of God)
fly these things, and in thy Christian Calling follow after righteousness and
holiness, in thy particular vocation exercise thy self in such things as may
be not only lawful in the Commonwealth, wherein thou live, but profitable
both to thy self and others, and especially in the sight of God, and his
Church, just and honest; so that thou may (as it becomes a Noble Christian)
both reprove with thy contrary practice the rich and honorable lasiness which
such Lords of Idleness (that keep their Christmasse all the year) count the
privilege of their gentilitie, and delight thy self with Isaac to sow the
seeds of thine own labor, for the obtaining of Gods blessings. And the God of
Peace, if thou water the ground with thine own sweat, shall bless thy labors
here a hundred fold, and hereafter shall end thy labors in Rest Eternal.

Amen.
ACTS 10. 43. To him give all the Prophets witness.
I. The wisest of the heathen, and all creatures are good witnesses.
WHen the heavens and the earth are so far distant a sunder, who would ever
suppose al things on earth should draw to themselves a vital efficacy, and
heavenly fertility from those (as the Scripture calls them) kind influences, so
far sent, except the whole world were campus dicendi, a large field, wherein
every plant with so many sweet flowers of natural eloquence lessoned our
reason by sense, and experience to believe it; upon the departure of whose
Summer beams, all the fruit again, and comely flowishes of earthly profit,
and pleasure, in re-interring themselves eftsoons faint, and die away. But
this Annual resurrection of Nature we, therefore see in this world which we
should never otherwise have believed, that we might believe that which in this
world we shall never see: that God is to receive us, what heaven is to earth.
For though he say of himself, Esaias, 55. the 9. As the heavens are higher then
the earth, so are my thoghts higher then your thoughts. Yet it pleases him to
descend from that height, in the 57. and 13. of the same Prophecy. Thus says
the High and lofty One that inhabits eternity. I dwell in the high and holy
Place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the
spirit of the co^trite ones. Earth has no power to move upwards, it is beyond
the sphere of her actiuitie: Heaven therefore virtually descends: man has no
power so much as to send a good thought up to God: God therefore bows the
heavens, and comes down in two special beams, one of his goodness which
shines every where in his works, and is therefore called by the Apostle, (...)
That which may be known of God; the other of his Truth, which is most eradiant
in his word, and is therefore called by our Savior the light of the world.

Now so diffusiue is God of his goodness, and graciously as it were prodigal
of his image, although in it self it can be seen in no place, yet he would
have no place, where it should not be seen in his works, which are all weak
shadows of some bright excellency, that is substantially resplendent in
himself. For as the noone-Sunne, which then makes all things most easily
seen, can then least of all be seen it self; and yet lights up innumerable
stars in the night season; wherein, as in so many little sparkles of it self,
it is visibly, though absent, presented to us: so our understanding in this
midnight of things, may see the spiritual Sun of our souls shedding some
small starrelight of himself in every one of his little images his works, whose
vnapprocheable light in it self whosoever should hope to attain unto, should
certainly never attain unto his hope.

Thus in his works the wisest of the heathen beheld, and admired, the
goodness, and glory, and power of God. The Heavens declare the glory of God,
says David, Coelum homini praebet spectaculum says Tully. The earth is
satisfied with the fruit of thy works, says David. Terra foeta frugibus
eidem fundit nutrimentum says Tully. Thou have set all things under his feet,
all sheep and oxen, yea and the beasts of the field says David: Bestiae ipsae
hominum causa sunt generatae says Tully. He opened the windows of heaven, and
raind down Manna the flower of heaven, and bread of Angels, and feathered
fowls, like the sand of the Sea, says David, so that well might the Orator
conclude. Neque necessitatibus tantummodo nostris prouisum est, vsque in
delicias amamur.

It were ambitious but to name the speeches of heathen Plato, Xenophon,
Plutarch, and the rest in this Argument, whose mouths tasting, their tongues
could not but be singing of this rank and commendable luxury of Nature,
which God with his open hand has powered out every where in his works.
Wherein Justin Martyr, and diverse of the fathers within the first four
centuries have so thoroughly sweated their studious thoughts, and as it is said
of Caesar, stirred up a desire in all, but taken away all hope of commendation
from any that should write after them: I will only add to theirs the religious
song of Epictetus, whose lampe-shell, whereby he studied was sold after his
death (such estimation was there of the worth not of the thing, but of the
man) for above 100. Sest^rties, who after he had began many a sentence with
(...), great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised; he shuts up his song in
these words. If I were a Nightingall (says he) I would sing to the honor of
my Maker as a Nightingall does; and how is that? Siquis adest auditor (says
Pliny) Lusciniae prius animus, quam cantus deficiet. The Nightingall, if any
will give him the hearing, will sing himself sooner out of breath, then out of
tunes; But now I am reasonable man, I will sing praises to God with
understanding, never cease to praise him, and I would to God (says he) all
men would do as I.

But these Sermons which the Creatures preach out of the great book of Gods
works, though they have wide mouths, and loud voices, and Stentorian like
will be hard through the whole Host of heaven; yet they can but show us the
outside of Gods Temple, and bring us to the Porch door; here they meet with
their Hercules pillars, the great veil of heaven, through which our Savior is
entered into the Holy of Holies, keeps them out. They bring God to us, but they
cannot bring us to God, they tell us the true God is to be worshipped but how
to worship him truly they cannot tell. Besides this natural divinity taught
by the creature, if it be seioygnd from the word had, as S. Paul tells us it
has a certain windy and puffing nature in it, to swell and bladder up the
soul of the wisest heathen, with a kind of Satanical pride, and
selfe-worthinesse. As knowing thereby al things to be made for them, and
themselves only for God; and so thinking themselves as it were vulgus deorum,
semi-gods in comparison both of their Creatures, I and other men. But we (right
dearly beloved in our Lord and Savior) must have a feeling as well of our own
misery, as a knowledge of the Majesty of God, joining our wants to his
abundance, and to his goodness our evil. Not like the Heathen of all, whom
we may say as Eunapius did of Oribasius, (...), They were Larks indeed, and
with ^pictetus, sung sweetly to Heaven: but they were crested Larks, and
thought too highly of themselves: believing God to be, but not knowing what,
confessing he should be worshipped, but not knowing how. And therefore the
Lady of all their Sciences Athens, when she built God an Altar, sacrificed all
her offerings upon it only (...), to the unknown God. But what says our
Savior to this woman of Samaria, that never came up to Jerusalem to learn
how to worship. Ye worship ye know not what, we know what we worship. And
though, Bias when a Profane Ruffian asked him what was Religion, held his
peace; and being quarrelled with by him to know the cause, answered out of his
angry wit, Because he asked about a matter he had nothing to do with: yet
let us assure our selves, that Religion so nearly touches us all, that we
must not only know what we worship, as our Savior says, but as his Apostle
tells us, be able and ready to give a reason of our faith, why we thus worship
GOD: which that we may do, there is correquisite to the loud voice of Gods
works, the soft voice of Gods word.

For as we can no way know the mind of another man, except it first open it
self, because it is manifest, as Solons Proverb goes, (...), words are the
only pictures of thoughts: so much less can any man ascend up to the mind of
God, except he climb to it by his word, which it therefore stands with Gods
honor to reveal; because he is no less gracious then just, and his Justice
exacting of us the duty of Worship, his Grace will not but give us a
possibility to know how to perform our duties. And thus far the whole world
of understanding men have gone, the very Heathen themselves. But in this
question lies all the sweat of religious quarrels.

II. How we should infallibly find out the true Word of God, which may lead
us to the knowledge of him, our selves, and our supreme happiness.
Here the way breaks into four paths in the search of this perfect witness
of God, his Word and Truth. In the first and broadest walks, the heathen
Idolator. For divide the World into thirty parts, and he takes up (as is
observed by a judicious Mathematician) ninteen of them: but we must understand
his Observation of the continued magnitude of the surface of the earth, not of
the discreet multitude of men contained in it. In the next wide field of error
walks the Mahumetan, who dispreads himself into six parts of the thirty. In
the third, the straggling Jew wanders, who is discoasted into the bounds of all
the rest. And the Christian impaths himself in the last, and least, and
narrowest tract, holding but the proportion of five parts in the thirty parts.

The Heathen anciently mistook the Oracles of the Devil himself for the word
of God, and in a manner is blinded in that error to this very day, either by
the illusision of Satan himself, or the collusion of his Priests. The
Mahumetan embraces the Alcoron for the undoubted word of God, and esteems
that of Divine and oracular authority. The Jews retain still the ancient word
of God, but they al reject the New, and are therefore called by the Fathers
Archiua Christianorum, The old Records of the Christians being differenced
among themselves into three Sects; the first whereof are called Charraim, and
allow all, and only the old Testament. The second sew to the Bible all their
fabulous Talmud, and make that of Scripture-authoritie, and are therefore called
the Talmudists. The third defalke as much from Gods word, as the second crowded
to it, and leave only the Pentateuch, or five books of Moses for
selfe-credible, named by the rest Samaritans.

Neither can the little flock of Christ, the Catholic Church, now professant
in the world, go peaceably in their narrow path together, but with Abraham's
and Lots Heardsmen, or Jacobs brethren, they will wrangling and scolding as
they go: being dissundred into thirteen small, or five maine different sects.
Protestants, Latins, Gracians, Nestorians, Iacobites: whereof most of them
darken that word of God that should enlighten themselves, by carrying the Sun
in a clowd, and reading the Scripture in an unknown tongue, either of Latin,
Greek or Syriacke, and so traducing all the authority of Gods Word from it
self to the golden and empty Title, of The Church. As the Latins, Nestorians,
Indians, Iacobites, the Cophti, and the Mannites. Some of these again spanging
out of the Canon of the New Testament, all the Revelation of S. John, the
Epistle of S. Jude, the second Epistle of S. Peter, the second and third
Epistles of S. John: others farsing into the Canonical writings, Apocriphall
and unknown Authors, the Gospel of Nicodemus, etc. with a world of rotten and
unwritten Traditions. To omit the populous Churches at this day of the
Nestorians and Iacobites, who commit the like error concerning the Living word,
as they do about the written; the first dividing Christ into two Persons by a
separation; the second co^founding him into one Nature by the Adunation of his
Humanity, and divinity.

Now all these selfe-arrogating to themselves the word of God, either by
oracular Revelation, as the Heathen or written Tradition, as the Mahumetan,
Jew, and Christian, how in such a world of open War, and civil mutiny about
GODS Word, should blind souls (such as we all come into the World with) be
ever able to center themselves immoueably in the Divine Truth of God, and not
be carried about with some one wind or other of these erroneous doctrines?

Give me leave with the mighty Angel, that held open in his hand the little
book of Prophecies, Revel. 10. to swear by him that lives for ever, and
ever. Either the means how to effect this is here set down. To him give all
the Prophets witness, or there is none in the earth, or under heaven. For as
in it self the least tittle of Gods word is more firmly pillard, and less
passable, then the whole fabrique of heaven and earth. Heaven and earth shall
pass, etc. So to us this certainty can no way be more infallibly evident,
then by the Prophesies, that are storied in it. And as the Prophesies are the
greatest argument of all the rest: so this is the greatest of all the rest of
the Prophesies to argue by. For here both Gods words are met together. The dead
word has met with the living, the old Testament kisses the New, and either to
other, one by foretelling, the other by fulfilling give mutual witness of
their irrepugnable Truths. Since therefore there is so great unity in the
words, and the Prophets are all joined in one witness, and Christ to whom they
witness is undivided, I industriously spare to make any division either of the
words, or among the Prophets. Only I will set this one truth in the Light. That
Christ is the Center to whom all of them standing round about him as a
compassing clowd of witnesses, draw all the lines of their Prophecies, and then
briefly gather such Instructions as shall be thence deducible.

We might see this golden circle of all the Prophets geaphically described by
the last of the Prophets himself, Revel. 4. and 5. chapters, where in the
midst of 4. Beasts, and 24. Elders, a glorious Lamb stands, and sends forth
the 7. Spirits of God into all the Earth. That Christ is the Lamb himself the
Passover of the Jews will tell us. And that the four Evangelists are the
four beasts, their even number; and their standing nearest the Throne; as
waiting immediately on the Lamb of God our Savior, and the strict keeping of
decorum, in figuring them like beasts, such as the Lamb himself is,
sufficiently proves. And doubtless the 24. Elders can be no other then the 24.
Prophets of the Old Testament, both because they are called Elders; being more
ancient then the four Evangelists, and stand in a greater distance, and
farther off from Christ, their number being just the very same as S. Hierome
observes: And because as themselves sing to their golden Harpes, the Lamb had
made them Kings in matters of Life, and Priests in Points of Doctrine to rule
the Earth, having before redeemed the^ to God by his blood, which is not
appliable to the steadfast Angels, but only to such who had been young sinners,
before they became saintly Elders. And to conclude, the seven spirits sent
forth into all the Earth, must needs be the seven gifts of Gods Spirit,
precisely set down by S. Paul, 1. Cor. 12. 28. Apostles, Prophets, Teachers,
Miracles, Gifts of healings, Helps in government, Diversities of tongues,
which are therefore named by Saint John in the very same place seven Lamps,
and the seven horns and eyes of the Lamb; because by them Christ gives Light
to his Church, and exercises a visible power in all the Earth.

And here we see all our Saviors witnesses are met together. The twenty
four Prophets hold out the first Lights to discover the Lamb of God, and least
they should be obscure, the Evangelists sets the truth of the story by the
words of their Prophecy; and that Christ's Church may see this truth, Christ
sends out into the whole earth, these seven gifts of his Spirit, as Lamps to
give Light both to his Prophets and Apostles: So that if any Spirit of
Antichrist obtrude upon the Catholic Church any other witnesses, or blind
Light of government, and interpretation besides these, or think that Christ
sent his seven spirits forth into Rome, and not forth into the whole earth, it
is to be held a Spirit of Error, and not of Truth. But to close up this
general shadow of the Prophets, (which I have unawares unfolded beyond my
first purpose) and to open the particular substance of their several
Prophecies, we shall find the^ all so signally point at our Savior, that if
Moses veyle were not taken from his face, and laid upon their hearts, if they
did not by a wicked (...) of the old Prophecies set the last coming of our
Savior in glory before his first in humility, that so they might grow proud by
him, who would first learn them to be humble, Learn of me for I am humble,
they could not but now at length see him to be the Glory of Israel, who has
been so long a time already the Light of the Gentiles, all the Circumstances
of his Birth; the Miracles, Offices, Doctrine, and Humility of his life; the
causes, manner, and other co^currences of his death; the Place of his burial,
and the assurance of his rising again, being so clearly praeassigned by their
own former Prophets, living so long before. Let us therefore diligently search
into

III. The several Prophecies concerning the Birth, Life, Death, and
Resurrection of the Savior of the world.
FIrst, that his Mother should be a Virgin, was foretold, Isay 7. 14. and we
shall find it Mat. 1. 18. fulfilled. Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, which the
Jews most sillily translate a young woman, as Trypho the Jew in his disputation
with Justin Martyr, and Aquila and Theodotion, both Jewish Proselites in their
Translations. But as Justin replies, it were no wonder for a young woman to
conceive, whereas the Prophet speaks of it as a wonder. Behold, the Lord
himself will give you a sign, (...), as your ancient Septuagint, says the
Father, reads it, and not as your idle Rabbis newly translate it, (...),
Behold, a young woman shall conceive, making that a very strange wonder, then
which nothing is more common and usual. Besides, to speak in grammar
property, (...) Alma signifies neither a Virgin simply, nor yet a young woman,
but one between both, a Virgin already espoused, but not married, such as Mary
was to Joseph, such as Rebecca was to Isaac, when she veyled her face at his
sight, Genesis 24. 65. and is therefore derived from (...) to veyl or hide. This
being the maiden ceremony of the old world, for Virgins after they had once
made choice of their husband, to cover their faces, and to be Nuptae, before
they were Maritae, veyled from al other before they married their own man. The
husbands being to become the veyle of her eyes, as Abimelech speaks of
Abraham to Sarah, Behold he is the veyle of thine eyes. And this was Gods own
Argument, to prove our Savior his Son the Messiah, Genesis 3. 15. Ier. 31. 22.
and in the place now cited.

And as the person of his Mother, so the person of his Messenger was as
disertly foretold by the Prophets, Esaias 40. 3. Malach the 3. and 4. chapters,
and fulfilled by John the Baptist, Luke the 4. who is therefore called Eliah,
not because he was to be person aeliter, but only personate, being to come in
the spirit of Eliah, and in the manner of his life. Eliah fasted often, so did
John; Eliah was girt with a leather girdle, so was John; Eliah spoke all his
Prophecy, writ none, so did John; Eliah reproved the people openly to their
faces, so did John; Eliah was sent to renew the worship of God, then defaced
and changed, so was John; Eliah told Ahab and Iesabell of their faults
plainly, so did John Herod and Herodias; painted Iesabel sought Eliahs life to
slay him: dancing Herodias sought and obtained the life of John, and slew him.
So that in his place and apparel, in his manners and Prophecies, in the
prosecution of his life, and persecution at his death, John, though he were not
Eliahs person, yet did thoroughly personate Eliah. And this was John's crying
Argument, to prove our Savior the Messiah, The voice of a Crier in the
wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord, says Esaias; Who art thou say the
Jews to John? The voice of a Crier in the Wilderness, prepare ye the ways
of the Lord, says John to the Jews.

But our Savior as he had two Natures, so he had two Messengers. John was a
burning and shining Light on Earth, but the Star burned, and shined to give
him Light from Heaven. A Star shall come out of Jacob, says Balaam, Number. 24.
17. Where is the King of the Jews. says the Wise men, for we have seen his
star, and are come to worship him, Mat. 2. 2. And this is the heathen man's
argument, that so much troubled Herod, and all Jerusalem with him.

Now if we search diligently, either the time when this star first appeared,
or the place whether it led the Wise men after it had brought them out of their
own Country; was it not in the time of the first Herod, Luke 3. 1. when the
Scepter was departed from Judah? Genesis 49. 10. And the Land was forsaken of both
her Kings, Esaias 7. 16. And this was old Jacobs argument to prove Iudahs son
the Messiah. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, till Shiloh, that is, his
Son come. And went it not with them directly to a little Bethleem? foretold
by Micah the 5. the 2. and in the 2. and 5. of Matthew interpreted by the chief
Priests and Scribes, and people, all gathered together at the commmand of Herod
to this very purpose, who making this quiry, Where Christ stould be borne?
received this answer: In Bethleem of Judah. And thou Bethleem art not the
least among the Princes of Judah: for out of thee shall come the Governor that
shall rule my people Israel. And this was the Argument of all our Saviors
enemies met together against him: Herod's, the chief Priests, the Scribes and
the Peoples to prove him the Messiah.

We might now take our Savior out of the Cradle of his birth, and look upon
him in the Miracles, Offices, Doctrine and Humanity of his Life: all which we
shall find curiously foretold by Moses, David, Esaias, Zachary, and witnessed
not only by the mouths of Children and Wise men; but forcibly arrested by the
Peoples and Pilates, and the voice of the very Devils themselves, crying, We
know thee what thou art, even the Holy one of God: but because the great Rock
of Scandal whereat both the obstinate Jew stumbleth, and the wise Grecian of
the world esteems folly, is the ignominy of the Cross, the one looking for
the glory of a Crown, and therefore hating the shame of the Cross, and the
other knowing God to be impassible, and therefore mocking the Christians God by
calling him (...) the Crucified God: let us see whether our Savior may not say
to these two Naturalls, what he sometimes said to his own disciples
traveling to Emaus, who at that time were just opinion'd in every point like
unto. For first, they dreamed of a temporal Redemption. Secondly, when they
saw our Savior condemned and crucified, they concluded, it could not be he
that should redeem Israel. Thirdly, they talked of Christ, as of one dead and
crucified, when he walked into the midst of them: and when he talked to
them out of his word, their eyes were held (as these men's are) that they know
him not. And therefore well may our Savior now say to these as he did then to
them. O fools and slow of heart, to believe all that the Prophets have spoken:
Ought not Christ to suffer these things, and to enter into glory? Yes
assuredly, if with our Lord we should begin from Moses (who spilt the typical
blood of our Savior in his Paschall Lamb, and in all his bloody Sacrifices)
and go through all the Prophets, we shall find none more punctually leuelled
at him, or more closely touching him to the quick, then those of his Passion.

If GOD be to smite him, Zachary will foretell it, Awake, O Sword, against my
Shepherd, and against the man that is my fellow, says the Lord of Hoastes,
Zachar. 13. 7. If at this first blow of God, his Disciples prove all fugitives,
the same Prophet in the same place foretells it. Smite the Shepherd and the
sheep shall be scattered. And this was our Saviors own argument to prove
himself the true Shepherd, and them his little, and fearful flock. If the
Jewish people and the heathen Soldiers, if the Kings of the earth, and the
rulers of the Jewish Synagogue gather themselves together against him, as at
his death they did, and for many years after: David will not conceal it: Why
did the Heathen rage, and the people imagine vain things? The Kings of the
earth stood up, and the Rulers were gathered together against the Lord, and
against his Christ. And this was the argument of the whole Primitive Church met
together in Prayer. Acts. 4. 27. If we would know who should betray him, David
tells us. He that eats bread with me. And when he had dipped the sop, he
gave it to Judas Iscariot. Says the beloved disciple Ioh. 13. 26. And this was
Judas his venturous Argument to prove our Savior the Son of God, and
himself the son of perdition. If we would know the price of his treason
Zachary sets it down. They weighed for my price thirty pieces of silver, and I
cast them to the Potter in the house of the Lord: Zach. 11. 13.

If the time of death be doubted David will foretell us, in the 9. Chapter and
5. last verses of his Prophecy, where he reckons 70. weeks (every week
standing for a Sabbath of years, a day for a year, which makes in all 490.
years a short kind of Arethmetique usual in the Scripture.) to be determined
before the cutting off of the Messiah. 7 weeks whereof, that is 49. years,
were to be accomplished before the building of the Temple. And 62. weeks that
is 434. years before the Annoynting of the most holy, which time was ended,
when the heavens broke open themselves, and the Spirit of God came riding out
upon the wings of a Dove, whose wings were silver, and his feathers flamed with
pure gold, to anoint him to his prophetical office with the oil of gladness
above all his Fellows, which holy unction St. Peter mentions in this very
Sermon of his. Acts 10. 38. Now the remainent week, that conteynes 7. years
more in the midst of which, that is after 3. years and a half the Messiah by
the Sacrifice, and oblation of himself was to make all other Sacrifices and
Oblations to cease, we shall find exactly fulfilled in the preaching of our
Savior, who after he had preached 3. years and a half offered himself upon
the Alter of his Cross. And this was the Angel Gabriels most accurat Argument
to Daniel to prove our Savior the Messiah, who here before the time, was the
Prophet of his death, and the messenger of his Birth in the fulness of time
after, and therefore could best acquaint us with them both.

But if we would see the whole passion of our Lord most exquisitely drawn with
the lines of his own blood, let us but join David, and Esaias, and Zachary
together, and you shall have it expressed with as much as death can be. If a
crown of thorns tear his hair, and his whole visage should be shamefully
dishonored with his own blood, and the peoples spettle, if his back should
be beaten with stripes, and his cheeks buffeted, Esaias will set him before our
eyes in this very form, in his fifty and two and fifty Chapters. His visage
shall be more deformed then any man's (says the Prophets) his form more then
the Sons of men: I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that
plucked of the hair, I hid not my face from shame, and spetting.

If his whole body should be racked, and tenter'd with the violent discension
of every part of it upon the Cross, so that his bones should be disioynted,
and might all be told: if his hands, and feet were to be nayl'd to it: if
the people that past by should wagge their heads at him, and the Priests should
mock him and say he trusted in God let him deliver him, if he will have him; if
the Soldiers should cast lotts for his Garments, and the standers by should
give them vinegar to drink, all this will David most heavily sing in the 22.
and threescore and ninth Psa. All my bones are out of joint, they pierced my
hands, and my feet, I may tell all my bones. They that pass by shake their
heads at me saying. He trusted in God, let him deliver him if he will have
him. I was a thirst, and they gave me vinegar to drink, they parted my
garments among them, and cast lotts upon my vesture.

If he suffer among thieves Esaias tells us He was numbered among the wicked.
Esaias. 53. If he pray for his enemies, Father forgive them, He prayed for the
transgressors says the same verse: If they pierce his side with a spear. They
shall see me whom they have pierced says our Savior by Zachary, in the 12.
Chapter and the 10. verse of his Prophecy: If all this storm fell from heaven
upon him for th'iniquitie of Gods people, and to save us from death, Esaias
precisely says as much in the fore mentioned chap. For the transgression of my
people was he smitten, the Lord has laid upon him th'iniquity of us all. And
this was Caiphas the Highpriests blind argument to prove our Savior the
Messiah. It is expedient that one man should dye for the people. John. 11. 50.

In a word his Burial in the grave of rich Joseph is foretold by Isay 53. He
shall make his grave with the rich, and his Resurrection by David Psalm. 16. 10.
Thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thy Holy one to
see corruption. For God before had made his soul an offering for sin, as Esaias
tells us 53. 10. And this was the great argument of the two great Apostles,
wherewith they converted both Jew and Gentil to the faith of Christ Acts. 2.
and 13. Chapters, 800. at two sermons.

I will not add to these Divine Attestations, the prophetical Acrostique of
Sebyd Erythcaea cited by Constantin in his oration which he entitled ad Caetu^^
sanctorum, the 18. Chapter, and translated as he says by Tully, before our
Savior was borne. (...) who I doubt not not but might Prophecy of Christ, as
Balaam did: Nor the Egyptian cross which among their (...) Divine
Hieroglyphics signified Salvation, as the heathen themselves confessed, out of
Socrates in the 5. book of his Ecclesiastical story, the 17. Chapter. Nor
the illustrious report of Josephus, in the 18. of his Antiquities both of our
Savior, and John the Baptist, which the Jews ignorantly slander as inserted
by the Christians, mistaking this Josephus, the son Matathias who writ in
Greek, for another Josephus of theirs, who writ in Hebrew, the son of
Gorion, in whom indeed there is no such report. Nor the wirtie, but not so
weighty Arguments of some of the Fathers. As of Justin Martyr, who would needs
persuade Trypho, and his two fellows, that the holding of Moses Arms in the
figure of a cross, and the spitting of the Paschalll Lamb with the two
shoulders passant prefigur'd the crucifying of our Lord: or of Irenaeus
speaking of the incredulous Jew, who should see our Savior, the life of the
world, hang before his eyes, and yet obstinate his heart in unbelief, out of
the eight and twenty of Deuteronomy. Et erit vica ^ua pendens ante oculos tuos, and
non credes vitae tuae. lib. 4. aduersus Haereses cap. 23.

But if any would lay the foundation of his faith wider, and hope to himself
more Arguments to ground his belief upon: Let him but advisedly think with
himself how it became the Savior of the world to live, and what other
witnesses to bear him testimony of him: and then let him add to the
prophesies of his death, the innocence of his life. For never any man lived as
he lived, which of you (says our Savior as to all our enemies) can accuse me
of sin: And to the innocence of his life the Authority of his Doctrine.
Never man spoke as this man does, say the emissary scouts sent to apprehend
him. And to the Authority of his Doctrine the power of his miracles: We never
saw such things in Israel, say all the people, and to the miracles that he
wrought the miseries that he suffered, Behold and see if there were ever grief
like my grief, may our Savior truly say of himself: And to the miseries
that he suffered himself, the constancy of his Appostles, and Primitive
Martyrs that suffered for him. Who, who ever had such witnesses, as to kindle
other men into the same faith with them, would set themselves on a light fire
of zeal, till they were consumed for the honor of their Lord? So that the
first Imperious Persecutour of the Christians Nero* that in humane lump of
cruelty, whom Nature for have might seem only to have curded up into a knot
of blood, guest not much amiss when anointing their bodies of the Christians
he set them burning in every street of Rome, like so many Torches, to give
light to the City as Tacitus reports in the 15. of his Annals. For they
gave light indeed, not for awhile only to that heathenish City, but to the
whole Christian world for ever after. Never was there day kindled with half so
many beams, as that night was, sure never was there night, though all the
Stars in Heaven should flame out in it, to make it glorious, that shone half
so brightly as did this when to meet their Bridegroom in the first watch, and
morning of their Gospel, so many early Virgins had lighted their Lamps.

And to these living Martyrs, let him add two dead witnesses, the voice of
the Son from heaven at his exspiration, when the whole world lost the day at
Noone; and the voice of the Earth at his Resurrection, when her mouth opened,
and let abroad so many Saintly bodies, that awakned, and leapt out of their
graves to tell it in Jerusalem, that Christ was risen. O the Divine virtue of
this celesticall body! If it die, heaven that enlightens all, extinguishes it
self; if it revive, the dead work of the Grave, that receives the dying,
excludes the living, and like the barren womb of Sarah is alust to bring forth
the Children of promise, in testimony of the secret influence of life it felt,
after Christ had layen with her. And thus it became the Savior of the world to
live, thus to be borne, thus to die again; these witnesses became him, and
these Miracles. And therefore give me leave to use, first

IIII. A free Reprehension of all fashionable Aggrippaes in faith; and farther
motives to win them to become through believers.
AFter the voice of so many Prophesies, and witnesses, art thou yet an
Infidel? O that there were not in Christ's militant Church, as there were in
Othoes military Camp, so many men, so few Soldiers, so many professors, so few
Christians. Let me but ask thee as St. Paul did Agrippa, Beleeuest thou the
Prophets? and I would I could say as he does. I know thou beleeuest; but I
fear I may better say, as the Prophecy it self speaks, Who has believed
our report? And what might the reason be of so much infidelity among so many
believers of us; that so many with the Roman Soldiers should kneel down to
Christ, and by an open profession of their mouths say to him Hayle King of the
Jews with the smooth voice of Jacob, and yet with their practice, and rough
hands of Esau smite him on the head, and face, and crucify him?

Is it not because they live neither as just men by Faith, nor as wisemen, by
reason, but wholly by sense? so ignorant are they, and like bruit Beasts before
God, believing only what they see, and quae sunt ante pedes, as the Orator
speaks, what they must needs stumble upon with their eyes, and no more? Well:
have thou both thine eyes out of Faith, and Reason? give me thy hand (O thou
reasonable Beast) and follow me with that one blind eye of Sense, that thou
have left thee. Thou will not believe in Christ because thou did not see the
former Prophesies foretoulde of him, fulfilled by him. That thou may see
then, what thou should believe now, believe those Prophesies which are yet
to be seen.

Thou saw not perhaps, the coming of Christ in humility foretold by the
foregoing Prophet; but that which was foretold by his following Apostles, thou
may yet see^, the coming of Antichrist in pride. Thou could not see
Jerusalem destroy the Temple of Christ's Body foretold by the former Prophets,
but our Savior himself Prophesied of the destruction of Jerusalem, and that
is yet to be seen. Thine eyes cannot behold the spiritual Kingdom of Christ,
because it is of another world, and beyond thy eye sight; but the power of this
Kingdom, which was to break in pieces the former great Monarchies of the
world, and it self to remain unshaken for ever, Prophesied twice by Daniel in
his 2. and 7. Chapters, if thou will but open thine eyes, thou can not but
behold. The Divine image of the invisible God dwelling bodily in the humane
Nature of our Savior prophesied in Esays Immanuel is to divinely subtle for
his owls eyes to look upon: but it is visibly to be seen by thee, that the
false image of the heathen, like Dagons Idol before the Arc, are fallen down,
and by the power of Christ's Kingdom beaten to the ground, Prophesied in the
second of Esaias, and David, and diverse of the Prophets. How the Kings of the
earth, and the Rulers banded themselves together against the Lord, and against
his Christ, to extinguish his Church in the very Cradle of it, Prophesied by
David, was, thou will say, before thou were borne to see it: but happy, happy
art thou, that thou art borne to see now Kings to be the Noursing Fathers and
Queens the Nursing Mothers of his Church Prophesied by Esaias. Es. 49. 23. Thou
see not the whole world Jew and Gentil forget themselves, and rebel against
the Lord, denying his Kingdom, or to be governed by him: We have no King but
Caesar: But thou see now the Kingdom is the Lords, and he is the Governor
among the Nations, and that all the ends of the earth has remembered
themselves, and turned unto the Lord, Prophesied by David Psa. 22. 27. Briefly
thou see not the Resurrection of our Savior in glory among the Jews
Prophesied by David; but thou see that which was immediately to follow among
the Gentiles, the Resurrection of grace, foretold by all the Prophets. Neither
can thou see now the Jews crying crucify him, crucify him. But thou may
yet see that which instantly follows, His blood be upon us, and upon our
Children.

Since therefore thou have lying before thine eyes, by the power of Christ's
kingdom, the 4. great Monarchs of the world broken in pieces, by the divine
Image of God, the false images of Heathen beaten down, the destruction of that
city that destroyed him, and the dispersion of that People that scattered his;
the rebellious Gentiles his servants, and the persecuting Kings his Subjects,
if thou will not be among those whom our Savior blesses, Blessed are they that
have not seen, and yet have believed, be at least one of Saint Thomas his
Disciples, use thine eyes as he did his fingers, and be not faithless, but
believe,

For I will not fear to say that the certainty of our faith arising from the
Prophecies, is more powerable to persuade, the^ if it were by an ocular
demonstration, now before our eyes miraculously confirmed, then if one should
rise from the dead to instruct us, then if GOD himself should descend, and
speak to us from heaven. A great audacitie of speech will some say: I, and a
proud hyperbole of Truth, but such as the Scripture uses, They have Moses and
the Prophets (says Abraham) let them hear them. And though such
purple-habited, and high-dieted Epicures as are already in the state of the
damned, though they live in the world among us, foolishly suppose, that of one
should rise and come to them from the dead, they should presently believe yet
the Father of the faithful who knew better how faith was begotten, tells us
plainly; if they will not hear Moses, and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded though one rose from the dead.

And what says Saint Peter, who himself heard the voice of God immediately,
and gloriously speaking to him from heaven? This is my Well-beloued Son,
hear him. We have (says he) a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto you do
well, that ye take heed, 2. Pet. 1. 19.

And is it possible any word in the earth should be more certain, then word of
God immediately speaking to him from heaven? Certes, not in regard of the
substance of the thing delivered. For so both the word of God immediately framed
by himself, and spoken from heaven, or uttered by the mouth of his Prophet, is
all one, and has the very same identiall certainty: but both in regard of the
manner of delivery, the Prophesies are more sure, because they are larger, and
more copiously expositiue of themselves, in case of doubts emergent, God
speaking but awhile by a voice immediately framed by himself, but speaking by
his Prophets from the beginning of the world to the end of it, which are
therefore interpretatiue of themselves: and specially in regard of us, Because
the voice of God immediately speaking from heaven to us, is more astonishing
and less instructiue then otherwise it would be. So we see the Children of
Israel, when God spoke from heaven to them, Exodus 20. 18. 19. shaken into such
an Ague of fear and trembling (as Moses himself was, Heb. 12. 21.) that they
started back, and stood a far off, and cried to Moses. O let not God speak
any more unto us, lest we die. Which natural fear God does not only
pardon, but approve, and therefore stooping to their nature, and laying aside
his own Majesty, we shall see in the 18. of Deuter. 16. verse, what he says
to them, and by whose mouth he promises to speak to us. According to all that
thou desire of the Lord thy God in Horeb, in the day of the Assembly, saying,
Let me not hear again the voice of the Lord my GOD, neither let me see this
great fire any more, that I die not. And the Lord said unto me, they have well
spoken in all that they have said, I will raise them up a Prophet from among
their Brethren, like unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth, him shall
they hear, etc. Thus when the Greeks came to see our Savior, John 12. 21. and
God gave a maiesticall witness to him from heaven: they were all so horrowed
with sudden amase and affright, that some thought it thundered; others, that
an Angel spoke from heaven to him: but what was said, none of them all knew.
And thus our Apostle here himself was for the time that GOD spoke in Mount
Tabor, struck half beside his understanding with fear and astonishment.
Matthew, 17. 6. and talked himself he knew not what. Luke 9. 33.

We see therefore, how strongly the Rock of our salvation, Christ the
Cornerstone is laid by the Prophets, in the Church of God, and how mightily
Christ vpholdes the Scriptures, that are built upon him: one by foretelling,
the other, by fulfilling, the written word how the living should be borne, and
live, and die, should be buried, and raised, and the Living word, by so
entering the womb, and his grave, so living, dying, and rising, as was written:
so that if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to those only, whose minds are blinded
by the God of this world, as the Apostle speaks. But as our Christian Faith is
much dishonored by a company of rude and unsettled Professors; so it is
utterly ashamed of the multitude of false, blind, which is strange, and dumb
witnesses the Church of God is pestered with. I will end therefore with

V. A just Invectiue against all false, blind, and dumb Prophets, who are
indeed no true Witnesses of the Lord.
LEt the Jesuit now, the Sophister of Christianity, call to us to beg light and
sufficiency, and auritie to Gods word from their Roman Church, tell us, tell
us that we must run to Rome, to their Spiritual Man to enterpret the
Scriptures, who commonly understands not the Tongues they were writ in: Let
their Apostolical Cha^re vaunt it self, it cannot fall from the Faith,
because the two noble Apostles, S. Peter, and S. Paul, sat in it by their
doctrine, ymbrightened it by their example, and with their own bloods baptized
it. Alas! did not our Savior himself sow Jerusalem with his doctrine, grace
it with his Miracles, shine upon it with the light of his vniuitable example,
water it with the shower (the best shower that ever fell from heaven) of his
own blood: And yet is not that Vine-yeard become a wilderness? has it not
loss with the leaves the fruit, with the power of Religion, the profession of
it? And is it possible that Gods word should be dark it self that gives
light to the simple? insufficient, and imperfect in it self, that makes perfect
the Man of God? that Gods word should beg authorities from man's! and such a
man's, who is either the man of Sin, or the Beast drunk with the blood of the
Saints, and Martyrs of Jesus? from such a beastly, and sinful man's word: That
he should be the sole and Infallible Interpretour of Gods word, and his
divine Law, in whose chayre-sentence all our thoughts must acquiet themselves,
who by his dispensatory court of Faculties, is the daily Cancelour of it, and
is therefore (...) styled by the Apostle (...), the lawless Man? Who can make
Apocryphal Authors Canonical; Humane Traditions of Divine Authority:
disanulling in Princes holy Marriages, and making Legitimate amongst them
incestuous Contracts: Inioyning his Friars unlawful chastity, forbidding his
Seculars holy Wedlock, commending in his Cardinals royal excessive pride,
commanding in his votaries abject humility; counsayling in his Jesuits, blind,
and sinful obedience, countenancing in foreign Subjects secret and Sainctly
Rebellion: creating here among us a Religious murder, and meritorious treason,
and making the bulletting of a whole Commonwealth up into the air at a shot,
an Action not only vndiscouerable, and to be sealed up under the holy Signet
of Confession, but canonizing the father of the Action for a most heavenly and
venerable saint. All which to the word of GOD are most repugnant, and
gladiatorie.

Is this the man upon whose lip of knowledge they would have us and all the
Prophets hang? to kiss whose toes, and commit idolatry, with the golden
Cross upon his Pantofle, they would have us fly over the seas?

Well, when we hear say, he is better able to make good his Interpretations
by the Lights of Art, and help of Tongues, and authority of Scriptures,
rightly inferred from the Collation of places, the significancy of phrases, the
light of circumstances, the Aim of the words, and the Analogy of Faith, and
has joined to all these a sincere love of the Truth, without any siding, and
part-taking for gainefull and honorable respects, and an unwearied search for
it without prae-iudicating affections (all which together make up, not an
infallible, but the least fallible Interpretour) we will then think, whether
it be fit to put out all these Lights in other men, thorough the whole Church
of GOD, and with the loss of our Christian liberty, to imbondage our selves
to his Roman Chair.

It is best therefore to keep on this side the seas, from the false and whorish
Prophet of Babylon, that bears only false witness to Christ, and to consider
those Ecclesiastical home-Droanes of our own, which hiue themselves under the
shadow of our Church (the wicked thief money, that silver dropsy, that now
raigns in unconscionable Patrons, making way for them) and so bear indeed,
either no witness to Christ at all, or but very slight, and rash witness.

It was Eliahs speech from God to Ahab. Have thou slain, and also taken
possession; and it may well be his Churches to either of theirs. Have thou
taken possession, and will thou slay also? not the body once, but for ever the
souls, of innocent men. Let no man quarrel with me, as Ahab did with Eliah.
Have thou found me O mine Enemy? If he do, I must borrow Saint Paul's answer:
Am I thine enemy, because I tell thee the Truth? No (I speak not out of rash,
but charitable zeal) thou art thine own Enemy, thou art Gods Enemy, thou
art the enemy of his Church. For if thou did love him, thou would feed
his flock, feed his Sheep, feed his Lambs. If thou did love his Church,
thou would show thy love by thy obedience to it. Who enioynes every one
eleven months residence upon his cure, and graunts him but one months absence,
whereas it is a venture, but without long search you may find one that absents
himself eleauen months, and is resident but once a year, and that is perhaps
at harvest, or peradventure at Easter, when his own, and not so much the
Churches profit calls him to his benefit, not his Benefice. He would being
resident preach every Sunday, as she commands him, in her 45. Cannon. He
would labor to convince Heretics, (which now in his absence grows upon
her) or see them at least censured as she bids him in her 65. and 66. Canons.
He would keep the sound in safety, and visit the sick, as she directs him in
her 67. Canon. Thus he would do, and not laugh at them that did thus, and would
have him do so, as men more precise, than wise, of more heat than discretion.
I am not so intemperate, as to rage against all Non-residency, which in case of
insufficiency of one Living, or public, and necessary employment, either in
Universities, or Court, must needs be allowable: but either our Church it self
is precise, that bids him do thus: or he that does the contrary without any
ouer-ballancing reason, proves himself a Bastard, and none of her Children.

A double wound it is our church receives from these men. For as themselves
have not the grace to correct their own sin, so they have commonly in their
rooms certain vnder-curats, so grossly ignorant, as not to know theirs. They
that know nothing themselves, are set by these to teach others, of whom we
cannot say, dies diei, but nox nocti indicat scientiam. One night teaches
another, a blind Prophet, a blind People: yet I have seen some of these not
only stand high upon their bare and solitary honesty; but peremptorily
censured grave and worthy Ministers, as Demosthenes an Arrian, the Cook of
Valens, the Emperors kitchen did Saint Ambrose, as men, not thoroughly gifted
for their place, which reproach Saint Ambrose smiling, put up and off with this
merry answer. (...). I have met with to day a barbarous Demosthenes: but to
the common virtues of a Christian upright feet, and honest hands, it were good
these men would add the tongue of the learned Esaias chap. 50. v. 4. else the
Greek Epigram will find fault with their sermons, and tell them, sound hands
and feet will not excuse lame heads and cracked brains. (...)
(...).


I do not deny but that God is able to perfect his power in these men's
weakness: For it is not impossible for our spiritual Sampson (as he
overcame his enemies, and was refreshed with a iawe of the seely beast) so to
make the waters of Life spring between the teeth of these simple creatures: but
these unsent Runners might do well to content themselves with one Cure, and not
to be too busy in trudging between many, as some of them are (for to be so
officious must needs prove offensive to the church, till they know better how
to apply more seasonably, than yet they can, the sacred word of God to the
precious souls of their Hearers; and to set those Apples of silver into these
pictures of gold.

Neither do I deny but that such trading Preachers may find work enough for
their mouths, by making other men's labors run through them. But this is to
get their Living by the sweat of other men, and to wipe it off to their own
brows. And if we should see a rude Carter offer to play upon the instrument of
a fine-fingred and dactrycall Musician (suppose one of these Tradesmen, upon
the golden Harp of the sweet Singer of Israel) who could but laugh at him, and
say, as the Greek Proverb goes, (...) Asinus ad lyram. But such derisorie
reproves are too mild for such tails of Jeroboam, more fit indeed to make
Priests for Baal, the^ Prophets for God, who intrude themselves into the
Ministry for mere necessity, and therefore may say indeed with St. Paul, A
necesesitie is laid upon me. But whereas the Apostle proceeds, And woe unto
me if I preach not the Gospel. How much better may they say to themselves, and
woe unto me, if I preach the Gospel.

And lest we should fear to speak against such vagabond Shepherds as are
not able to feed the flocks, they are fed by, Prophecy against them (says
the Lord) woe to the Shepherds that feed themselves: that is their end; but
Gods end in appointing Shepherds follows. Should not the sheepheards seed the
flocks? Nay, what can they exspect, but the double woe of Jeremy and Ezekiel:
woe, woe to the Shepherds that destroy and scatter my sheep. But as these
blind Guides are most insensible of their own maladies, because ignorance is
a disease (as the Greek Tragedian calls it) that never pains a man (...): so
it is no less then a miracle to a man of understanding, to see the great zeal
and little knowledge, some well, but weak minded people use, to defend these
Tradesmen with: Was not our Savior, say they, a Carpenter, Mark 6. 3. before
he was sent to preach? S. Peter a Fisherman, Matthew a Publican, S. Paul a
Tentmaker? True indeed; but our Savior ventured not himself to preach, before
the Spirit of GOD sent him, Luke 4. 18. and laid a most district charge upon
his Apostles, to tarry at Jerusalem, till by the commission of the Holy Ghost,
they should be endued with power from on high, Luke 24. 49. But these men, as
they cannot arrogate the ordinary means to make their Calling justifiable: so I
suppose no man ever saw the Spirit of God descending upon them, and fitting
them with extraordinary and infused gifts of knowledge.

Christ, indeed was a Carpenter, but to build heaven and earth, and his Church
in them both: S. Peter was a Fisher, but to angle in all the Circumcision to
the Faith of Christ, and to circumcise, not their fore-skins, but their hearts,
(...), as an ancient Father, alluding to the fifth and second of Joshua, where
the Israelites were circumcised with knives of stone, most elogantly speaks
of him. Matthew was a Publican, but to gather the precious souls of men into
the Heavenly Treasury of the King of Kings. Saint Paul was a Tent-maker, but
to persuade Iaphet to dwell in the Tents of Sem, and to spread Christ's
Tabernacle all the world over among the Gentiles. But in the great day of their
Reckoning, when the Disciples of our Lord shall bring in their Accomps, and S.
Paul shall say, I have gathered to the faith, all the Riches of the Gentiles;
and S. Thomas, I have gained all the treasures of India; and S. Peter, I have
gathered the dispersions of Judah: What shall these hirelings say, but we in
our little flocks have scattered so many, and we have destroyed so many, and we
have wasted and preyed upon and devoured so many. And therefore as the feet of
these wise Stewards shall shine like the Stars of heaven for brightness; so
these had need to take heed least their heads, for the clouds of ignorance
they are wrapped up in, meet not with Marcellus his fate, apud inferos. Cui non
atra caput tristi circum volat vmbra.

Pardon me (right dearly beloved in our Lord and Savior) if when Thorns and
Thiftles grow upon Gods Altar, as the Prophet Hosea speaks, I am forced to use
a little fire of Zeal to consume them. I am sorry there is such a necessity
still for Gods spirit to descend in fiery Tongues. O that it might always fly
down with the wings of a Dove from heaven upon us. But as long as common
Customs lawfully rob the Churches Treasure, and commit open sacrilege every
day more then other upon Melchisedcks Tithes, the Patrimony of Christ;
insomuch, as it is verily thought, the Church within these threescore years,
by concealements, encroachments, and customary thefts, has been spoiled of no
less then 40000. yearly. What hope can there be of sufficiency of the
Prophets, when the insufficiency of their means will not afford it? when one
Subject into whose cofers 20000 pounds: when a Lay Parson, into whose Cofers
20000. pounds annually flow in, and therefore if he were but a Pharisee in
profession, should out of his abundant streams of wealth, cast in much into
the common Treasury of the Church, shall taken into his own possession
fifteeene houses of God, and stick down but the bare feathers of ten pounds
or twenty Nobles a year for the needy service of Gods Altar? Can all the
flourishing and pragmaticall wits in the world, if they were headed in one
brain, show by what just right a Lay hand can invade and coast upon Gods
portion of Tithes, which he has given to those that wait upon his Altar for
the food of their bodies, and the poor people change with us for the food of
their souls? Is not this the reason why in the great harvest there are so few
Labors. For the Psalmist had no sooner said, They have sent fire into thy
Sanctuary (meaning perhaps the fire of Covetousness that deuoures all) or as
he speaks of them in another Psalm Let us take to our selves the houses of God
in possession; but presently it follows, There is no more any Prophet,
neither is there among us any that knows.

But GOD persuade those whom it most concerns, to regard in time the common
poverty of the Church, and to set a sea-banke against this diluviating evil of
Satan, who as GOD drowned all the world in the beginning of it, and saved alive
only the Arc of his Church, so now in the end of it would the Devil drown
the Arc and Church of God it self, with these inundations of blind Seers,
dumb Teachers, betraying Patrones, Sacrilegious Customs, Lay-Parsons,
theeuish Tithings, and which by the abuse of them, were become so many
Chappells of Satan, where many a soul turned the Sabbath of God into the
Devils holi-day, drunken Tap-houses; under the weight of which sin, the whole
Land staggered, and the Churches; of God, like poor Sion, even upon his own
day, lay desolate and waste. But these gates of Hell shall never prevail
against the Suburbs of Heaven, Gods sainctly Colony here on earth, and
therefore we will end as David does, Psa. 20. 9. Say Lord; Let the King hear
us when we call.

FINIS.

