THE NINE ENGLISH WORTHIES: Or, Famous and Worthy Princes of England, being all
of one name; Beginning with King HENRY the first, and Concluding with Prince
HENRY, eldest Son to our Sovereign Lord the King.



AT LONDON Imprinted by H. L. for John Harrison the younger: and are to be sold
at his shop in Paternoster, row, at the sign of the blue Anchor.

1606.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE HENRY, Eldest Son to our Sovereign, the Kings
most Excellent Majesty.
RIght High, Right Excellent, and gracious sweet Prince, (in all humility) I
beseech your Highness to pardon me, in that (being one of the meanest among
the King your Fathers servants) I have presumed to Dedicate this simple small
Treatise to your Excellency: the Subject whereof is notwithstanding such and
so great, as may seem unmeet to be termed a Subject. For, it treats only
of Kings and Princes; all excellent Worthies: a matter (I confess) much
unbefitting my slender capacity, and less learning, to deal with. In which
regard, I cannot but acknowledge, the true Proverb most fit to be applied
against me, Blind Bayard is the boldest horse in the Cart. Notwithstanding,
that, which has spurred me forward to commit the fault, may (I hope) in some
measure, qualify and excuse it; to weet, my seruent love and zealous heart:
which cannot endure, your Grace should pass by me, without some little
testimony of my great joy, zeal, and bounden duty: howsoever, in the manner of
expressing it, my discretion may perhaps be worthily taxed, and my
insufficiency laid open to the world. But to proceed on: The Worthies, here
recorded, are nine in number; all Henry's, al mighty Potentates: eight of which
have already been Sovereign Kings of this renowned Nation; seven of them
excelling in Martial valor and conquest, one of them (namely, King Henry the
sixth) in virtue and piety, (the conquest of sin and himself) and none of
them much inferior to some of the ancient nine Worthies. Now, your Highness
being of the same name with them, and Heir apparent to the same Dominions,
which those eight Worthies (your glorious Ancestors) sometime held, and the
blessed son of a mighty Monarch; the eye of the World is upon you, and looks
for a transparent passage of their virtues into you, and a reflection from you:
the joy and comfort of this famous Realm of Great Britain (as well in Church
as Common wealth) is set and settled in and upon you, next to our King and
present saving Governor. And their hopeful expectation has already installed
you the ninth Worthy; as being likely (in time) I say not, to equal the eight,
but even to surmount and exceed them. For, as the ages, since theirs, have been
illustrated with more learning, Religion, and divine wisdom: so, besides your
gifts of Nature (who, in perfections, has not been niggardly toward you) your
Highness taking also your princely and happy education in a time of peace,
and that under the wings and eyes of the most learned King your father,
virtuous Queen mother, and such a Council of settled and deep wisdom, as not
the like in Europe; your Highness, I say, has (herein) means, examples, and
leisure to hear, learn, behold, and observe the singular goodness of God, in
that, which hereafter shall be your own greatness and happiness. And here I
may not forget your chiefest honor, nobility, and worthiness; that you are
descended of the eldest and highest house, of the blood royal of Heaven, the
child and son of God, and consequently coheire with Christ (our great Lord)
to the immortal Crown. Now, the same God, your heavenly Father, who hitherto
(in rich mercy) has showred down abundantly his graces upon you, vouchsafe
to continue and increase them in you; guiding al your princely affections and
actions, to the glory of his name, the benefit of the Church, the good of this
whole Monarchy, the unspeakable joy of your royal Parents; and bless both
them and you, as with much health, long life, and glory here, so with eternal
happiness hereafter. July the 4.

Your GRACES most humbly devoted, ROBERT FLETCHER.

TO THE RIGHT HOnorable, my very good Lords, the Earls of Oxenford, and Essex,
with my Lord Vicount Cranborne, and the other young Lords, Knights and Gentlemen
attending the Princes Highness; health, honor, and happiness.
NObles and Gentlemen: Please ye to peruse the Chronicles of this Realm, you
may therein read of many your famous and worthy Progenitors, who (some of them
by Valor; the rest, by Wisdom and their other virtues) have grown great in
Souereignes favor, been preferred to high Place in Common wealth, lived and
died in much glory; leaving an ouer-plus of honor and dignity (by many
descents) to you their children. The consideration hereof may, and (I doubt
not) will, incite and egg you on (who are already well entered the way) to tread
the same steps of honor, by imitating those your worthy Ancestors in their
virtuous actions. For, your tender years are not ignorant, that The readiest
way to get (and surest to hold) true honor, is to deserve it; and
(consequently) that Virtue only, which first began Nobility, must still
maintain it: whereas, contrariwise, by degenerate and base conditions, many
forfeit their Nability, ere they come at it. For, who knows not, that
Nobility, without Virtue, is but apocryphate Gentry? and that, therefore, as
it began in virtuous Ancestors; so it ends in their wicked progeny. We see,
The strongest wine becomes the sharpest vinegar: and, The most Noble, by
nature, are made most vile by negligence. Of which Rank and sort, are chiefly
such as hold learning in scorn, and the attaining of knowledge not worth the
while. In reproof of whom, truly and eloquently was it (long since) written
by M. Ascham; The fault is in your selves, ye Noble-mens sons (and therefore
ye deserve the greater blame) that commonly the meaner men's children come to be
the wisest Counsailors, and greatest dooers in the weighty affairs of this
Realm: and why? For, God will have it so by his providence; because ye will
have it no otherwise by your negligence. And again, It grieueth me to say (but
it helps not to hide) what every man sees; It Is seldom seen, that the son
of an excellent man proves excellent. I grant, that in excellent men, Nature
must frame the chiefest parts: but learning adds a further ornament,
groundeth a deeper judgment, and forms perfection, and excellency, in
shorter time. The best learned are best advised. And, No man is deceived, but
in those things whereof he is ignorant. In a word: What soever may be saydin
dispraise of Ignorance, is the praise of Learning and Knowledge. Wherefore, I
trust, your Honors, and the rest, will think it as great shame (which also are
M. Aschams words) to be valiant and Courtly without Learning, as to be studious
and bookish without Valor. My seruent prayers, to almighty God, shall be so to
direct your generous hearts to the study of good literature, with the love of
virtue and true valor, that you always (not only in time of this your tender
youth) may be found meet Gentlemen to attend so worthy a Prince. Remember, I
beseech you, the Poesies borne in some of your honorable Ensigns; Vero nihil
verius. Virtutis comes Inuidia. Sero, sed serio: And never forget the most
worthy saying of that thrice honorable late Senator; Corvnum, via vna. These
Mottoes, well imprinted in youth, will bring honor to old age. Which the God
of heaven and earth make you all partakers of in the present, and possessors in
the future; and the same, after many years, to be permanent in the heavens,
for ever.

Your Honors in all humility, ever to be commanded, ROBERT FLETCHER.

To his friend M. To. Fletcher, upon his Subject of the nine Worthies.
WHo dreads the fume of every froathy spirit,
And begs the applause of each fantastic brain,
Frighting with causeless fears industrious merit,
Too much deiects exalted Poesies strain.
Let blind distrust insinuate approbation:
A princely Subject scorns base deprecation.
Vino vendibili, non opus est suspensa bedera.
philaret, R. Fenne.

Thomas, Lord Windsor, his humble congratulation of the ninth Worthy.
WHo-euer shall a virtuous mind embrace,
Present renown, and glory shall him grace
Long after life: as in these Worthies nine
It does appear. For they long since are dead;
Their Virtues live, in Chronicles they shine,
Their Corpse consumed to dust: yea even the Lead,
That closed their earthly bodies in the grave,
Can not be seen; no sign thereof we have.
Their names, nor fames, their deeds will never die:
Their Acts (their Monuments) their worthy praise;
These registered, do live perpetually:
There is no end or period of their days.
Live so, Great Britains Prince, as they have done,
Ninth Worthy, hopeful HENRY, great Kings Son.
Sir William Whorewood, Knight, in honor of the ninth Worthy.
WHen Siluius Post-humus did seek this soil,
And therein thought to reign, to rule, to rest,
Travails he found, and storms, with bitter broile:
But little space in quiet he possessed.
Since when, what alterations, and what change,
By Conquest, and by Tyrants bloody hand,
To write at large, it would be true; but strange
To count the troubles of now happy land.
Yet, by eight HENRY'S, settled in it self;
Lastly, united to one Kingdom more,
What needs it to care for Indian pelse?
Gold, Plate, and Pearl it now possesses store;
And, more then all, a King, a Queen, a Plant,
A Royal Issue, Parents chiefest joy,
A Captain that in time will those supplant
That dare attempt Great Britains least annoy.
Ninth Worthy, worthiest next our Sovereign be.
God grant, long Reign of both may Britain see.
John Widevp (the elder) Gent. upon the Worthies; but with most humble duties
to the Worthiest of them all.
NIne Worthies were described long agone,
And as forgotten are intumbed dead:
No Monument remains of any one,
Though they were Shrined better then in Lead:
But Joshua, David, Macchabeus be
In Bible booked for first Worthies three.
Next in that Rank (and so the number nine)
Were Julius, Alexander Macedon,
Hector of Troy, and Godfrey-de-Boloigne,
Arthur of Britain, Charles King Pepins son.
In other books their Stories written are;
With whom eight HENRY'S welnigh may compare.
The ninth, in hope more worthy then the eight:
Upon whose shoulders wisest heads have hurld
Of future honor a far greater weight,
Applauded of Europa, and the World.
Besides all these, one Worthy more I sing;
The worthiest of Worthies, JAMES our King.
Jo: Guilliams Gent. upon the ancient nine Worthies.
THe drift and scope of princely Subject this
Is bent to very perfect honest end.
The Writer thought, he could not write amiss,
In writing that which formerly was pend.
Nine former Worthies Stories theirs extend
Some of them up to heaven, with endless praise:
All of them lived most worthy in their days.
But all were not of one, nor oneselfe sort:
Three excellents, of God ordaind before:
Three other valiant, famous by report.
The first three Kings, one Prophet, valor store:
All three commended heavenly virtues lore.
Three other were profane, but valiant men:
Three Christian Kings, that used pike for pen.
Paul Peart, Gent. upon the later nine Worthies.
TO make those Worthies live again.
Which long ago were lapt in Lead,
Is worthy praise for taken pain,
To him that raises from the dead
Such Princes as in time possessed
The Regal Scepter, Crown and Globe,
And in their Tumbs have taken rest,
That once did wear a kingly Robe,
Now to appear on princely Stage,
And to resign a princely power,
Unto a Prince whose tender age
IEHOVA bless, and grant each hour
Him to attend the royal hest,
And follow after true renown.
He then from heaven shall be blessed,
Nor dare proud Fortune ever frown
On him that virtuously does live,
To whom eight HENRY'S honor give.
John Widevp (the younger) Gent. of the nine Worthies.
THe primier Worthies, which we Worthies call,
Were worthy, three for godly exhortation
(Joshua, David, Macchabeus): and all
The other six for valors imitation.
Nine worthies more behold; eight Kings, a Prince,
Young, Tender, Sweet, Great Britains hopeful Joy:
Who will in time his fathers Foes convince,
And worthy prove, as Hector was of Troy.
Then eighteen Worthies, with the Prince of Britain,
This book does note: Lo here their stories written.
Thomas Webber (servant to the Kings Majesty) upon the sixth Worthy, King HENRY
the sixth.
THe King was left an infant, most unfit
To Reign, by age: but not to rule, till when
He should attain in time to riper wit,
Thereby to judge the differences of men:
Yet, Crowned in Paris King of mighty France,
In tender years almost an infant still,
His uncles and his Nobles did advance
His Regal power, as did his father will
They should. But yet this King, a tender child,
Was ruled and ouer-rul'd by Tutors head.
For de-la-Poole his nonage then beguiled
And brought King Rayners daughter to his bed:
Yet during nonage, or his kingly youth,
The valiant Dukes of Bedford, Gloucester thoe
Salisbury, Shrewsbury Earls, these bent their truth
T'vphold him King of France in spite of foe.
In whose time, Talbot was a terror great
To all the French. For, as his dubbing drums
With armed soldiers did their walls down beat:
So women feared their children, TALBOT comes.
Thus whilst these Nobles lived, this Worthy thriues:
They being dead, then all was lost again.
Salisbury, Talbot both did lose their lives,
Bedford likewise. Now both these valiants slain,
This King at home drencht in domesticke strife,
Fierce factions set his Nobles at debate:
Some followed him, and some his headstrong wife,
Till Richard Duke of York disturbd their State,
Who claimd the Crown; yet never could attain
The same: but Edward fourth his valiant son
Rose into Arms, though first his father slain
At Wakefield, where the Queen a battle won.
With these and thousands more, this worthy King
Tossed and turmoyled, spent his Mortal time
Till Tyrant Gloucester in the Tower did bring
To death this worthy Prince deuoide of crime:
In all his life who ever shunned evil,
Conquering Sin, the World, the Flesh, the Devil.
Thomas Binwin, Gent. upon his worthy young Master, the ninth Worthy.
I Fall the Worthies should on earth appear,
The ancient Worthies nine in Rank and place
(Three from Iudaea, three from other where,
And Christians three) our Britains hopeful Grace,
Our sweet young Prince, thereby could take small stain
Though they from graves were raised up again.
Now for those Kings, which HENRY had to name,
May they compare with HENRY Britains Prince?
These Worthies (though of far renoumed fame)
Have sought and fought long time ago, and since,
In vain for to conioyne their neighbor land
To this their own; continuing war and strife,
Until it pleased Iehouas mighty hand
From hence to give King JAMES the fourth a wife,
HENRY seuenths, sister, Lady Margaret fair;
Of whom descends our Liege and gracious King,
And brave Prince HENRY, his thrice worthy heir.
Magnify God and Nature, for this thing.
Which sole succession has brought such accord,
That he of both may once rest Sovereign Lord.
This then may make our Worthy principal
Of later nine; His future power and strength:
Yea more, herein exceeding Worthies all;
They being dead are now entumbd at length:
This Worthy lives. God grant him long to live:
Grant long (good Lord) the King, his father, reign
(And to his princely son thy graces give,
Great God) that both may Britains wealth maintain.
The Authors excuse of an Escape, in the Title following.
NExt Title some small error may contain;
Which does auerre HENRY'S, nine English Kings:
Yet, to my Book, why should it seem a stain?
Since, to Great Britain, it great comfort brings.
The hopeful Prince and Heir apparent, He
With the eight Kings well may consorted be.
Twice escaped (by Pen, and Press) I feared to raze
His future Style, at whom even Kings may gaze.
The nine English Worthies, or famous and worthy Kings of England; being all
of one name, beginning with King HENRY the first, and concluding with HENRY now
Prince of Great Britain.
King Henry the First.


KIng Henry the first was the son of William the Brother to William Rufus,
that was immediately before King of England: which worthy King for his wisdom,
learning, judgment, and honorable policy was surnamed Henry Beuclarke, or the
fair Writer and good Scholar. He began his reign the fifth day of August,
Anno Domini 1100. He was crowned at Westminster, reigned 35. years, and 4.
months, lacking 4. days: he was strong of body, comely of stature, black
haired, large and fair eyes, a Princely and a pleasant countenance, excelling
in three virtues most commendable and comfortable to the subjects of his time,
viz, Wisdom, Eloquence, and Ualour.

His Epitaphe.
HENRY the first, a King, a Princes son,
Excellent wise, well learned, of valiant mind,
His government recorded this has won,
For everlasting praise to him assigned,
First worthy. Then take place, O mighty Prince,
That with these virtues did thy foes convince.
King Henry, the Second of that name.


HE was a Frenchman borne, the second son of Ieffrey Plantaginet, Earl of
Aniow, begotten of Mawde the Empress, daughter to King Henry the first; he
began his reign over this noble Kealme of England the 25, day of October, in
the year after the incarnation of our Savior Christ 1154. and departed this
life in An. 1189. in the 61. year of his age, after he had reigned 34. years,
9. months, and two days. And here may be thought (says the Historiographer)
that the reign of the Frenchmen, and the names took an end, after they had
borne sway 122. years, after the coming in of King William the Conqueror.
For, those Kings which reigned after this Henry the second, may rightly be
called Englishmen, because they were borne in England and used the English
tongue, custom, and manners, according to the nature and quality of the
Country. His body was buried at Fountverand, which is an Abbey situate not far
from the Eagle, within the Duchy of Almucon.

His Description.
HE was a man of good stature and very well formed, of comely conntenance,
partly red hayred, gray eyes, of wit quick, and perfect good memory, so that
he could remember long al things of any moment, which he had either heard or
seen; of body somewhat fleshy, and strong, and could abide very patiently the
displeasures both of cold and heat, he had a large head, a broad breast, and
very spare of diet, the rather because he would not be too fat, therefore when
he was at leisure and free from wars, his exercise was hunting, and progress
travels.

He was a Prince of stout stomach and invincible courage, more resolute and
constant in time of adversity, then in prosperity: liberal to all men, but
chiefly unto soldiers. Pitiful to the poor (an excellent virtue and nature
in a Prince). For proof whereof in a time of dearth which happened in Aniow
and Main, he did at his own cost and Princely pity: feed ten thousand
poor people every day with good victuals, from the first of April till the
last of July, An. Dom. 1176. And above his Princely and most magnificent
housekeeping he stored garners, cellars, and store-howses, religious persons
and their howses. Tributes and Taxes he took very seldom, and those not
great. He was very expect in feats of war, and no less fortunate therein.
He would praise his Captains and men of war after their deaths to encourage
those that lived; he was well learned as those Princes aforesaid, and
exceeding wise. His care to have Justice duly administered in his Realm was
exceeding great, in so much that finding that the Sheriffs in his time were
rather inclined to seek their own gain, then to deal uprightly with his
subjects, he appointed Sapranisors over them to over see their doings, as if
they had been Controllers, so as an awful regard made them circumspect, and
wary in their doings. He ordained also punishment for Hunters in Forrestes and
grounds of warren, either by fines or byimprisonment. He ordained that
murderers should be hanged, other offenses he punished with loss of limbs,
and otherwise as the quality of the offense required. Most careful he was to
have justice administered without corruption. He tried men of sundry sorts to
execute justice with justice, but in fine he referred it to the Bishops and
Clergy men, hoping in that profession to find the most integrity: and yet he
little regarded the Bishop of Rome or feared his censures, as is manifest by
the history of Thomas Becket in this Kings time, and sundry others.

I find two Latin Epitaphes translated into rude English by the Writer of this
whole History, the effect whereof somewhat reformed is, as follows.
KIng Henry was of late my famous name,
A Conqueror of many a Princely land:
Small Epitaph shall need to advance my fame,
What done by me was done by powerful hand,
And in my days I passed not a pin,
For Pope of Rome, he naught of me could win:
War, Law, and Justice as a princes word,
I held them always of the great'st regard:
Where peace would not prevail I drew my sword:
Unto my self and soldiers, full reward
I gave, and with small bloodshed as I could,
I tamed my foes and quailed princes bold.
As second Worthy, I do claim the place,
Amongst the nine, and more. For in my time,
All Christian Princes sought to me for grace,
For without me they could not live sans crime.
My peers and princes I maintained with right,
And in the field dubd many a worthy Knight.
King Henry the third.


KIng Henry, the third of that name was the eldest son of King John, the
youngest son of king Henry the second: being a child of the age of nine years
he began his reign over the realm of England the 19. day of October, in the
year of our Lord 1216. he was crowned at Gloucester by the hand of two Bishops:
viz. Winchester and Bathe, by the honorable means of William Marshall then
Earl of Pembroke. He was a Prince of great wisdom, power, and policy, by
whose eloquent oration this young king was crowned as is here mentioned: he
departed this life at Westminster the 16. day of November, Nota.
in the year of our Lord 1272. after he had lived 65. years and reigned King
of this Realm 56. years and 28. days: he was buried at Westminster, left
a Princely and a very honorable issue, as Edward Prince of Wales, who
succeeded him by the name of King Edward the first. He had one Son more and
three daughters, he was of body well cast (to use the former writers own
words) being strong and of a good stature, well favored, and of a be wtifull
face, only blemished a little in the lid of one of his eyes, of nature very
courteous, and of stomach both noble and stout, as may appear by his many
battles and victories, a deuaut Prince toward his God, and bountiful in
works of relief, and comforts toward the poor and needy: therefore a
Worthy, and worthy of the ensuing Epitaph.

His Epitaphe.
HEnry the third began his reign in peace,
And likewise brought a mighty peace to pass:
Beginning his forced factious French surcease,
And landed Lewis in France where first he was:
Else noble England had been thrust in thralls,
By Lodowicke and his lusty gallants then:
But English Britains banished the Galls;
So showing that they were true English men.
King Henry then of Worthies was the chief,
That for his subjects wrought so greatreliefe.
King Henry the fourth.


WHen king Richard the second had resigned the crown, as in his history it
appears he did, Henry Plantaginet borne at Bollingbroke in the county of
Lincoln, Duke of Lancaster, Earl of Hertford, Lecester and Lincoln, was with
the general consent both of the Lords and commons of the Realm published,
proclaimed, and declared king of England, France, and Lord of Ireland: he was
crowned at Westminster in An. 1399. with great and kingly Majesty, all
Officers of estate and of princely service doing their homages, and attending
upon the same. He departed this life the 20. day of March 1413. and in the
year of his age 46. when he had reigned 13. years five months and od days.

The manner of his death.
THis king was endued with magnanimity, and did purpose a voyage against the
infidels, and to have with his force and might redeemed Palestina, or the holy
land then so called, from the Infidels. Having an army and all honorable
provisions for such a journey ready, and being the time of his high court of
Parliament, he fell suddenly and extremely sick, as he was then (though
vainly) praying before Saint Edwards shrine: from whence being removed into a
chamber of the Abbots of Westminster called Jerusalem, he departed as is above
said. But during the time of his sickness, say some Writers, he caused his
crown to be set upon a pillowe at his beds head: and suddenly the pangs of
death having power over him he seemed dead, and the gentlemen Attendants
covered his face with a veil. That valiant Prince his son being advertised
thereof, entered into the chamber, took away the Crown and departed. The King
his father revived quickly, and did perceive the lack of his crown, and
having knowledge that the Prince his son had taken it away, he caused him to
appear before his presence, demanding of him how he durst presume to such an
act. Who made unto the king an humble and princely answer: but the king
answered with a powerful Majesty, saying with a great sigh; Well fair Son,
what right I had to it God knows, yet I commit all to God, and wish unto you
all good graces from him worthy of so high and mighty a calling; so yelding up
the ghost in the Abbot of VVestminsters chamber called Jerusalem as is
aforesaid. And himself being told that the same chamber was so called he
took comfort there at and much reioiced therein: for, determining a most
honorable journey toward Jerusalem, he did end his days in Jerusalem.

His Description.
THis King was of a mean stature, well proportioned and formally compact,
quick, prompt and ready of wit, of a stout courage, and in his latter days
he showed himself so gentle that he obtained more love amongst the Nobles and
people of this Roalme, then he had purchased envy concerning his right to the
Crown mentioned to the Prince his son: he was buried at Canterbury, the
King his son being present at his funeralles.

His Epitaphe.
HEnry the fourth (though Richard second should
Have dyed our king) he dyed our King indeed.
Which act by dint ofsword was so controlled
That many English hearts it made to bleed:
Shrewsburie field does still the matter scan:
Where Percies pearc't the heart of many a man,
Themselves were pearc't and perished in the field:
This mighty King could not be conquered so,
Lord Henry hotspurre could not make him yield,
Northumberland Earl, Worcester, thousands more,
The Prince of Wales, a leader young but bold,
Fought for his Father like a Lion old.
Like an old Lion rampant open jaws,
Devouring beasts, so fought this peerless Prince;
Yet was he, wounded in the face God knows,
Prayed to take Tent: he said I will convince
Those foes that dare behold my Fathers face,
Within his land and work him this disgrace.
The brave Earl Douglas struck the King on helm,
And feld him flat upon the trampled plain,
Slew Walter Blunt and like to ouerwhelme
The King, the prince, and all their valiant train,
Till Kingly valor forced Douglas flight
And with his hand slew thirty six outright.
Douglas was taken prisoner in the place,
So was the Earl of Wore'ster worthy pain,
And so he was beheaded wanting grace:
But Douglas was received to grace again,
And freely ransomed by that worthy King
Against whom he fought and many foes did bring.
More of this King, if more ye list to hear,
Then read his story and more shall you find,
That from his prime unto his perfect'st year
Great honor and great fortunes were assigned
Unto this King; but more unto his son
Who had no peer since Christian World begun. Counterfeit kings.

Counterfaite Kings in Kingly armors clad
Were beaten down by the Earl Douglas hand,
To see them fall it seemed his heart to glad
To rise again, he said o powerful land
That valiant hearts withstanding fortunes check
Three Kings to rise each one in others neck.
King Henry the fifth.


THe Prince of Wales son and heir to king Henry the fourth was born at
Mounmouth in Wales upon the river of Wy: after his Father was departed this
life, he took on him the regiment of the Realm of England the 20. day of
March: and being proclaimed King by the name of Henry the fifth, the year of
our Lord 1413, such great hope and good expectation was had of this kings
fortunate success to follow, that within sour days after his Fathers
departure, diverse Noble men and honorable personages did to him homage, and
swear to him due obedience: which had not been seen done to any his
predecessors kings of this Realm, till they had been possessed of the Crown.

He was crowned the ninth day of April being Palme-sonday: and being a very
fierce and cruel day for variety of foul weather, men diuined and deemed
diuersely what might ensue of such a beginning.

But whatsoever men's fantasies might or did conjecture, yet this was the King,
that according to the proverb did show and declare indeed how true and new
honor ought to make exchange of old and evil manners. For no sooner was he
invested king and had received the Crown, but he did put upon him the shape
of a new man, turning insolency and wildenesse, into gravity and soberness:
and whereas he had passed his youth with wanton and dissolute wild young
gentlemen who had led him into all excess of riot, in so much as one of his
youthful train being committed by the Lord chief Justice for misdemeanour,
the youthful Prince did strike the Lord chief Justice upon the face, who also
presently committed the Prince to strait and close prison. The King his Father
mainetained the Lord chief Justice; banished the Prince from his presence and
Court, did remove him from the Counsel Table, and would not readmit him into
favor, until with submission extraordinary he obtained the same. But as
before being placed in the seat Royal, he called these Gallants before him,
toulde them of his and their own faults, banished them from his presence, not
unrewarded nor yet vnpreferred, inhibiting them upon a great pain, not once to
approach, lodge, or soiourne within ten miles of his Court or Mansions. And
then he made choice of grave, wise, and politic Counselors: by whose high
wisdoms, and prudent aduertisements he might at all times rule to his honor,
and govern to his profit. And considering with himself what charge he had in
hand, and what appertained to his duty and office, he trusted not too much to
his own wisdom, Judgment, and directions: but as is aforesaid he called to
his Counsel such honorable personages as might assist him in the government
of so weighty a charge to instruct him with such good reasons and fruitful
persuasions, as that thereby he might show himself to his subjects, a Mirror
of virtue, and an example of just and upright dealing. And having first laid
the foundations of his government sure, he did prouidently forecast and
consider in his Princely mind, that every good gift and every perfect gift
comes down from the Father of lights. He determined withal to begin with
something most acceptable to his divine Majesty. And therefore commanded the
Clergy sincerely and truly to preach the Word of God and live accordingly; that
they might be as they ought to be, and their profession required, lanternes of
light to the temporaltie. The Lay men he commanded to serve God and obey their
Prince, prohibiting them above all things the breach of matrimony, the foul
abuse of swearing, chiefly of wilful perjury: and to that end he ordained
good and wholesome laws, and presently summoned a Parliament, in the which in
honor of ye most noble order of ye garter, he ordained the day of S. George
ever after to be kept with a double feast: in this his first parliament, he
propounded matters of question touching the hierarchy of Churchgouernment, that
time; but was answered with the just and lawful title which he had to the
kingdom of France. Which when he had conceived to pursue, the Dolphin of
France a valiant young prince, sent unto his Majesty a barrel of tennis bals, as
if he would have said, these are fit instruments for such a young gentleman to
play withal as you the King of England is, and not at these years to forecast
the conquest or rather a Reconquest of the noble and renowned kingdom of
France, which the King my Father, and I the Dolphin do and will possess
mauger the power of England.

But this redoubted king, magnanimous, wise, grave, and settled to all kingly
resolutions, sends the Dolphin this mild and sober answer. Go tell that
gallant young gentleman your Master, that I do thank him for his present, and
will with all speed prepare to send him in requital such store of London bals,
as shall batter the strongest holds, make stoops the most bewtifull Towers,
and make flat the chimnies, and roufes of houses, about his and his Fathers
ears, that are contained in the realm and confines of France. For I will make
the highest crown to stoop, and the proudest miter to kneel down; yea and
that before one year do pass me, by the power of God. Which thing to make
good he slacked no time, omitted no occasion, lost no opportunity, but made
preparation both by sea and land to execute the full of his intended purposes.

Being furnished for the expedition of the fleet, ready for his Majesty and
Armies to sail forth for the entire conquest of all France, behold a
conspiracy was practiced against this immaculate king, by the Earl of
Cambridge and others at Sowthhampton, upon whom he commanded (though sore
against his will, as some Authors do affirm) execution to be done upon his
going to shipborde, making it known by a most loving and princely Oration how
unwilling he was to have taken life away, or to have left the noble Earl of
Camebridge dead and sequestered from his then victorious voyage.

Yet had he seen or foreseen at that time to have showed the like upon the
Earl of March: Richard Duke of York had not claimed afterward as he did, nor
confounded the state and government of this kings only son, nor wrought his
own end at Wakefield as he did: but the Almighty is and ever will be all in all.

This his first and honorable voyage into France, his warlike proceedings
there, his conquest of many particulars, his battle or most famous victory
at Agincourt, where he slew and subjected to himself, as prisoners and
captives, all the flower and chiualry of France, his return again into
England, his second voyage back again, his second conquest of all France, the
Homages of Philip duke of Burgundy with other estates of France, his marriage
with Katherin the French Kings daughter, his triumphant stay there in Paris,
his Princely or rather Imperial howsekeeping there, his return again into
England, his last return into France, his settling of the estate there, his
Coronation at Paris, the most Prophetical censure of Prince Henry his Son
borne at Windsor, and afterward King of England crowned also in Paris King of
France, his untimely or most lamentable death, his return into England in
mournful funerals, are extant in his histories, and the best worthy of
reading, in regard of his own Princely Person, valor, virtues, and most
excellent acts, of all the other Chronicles of the English Nation. And yet to
observe the order and decorum of my poor endeavor in abstracting the
beginnings and endings of eight most worthy Kings, and all Henry's, I will
conclude this most worthy king, with the manner of his death, and description,
using the Hystoriegraphers own words, phrase, and manner; as not to be amended
by any.

The King fell sick, and so was brought to Boys de Vincens, and thither came
to visit his Majesty (with heavy hearts) the Dukes of Bedford and Gloucester:
the Earls of Salisoury, and Warwick; whom the King right lovingly welcomed,
and showed himself to be no less glad of their presence: but when he did see
them pensive for his sickness, and danger wherein he lay, with many grave pithy
and courteous words recomforted them the best hes could, and there with he
exhorted them to be trusty and faithful unto his son, to see that he might
be virtuously educated, and brought up: concerning the rule and gonernance of
his Realms, during the minority and young years of his said son, he willed
them to join together in all friendly love, and concord, keeping continual
peace and amity with the Duke of Burgundy and never to make treaty with
Charles, who calls himself Dolphin of Vyenne, by the which any part of the
crown of France, or of the Duchy of Normandy and Gwyene might be lessened and
diminished. And further that the Duke of Orleance, and the other Princes should
remain prisoners till his son came to lawful age, least by returning they
might kindle more fire in one day, then could well be quenched again in three.
He further aduertized them, that if they thought it necessary, then it should
be good to have his brother the Duke of Gloucester to be Protector of England
during the minority of his son: And his brother the Duke of Bedford with the
help of the Duke of Burgundy to be Regent of France.

Commanding him with fire and sword to persecute the Dolphin, until he had
either brought him to reason and obeisance, or else to drive and expel him out
of the Realm of France. And herewith he protested unto them that neither
ambitious desire to enlarge his Dominions neither to purchase vain renowue and
worldly fame, nor any such consideration had moved him to take that war in
hand, but only that in prosecuting his just Title, he might in the end
attain to perfect peace, and come to enjoy those pieces of his inherita^ces
which to him of right belonged: and that before the beginning of the same wars
he was fully persuaded by men both wise and holy of life, he might and ought
upon such inteut, both begin the same wars and follow them til he had brought
them to an end, justly and rightly; and that without all danger of the
Almighties displeasure, or peril of soul.

The Noble men present promised to observe his precepts and perform his
desires: but their hearts were so pensive, and replenished with sorrow, that
one could not for weeping behoulde an other. Then he received the Sacrament
and fell to devout prayer: and in saying of certain Psalms meet for the
present time, he ended the days of this life, the last day of August, Anno
1422.

His Description.
THis Henry was a king whose life was immaculate, and his living without spot,
this king was a prince whom all men loved, and was of none envied, this prince
was a Captain against whom fortune never frowned, nor mischance once spurned:
this Captain was a Shepherd, whom his flock both loved and obeyed. This
Shepherd was such a Iustitiary, that he left no offense unpunished, nor good
desert unrecompensed and fully rewarded. This Iustitiary was so feared, that
all rebellion was banished, and Sedition suppressed. His virtues were no more
notable then his other qualities were worthy of praise. In strength, and
nimblenesse of body, from his youth few or none were to him comparable. In
wrestling, leaping, and running, no man (almost) durst with him presume. In
casting of great iron bars, and heavy stones, he excelled commonly al men:
cold weather never made him siothful, nor hot caused him to shrink, and when he
most labored his head was uncovered: he was no more weary of his armor, then of
a light cloak. Hunger and thirst to him were never noisome, he was never
afraid of a wound, nor would shrink for the pain in dressing, he neither
turned his nose from ill sauoures, nor from smoke and dust would close his
eyes, no man could be found more temperate in eating and drinking, whose diet
was not too delicate, but rather more meet for men of war, then for dainty
and delicate persons: every honest person was permitted to come to him even
sitting at meals, and either secretly or openly to declare their minds, and
intent: high and weighty causes as well between men of war, as other he would
gladly hear, and either determine them himself, or commit them to other to
give sentence. He slept very little, and that was moved either by bodily
labor, or unquietness of mind: but being in sleep no small noise could
awake him; insomuch as when his soldiers did sing, or minstrels play in the
camp that it sounded withal, then he slept most soundly. His courage was
invincible and his heart so immutable that fear was banished from him. If an
Alarm chanced to be raised by his enemies he was the first in armor, and the
first that would set forward: in the time of wars he would not only get
knowledge what his enemies did, but what they said, and intended to do; so that
all things to him, were known aforehand. And of his devises, few persons
before the execution of his purposed intent should be made privy: he had
knowledge in the ordering and guiding of an army, and such a rare gift to
encourage his men to fight, that the Frenchmen said it was impossible for him
to be vanquished in battle: he had such wit, such prudence, and such policy,
that he never enterprised any thing before he had fully debated it, and
foreseen all the maine chances that might happen: and when the end was once
concluded, he with all diligence and courage set his purpose forward. What
policy he had in finding sudden remedies, from present and dangerous
mischiefs, and what practice he used in saving himself and his people in
sudden distresses, except by his acts they did plainly appear, it would seem
incredible to be told; and no less admirable how he did abstain from
lascivious living, and auaritious desires in such time and estate of riches and
provoking youth. In the time of loss he was no more sad then in the times of
victory, which co^stancy few Princes have ever used. To speak of his bounty
and liberality, no man could be more free, gentle and liberal in bestowing
rewards upon all persons according to their deserts: saving that he did not
regard money to keep, but to give away, and to spend. What may besayd? he was
the Myrror of al Christendom, and the glory of his Country, the flower of
Kings passed, and the glass of all succeeding Majesty. No Prince had less of
his subjects, no king conquered more: whose fame by his death lively flourished,
as his acts in his life were seen and remembered. The loss of such a Prince
could not be sufficiently lamented of his subjects: blaming fortune for
taking away so precious a jewel, so noble an ornament so sure a defense: for no
doubt so much hope as was taken away from the Englishmen (the assured conquest
of all France) by his sudden death, so much trust was increased in the French
nations stomachs to recover their late losses again; as not many years after
they did indeed: Peeter Basset Esquier, and one of his chamber, affirmed that
he dyed of a Pleurisy, there were others that did astirme otherwise, but the
most likely was a Pleurisy indeed; the nature of that disease being then
unknown to Phisicians, or to the world in those days especially.

This King reigned nine years, five months and three and twenty days: and
lived not full thirty eight years: he was of stature higher then the common
sort, of body lean, singularly proportioned and strongly made, of face
bewtifull, something long necked, black haired, stout of stomach, eloquent
of tongue, in Martial affairs a perfect master, and of chiualry the very
peragon: His body inbalmed and lapped in lead was laid in a chariot royal,
richly apparelled in cloth of gold: upon his corpse was laid a representation
of his person, adorned with robes, diadem, scepter, and ball, like a king: the
which chariot was drawn with six horses richly trapped with several arms;
the first with the arms of S. George, the second with the arms of Normandy,
the third with the arms of king Arthur: the fourth with the arms of S.
Edward, the fifth with the arms of France, the sixth with the arms of England
and France. On this Chariot gave attendance James King of Scotland principal
Mourner, his Uncle Thomas duke of Exceter, Richard Earl of Warwick, Edmond
Earl of March, Humfrey Earl of Stafford, Edmond Earl of Mortaine. The Nota.
Lord Fitz Hugh, Hugh L. Beufort, Walt. L. Hungerford Sir Lewis Robsert, Lord
Bourchier, Sir John Cornwall, Lord Fanhope, and the Lord Cromwell were the
mourners. The Lord Louell, the Lord Audley, the Lord Zouch, bare the banners of
Saints: the Baron of Dublin bare the standard, The Earl of Longvile bare the
banner. The Hatchments were borne only by Captains to the number of twelve,
and round about the Chariot rode five hundred men at Arms all in black armor,
and their horses barbd with black, carrying the but end of their spears
upwards. The conuoy of this dolorous funeral was committed to Sir William
Philips Treasurer of his househould, and to Sir William Porter his chief
caruer and other mourners: on each side the chariot were 300. men bearing long
torches, and Lords bearing banners, baueroles and penons. Nota.
With this funeral pomp he was conuaied from Bois De Vincens to Paris; and so
to Roan, to Abuill, to Calis, to Dover, and so through London to Westminster,
where he was buried with such solemnities as to such a Prince appertained;
especially such lamenting of the Lords, and such mourning of the Commons, asn
ever before those days were seen in the Realm of England.

There is as I do think an Epitaph fixed upon his Tumbe, at Westminster: but
I held it my duty to continue my course in writing a simple one of my own, in
honor of him, etc. His Epitaphe.
OHad I Homers pen, and Virgills wit,
With Tullies Eloquence to praise this Prince,
And would the Muses come and by me sit;
Yet pen and paper would my Muse convince.
For who can write of this most famous King,
And shall not err in many a worthy thing?
His life immaculate, what does that mean?
But that he conquered sin, the world, the flesh,
Unspotted sure: O heart and body clean!
Almost two hundred years ago, yet fresh
The memory of thee O King remains.
Thy Tumbe like Crystal shines deuoyd of stains.
Prose be thy praise, which Holinshed hathpend:
And praised be thy name O King for ever.
Thy own pure praise no mortal man can mend,
Thy name cannot forgotten be, no never.
England and France ring forth thy famous praise.
Though thou reign with the Ancient of all days,
Yet as a mirror, or a looking glass
Thou mai'st remain o King amongst us still.
Succeeding princes will not let thee pass
To Heaven without administering thy Will.
Such testaments grant all thy heirs to prove:
Then Englands glory never shall remove.
Rest then o Rex, and rise up with renown,
VVestmonastery does thy tomb possess,
Succeeding Sovereign does enjoy thy Crown
And Kingdoms all, one more; for whom we bless
Thy name great God, who long prolong his days
To Englands comfort and ay-lasting praise.
King Henry the sixth.


AFter yt death had bereft the World of that noble Prince King Henry the fifth,
his only son Prince Henry being of the age of nine months or thereabout
with the sownde of Trumpets was openly proclaimed King of England and of
France, the thirteenth day of August Anno. 1422. by the name of King Henry the
sixth. The custody of this young Prince was committed to the Duke of Exceter,
and to Henry Beuford Bishop of Winchester. In the eight year of his reign and
the same of his age, he was with all solemnity crowned king at Westminster: not
long after which time he took the sea at Dover, landed at Calis, from thence
to Roan, and so to Paris, whither attended on him his Uncle the Cardinal of
Winchester, the Cardinal and Archbishop of York, the Dukes of Bedford, York
and Norfolk, the Earls of Warwick, Salisbury, Oxford, Huntington, Ormond,
Mortaine, and Suffolk: of Gaskoines, there were the Earls of Longvoile and
March, besides many Noble men of England, Gwyen, and Normandy: and the chief
of the French Nation, were the Dukes of Burgundy, Lewis of Luxenburgh Cardinal
and Chauncelor of France for King Henry, the Bishops of Bauiors and Noyom, both
Peers of France; the Bishop of Paris and diverse other Bishops: the Earl of
Vandemont, with a great number of other Noblemen, superfluous to be named. And
he had a Guarde about his person of three hundred choice Archers, some on
horseback, and part on foot. With what tryumphes, pageants, rich and
sumptuous shows he was received into Paris, would be too tedious to
repeat. On the seventh day of December, he was crowned King of France in our
Lady Church (so called) in Paris, by the Cardinal of Winchester; the bishop of
Paris not being contented that the Cardinal should execute such an high office
in his Church and Jurisdiction. After all ceremonies finished, the king
returned to the palace, having one crown on his head, and another borne before
him, one scepter in his hand and another borne before him: A triumphant feast
and great rejoicing, but mingled with distaste by means of the proud Cardinal
of Winchester; who, preferring his own will before the weal public,
controlled that mighty Prince and valiant Captain, the Duke of Bedford
Protector of France: which malice moved, and heart-burning broched by the
Cardinal, was remembered and revenged by the Nobility. But my only purpose
being to select forth the name of Henry, and but to note their beginnings and
endings, by way of abstract I will leave this worthy young prince yet a while,
and tell the untimely death of John Duke of Bedford, a tale worthy of note and
memory, and this is it: viz.

This year the fourteenth day of September 1436. dyed John Duke of Bedford and
Regent of France, a man most politic in peace, and no less hardy in war,
and yet no more valiant then merciful when he had the victory: whose body was
with all funeral pomp and solemn obsequies buried in the cathedral Church of
Roan in the North side of the quier under a sumptuous and costly monument etc.
Which Tumbe when King Lewis the 11. knew to be his, and was incited by certain
indiscreet Frenchmen to deface the same, he answered; What honor shall it be
to us, or to you, to break this monument, and to pull forth of the ground the
dead body of him, whom in his life time, neither my father nor your progenitors
with all their puissance and friends were not once able to make flee one foot
backward; but by his strength wisdom and policy, he kept them all out of the
principal Dominions of the realm of France, and also out of this Noble and
famous Duchy of Normandy: wherefore I say first, as God has his soul, so
shall his body now ly in rest, who when he was alive would have disquieted the
proudest of us all. And as for the Tomb, I do assure you it is not so decent
nor convenient, as his honor and acts deserved, no although it were more
rich and more bewtifull then it is.

But to return according to the occasion, and by the way to touch this worthy
Prince. His misfortune in his minority, was the cause of his Nobles dissension:
and that the cause of an unmeet and unfortunate marriage; so that the Prince in
his young years spent all the honor power and pleasures of this mighty and
worthy King, whose life was immaculate like his Fathers, whose patience
overcame all his perplexities. Once deposed from his regal state, and dignity,
and once again restored (in which interim was his prophetical speech to those
Princes and Nobles about him, touching the young Earl of Richmond a child of
ten years old, Behold (says he) steadfastly beholding the young Earl: This
is he, whom we and all our Adversaries must give place unto, when all is
done) He was again deposed, committed to the Tower of London, his only son
slain, his Queen took sanctuary, his Nobles, best subjects, and all his
partakers slain in sundry battles: himself lastly murdered in prison; and
yet his patience, integrity, godly life and good works were no less
commendable, then the acts of his father were famous, and honorable. He reigned
38. years, 6. months and odd days; and other 6. months after his
readeption of the crown. Heliued 52. years.

To censure him, ye God punished him for his grandfathers and fathers faults,
or that miracles were wrought by him, I neither will believe, nor write, as the
writer of his history does, nor of King Henry the seauenths purpose to have
him canonized for a Saint: but yet the love of that most mighty King, that in
the zeal of this Kings immaculate life would have had him remembered for such
holiness, does commend my purpose (which is) to commend him for the sixth worthy
(and in rank also) above all other his princely deeds. The kings college in
Camebridge, and Eaton College near Windsor, are both very excellent
monuments of his princely liberality: and my self have observed forty years
together that God blessed both those houses, the one for education, and the
other for bringing forth very excellent scholars.

His Description.
HE was of a seemly stature, of body slender; to which proportion all his
parts were answerable. His face was very bewtifull: wherein was ever resident a
sweet reseblance of bounty, wherewith his Royal heart was naturally indewed,
and ever thereunto inclined. He abhorred all vices both of the body and of the
soul. His patience was such, that of injuries done to him (which were
innumerable) he did never seek vengeance; thinking and saying, that for such
adversities as befell him, his sins should be forgotten and forgiven: what
losses soever did happen unto him, he never esteemed nor made account thereof:
but if any thing were done which seemed to offend the Almighty, that he
lamented with sorrowful repentance.

His Epitaphe.
HEnry the sixth, a Prince, a Saint, a King,
Fair Englands sovereign eight and thirty year:
Which time with more, his woeful end did bring,
As in his story does too plain appear:
O had his Uncles lived and well agreed,
His death had not so vilely been decreed.
Had Dela Poole been dead ere he was borne
King Raynars Daughter had not been thy wife.
If innocence thou had held in skorne
And reached thy hand to war, debate and strife,
And Parent like had proved Mars his son,
Gloucester had not thy fatal thread vnspon.
Had Richard (Warwick) won at Barnet field,
Brave Mountacute, or many Nobles more,
That fled, or died, or were enforced to yield
(But power divine had not ordained so)
He had not gone back prisoner to the Tower
And there detained until his latest hour.
Tewkesbury field had like or worse success;
Duke Somerset, the Earl of Deuon, eke
The Marquess Dorset taken in the press
The poor young Prince was found, whom Crofts did seek
And brought before the King by armed Band;
Whom Richard Gloucester murdered out of hand.
Did patient Job endure more pain then this
Most Mighty Prince. Who hearing all this ill
Yet never murmured or once thought amiss,
More then a man, remaining patient still,
A King indeed a conqueror of the mind.
In all the stories we no such do find
(Divine, profane, or moral, as I yet
Did ever read) such magnanimity
To rest in man where humain heart was set,
Or who had feeling of extremity.
Rest now o King in heavens most happy shrine,
Preserved from foesb all the powers divine.
Let Windsor be his monument of state,
Because he was both borne and buried there,
Knight of the Garter, mighty Potentate. Nota.

Though to his Fathers sense it did appear
That Henry borne at Windsor should not be
Like Henry borne at Mounmouth, which was he:
Yet Henry borne at Windsor worthy fame
Was and still is and shall be to the end:
His Colleges continue will his name
Whilst Worlds endure: it is in marble pend.
Then worthy King, Sixth Worthy live, and be.
For many Worthies were not like to thee.
King Henry the seventh.


THat most valorous, virtuous, and politic Prince, King Henry the seventh,
needs not any preamble for his birth and education: only he was the true and
undoubted heir of the house of Lancaster, and came to the Crown by the
conquest of his enemy Richard Plantaginet late Duke of Gloucester; but later a
most horrible murderer, registered Homicide, Tyrant, and Usurper of the crown
of England: of whom I will make no further mention, but that this mighty Prince
conquered him, and his people in foughten field. At Bosworth in the county of
Lecester 22. day of August 1485. the conflicte and conquest was determined.

So prevailed King Henry the seventh, the day and year above said, to the
great glory of God, and the continued comfort (ever since) of all true and
faithful English hearts. Now this King being by conquest absolute, by power
able, by birth heir Apparent; yet to settle and make steadfast his reign and
succession, he married Elizabeth, the daughter of king Edward the fourth, next
heir of the house of York: and so reunited both those howses (most honorable
in themselves) into one entire monarchy, into one unity, into one body, into
one (I say) and that a most happy one, into one bed; and blessed be that
bed, and the seed for ever, that sprang and still springs of that
generation. This union, or knitting of these two famous howses both together,
was the end of long continued civil wars, the death of nobility,
destruction of the comminalty, the griete of foraine Princes, the lamentation
of Cities, the outcry of the people. The State, before this union, was so rent
and torn, that it was thought a thing impossible ever to have been reconciled
again: therefore this gracious beginning does prognosticate a happy
continuance and never to have ending.

Yet the Duchess of Burgundy, a Princess of state and stomach, being Aunt to
Elizabeth the Queen, did so much malign this great and excellent good, that
she set up many mawmentes and apysh toys of purpose to distemper the peace of
this union: as rearing up Perkin Warbecke, a base dutch vassal, to usurp the
name of Richard Duke of York, the second son of king Edward the fourth; who
with his tender young brother king Edward the fifth, had by their unnatural
Uncle been both murdered in the Tower. Many vain and surmiled images she
advanced to distemper the state, until time and succession made an end of her
malice: which also by a lingering sickness took this worthy an excellent king
forth of this World. But, before his death, he married the Lady Margaret (his
eldest Daughter) to King James the fourth King of Scotland: which marriage I
thought good to insert, as it is recorded in the course of his history; viz.

James the fourth king of Scotland, a mighty and a valiant Prince, having had
sundry fewdes, and garboyles which the English Nation, and that in the interim
of truce, and abstinence of war, especially about Norham castle; the Bishop
of Durham Richard Fox owner of that castle in the right of the Bishopric
wrote diverse letters of submission to the said K. and the K. again to the
Bishop, and one letter in conclusion of many things, that the bishop of Durham
should come into Scotland to him about weighty affairs.

The Bishop certifying the King his Sovereign of the premises, The King
commanded the Bishop by his letters to satisfy the Scottish Kings desires,
which he took to be both reasonable and honorable: and of which message the
Bishop was very glad.

So going into Scotland the king himself most graciously and courteously
received this Bishop at the Abbey of Melrose, and after some expostulation with
the Bishop touching some slaughter done upon his Subjects at Norham Castle, and
the Bishops submisse and gentle answers thereunto, the King gave the same most
like a King the hearing. And afterward called the Bishop into a secret place
garden or gallery, where no witnesses were admitted but only the King and the
Bishop, and then he declared unto him what just causes had moved him in times
past to seek amity with the king of England which now he desired to have
confirmed, and to hold inviolable for ever, if the said King would vouchsafe to
conioyne in matrimony with him the fair and bountiful Princess L. Margaret
the K. eldest daughter. In the behalf whereof we were purposed to send our
Ambassadors to the K. your master. But we thought good first to prove your
love, good liking and forwardnes toward us and our good liking to your king,
his daughter, his subjects and dominions.

The Bishop answered but few words: only he said that when he was returned to
the King his master, he would in so great and weighty a cause do the best
offices that he could. When the Bishop was returned into England and came
before the king, he declared to his Majesty all the communication which had
passed between king James of Scotland, and him, from point to point in order.

The king liked exceeding well of the motion, as he to whom peace was ever a
sovereign salve.

But having then a marriage in nuptial celebration almost, between Arthur
Prince of Wales, and Katherine the Infant of Spain, the marriage with Scotland
being hastened by both the kings: in the very triumphs of the former marriage,
king James sends an Earl, a Bishop and diverse noble personages, who were
received into London for the consummation of his marriage with the aforenamed
Lady Margaret: which Earl by proxey, in the name of king James his master
affied and contracted the said lady. The which affiance was published at Paul's
cross the day of the conversion of S, Paul being the 25. day of Januarie
supposed. In the reioicing whereof Te Deum was sung, and great bonefiers made
throughout the City of London.

All these things being accomplished, the Imbassadors both of Scotland and
Spain took their leave of the king and departed, not without great rewards to
both the Ambassadors.

Not long after, the Lady Margaret affyed as aforesaid was sent toward the
king her husband: the conueiance of which princess was committed to the Earls
of Northumberland and Surrey, the Earl of Northumberland being L. Warden of
the Marches, and was commanded to deliver her at the very confines of both the
realms. And thereupon she was removed from Barwicke to Lamberton Kyok in
Scotland; where the kings Majesty met her, and with him all the flower of
Scotland of Noblemen and Gentlemen; and where the Earl of Northumberland
according to his commission delivered her unto the king of Scotland. The Earl
of Northumberland that day was so richly apparrelled in garments garnished with
goldsmithes work, stone and pearl, his Hexemen also and the barbes and
trappings of his horses, besides 400. tall med well mounted and apparelled in
his livery and colors, that he seemed more like a king then an Earl.

From Lamberton the foresaid Lady was conuaied to Edenborough; and there, the
day after, king James espoused her in the presence of all the Nobility of
Scotland, and of those English that attended her, with great feastings
banketings, iustes, and Princely pastimes: and after all things finished to
such a solemnity appertaining, the Earl of Surry being chief in commission,
with the Earl of Northumberland, and all the other English Lords and Ladies
returned into their Country again.

But as al earthly creatures and things transitory have their end and period,
so had this Mighty prince K. Henry the seventh. For his sickness increasing
daily more and more, he well perceived that his end drew near: therefore
meaning to do some comfort to his people, he did grant them of his own free
motion a general pardon for all men, and for all offenses committed against
any his Laws and Statutes: Thieues, Murderers, and certain others were
excepted: he also paid the fees of all prisoners in and about the gaoles of
London abiding there only for that duty: He paid also the debts of all such
persons as lay in the Counters or Ludgate for forty shillings, and under, and
some he relieved that were condemned in ten pounds. General prayer being made
to God for the restitution of his health, nevertheless he was so wasted with
his long Malady, that nature could no longer sustain his life, and so he
departed this life the 22, of April, 1509 at his palace at Richmond: his corpse
was conuaied to Westminster with all funeral pomp, and there buried by the
good Queen his wife in a sumptuous Chapel, which he not long before had
caused to be builded. And as the greatest Travelers have reported it is one of
the most bewtiful and most curious pieces of work in the World.

His Issue.
HE reigned twenty three years, seven months and od days and lived fifty
two years: he had by his Queen four sons, and four Daughters, of the
which number there remained alive behind him, Henry his second son, prince of
Wales, which after him was king: Margaret Queen of Scotland, and Marie
promised to Charles king of Castile.

His Description.
HE was of body but lean and spare, yet mighty and strong therewith, of
personage and stature somewhat higher then the common sort of men: of a
wonderful beauty and fair complexion, of countenance merry and smiling,
especially in his communication: his eyes gray, his teeth single, and hair
thin, of Nota,
wit in all things quick and prompt, of a princely stomach, and hauty courage;
in great perils, doubtful affairs and matters of importance supernatural and
as it were divine: for he ordered all his doings advisedly and with great
deliberation.

He was sober, modest, moderate, honest, courteous, bountious; so much abhorring
pride, and arrogance, that he was ever sharp and quick to all about him noted
with that fault, he was also an upright Justice: by the which one property he
wan to him the hearts of many people. He left to that lusty valiant and
gallant young Prince his son and heir many excellent good parts and
properties of a Prince, as also Coffers full stuffed with coin, jewels and
treasure. To conclude, he had in him as many good gifts both of body and
mind, and fortune as it was possible for any King to have: his politic
wisdom in governance was u^ngular, his wisdom always assured, reasons
pithy and substantial, his memory fresh and holding, his experience notable,
his counsels fortunate and taken by wise deliberation, his speeches grations in
diverse languages: leagues and confederations he had with all Princes Christian,
his mighty power was dread every where both within his own Realm and without,
all his people were to him in humble subjection as ever they were to King: his
land many a day in peace and tranquillity, his prosperity in battle against
his enemies was marvelous: his dealing in time of perils and dangers was cold
and sober, with great hardiness. If any treason were conspired against him it
was miraculously discovered: his buildings most sumptuous, and goodly, all of
the newest form and fashion and cast all of pleasure. So this king lived all
his time in fortunes favor, in high honor, wealth, and glory, and all which
wrought his fame in this world, and the same everlasting in the world which
shall never have end.

His Epitaphe.
MOst provident, most politic, most wise,
Most sumptuous builder, most profound in all
The things that wealth and wisdom can devise,
The things that Art to memory can call,
All things that God and nature did decree,
Those with this worthy king concluded be.
Not any other with this mighty King
May be received nor intertainment have.
That which does peace and plenty to him bring
That which his Realms and subjects lives can save,
Those he receaues that blessing brings from God,
Those he reiects which threaten scourge and Rod.
Thrice blessings in his marriages he made:
First was his own, Queen El'zabeth his wife;
Before the which was many a bloody blade
Bathed in the bowels of continued strife.
The house of Lancaster, with York did strive,
To leave of Prince nor Subject one alive.
This Worthy brought into his nuptial bed,
The bride whose beauty did the World excel,
This Worthy joined the white Rose with the red,
This bed does now in Windsor wardrobe dwell:
This manage wrought that perfect Unity,
By which this day all Britains happy be.
The second was his eldest Virgin pure,
The Lady Margret. Unto James the King,
Bishop of Durham did that match procure:
Earl of Northumberland the bride did bring
Home into Scotland. James the fourth did wed.
Britain most happy by that nuptial bed.
Only these two, though more this worthy made,
May now and shall suffice, for all the rest.
No Actor he of Hymenaeus trade.
We in these two most happy now are blessed,
And blessed in heaven are the authors all
As we thereby redeemed are from thrall.
Henry the seventh seven Sciences embraced,
All liberal, all princely all of power,
All enemies he from his kingdoms chac't
And left a Son of Chivalry the flower,
Succeeding Henry and the eight to be
Worthy, but now a worthyer is then he.
King Henry the eight.


KIng Henry the eight was borne at Greenwich the 22. of June, Anno. 1492. He
began his reign the 22. day of April. 1509. he reigned, 37 years, 9. months
and od days, being 18. years old when he began to reign. And although this
worthy king was in years young, in person strong, bewtifull and valiant, in
treasure rich passing any his predecessors, mighty and worthy in power and in
action: yet being adorned and bewtified with learning to his Princely
magnanimity, he ordained his Council by the advice of his gracious grandmother
the Countess of Richmond and Darby, such as he knew to be prudent indeed, and
the kings his father most dear and familiar friends: some of whose names I
thought good to insert, for the especial and singular effects which insued of
their most honorable and grave counsels: viz.

Thomas Lord Haward Earl of Surrey and Treasurer of England, George Lord
Talbot Earl of Shrewsebury and Steward of the kings householde: Charles L.
Somerset Lord Chamberlain, after Earl of Worcester, and others: which wise
and grave Counselors, seeing what abundance of wealth this young king was now
possessed of, least it might incline his young years unto riotousnesse, and
forgetting of himself (for not to any King before him was left the like riches
in ready coin, jewels, and plate, and excellent moueables, as to him by his
famous father King Henry the seventh) therefore those most honorable
Counselors did labor to attain his Princely presence, in their secret
meetings, and most honorable privy counsels; that by degrees they might win
him to suruay at least the affairs of a kingly office, and Princely government.

Which also he slacked not to do: for within less then 5. years after, to
wit, the 20. of July in the fifth year of his reign, he entered into France
with a puissant power; and mighty army, wan the strong Towns of Torney* and
Turwin, had in pay (as soldiers mercenary) that most famous Emperor Charles
the fifth, and also the Palsgraue of the Rhene, which wore Saint Georges cross:
in which time also was fought that famous battle of Branxstone or
Floden-field, where the King and the flower of all his chiualry was conquered
by the valiant hands, of Norfolk, and Hawardes.

In the sixth year of his reign the Pope did send him a cappe of maintenance,
in those days the highest degree of honor: and the same Pope was mediator to
him for peace, in the French Kings behalf, and for the confirmation thereof
the French king married the kings younger sister Mary, and dyed shortly after.

In the twelfth year, the king made a most famous, pleasant, and princely
voyage into France, with atriumphant train of Nobles, Ladies, etc. for an
interuew between him and his Queen and States on the one party, which was
performed in the valley of Andrean, with many varieties of princely shows, as
the history thereof at large describes that voyage;

And that in his way the Emperor Charles met his Majesty at Canterbury
keeping Whitsontide there, with the king.

In the foureteenth year of his reign, he was by a Bull from Rome, ordained
or entitled the defender of the Christian faith, which title was then given to
him and his successors for ever.

The same year also he received into his Realm the forenamed Charles the fifth
Emperor again into the City of London, with Great triumphs, etc. inuosted
him with the Garter, and habit of that most honorable order, swear league and
amity during both their lives.

In the 18. year he contracted league with the french K. to hold both those
kings lives, and one year after; he was also invested, with the collar and
order of S. Michael, and the French king with the Garter and order of S. George.

The twenty three year he (or the law for him) did confiscate Cardinal
Wolsey a proud and wealthy Prelate in the statute of praemunire, had great
treasure thereby, as also great fines of all the Clergy, for defense of the
Cardinals power Legatine: and about the same time, he took upon him the title
Supreme head of the church etc. For the which and for the suppressio^ of
Abbeies immediately after; howsoever the Pope and his successors since have
presumed to curse him and his blessed succession (his Daughter Mary only
excepted):

Yet the Almighty has blessed both him, and them, Edward and Elizabeth since,
and long O Lord vouchsafe to bless the true and lineall descent of noble King
Henry the seventh.

But sure it was a wonderful Kingly Majesty in that valiant King: who
possessed but a part of great Britain, nor having fast friendship with the
other part, but many domestic and civil garboiles at home: all or the mayor
parts of Christendom, holding then Rome and her religion for Catholic and
universal: all which notwithstanding, this most famous and mighty king did
abolish and abandon, to his ever immortal praise and wonder of the world. How
did God after this bless his son, although but with young years and short
reign, yet with miraculous might: and his second sister reigning almost forty
and five years, with immaculate happiness.

And after this also he warred against the French king, won the Tower of
Bulloyne and many other parts on that side, forced that Nation to composition,
brought home peace, honor, wealth; and in the exceeding love of his people, he
ended his life, at his palace at White Hall, the eight and twentieth day of
January, Anno 1546. when he had reigned thirty and seven years, nine months,
and odd days, triumphantly, and in great felicity, leaving the Issue before
mentioned, Edward, Mary, and Elizabeth. His body, according to his Will in that
behalf, was interred at Windsor, with all funeral Pomp, in the Chapel, and
College of S. George, Patron of the Garter; whereof almost 38. years he had
been sole Sovereign.

His Description.
THis worthy Prince was right fortunate in all his doing^* so that (except
only in his marriages) all other his attempts had good success as well in
matters of peace, as of wars. Of personage he was tall and mighty, yet
exceeding comely: but toward his latter end gross and (as we term it)
bourly: in wit and memory very perfect, of great Majesty; yet so tempered with
gracious humanity as best became so high an estate: a great favorer of
Learning and learned men, and of himself not ignorant of divine Learning, nor
moral literature: and for his great magnificence and bountious liberality his
renown was spread throughout the World.

His Epitaphe.
EIght Worthies now are nominated here,
Eight Kings, eight Britains, eight brave English men:
Eight, such as in their times had no compeere:
Eight, such as cannot be expressed with pen:
Eight, such as never lived in time together,
King David's Worthies might not match them ever.
For David's Worthies were not crowned Kings:
David was once anointed of the Lord, (...)uid.

His Psalms great comfort to our conscience brings,
His virtues were according to the word
Of God, for all his treatises are true
Prefiguring Christ, he Bear and Lion slew.
Prince Joshua Captain of that mighty host,
Six hundred thousand did his camp contain, (...)ua.

His prayer stayed the Sun amid the Coast
Till he the Kings of Canaan had slain:
He Israel their foes did all confound
And razed proud Jericho down to the ground.
Brave Judas Machabeus with the best (...)as acha(...)us.

Of valor his thus bouldly may he boast:
The Jews redeeming them with foes oppressed
And that with small and very sober host:
A Worthy therefore of the Jewish Race,
Armed with that God, disposer of all grace,
Great Alexander Macedonian Prince,
Whom the earths continent could not content: Alex(...)der.

Philippe his father Nations did convince,
For which his son with tears did sorelament,
Saying with sighs his fathers Captains to,
My father will leave nothing me to do.
Hector of Troy a valiant Champion tried
Against factious foes did often r'enforce the field, (...)ector.

Enforcing them their faces else to hide
Or plead for mercy and like suppliants yield,
Not any of our Henry's wanted power,
To have subdued him in his sternest stower,
If Julius Caesar could have been a King (...)lius (...)sar.

With conquest which his Roman Legions made,
By blody bodkins he should not the sting
Have felt of death in powrefull Senates shade.
Brutus his son nor Cassius had conspired
His death, had he not kingly state required.
Arthur of Britain most renowned king, (...)rthur.

Six of the nine were not his equal peers,
Full thirty king domes he to his did bring,
Yet was his life not many more in years.
Brave Britain then take place among the best,
And midst our worthy Henry's take thy rest.
Next Charlemaine of France, a Monarch great, Charlemaine.

So called great, and Emperor he was.
French Chronicles his actions all do treat,
He for a Christian Worthy well may pass.
Yet Henry ours the eight as good as he,
Shall for a Christian King compared be.
Godfrey de Bulleigne was a Prince of fame,
He wore upon his helm a crown of thorn, Godfrey

Hefreed all Christian captives where he came:
And not forsook them, till in pieces torn
He left their foes laid groueling on the ground,
That durst attempt a Christian to confound.
See then nine Worthies in their rank and place,
Three of which number governed the Jews,
Great Joshua is foremost of that race:
But, for king David brought us better news,
I place him first, and do withal compare
Henry the eight a worthy King most rare.
Henry the eight gave us our primier taste
Of milk which is most meet for infants food:
Edw. and Eliza. stronger meats embraced,
And fed us till we better understood
The word of God, which Rome had us bereft:
This grace to England gracious Henry left.
Three more of Worthies by their names to call,
Great Aloxander was the Graeciaus joy:
And Julius Caesar mighty Roman shall
Be second here, then Hector stout of Troy:
Threee mighty Princes, peerless in their days,
Whose worthy valor won them endless praise.
Three Worthies more of Christians bear the name,
Arthur of Britain, Charlemaine of France,
And he that freed all Christians where he came
Wearing a crown of thorn the name t'aduance,
Godfrey de Bulloyne worthy Christians three.
Nine no less worthy follow in degree.
Henry the first, Henry the second eke,
Henry the third, Henry the fourth and five:
Henry the sixth, whose match is far to seek.
Except King James do match him, none alive
With that sweet King may well compared be,
For true and perfect magnanimity.
Henry the seventh a prudent worthy Prince,
Whose wisdom joined with perfect policy,
With red Rose and with white, he did convince
Domestike foes, and foraine that durst try
For title, state, pre-eminence or place.
Eld'st Daughter his is now great Britains grace.
Henry the eight, eight Worthies more has made:
The ninth remains in Henry Prince of Wales.
The eight do rest in fresh Elysian shade,
The ninth need fear no blaste of winter gales,
So long as worthiest of all Worthies lives,
King James, to whom all Eighteen Worthies gives
Their Scepters, Crowns, their Diadems and power,
Their places and pre-eminence likewise.
The Almighty hold his mighty hand each hour,
Upon his head; that caused him to rise
Like Phoebus when our Cynthia lately set, Cynthia.

Paying to God and nature all her debt.
This Epitaph in Henry eight shall end,
And Henry Prince of Wales may here begin,
To imitate, for that he does descend,
Such Worthies eight, such honor may he win,
Long life, good health, all graces from above,
With Subjects praise and kingly Fathers love.
FINIS.
Henry the ninth, Prince of Great Britain.


The Author, in honor of the last ninth Worthy.
EIght famous Kings precedents to a Prince,
Whose valiant acts are registered with fame:
Eight Henry's, and all those the conquest since,
As Worthies all have justified their name:
Eight such as all the King domes of the earth
Cannot exceed, for Title, State, and Birth.
What makes men Noble? Birth and parentage,
Adornd with gifts, and beautified with grace.
Then Britain boast, that never any age
Brought the like Prince, a thousand years in space:
For birth, for virtue, and for expectation,
Prince of Great Britain ouerpeer's each Nation.
Ninth Worthy then, O Prince, possess in peace
That worthy Title, best befitting fame:
Let prudence, fortitude, and all increase
That virtue adds, and does adorn your name.
Let Princes all, and spite it self confess,
In foreign Lands Prince Henry is peerless.
Of all the World our mirror then of might,
Our Paragon, most rare and worthy praise,
Our Comet, and our rising Star most bright,
Grant mighty Jove, that long and happy days
He may enjoy, and we rejoice and sing
For this Ninth Worthy, first for James our King,
Your famous father, and Great Britains Joy,
Your glory also, guyder of your youth;
Whose careful, Counsel to prevent annoy,
Most like a King, he pend in perfect truth,
You to direct: and all young Gentlemen
(Your followers) are advised, by Kingly Pen.
The Prince his Bien-venue, or welcome to all the famous Worthies of the World.
Brave Britains beauty, and fair Englands Joy,
Cambers Commander, Irelands lamp of light,
Cornwales fair Duke, and Chester from annoy
Count Palatine, for to defend with might,
Whole Europes Comet and Saint Georges Knight,
Grant Lord, the George and Garter long he wear
To King and Countries comfort, as true heir.
Welcome sweet Prince, into our company,
Which we from heaven with cheerfulness behold.
We had our times, our period was to die;
But yours to live, and registered in gould:
Whose powerful parent cannot be contrould,
Because he knows and fears the Lord above,
Lives in his Laws, and has his peoples love.
But had your praise been limd with learned pen,
Of Princely Surrey, once a Poet sweet,
Sir Thomas Wyat, or like gentlemen,
They on this Theme discoursers had been meet:
But this (alas) has earthen hands and feet:
And yet, for that we in our Tumbes do rest,
Let Us be content to see and and say the best.
This poor beginning may much better prove:
The fairest tops and architectures stand
On low laid mortar: beauty shines above.
Foundations, first, are laid, with mirie hand:
Timber, glass, stone, lead, iron, gould on sand
Are seated, and more subject to decay
Then that beneath, whereon their State does stay.
From hence may hap some Builders take a frame,
And rear with Beauty sumptuous stately Towers:
The worthy Poets, Daniell by name,
Syluester, Drayton, can build sumptuous Bowers:
And many more bedewd with heavenly showers.
And though who now this task does undertake,
Did never to the Muses homage make
(The more unfit to fawn upon them then,
In craving of their aid without desert,
And to inuit them with a rusticke pen,
Fetching his cunning only from the Cart)
Yet, yet, give leave to every loyal heart.
For all are not indewed with learnings skill:
And he writes well of States, that writes no ill.
Then take, in gree, all what proceeds of love,
Of duty, and of true obedience.
And whosoere he be does faithful prove
In services, and shall (without offense)
Whistle or pipe, sans hope of recompense,
And only to express a joyful heart
At Princes good; O, let him Act his part.
FINIS.

