THE ROMAN Histories of LUCIUS JULIUS FLORUS from the foundation of ROME. till
Caesar AUGUSTUS, for above DCC. years, and from thence to TRAIAN near CC.
years, divided by Florus into IV ages. Translated into ENGLISH.

LONDON By Will. Stansby.



TO THE MOST FLOVRISHING, puissant, and noble Peer, GEORGE, Lord Marquess of
BVCKINGHAM, etc.
MY LORD,
THE Histories of Lucius Florus, co^prehending in four short Books the one
hundred, forty and two of that principal Historian of the Romans, Titus
Liuius of Padua, and of many other, written, hard to say, whether more
conceitfully or completely, are here translated out of their Latin into
English. A labor greater far (as all our learned know) then for the slender
bulk of the volume. His Majesty's great example, and your Lordships fervent
imitation, to increase in the full sail of fortune, the balasse of worthy
readings, is here in part well fitted. For your Honor cannot possibly find in
so little a room so much, so well together, of this weighty argument. A thing
to your Lordship acceptable, considering your small leisure, and to all those
other who have already profitably run through his authors: himself so brief
as it is almost his fault; so neat, and pithy, as Liuie fares the worse for
it, so desirous to remember what himself has said, and to have it understood
by others, as he sums his own summarie narrations; and finally, so worthy, as
seeing the glory of a great Historian forestalled by Liuie, and others, he
held it more honorable to be (as he is) the first among brief writers, then
one among few in the large ones. Epitome's notwithstanding are no other in
truth but Anatomies, and all spacious minds, waited upon with the felicities of
means, and leisure, will fly them as bane, but this brief has all the
requisites of a perfect body, and apparel as rich as any; for professing
Story, he has certainly performed a Panegyric. His scope, to kindle the
valor of the old Roman world in the bosom of the new: though himself, an
heathen man, and living under Traian the emperor, saw the proportion of valor
well-maintained: that being the most goodly, and most flourishing estate, which
at any time under heathen princes, that monarchy enjoyed. Those annotations,
and collections, whose lights will lead your Lordship into the wise, and heroik
secret of the most potent, grave, and honorable, masters which ever mankind
had, are fittest for your more leisure. To your good Lordship therefore, in
whose person the ancient splendors of the noble families of VILLERS, and
BEAVMONT are united with advantage, does Lucius Florus offer himself in our
vulgar tongue, and brings with him the plain, but withal, the free, and
grounded good will of his most loving, and careful interpreter, humbly

Your Lordships, PHILANACTOPHIL.

To the Reader.
FLORVS (says IVSTVS LIPSIVS, who in Mr. CAMDENS opinion carried the Sun of
antiquity before him) wrote a brief, not so much of Liuie (from whom he often
dissenteth) as of the Roman affairs, in my poor conceit, aptly, elegantly,
neatly. There is in him a sharpness of wit, and shortness of speech,
oftentimes admirable; and certain gemmes as it were, and jewels of wise
sentences, inserted by him with good aduisement, and verity. Thus far that
excellent master, and with him let thy judgment go, if thou will herein do
justice, howsoever, with Mathematical Stadius, FLORVS is but a tumultuarie
author: for so it pleases that learned Critike to style him, ouer-loading him
with the comparison of incomparable Liuie. Be it free, with reverence and
modesty, to note ouer-sights (as none do want them) and for me also, a
professor of sober freedom, to tax that as an ouer-sight in manners, to use
such authors sowrely, without whom the Critics fame had oftentimes been
obscure, or none at all. In mine Hypercriticks, concerning our countries
History, I have dealt freely, as a man desirous to stir up a Liuie, or a
Florus to our selves. There is little left testifide touching him, or rather
nothing at all, but what himself remembers, which is, that he lived in
Traians time. Conjecture propounds unto us, that he was of the Seneca's (that
also is my opinion) and so an Annaean by line (that is, of the Spanish-house,
or family of the Annaeans) and they who entitle him to be of the Iulij, have
also their diuinatorie reasons. His generous, bright, and flowrie writings (the
best memorial) are alive, and now translated into our vulgar, with as much
propriety as one Englishmans English could attain unto for the present; but
every where with a religious aim to his meaning, howsoever it may be many
times mist, the diversity of Copies, like a change of the mark, and the
peculiar manner of his style like a sudden blast coming between. For this is
true, that there are in FLORVS sundry knots, not easy to untie, while he,
desirous to speak quick, and close together, our understanding in him, wants
room as it were, and that scope which is, has somewhat thick in it,
amounting to a cloudiness: -- breuis esse laboro, obscurus fio -- more
perhaps, in this author, through corruption of manuscripts, and Prints, or of
our duller-pointed wits, then through his fault, whose writings are altogether
as luminous, as acuminons.

First, the names of men, Romans, need a particular interpreter, which this
pocket-volume will not handsomely permit, at leastwise not in present.

Florus, are for the most part explanatorie of the authors meaning, supplying
marginall notes.

Rome, in the person of a MAN (as the frontispice shows) it lost for the
greater part, throughout the translation, where the singular number sorts not
so well, but breeds perplexity, or obscurenesse.

Fourthly, The doctrines Theology, and morality, and upon which the fabric
of his narrations stands, are such as thou art to expect from an heathen,
with whom Polytheism, or plurality of Gods, was an article of faith, and among
whom, selfe-killing, to avoid disgrace, seemed an high point of true
magnanimity, and the like, which have small danger in them now, and their
examen will elsewhere fall out fitly.

Fifthly, The numbers in Rome built, which these letters, A. V. C. do
denotate, that is, Anno Vrbis Conditae; in the year of Rome Built, such, or
such. A discovery not worthy of any one, but only of them, who are nothing
else in a manner, but mere English. Necessary is it here notwithstanding, for
explanation of the author, who (as the frontispice, which (with the help of
the authors preface) interprets it-selfe, unfolds) by a most exact, and
studied method of briefnesse, has summed the whole time of Rome in gross, and
distributed it into ages, as Lactatius Firmianus (vouching I know not what
Seneca for it) and Ammianus Marcellinus in his eighteenth book, and lornandes
an usurper, and concealer of Florus his wit) under the I'mperour Justinian.

What the translatour thinks worthy of thy precious time, to knew further,
requires a large book, rather then an Epistle, and that also will be but a
brief upon a brief) of all the old Roman wisdom civil, and martial, as
here thou have of their facts. Enjoy this translation in the mean time, and let
not unthankfulness strangle any intendments for thy more satisfaction, nor show
thee ignorant of such a treasure, as which, after above one thousand four
hundred years continuance (twice the time of this story) growing stronger in
the world by one language more then his own (when the Roman empire it self
(the subject of the book) has long since in a manner come to nothing) does
give great hope that it is to be immortal.

Farewell.
THE PREFACE OF LUCIUS FLORVS.
THE People of Rome, from King Romulus to Caesar Augustus, for the space of
seven hundred years, performed so many noble deeds both in peace, and war,
that if a man compare the magnitude of their empire with the number of the
years, he will think it greater, then for the time. They displayed their
warlike ensigns so far, and wide upon the globe of the earth, that such as
read their performances, may learn in them, not the actions of one people,
but of all mankind: For they were tossed with so many labors, and perils, that
to establish their empire, Virtue and Fortune seem to have contended. Which
thing, though it be also principally worth the knowing; nevertheless, for so
much as the very greatness it self is an impediment to it self, and the
variety of matter makes the mind abruptly flit from one thing to another;
Aciem intentionis abrumpit.
I will imitate them who draw the maps of countries, and comprehend the whole
image of that great Body, within as it were a narrow table: And in so doing, my
hopes are, that I shall offer up somewhat toward the admirable honors of the
whole worlds sovereign people, when together, and yet distinctly in it self,
I shall advance into view their empires universal greatness. Imagining
therefore the whole people of Rome were but as one single person; and then
running over all their time, think how they began, and how they grew strong;
then, how they attained to a certain flower as it were of youth, and how in a
sort they afterward waxed old, we shall therein find four degrees, or maine
progressions.

The first revolution was under kings, for almost two hundred and fifty
years; in which space they wrestled and strove about their Mother-citie with
their neighbors. This may be the time of their infancy. The following period,
from the Consulship of Brutus, and Collatinus, to the Consulship of Appius
Claudius, and Marcus.
Quintus Fuluius, comprehends those two hundredth and fifty years, in which
they subdued Italy. This was a time most famous for manhood, and deeds of
Cheualrie. It may well be therefore termed their youthful age. From hence, to
Augustus Caesar, are those other two hundredth and fifty years, in which he
settled peace through all the world. And this compass of time is the very Man's
estate, and as it were the strength and ripeness of the Roman Empire. From
Augustus Caesar, to our days, there have not passed many fewer then two
hundredth years; in which, through the unworthiness of Emperors, the force of
the Roman people waxt old, as it were, and wasted it self: saving, that under
the government of Traian, their sinews requicken, and beyond all expectation,
the old age of the empire, as if the youth thereof were restored, grows green
again, and flourishes.

THE HISTORY OF THE ROMANS.
The first Book.
CHAP. I.
Of ROMULUS, first King of Romans.
THe first founder of the city, and empire of Rome, was ROMULUS, the son of
Mars, and Rhea. Syluia. Vestae Sacerdos.
This the Vestall Priestesse, great with child, confessed of her self, nor did
fame long doubt thereof, when Romulus, by commandment of Amulius, thrown
into the river, together with his brother Remus, could not be drowned. For the
Genius of Tiber both checked down his waters, and a sheewolfe following the cry
of the babes, left her young ones, and with her teats discharged toward them
the office of a mother. And in this plight, found under a tree, Faustulus, the
kings shepherd conveyed them to his farmehouse, and bred them up. Alba, built
by Julius, was then the chief city of Latium, which his father Aeneas had
reared. Amulius was the foureteenth king from these, and expelled his brother
Numitor, of whose daughter Romulus was borne. He therefore, in the first heats
of his youth, chased his uncle Amulius out of the royal seat, and restored his
grandfather; himself delighting in the river, and mountains, among which he
had been educated, was busied in plotting the walls of a new town. These
brothers were twins; and it was therefore agreed between them, to make the
gods judges, which of them should first enter upon the government and rule.
Remus took his stand upon mount Auentine, and Romulus upon mount Palatine. It
was the fortune of Remus to see birds first, and they were six Vultures;
Romulus saw last, but had twelve. So having the upper hand in this trial by
bird-flight, he builds his city, full of hope, that it would prove a martial
one; according as those birds, accustomed to blood and rauine, did portend. A
Vallum.
trench and rampire seemed sufficient to defend the new city; whose
narrowness while Remus derided, and leapt over, in reproof thereof, he was
slain; whether by his brothers commandment, or no, is doubtful. Certain it
is, that he was the first sacrifice, and consecrated the new cities
fortification with his blood. There wanted inhabitants. Near hand grew a
grove, which he makes a place of sanctuary; and thither a wondrous company
of men did forthwith flock, some of them Latins, some shepherds of Hetruria,
and other of them some of those beyond sea Phrygians, who were under Aeneas,
and of those Arcadians, who having Euander for their General, had come flowing
in. Thus of, as it were diverse elements he gathered together one Body, and
himself composed of them the Roman people. This was a work of Time, the
increase of inhabitants was a work of Men. Therefore they sought wives from
among the neighbors; whom, when they could not obtain by suit, they took by
force. For they pretending to make shows and games on horseback, the maids
assembled from parts about, to behold them, were seized as lawful pray. This
ministered an occasion of present war. The Veientes were beaten, and put to
flight. The Caeninensians had their town taken, and rased; and king Romulus,
with his own hands, offered up to Jupiter Feretrius, the magnificent spoils,
which he had gained from his adversary Acron.
King. The gates of Rome were betrayed to the Sabines by a silly Tarpeia.
Virgin, who had bargayned to receive for reward that which they carried on
their left hands, doubtful, whether she meant their shields, or bracelets.
They both to keep their promise, and not to suffer her to escape, ouer-whelmed
her to death with their shields. The enemies thus getting to the walls, there
rose a terrible conflict in the very entrance, so farreforth, that Romulus was
glad to beseech Jove, to flay his people from their shameful flying. In this
place there is a temple, and the statue of IVPITER the Stayer. At last, they
which had been ravished, came running-in tearing their hair, between the two
armies, as they were furiously encountering. So was peace made with Tatius, and
a league ratified. There ensued a matter wonderful to be spoken. The Sabine
enemies leaving their ancient seat, removed with their whole families into the
new city, and share their horded riches among their sons in law for
portions. Their joint forces quickly increasing, the most wise Romulus ordained
this form of commonweal. That the young men, divided into tribes, should
serve on horseback, and watch in armor, to be ready for all sudden
occasions of war: the council of estate should belong to the old, and
ancient, who for their authority should be called Fathers, and for their
antiquity, Senators, or Aldermen. These things thus established, A. V. C.
XXXVIII.
he was taken out of sight in a moment, as he made an oration before the
city, at the poole of Capra. Some think he was torn in pieces by the Senate,
for his harsh, and rough disposition: but a tempest rising with an eclipse of
the Sun, made it seem like the consecration of a Godhead. Which opinion,
Julius Proculus, caused to go presently current, by affirming, that Romulus had
appeared to him in a more maiesticall shape, then ever he was seen before:
that he commanded, they should adore him as a power divine: That the Gods had
decreed, his name in heaven should be Quirinus: and that Rome should so
obtain the empire of the world.

CHAP. II.
Of NVMA POMPILIVS.
TO Romulus succeeded Numa Pompilius, whom living at the Sabines Cures, the
Romans, of their own accord, entreated to be their king, for the fame of his
religion. He taught them sacred rites, and ceremonies, and all the worship of
the immortal gods. He instituted their Colleges of priests of all sorts,
Pontifices, Augures, Salians, and the rest: distinguished the year into twelve
months, and marked out which days were luckie, and which were dismal, in them.
He gave them their Ancilia shields, and Palladium, as certain secret pledges
of empire. He gave them their temple of Ianus, to be the sure sign of peace,
or war: most specially the harth of Vesta, for virgins to adore, that in
imitation of the stars of heaven, the flame preserved there alive, might ever
keep awake for safeguard of the state. All these things he ordained, by, as it
were, the oracle of the goddess Egeria, that the barbarous might so accept
them the rather. To conclude, he brought the fierce people to that pass, that
the kingdom which they had achieved by violence, and wrong, they governed by
religion and justice.

CHAP. III.
Of TVLLVS HOSTILIVS.
NEXT after Numa, reigns Tullus Hostilius, to whom the kingdom was freely
given in honor of his virtue. This prince founded all their martial
discipline, and art of war. Their young men thereby, wonderously practiced
in feats of Arms, they durst provoke the Albanes, an honorable people, and
which had long time borne chief sway. But their forces being equal, and their
conflicts many, when both sides were diminished, the war was drawn, by
consent, to a short work, and the fortunes of both the nations were entrusted
to a combat, between the Horatij and Curatij, being three to three of a side,
and brethren. The fight was brave and doubtful, and admirable in the event.
For three of the one side being wounded, and two of the other slain, that
Horatius, who remained alive, helping out his valor with his wit, faynes
himself to fly, so to single forth the enemy, and then turning upon each as
they were able to follow, ouer-came them all. So (which was otherwise a rare
glory) the victory was gotten with one man's hand, which he forth with
stained by parricide. He saw his sister weep at the sight of the conquered
spoils he wore, being her betrothed husband's, though an enemies. Which
unseasonable tender-heartednesse he revenged with sheathing his sword in her.
For this heinous fact, he was arraigned. But the merit of his manhood
preserved the offender from danger, and the crime was hidden with in his
valors glory. Nor did the Albanes long keep their faith. For, being sent as
aids, and fellows in arms against the Fidenates, according to the articles
of their league, they turned neutrall in battle for their own advantage. But
the politic king, Hostilius, so soon as he saw his associates incline to the
enemies party, he gathers fresh spirit, as if he had willed them so to do;
which did put hope into our men, and struck fear into the foes. So the
treason came to nothing. The battle therefore being won, he causes Metius
Fufetius, the breaker of the league, to be tied between two chariots, and
plucked in pieces with swift horses: and though Alba was the mother of Rome, yet
withal, because it was a rival, he threw it to the ground, after he had
first transported the whole riches, and all the people thereof to Rome: that a
city, a kin by the whole blood, might not altogether seem to have perished,
but to have, as it were, turned again into her proper Body.

CHAP. IIII.
Of ANCVS MARTIVS.
THe next King was Ancus Martius, A. V. C. CXIII.
Nepos.
Grandchild of Pompilius by his daughter, and of such a wit. He therefore girt
the city with a wall, and joined both the sides thereof together with a bridge
over Tibris, which ran between; and planted a Colonie at Ostia, where that
river falls into the sea. His mind giving him even then, that the wealth of
the whole world and passengers to and fro, out of all parts, should be received
there, as in the haven town and maritim Inn of Rome.

CHAP. V.
Of TARQVINIVS PRISCVS.
TArquinius, afterward called Priscus, though descended from forainers beyond
sea; yet of his own free courage demanding the kingdom, had it as freely
granted, for his industry, and noble carriage. For sprung out of Corinth, he
had mingled Greek wit with Italian fashions. This prince enlarged the majesty
of the Senate, and augmented the Tribes with new Centuries: notwithstanding,
that Attius Naeuius, excellently seen in Augurie, had forbidden the number to
be increased: of whom, the king, to try his skill, demanded, Whether that
might be done which he at that instant had in his mind? Naeuius having first
put in practice the rules of his bird-flying mystery, answered, That it might.
Then it was my thought (quoth he) whether I could cut that whetstone with a
rasour. And thou may (said the Augur) and he did it. Hence the Augur-ship
became sacred among the Romans. Nor was Tarquinius better at peace, then at
war. For he conquered the twelve Tuscan nations, with often fighting: and
from thence came our Maces, our Trabeae, our Chairs of State, our Rings,
Trappers, Robes, purple-guarded Coats, Chariots of Triumph guilt over, drawn
with four horses, embroydered Gowns, Cassocks chambleted with figures of
palms: and briefly, all the ornaments and ensigns, by which sovereign
Majesty is made eminent.

CHAP. VI.
Of SERVIVS TVLLIVS.
THen Seruius Tullius usurps the royal power: nor was his baseness any
bar unto him therein, though his mother was a bondwoman. For Tanaquil, the
wife of Tarquinius, had bred him up in honorable fashion for his excellent
dispositions sake: and a flame being seen to blaze about his head, did assure
he should prove famous. Therefore, in the Interregnum, after Tarquinius his
death, he being set up by the Queen dowagers means, to supply the Kings
place, as it were but for a time, so managed that authority by his wit, which
he had achieved by practice, that he seemed to have good right unto it. By
him the people of Rome had their estates valued, Relatus in censum.
and books of value, and musters made, themselves marshalled into forms, or
classes, and distributed into courts and companies. And by this kings
incomparable diligence, the Commonweal was so ordered, that note was taken of
all their lands, goods, honors, ages, arts, and offices, and put into public
register; as if the state of a most mighty city were to be kept up and held
together with the same diligence that a petty family.

CHAP. VII.
Of TARQVINIVS SVPERBVS.
THe last of all the kings, was Tarquinius, surnamed the Proud, of his
conditions. He rather made choice to invade, then to expect his grandfathers
realm, which was withheld by Seruius: whose murder having procured, he
governed the Commonweal as badly, as he had obtained it wickedly. Nor was his
wife Tullia of any better nature then himself. For hurrying to salute her
husband King, she ran her amazed Coach-horse over the bloody body of her
father. But Tarquinius raging with slaughter against the Senate, and against
all men with proud behavior (which worthy men brook worse then cruelty)
after he had tired himself at home with shedding blood, he marches at
length against the enemy. So Ardea, Ocriculum, Gabij, Suessa Pometia, towns of
strength in Latin land, were taken. Then turned he cruel toward his own.
For he stuck not to scourge his son, to the intent, that thereupon
counterfeiting himself a fugitive, he might gain credit with the enemy: and
Gabij, according to this plot, being surprised, when the son sent messengers
to his father to understand his farther royal pleasure, he only struck off
the tops of those poppie-heads, with his wand, which ouer-topt their fellows;
meaning thereby, that he would have the chief men put to death. And this was
all the answer which his pride vouchsafed. Nevertheless, he built a temple
out of the spoils of conquered cities. Which when it came to be dedicated,
according to the rites, all other the Gods (a wonder to be spoken) leaving the
place, Iuuentas and Terminus only remained. This contumacie of the powers
divine pleased the soothsayers well: for it promised, that the Roman affairs
should be flourishing, and eternal. But this was marvelous, that in digging to
build, there appeared the head of a man for a foundation: which all men did
confidently interpret, as a most fair and happy sign, prognosticating, that
there should be the head seat of the whole worlds empire. The people of Rome
suffered the pride of their king, while their women were forborne: but that
insolent abuse they could not endure in his sons: Of whom, when one of them
had ravished that most beauteous Lady Lucretia, and she clearing her self
from the infamy, by killing her self, then they utterly abrogated their name,
and all the authority of Kings.

CHAP. VIII.
The sum of the whole premises.
THis is the first age of the people, of Rome, and as it were their infancy,
under seven kings: men, by as it were a special provision of the fates, as
differing in disposition, as the reason and profit of the Commonweal required.
For who could be more hot, or fiery, then Romulus? But there was need of
having such an one, to set up the kingdom perforce. Who was more religious
then Numa? But their assayres could not want such a person, that the fierce
people might be made temperate, through the fear of the Gods. How necessary
was that Master of their martial discipline, Tullus, to a warlike Nation? for
whetting, and perfecting their courages with reason. How needful was Ancus,
the builder? that the city might spread it self, by sending out a Colonie;
that the parts thereof might be united by a bridge, and it self be defended
with a Wall. Again, how great dignity, and grace, did the ornaments, and
ensigns, which Tarquinius Priscus brought in, give to the worlds chief
people, by their very fashion? What other effect had the musters, and survey
which Seruius took, then that the commonweal might know, and understand it
self? Lastly, the intolerable lordlinesse of Superbus did some good, nay, a
very great deal of good. For thereby it came to pass, that the people stung
with abuses, were inflamed with the desire of freedom.

CHAP. III.
Of the change in State, from Kings, to a Commonweal.
THe people therefore of Rome having Brutus, A. V. C. CCXLIV.
and Collatinus (to whom the noble matron recommended at her death, her
injuries revenge) for captains, and authors, and by as it were a divine
instinct, being thoroughly all of them resolved to restore themselves to
liberty, and secure the honor of their women, sodeinly fell away from the
king, spoil his goods, consecrate his ground to Mars, and transfer the
sovereign power to the same men, who had been founders of their freedom, but
yet changeing both the judge, and title. For it was agreed, that whereas the
authority had before been single, and perpetual; it should be now but from
year to year, and bipartite, lest either by singularity, or continuance it
should be corrupted: and for kings they styled them Consuls, that they might
remember the duty of their place was to consult, and provide for their
Country. Such joy was conceived for this new freedom, that they could hardly
believe the change, and one of the Consuls, because he was of kingly name, and
race, they deprived him of his office, and banished him the city. Into whose
room Valerius Poplicola being substituted, he bent his whole studies to
augment the free maiessie of the people. For he bowed down to them the Fasces
in their assembly, and made it lawful to appeal from the Consuls to the
people. And that the show of a seeming castle might not offend, he plucked down
his house which stood high, and built it on a flat, or leuel. But Brutus to
come with all his sails into popularitie, did both cast his house to the
ground, and slew his sons. For having discovered, that they practiced to
bring in kings again, he drew them forth into the Forum, and in the midst of
the assembly, scourged them first with rods, and then cut off their heads with
the axe: so that he plainly seemed, as a common father, to have adopted the
people of Rome into the place of his children. From henceforth free, the first
arms which the people took, were against aliens for maintenance of their
liberty; secundly for their bounds; thirdly for their associates, as also, for
glory, and dominion; their neighbors by all means daily vexing them. For
whereas they had in the beginning no land of their own lying to their city,
they forthwith enlarged their territories with that which they won from the
enemy, and being situated in the midst, between Latium, and Tuscanie, as it
were in a two-way-leet, they never gave over to issue out of their gates
against the adversary, till running like a kind of plague through every
nation, and always laying hold of such as were next, they brought all Italy
at last to be under their subjection.

CHAP. X.
The war with the Tuscans, and King PORSENA.
KIngs being driven out of the city, A. V. C. CCXLVI.
the first arms which the people took were for supportation of their
freedom. For Porsena, king of Tuscans, was at hand with huge forces, and
brought back the Tarquins, under his protection. Nevertheless, though he
pressed them, to accept the king again, with fighting, and with famine, and had
gotten mount Ianiculum, which stood in the very jaws of the city, yet they
both resisted, and forced him also to retire: and finally they struck him into
so great admiration, that after he was now grown too hard, he voluntarily
entered into a league of friendship with that people, which he had almost
overcome. Then were seen those brave Roman adventures, and wonders, Horatius,
Mutius, Claelia, who if they were not in chronicles would at this day be taken
for fables. For Horatius Cocles, after that he alone could not keep off the
enemies, who assaulted him on all sides, and that the bridge was broken down
behind him, he crossed over Tibris, swimming, and yet held his weapons fast.
Mutius Scaeuola came by a stratagem to the king, and attempted to stabbe him in
his camp; but when he saw the stroke lost, by mistaking another for him, he
thrust his hand into the prepared fire, and doubled the kings terror by his
cunning. For thus he said: That thou may know from what manner of man thou
have escaped, three hundred of us have all sworn the same thing. Mean while
(an horrible thing to be spoken) Horatius stood undaunted, and the other shook
with fear, as if it had been the kings hand which burned. Thus much for men.
But, that neither of the sexes should want their praise, behold the courage of
a noble damosel Claelia, one of the hostages delivered to the king, breaks
from her keepers, and swam safe home on horsbacke through her native countries
river. Porsena terrifide with so many, and so notable fair warnings, bade them
farewell, and be free. The Tarquins fought so long, as till Brutus, with his
own hand, slew Aruns, the guilty son of king Tarquinius, and till himself
also being wounded by the same Aruns, fell down dead withal upon the body,
as if he plainly meant to pursue the adulterer even to hell.

CHAP. XI.
The war with the Latins.
THe Latins in like sort upon emulation, and envy, took in hand the quarrel
of Tarquinius, that the people which were Lords abroad, might be made vassals
at home. All Latium therefore, having Manilius of Tusculum for leader, was up
in arms, upon pretense to revenge the kings wrong. They encountered at sake
Regillus in doubtful fight for a long time, till the Dictator himself,
Posthumous, tossed the standard among the enemies (a new, and famous device) that
it might be recovered with running in; and Florus has Cossus, not Aebutius.
Titus Aebutius Elua, Master of the horsemen, commanded them to slip their
bridles over their horse heads (and this also was a new device) that they might
charge the more desperately. To conclude, such was the furious bravery of the
battle, that the Gods are said to have given it the looking-on; and that
Castor, and Pollux, two of them, did, mounted upon white coursers, no man
doubts. Therefore the General of the Romans adored, and upon condition of
victory, vowed them a temple, and duly performed it, as pay to his
fellow soldiers. Thus far for liberty. Their next war with the Latins was
concerning limits, and bounders, which brake out presently, and continued
without truce. Sora (who would believe it?) and Algidum, petie cities, were
then a terror to Rome. Satricum, and Corniculum, towns of no more fame, were
Provinces. Over Veij, and Bouilli, a shame to say it, yet we triumphed. Tibur
which is now but a suburb, and Praeneste but our summer-recreation, were then
demanded of the Gods, as mighty matters, with vows for victory made solemnly
first in the Capitol. Faesulae were then what Taphrae were of late; and the
forest of Aricinum the same, which in these days the huge Hercinian woods;
Fregellae what Gessoriacum; and Tibrsis what Euphrates. Nay it was then held an
act of so great glory to have overcome but Corioli, that Caius Marcius (fie
upon it) was thereof called Coriolanus, as if he had co^quer'd Numantia in
Spain, or the worlds third portion, Africa. There are at this day to be seen
the tropheas of the sea fight at Antium, which Caius Maeuius, having vanquished
the enemies navy, hung up in the stage of the Forum; if that at leastwise may
be termed a navy; for they were but six beak-heads: But in those young
days, that number made a battle at sea. The Aequi, and Volscians were
nevertheless of all the Latin nations, the most obstinately bent, and, as I
may call them, quotidian enemies. But Lucius Quinctius chiefly brought them
under; that noble Dictator, who taken from holding the plough, did by his
excellent virtue deliver the Consul, Lucius Minurius as he was besieged, and
almost distressed in his camp. It was then about the midst of seed-time, when
the officer of arms sent from the Senate found patriciuni virum.
the honorable man at his plough-worke. From thence setting forward to the
army, he, to show he had not left off any point of countrey-fashions,
compelled the conquered enemies to pass reproachfully under the yoke, like
cattle. And so the service ending, he returned home to his oxen, a triumphall
husbandman. O the goodness of the Gods how great was the speed! The war was
all begun, and ended, within the space of two and twenty days; that the
Dictator might seem to have hastened home to his rural task left behind
unfinished.

CHAP. XII.
The war with the Falisci, and Fidenates.
Our daily, and yearly enemies were the Veientines, people of Tuscanie, so
far forth, that the noble house of the Fabij promised to the state an
extraordinary band of voluntaries, and undertook their part of the war,
upon their private charge, but with too too great calamity to themselves. For
at the river of Cremera, A. V. C. CCLXXIV.
three hundred and six of them, a little army of lords, were slain; and that
gate of Rome through which they issued to that encounter was thereupon
entitled Dismal. But that deadly blow was revenged with notable victories, as
their strongest towns were taken from them by sundry Roman Generals, with
differing events. The Falisci yielded themselves of their own accord. They of
Fidenae were burnt with their own firebrands. The city of the Veientes was
ransackt, and razed for ever. The Falisci yielded upon admiration of their
adversaries nobleness, and not without cause; for the Roman General sent back
the treacherous Pedant fast bound, before those children which he brought, with
a purpose by their surrender to betray the city. For Furius Camillus, a wise,
and religious gentleman, well understood, that victory to be a true one,
which was achieved without wrong to common honesty, and with honor saved.
The Fidenates, to scarre us, came marching forward, like an host of infernal
furies, with blazing firebrands in their hands, and flaring head-tires speckled
like skins of serpents: but that ghastly spectacle was nothing but an omen of
their own destruction. How great a State the Veientines were, those ten years
siege, which they endured, makes evident: this was the first time of our
wintring in tents, of leuying money upon the Commons, to pay a winter-campe:
and the soldiers, of their own free wills, took a solemn oath never to rise
from before the city, till they had taken it. The spoils of king Lartes
Tolumnius were brought to Jupiter Feretrius. To conclude, the last act of that
cities tragedy was not performed by scaling ladders, or assaults, but by
mines, and stratagems under ground. The hugeness of the bootle was such, that
the tithes thereof were sent ouer-sea to Pythian Apollo, and the whole people
of Rome were called forth to share in the pillage. Such were the Veientines
then. Now, who is he that once remembers them to have had a being? which are
their remains? or which the least token of them? The credit of Histories is
put hard to it, in making us believe that ever Veij were.

CHAP. XIII.
The Gallick war.
AFter this, either by the envy of the Gods, or by destiny, the most round
quick stream of spredding dominion, was for a while kept under by the
ouerflowings of the Galli Senones. Which season, it is hard to say, whether it
were more dismal to the Roman people through terrible calamities, or glorious
for the proofs they gave of their manhood. Certain it is, that the violence
of their extremes was such, as I may well think they were sent from heaven of
purpose; the immortal Gods desirous to try, whether the virtue of the Romans
might deserve the empire of the world. These Galli Senones, a nation naturally
fierce, of a wild behavior, their bodies huge as well as their warre-like
weapons, were in all respects so dreadful, as they seemed no other then borne
to destroy mankind and beat down cities. In former ages, when the Ocean had
surrounded all, they coming in an huge plumpe from the utmost coasts of the
earth, when they first had wasted what was in their way, and then seated
themselves between the Alps, and Po, nor yet contented there, they wandered
also over Italy. They lay now at siege before Clusium. The Romans became
intercessours, as for their fellows, and confederates. Ambassadors were sent,
as the manner is: But what regard has right, or wrong, among the barbarous?
They carry themselves roughly; and transfer the quarrel, from thence.
Rising therefore from before Clusium, and coming to Rome, the Consul Fabius
gives them battle with an army, at the river Alia. The discomfiture at
Cremera was not more piteous. The Romans therefore mark this day among their
black ones. Our forces defeated, they forthwith approach the walls of Rome.
There was no garrison. Then, or else never, did the Roman bravery of mind
appear. For, so soon as might be, such of the Senators, as had borne highest
offices, assemble in the Forum, and under the curses of the chief Priest,
banne, and deuoue themselves, for their Countries safety, to the gods
infernal: and, those dire ceremonies ended, they were each of them immediately
put back again to their houses, before which, they seated themselves upon
their Court-chaires, apparelled in their robes of state, and most honorable
habiliments, that when the enemy came upon them, they might die in the
majesty of their places. The Priests, and Flamines, did partly pack up, in
dryfats, whatsoever was most religiously esteemed of, in their temples,
covering them under ground, and partly trussed into carts, transporting it away
with themselves. The Virgins also of Vesta's college did barefoot accompany
their flying gods. At which time, Albinius, one of the common people, is said
to have taken his wife and children out of their wagon, and placed those
virgins there. So that even in those days the religion of the State was more
dear unto us, then private affection. Such as were able to bear arms, whose
number was scarce six thousand, followed Manlius, for captain, up into the
Capitol, praying high Jove, as if he were even present then among them, that
as they were flockt together for defense of his temple, so he again would
protest their valor under his title. Mean while the Galls come, at first as
men amazed, finding the gate wide open, suspicious of some plot: but when they
found all hush, they enter disorderly, with no less a cry, then fury. They
go to the houses, whose doors stood euery-where open; and when they beheld the
purple-cloathed Senators sitting in their chayres of state, they worshipped them
at first as gods, or local Ghosts: but so soon as it appeared they were
mortal men, and that otherwise they disdained to answer, they straightwayes
did as absurdly sacrifice, as adore them; burn buildings, and with
firebrarnds, iron tools, and force of hands, lay the whole city as low as the
soil it stood upon. Seven months (who would believe it?) the barbarous houered
about one hill, having not only by day, but by night, assayed all means to
force it: whom, when at last they were mounted up in the dark, Manlius wakened
with the creaking of a goose, threw headlong back from the top of the cragge:
and to put the enemy out of all hope of staruing them, hurled loaves of bread
from the castle, to make a show of confidence, though their famine was extreme.
And upon a certain set day he sent forth Fabius, through the midst of the
enemies guards, to perform a solemn sacrifice upon mount Quirinal: who, by
the mere awe of religion, returned untouched through the thickest of the
leaguers weapons, and brought assurance back, that they had the gods their
friends. At last, when the barbarous were tired now with their own siege,
contented to sell their departure at a thousand pound weight of gold, and then
also putting in a sword over and above their bargain, into the false balances
they weighed by, insolently justifying it by this cutting quippe, Woe to them
who are overcome, L. Camillus suddenly assayles them at their backs, and made
such slaughter among them, that all the characters of destruction, which fire
had printed in the city, were blotted out with the inundations of the blood of
the Galls. We may well give thanks to the immortal gods in the behalf it
self of so great a calamity. That fire and flame which destroyed Rome, buried
the poverty of Romulus. For what other thing else did that burning, but
provide, that the city which the Fates ordained to be the mansion seat of men,
and gods, might not seem to have been consumed, or ouer-whelmed, but
hallowed, and expiated rather? Therefore, after Rome was thus defended by
Manlius, and delivered by Camillus, it rose up against bordering nations more
eagerly and vehemently then before. And to begin at those very Galls
themselves, she, not satisfied with having driven them out, beyond her walls,
but drawing after her the ruins of countries, wider over Italy, did so bunt
and pursue them under Camillus, as that at this day there remains no footstep
of such a people as the Senones, She made one slaughter of them at the river
Anien, where Manlius, in a single combat, took from the adversary champion a
Torques, or chain of gold. Thence were the Manlij by-named Torquati. Another
time she had the execution of them in the Pontin fields, where Marcus
Valerius, in a like duel, seconded by a sacred bird, reft his pursuing enemy
of his arms; and of that bird Coruus, a crow, the Valerij were entitled
Coruini. Nor as yet giving over, Dolabella, after some years, did utterly
extinguish the remains of those generations, at the lake of Vadimon, in
Tuscanie, that none of them might be alive, to glory, they had burned Rome.

CHAP. XIIII.
War with the Latins.
MAnlius Torquatus, A. V. C. CCCCXIII
and Decius Mus, Consuls, the Romans turned their weapons points from the
Galls, upon the Latins, men always troublesome, through emulation of being
like in power, and in bearing office; but then specially, out of contempt,
because the city had been fired; and therefore they demanded to be
absolutely free of Rome, and to have equal authority in state, and coming to
Magistracy, as the Romans; so that now they durst do more then encounter. At
which time notwithstanding who will wonder if the Latins gave way? When one of
the Consuls put his own son to death, for having fought against the
discipline of war without leave, though he got the upper hand, as thinking
Obedience a more important matter then victory: and the other Consul, as if
counseled thereunto from heaven, covering his head, deuoued, and gave himself
to the infernal gods, before the first ranks of the army, and shooting
himself forward into the thickest troops of the enemies battle, opened a new
path to victory, by the track of his blood.

CHAP. XV.
War with the Sabins.
AFter war with the Latins, A. V. C. CDLXIV.
the people of Rome set upon the Sabins; who grown unmindful of that old
alliance of theirs under Titus Tatius, had joined themselves to the Latins, as
infected with a kind of martial neighborhood. But Curious Dentatus, Consul,
they wasted with fire and sword all the space of ground, from the river Nar,
and the springs of Velinus, up as far as to the Adrian sea. By which
conquest, there was so much land, and so much people subdued, that whether of
them were most, not he who had overcome them, could imagine.

CHAP. XVI.
War with the Samnits.
THen, moved upon the petition of the country of Campania, they invaded the
Samnits, not on behalf of themselves, but, which was more honorable, on
behalf of their associates. Both the nations had stricken a league with the
Romans; A. V. C. CDXII.
but they of Campania, by surrender of their whole estate, had made it more
sincerely, and before the other. The Romans therefore underwent the war with
the Samnits, as in their proper right. Campania is the most fair and goodly
country, not only of Italy, but of all the world. Nothing is more delicate
then the air: flowers spring there twice every year. No soil can be richer;
and therefore it is named the contention, or wager of Bacchus, and Ceres.
Nothing can be more harborous, then the sea, which lies before it. Here are
those famous hauen-townes, Caieta, Misenus, and Baiae, warmed with her proper
fountains: here are the lakes, Lucrinus, and Auernus, bowers of delight, for
the sea to recreate in. Here the vines apparel the mountains, Gaurus,
Falernus, Massicus, and, the fairest of all the rest, Vesuuius, Aetna's rival
for casting out flames. Cities upon the seacoast, Fermiae, Cumae, Puteoli,
Naples, Herculaneum, Pempeij; and Capua, Queen of Cities, and once accounted
after Rome, and Carthage, the third maine City of the world. For this Seat,
and those Regions, the people of Rome invaded the Samnits, a nation, if you
respect wealth, glittering in armor of gold, and siluer-plate, and clothed in
diuerse-coloured garments, who should be brauest; if deceitfulness of
ambuscadoes, they are bold for the most part upon the advantage of wild woods,
and mountains, fitted for the purpose; if madness, and rage, they were bent
to the subversion of Rome, and that intention of theirs solemnly bound up with
cursed laws, and humane sacrifices; if their obstinacy, after six breaches of
league, and many notable overthrows, they were still more stomachous. All
these things notwithstanding, the Romans, in fifty years space, by the
conduct of their Fabij, and Papirij, the fathers, and the sons, did so
subdue, and tame them, and so razed down the very ruins of their cities, that
Samnium is at this day sought for in vain in Samnium; nor does the matter of
four and twenty triumphs easily appear. But the most notable and famous foil
which ever happened to the Romans by this nation, was received at the Forkes of
Caudium, Veturius, and Posthumous, Consuls. For our army being drawn by
stratagem, and shut up within such a fastness, as out of which it could not
escape, Pontius, captain general of the Samnits, amazed at his own
advantage, asked counsel of Herennius, his father, who as an old soldier,
wisely bade him, either to let all go free, or to kill them all. But he,
following neither of the courses, contented himself with only disarming, and
passing them naked under forkes, or gallowses; and so they neither became
friends as in thankfulness for a benefit, and yet after the foul dis-honour,
greater enemies then ever. The Consuls therefore, by voluntary yielding
themselves back to the Samnits, came gloriously off from the infamy of that
league; and the Roman soldiers crying for revenge, to Papirius their new
General, fell to raging (an horrible thing to be spoken) with their drawn
swords, upon the very way it self, before they came to fight; and in the
battle (as the Samnits themselves gave it out) the eyes of the Roman were on a
bright blaze of fire; and never gave over killing, till they had paid the
enemy, and their captive captain, their own forcks home again.

CHAP. XVII.
War with the Etruscans, Samnits, and Galls.
HItherto the people of Rome had to deal in battle with one nation after
another apart; A. V. C. CDLIIX.
but now in heaps with many at once, and yet even so also were hard enough for
them all. The Tuscans stirred at that time, with them the Samnits, the most
ancient people of Italy, and all the rest, suddenly concur to raze out the
Roman name. The terror of so many, and so mighty conspired nations, was
extreme. The ensigns of four armies of their enemies waued in flank upon
them, from Etruria. Mean while, the Ciminian forest, which lay between Rome,
and that army, reputed as impassable till then, as either the woods of
Caledon, or Hercinia, was so much misdoubted, that the Senate forbad the
Consul from daring to venture upon so great a peril. But none of these things
hindered the General from sending his brother in scowt, to discover the pase.
He, in a shepherds disguise, executes his part by night, and upon his return
makes full report. Then Fabius Maximus, by hazzarding one man, made an end of a
most hazzardous war. For falling in at unawares upon the enemy, straggling
loosly, and making himself master of the highest grounds, and tops of hills,
thundered from thence, after his manner, upon them underneath. For such was the
face of that war, as if volleyes of lightning, and thunder had been
discharged from the clouds of heaven upon the old earth-borne Giants. Howbeit,
the victory was not unbloody. A. V. C. CDLIX.
For Decius, the other of the Consuls, ouer-set in the bosom of the valley,
took upon his own head, by his fathers example, all the wrath of the Gods,
and made the vnder-going of general curses, for the general good, which was
now grown appropriated to his family, to be the price, and rate at which to
purchase victory.

CHAP. XVIII.
The war of Tarent, and with king Pyrrhus.
THe war of Tarent follows, A. V. C. CDLXXII.
single in name, and title, but affording many victories. For this inuolued as
it were in one ruin, the Campanians, Apulians, Lucanians, and, the head, or
top of the war, the Tarentines, all Italy, and together with these the most
noble prince in Greece, king Pyrrhus: so that at one, and the same time, the
conquest of Italy was finished, and a luckie sign given of fetching home
triumphs from beyond sea. Tarentus it self, sounded by the Lacedaemonians, was
once the metropolis of Calabria, and Apulia, and of all Lucania, as well
renowned for greatness, fortifications, and a port, as admirable in its
situation: for placed at the very entrance into the Adriatic sea, it fitly
sends forth shipping for our coasts, for Istria, Illyricum, Epyrus, Achaia,
Africa, and Sicilia. There looks upon the harbor, in prospect of the sea, the
cities theater, the original cause of all her calamities. They were then at
their solemn sports, when the fleet of Roman galleys was from thence espied to
row by the shore: and imagining them to be enemies, the Tarentines hurrie out,
and pell mell enter upon them, not well knowing either who, or from what place
they were. Presently hereupon, ambassadors from Rome brought a complaint; but
they violate their persons also, after a lewd fashion, and filthy to be spoken.
Thus rose the war. Dreadful were the adversaries preparations, when so many
nations stirred at once on behalf of the Tarentines; and fiercer then they
all, king Pyrrhus, who as in defense of that city, which by reason of her
Lacedaemonian founders, was Greekish, came attended upon with the whole
strengths of Epyrus, Thessalie, Macedonia, of elephants (till that time
unknown) of sea, of land, men, horse, armor, and the terror of those wild
beasts added. The first battle was at Heraclea, and Liris, a river of Campania,
Laeuinus Consul: which was so desperately heady, that Obsidius, captain of the
Farentan troop, chargeing king Pyrrhus home, disordred, and compelled him,
having first cast away his ensigns, or notes of a king, to abandon the fight.
There would have been an end, had not the elephants come forth, a sight of
wonder, and made their race into the battle, whose hugeness, hideous shape,
strange smell, and braying noise, amazed the horse, and seeming huger then they
were, through being vnacquainted-with, put the army in rowt, flying far, and
near, and made a monstrous hauock. The secund battle at Asculum in Apulia was
more fortunate, Fabricius, and Aemilius, Consuls. For by this time the fear
conceived of the elephants was worn away, and Caius Minucius, a spear in the
fourth legion, cutting one of their trunkes off, had made it appear, that they
were mortal. Therefore, the iauelins were darted thick at them also: and
firebrands hurld into the towers, ouerwhelm'd all the adversaries squadrons
with the fall of their burning works: nor was there any other end of the
overthrow, but that which night made by parting; king Pyrrhus himself, last of
them who fled, being wounded in the shoulder, was borne away armed, by his
guard. The last battle was in Lucania, near the fields which they call
Aurusin, under the same Generals, as before. And that event which virtue was
about to have given here, for an vpshot, or clozing victory, fortune gave.
For the elephants being brought again into the vantgard, one of them a young
one, being grievously wounded in the head with a weapon, auertit.
turned tail: and as in flying, it rusht through, over the bodies of friends,
and bemoned it self in braying, the dam knew it, and as it were to take
revenge for her foale, started out of her rank; then filled all with fear,
and affright round about, no otherwise then as if they had been her
adversaries: so the same beasts which carried away the first day clear, and
made the secund indifferent, gave away the third past controversy. But the
war with king Pyrrhus was not in the fields abroad with forces only, but
with wit also, and at home within the city. For the cunning prince, after he
had obtained the first victory, having well felt what manner of men he had to
deal with in the Romans, despaired to prevail by force, and betook himself
to devices. For he burnt the slain, used his prisoners lovingly, and sent
them home free without ransom. And in the neck of that, dispatching
ambassadors to Rome, labored by all possible means to be admitted as a
friend. But the Roman virtue approved it self then for excellent, in war,
and peace, abroad, and at home, in all points: neither did ever any victory
rather show the valor of the people, the high wisdom of the Senate, and the
magnanimity* slenders, then the Tarentine. What kind of men were trampled to
death in the first battle by the elephants? all their wounds were forward,
some found dead upon their enemies bodies, in every man's hand his sword,
threatenings left upon their brows, and anger living in death it self. Which
Pyrrhus so admired, that he said, O how easy were it for me, to become lord
of the world, if I were captain of the Roman soldiers, or for the Romans, had
they me for their king! And what speed made they who suruiued the first
overthrow, in renforceing their powers? when Pyrrhus said; I see as sure as can
be, that I am borne under the constellation of Hercules, for that so many more
heads as I have slain, spring out of their own blood, as it were out of Lernas
serpent. And what a Senate was that? when upon the oration of Appius the
Blind, the kings ambassadors who were sent back out of the city with their
gifts and presents, confessed to Pyrrhus, upon his demand of what they thought
concerning the enemies seat, that the city seemed a temple, the Senate a
parliament of kings. Again, what manner of men were the Generals themselves in
camp? when Curious sent the kings physician back, who made offer in secret, for
a certain sum to poison him, and Fabricius, having the choice given by
Pyrrhus, refused to share a kingdom with him. Or what were they in time of
peace? when Curious preferred his earthen dishes before the Samnits gold; and
Fabricius, using Censorian severity, condemned it for riotous in Rufinus, a
Consularie nobleman, because he had silver plate, in all to a ten pound
weight. Who wonders now, if the people of Rome, with such qualities, courages,
and martial discipline, obtained victory; or that by this one Tarentine war
they should in four years space bring into subjection (as they did) the
greatest part of all Italy, most puissant nations, most rich commonweals, and
most fertile countries? Or what does so much surpass belief, as when you
compare the beginnings of the war with the conclusion? Pyrrhus, conqueror in
the first field, harrased trembling Italy, Campania, Liris, and Fregellae, came
within ken of Rome, then almost taken, as he beheld it from the castle of
Praeneste, and within twenty miles off, filled the eyes of the quaking city
with smoke, and dust. The same prince, enforced twice after that to quit his
camp, twice wounded, and beaten over land, and sea, into his Greece again;
peace, and quiet, and the spoils, which were gotten from so many the richest
nations, so infinite, as Rome was not wide enough to contain her own
victory. For there never entered a more glittering, or more goodly triumph,
because before this time, she had beheld nothing but the cattle of the
Volscians, the herds of the Sabins, the carpenta.
chariots of the Galls, the manufactures of the Samnits arms. But, had you
been now a spectator, the captives were Molossians, Thessalians, Macedonians,
the Brutian, Apulian, and Lucaner, the pomp consisted of gold, purple,
statua's, tables, and the delicacies of Tarent. But Rome saw nothing, which
contented her more, then those beasts with towrs on their backs, of which she
had stood in such fear, and they again, sensible of their captivity,
followed drouping with down-hanging necks after the horse their Masters.

CHAP. XIX.
The Picenian War.
ALI Italy forthwith enjoyed peace (for after Tarent who should dare to do
oughts? A. V. C. CDLXXXV.
) saving only as the Romans thought it good, of their own mere motion, to
prosecute the enemies friends. Hereupon they conquered the Picentines, and
their chief city Asculum by General Sempronius, and the field, in the time
of battle suffering an earthquake, he appeased the goddess Tellus by
promising to build her a Temple.

CHAP. XX.
The Sallentine War.
THe Sallentines were added, A. V. C. CDXXC VII.
by Marcus Atilius, co^mander in chief for that service, to the Picentines,
together with the head-towne of that province, Brundusium, renowned for a port.
And in this conflict, Pales the shepherds deity, of her own accord, demanded
a Temple for her self, in lieu of victory.

CHAP. XXI.
The Vulsinian War.
THe last of the Italian nations who remained constant in their truth to us, A.
V. C. CDXX CVIII.
were the Vulsinians, the richest people of all Etruria, and now humble
suitours for assistance against their late slaves, who had set up the liberty
given them by their lords, over the giuers themselves, and getting the power of
the State among them, did accordingly tyrannize. But Fabius Gurges, the Roman
captain, made the villains smart for their villainy.

CHAP. XXII.
Of Seditions.
THis is the second age of the Roman people, and as it were their youth, a time
in which they were most fresh, and budding out in certain fiery shoots, boild
over as it were in iollitie of spirit. On the other side, that wildenes which
they retained of their shepheardish original, breathed forth somewhat still,
which was untamed in the^. Thence it came, that the army making a mutiny in
the camp, stoned Postumius, their General, to death, for refusing to give
them the shares he promised. That under Appius Claudius they would not overcome
the enemy when they might. A. V. C. CCXXCI.
That under General Volero, most withdrawing their service, they crushed the
Consuls fasces. Thence it was, that they punished the most honorable commanders
they had, with banishment, for resisting their pleasure, as Coriolanus, whom
they condemnd to the plough. Which injury he would as harshly have chastised
with his sword, if his mother Veturia, when he was now ready to charge, had
not disweapond him with weeping. Yea, as Camillus himself, because in their
conceits he had not made the shares of the Veientine spoils indifferent,
between the Commonaltie, and the soldier. But he, a much better man, did
rescue the besieged in Rome taken, and revenged their quarrel upon the Galls
their enemies, to whom but even now they were humble suitours. In such sort
they contended also with the Se nate it self about settling the rules of
right, that abandoning their houses, they threatened emptiness, and utter decay
to their native country.

CHAP. XXIII.
The cities first discord.
THe first intestine dissension happened through the unruliness of Usurers, A. V.
C. CCLVII.
who exercising villainous cruelty, the whole people departed in arms to the
Sacred Hill, and very hardly, not but until they had obtained Tribunes, and
were persuaded also by the authority of Menenius Agrippa, a wise, and eloquent
man, could be drawn to return. The fable of that old oration, effectual
enough to induce concord, is extant. In which is fained, that The parts of man's
body were once upon a time at odds together, for that, all the rest doing
their several offices, the belly only was idle: but in the end, when they
found themselves almost pined to death, by the separation, they became good
friends again, for that by the meat, which by the stomachs ministry was
converted into blood, the veins were filled with nourishment.

CHAP. XXIIII.
The cities second discord.
THE libido.
tyranny of the Decemuirs embroiled the city the second time, in the very
heart thereof. Ten princes elected for that purpose, had bookt the laws culled
out of such as were brought from Greece, at the peoples commandment: and the
whole rule of Roman justice was described by them in Ten Tables: after which
though their commission determined, they nevertheless retained the sovereign
power, upon a tyrannical humor. Appius Claudius was puffed up, more then all his
partners, with so great pride, as he secretly resolved to deflowre a freeborne
virgin, forgetting Lucretia, forgetting the expulsion of kings, and the laws
which himself had enacted. Virginius her father therefore, when he saw his
child by false practice judged a bondwoman, he made no bones to kill her with
his own hand, in the face of the Court; and the companies of his
fellow soldiers displaying about him their banners, admotisque signis
commilitonum.
they laid siege, in arms, to that whole usurped soueraignetie, and from mount
Auentine, where their first camp was, dragd it down into the jail, and
fetters.

CHAP. XXV.
The cities third discord.
THe dignity of marriages kindled the third sedition, A. V. C. CCCVIII.
in which the commons stood for freedom of joining in marriage with the
nobles. And this tumult brake forth in mount Ianiculum, by the instinct of
Canuleius, Tribune of the people.

CHAP. XXVI.
The cities fourth discord.
THe desire of honor in the commoners, A. V. C. CCCXXCV
who aspired to be also created magistrates, moved the fourth great stir.
Fabius Ambustus had two daughters, one of which he bestowed in marriage upon
Sulpitius, a gentleman of Patritian blood, the other upon Stolo, a Plebcian.
He, because his wife was frighted at the sound of the serieants rod on his
door, which was never heard there, till then, and for that respect was proudly
enough scoffed-at by her other sister, brooked not the indignity. Therefore
having gotten to be Tribune, he wrested from the Senate, whether they would,
or no, the participation of honors, and high offices. Nevertheless, in the
very hottest of these distempers, a man shall see cause to admire the generous
spirit of this princely people. For so much as one while they busied themselves
in the rescue of freedom, another while of chastity, then stood for dignity
of birth, and for the ensigns, and ornaments of honor. But of all these
worthy things, there was not any one over which they held so wakefull an eye,
as over liberty; nor could they be corrupted by any gifts, or good turns, as
a value for betraying it. For when in a mighty people, and growing mightier
daily, there were in the mean space many pernicious members, of them they
punished Spurius Cassius, suspected of affecting souereigntie, because he had
published the Agrarian law, and Maelius, for that he gave lauishly, both of
them with present death. Indeed, his own father took revenge upon Spurius,
but Seruilius Ahala, master of the Roman horsemen, or cauallerie, by
commandment of Quinctius, the Dictator, ran his sword through Maelius, in the
middle of the Forum. But Manlius, the preserver of the Capitol, carrying
himself, because he had freed most men of their debts, over loftily, and
above the garb of a fellow-citizen, they pitched him headlong from the top of
the castle, which himself had defended. Such were the people of Rome at home,
and abroad, in peace, and in war, during this working current of their youth,
fretum.
the secund age of their empire, in which they conquered all Italy, between
the Alps, and Sea, by force of arms.

The end of the first Book of Lveivs FLORVS.
THE HISTORY OF THE ROMANS. The second Book.
CHAP. I.
WHEN Italy was now brought under, and made mannageable, the people of Rome
having continued almost five hundred years, was in good earnest grown a man:
and if there be any such thing, as strength, and lusty youth, then certainly
they were strong, and young, and began to be hard enough for all the world.
They therefore (which is a wonder, and incredible to be spoken) who had kept a
struggling at home for wellneere five hundred years (so difficult it was to
set up an Head over Italy) in only the two hundred years which ensued, marched
through Afrike, Europe, Asia, and in brief, through the whole world, with their
victorious armies.

CHAP. II.
The first Carthaginian, or Punike war.
THe people therefore conquerours of Italy, A. V. C. CDXXC IX.
after they had run through all the length thereof, to the sea it self, like
a fire, which having consumed all the woods in it is way, is broken off at the
bank of some river passing between, in like sort stop a while. But when they
saw within kenn a wondrous rich booty lopt off as it were, and torn away from
their Italy, they burnt with so extreme a desire of atchieuing it, that
whereas they could not come at it by bridges, nor shut out the sea, they were
resolute to unite it to their dominion by force of arms, and so to make it
again a parcel of their continent. But lo, the destinies willing to open them
a way, there wanted not a wished occasion, Messana, a confederate city of
Sicilia, complaining of the Carthaginians outrages, who aimed at the conquest
of Sicilia, as well as the Romans, both of them at the same time, and with
equal affections, and forces, having in project the lordship of the world.
Therefore, for assisting their associates, that was the color, but in very
deed spurred on with love of the prey (though the newness of the attempt
troubled them, yet valor is so full of confidence) this rude, this
shepheardish people, and mere landmen, did well show, that manhood made no
difference whether it fought on horseback, or on shipboord, upon the earth, or
waters. Appius Claudius, Consul, they first adventured into those streights
which had been made hideous with poetical monsters, and where the current was
violent; but they were so far from being deterred thereby, that they made use
of the fury of the hurrying tide as of a favor: for falling in therewith,
they forthwith set upon Hiero, king of Syracuse, with such celeritie, that
himself confessed he found himself overcome before he saw the enemy. Duilius,
and Cornelius, Consuls, they durst also fight at sea. And the speed then used
to build, and rigge a navy was certainly a sign of speeding. For within
threescore days after the timber was felled, an armada of one hundred and
threescore sail, rid at anchor out of it; so that they seemed not the work
of shipwrights, but as if by a kind of metamorphosis, the gods had turned them
such, and changed trees to vessels. But the report which goes of the fight is
marvelous, where these slugges, and heavy bottomes seized upon the quick and
nimble navy of the adversaries, who were much more cunning at sea, so far as
skill to shift aside oars, and to dally out the strokes of beake-heads, by
yare, and ready turning. For the hands of iron, and other the grappling
engines of the Romans, the enemy made much sport at, before the battles
joined; but were then compelled to try it out in good earnest, as if they had
fought on firm land. Thus giving the overthrow at the Isles of Liparae, their
enemies armada either sunk, or fled, this was their first sea-triumph. The joy
whereof, how great was it? when Duilius, Captain general in that service, not
thinking one days triumph enough, did never come home from any supper, so long
as he lived, but he would have torches borne lighted, and flutes play before
him, as if he triumphed every day. The loss, in regard of so great a
victory, was but light. The other of the Consuls, Cnaeus Cornelius Asina,
entrapt by the enemy, under color of parley, and so surprised, became a
lesson against giving credit to the faithless Carthaginians. Calatinus,
Dictator, drove the Carthaginian garrisons out of Agrigentum, Drepanum,
Panormus, Eryx, Lilybaeum, well-neere all they had. The Romans were once in
great fear of a mischief about the forest of Camarina, but through the
excellent virtue of Calpurnius Flamma, a tribune of soldiers, we escaped. For
he, with a choice band of three hundred, did beat the enemy from a ground of
advantage, which he had taken, and meant to have made good against us, holding
play, till our whole army was gotten out of danger. By which his so prosperous
success, he matched the glory of Leonidas at the straits of Thermopylae: in
this one point our Calpurnius more famous then the other, that he ouer-liued
the exploit, though he drew no characters in blood. Lucius Cornelius Scipio,
when Sicilia was now become a purliew, or suburbe-prouince of the Roman state,
and war crept farther, crossed over into Sardinia, and Corsica, neighbor
Islands, where he so affrighted the inhabitants, by rasing the city Carala, and
so vanquished all the Carthaginians, or Paenish-men, as well by land, as sea,
that nothing now was left to be conquered, but Africa it self. Marcus Atilius
Regulus sailed with war aboard him into Africa. Yet there wanted not some,
who fainted at the terrible name which the Carthaginian seas had gotten.
Mannius, the tribune also, augmenting by his fear this fearful conceit, till
the General menacing him with the naked axe, unless he obeyed, made him take
heart, and put to sea, for fear of his head. They forthwith plyde it with oar
and sail: and the fear of our coming was such among the Paenish-men, that
Carthage had almost set open her gates, and been taken. The first reward of
this martial voyage was the taking of the city Clypea (for that stands first
in sight upon the Punick shore like a fort, and sentinel) and above three
hundred castles, besides the same, were sacked, and rased. Nor fought they only
with men but with monsters also; for a serpent of prodigious bigness, and bred
as it were to take vengeance on behalf of Africa, vexed our camp at Bagrada.
But Regulus, who conquered all things, having spread the terror of his name
far, and near, multitudes of their youth slain, their captains dead at his
foot, or fast in chains, his navy fraighted with infinite spoils, which he
had sent heavy laden away to Rome, as stuff for triumph, laid siege to the
chief seat of that war, Carthage itself, and lodged close at the very
gates. Here fortune wheeld about a little, only that Rome might have the more
glories to adorn it, whose greatness is for the more part most improued by
great mischances. For the enemies turning themselves to make use of foreign
aids, the Lacedaemonians sent them Xantippus for a General, who being most
expert in the Art of war, gave us a grievous overthrow, and the most stout
Regulus himself (a misfortune which had never happened to the Romans before)
fell alive into the enemies hands. But he was a man able to bear so great a
distress: For his mind could neither be conquered by imprisonment, nor with
the message he undertook; because, quite contrary to that which he had in
charge from the Carthaginians, he delivered his opinion in the Roman Senate,
That they should not make peace, nor yield exchange of prisoners. But neither
was the majesty of the man embased by voluntary return to the foe, in
discharge of his honor, nor finally, by captivity, nor by nayling on a gibbet
for punishment: nay, all these things increased the admiration of him. For what
other thing was all this else, then that the vanquished did triumph over the
vanquishers; and though not over Carthage, yet over fortunes self? And the
Romans were more eager, and more offensiuely bent to take revenge for Regulus,
then to compass victory. The Carthaginians therefore bearing their crests
aloft, and the war coming back into Sicilia, Metellus Consul made such a
slaughter of the enemy at Panormus, that there was no more stir in that
Island. An argument of a most brave day gained, was the seizure of an hundred
and twenty elephants: a great prey, had such an heard been gotten, not by
war, but by hunting. Publius Claudius Consul, the Romans were overcome, not
by the enemy, but by the Gods themselves, whose ceremonies they had contemned,
their navy forthwith sinking in the place, where he had commanded the birds to
be cast in, because they had given signs he should not fight. Marcus Fabius
Buteo, Consul, met the enemies navy in the African sea, about Aegymurus,
sailing onward to the invasion of Italy, and overthrew it. O how great a
triumph perished utterly at that time, by stresse of weather! when the pillage
of the enemies ships, driven by diverse winds, filled the shores of Africa, the
Syrts, the coasts of all nations, and the Islands about, with wrecks, and ruins.
A mighty loss, but it was not without some respect to the honor of the prince
of people, the Romans, that the victory was intercepted by tempest, and the
triumph miscarried by shipwreck. And yet when the Carthaginian spoils floated
up and down, and were split upon all the capes of land, and Isles about, the
Romans triumphed notwithstanding. A. V. C. DXII.
Lutatius Consul, an end was made of this war at the Islands called Aegates. A
soret sea fight was there never; for in the enemies armada was their prouant,
their landforces, their engines, their weapons, and as it were all Carthage;
which burden was their bane: the Romans navy, yare, light, vnincumbred, in
one kind like a landcampe, and in another, like a fight on horseback, they
were so guided with their oars, as with bridles, and the galleys themselves
seemed living creatures, their prowes, and beakes nimbly fitted to strike here,
or there, at pleasure. The enemies vessels therefore torn to pieces in a
trice, covered all the sea with their shipwracks between Sicilia, and
Sardinia. So exceeding great was that victory, as no question was moved now
about razing the bulwarks of their enemies towns. It seemed frivolous to rage
against the castle, and stonewalls thereof, when Carthage it self was
swallowed thus in the bottom of the sea.

CHAP. III.
The Ligurian war.
THe first Carthaginian war thus sinisht, A. V. C.
a short repose, such as might serve as it were to take breath in, followed:
and for a sure sign of peace, and that arms were laid aside indeed, then
first after the days of king Numa, the temple-gate of Ianus was shut in: but
it was forthwith set open again. For the Ligurians, A. V. C. DXVI.
the Galls of Insubria, and the Illyrians provoked them, as in like sort did
the nations from under the Alps, that is, from under the very entrances into
Italy, some one or other of the Gods daily egging them on, that the arms of
the Romans might not take dust, or cancker-fret: to be brief, quotidian, and
as it were domestike enemies were as a school of war to the young fry of
soldiers; nor did the people of Rome use this, or that nation of them
otherwise, then as a whetstone to sharpen the edge-toole of their virtue upon.
The Ligurians dwelling close upon the lowest ridges of the Alps, between
Varus, and the river Macra, sheltred among wild thickets, were more difficult
to come at then to conquer. This tough, and swift generation of men, trusting
to their fastnesses, and feet, rather made inroades by flealth, like highway
thieves then an orderly war. Therefore, after that the Deceates, Oxibians,
Euburiades, and Ingaunians, nations of Liguria, had thus for a long time
shifted for themselves, by advantage of their woods, ways, and starting holes,
Fuluius at the last shuts up their lurking places with smoke, and fire,
Baebius draws them down into the champaine, and Posthumous so disarmed them,
as he scarcely leaves them iron enough to shoe a plough.

CHAP. IIII.
The Gallick war.
THe Galls of Insubria, A. V. C. DXXVIII.
who also dwell under the Alps, had the minds of wild beasts, and bodies huger
then for men. It is nevertheless found true by experience, that as their first
brunt is more forceable then a man's, so their second is weaker then a woman's.
Bodies bred about the Alps under a moist sky, are somewhat answerable in
nature to the snow of their seats, for so soon as they wax hot through with
fighting, they forthwith melt into sweat, and are as it were dissolved with the
sun in a moment. These, as at other times often, but specially now,
Britomarus being their captain, solemnly swore never to unbuckle their belts
till they had mounted the Capitol. It fell out just. For Aemilius having the
victory, vngirdled them in the Capitol. Soon after, Ariouistus their
captain, they vowed to consecrate a golden chain to their God of War, to be
composed of such spoils as they took from our soldiers. Jupiter intercepted
their vow; for Flaminius erected a golden trophea to Jove of the chains they
wore. Verdumarus being their king, they promised to offer the armours of the
Romans up to Vulcan; but their vows ran bias. For Verdumarus was slain, and
Marcellus hung up the third magnificent, and pompous spoils, which since the
reign of Romulus had been offered to Jupiter Feretrius.

CHAP. V.
The Illyrian war.
THe Illyricans, A. V. C. DXXIV.
or Liburnians inhabit at the farthermost roots of the Alps, between Arsia,
and the river Titius, upon the whole length of the coast of the Adrian sea for
a very mighty way. They not contenting themselves under the reign of Queen
Teuta, with spoils gotten by incursions, added one heinous act to many bold
ones. For they took our ambassadors, as they sought for an orderly redress
by law, in the points of wrong, and slew them, not with the sword, but like
beasts of sacrifice with the butchers axe, burnt the masters of the ships,
and to make the matter fuller of dishonor, all this in a woman's reign.
Therefore, Cnaeus Fuluius Centumalus our General, they were brought into
subjection far, and near. So chopping off the chief Lords heads, we
sacrificed to the ghosts of our ambassadors.

CHAP. VI.
The second Carthaginian war.
Four years were scarcely now ouerpast after the first Carthaginian war, A.
V. C. DXXXV.
when lo, another brake forth, less in respect of the time (for it lasted not
above eighteen years) but so far beyond the former in respect of terrible
overthrows, that if a man compare the loss together, which both the sides
sustained, he would rather think the victors part to be the party
vanquished. The noble Carthaginians were ashamed, seeing themselves thrust out
of the seas possession, and their Islands violently taken from them, and they to
pay tribute, who were wont to impose it. Hereupon Annibal, then a boy, bound
himself by oath to his father before the altar, to take revenge; wherein he
was not slack. Therefore to beget matter for a war, he razed Saguntus to the
ground, an ancient rich city of Spain, and a great, but grievous moniment of
her truth, and faith to the Romans; whose freedom being by name provided for
in the general articles of league, Annibal seeking causes of new quarrels,
overthrew to the ground, with his own, and others hands, that by breach of
peace he might open Italy for himself. The Romans make not a greater
conscience of any thing then of keeping the faith of leagues. Upon
advertisement therefore that their confederate city was besieged, they did not
presently run to their weapons, but did rather first choose to assay by way
of orderly complaint, what amends could be had, as remembering they were also
in amity with Carthaginians. Meane-while the Saguntines tired with hunger,
batteries, assaults, and fire, and their constancy turning into madness, and
fury, they make a monstrous funeral pile in the most open space of their
city; and laying then themselves, and their whole substance on the top
thereof* made an end of all together with sword, and fire. For this so foul a
destruction, the Romans demanded the delivery up of Annibal. But the
Carthaginians paltring in the case, quoth Fabius, the chief ambassador of the
Romans, What means this delay? lo, in this lap I bring you war, and peace,
choose which of them you like best, and take it among you. And when at these
words the voice went round, he should give them at his pleasure, which he
would; Be it war then, said he; and therewithal flinging open the skirts of
his robe, in the midst of the Counsel-house, which he had gathered hollow, and
held up till then, he did it with such an horror as if he had indeed powered
war among them out of his lap, or bosom. The end of this war was suitable to
the beginning. For as if the last curses of the Saguntines in that their
public self-slaughter, and final fire had commanded such obsequies to be
celebrated, their ghosts were sacrificed unto with the deuastation of Italy,
the captivity of Africa, and the destruction of kings and Generals of armies,
by whom that war was managed. When as therefore that sad, and dismal storm,
and tempest of the Carthaginian war once stirring in Spain, had forged out
of the Saguntine fires, those lightnings, and thunders, now long in breeding,
and aimed at Rome, immediately then, as carried with a whirl-winde, it rusht
through the middle of the Alps, and fell upon Italy from the snowie top of
those mountains made higher then they were of themselves by fame, and fables,
as if it had been from heaven. The first rages of the charge burst streightway
forth with horrible violence, between the river of Po, and Ticinum. There,
Scipio General, the Roman army was put to flight, and the General himself
had fallen wounded as he was, into the hands of the enemy, if his son, then
wanting of eighteen years old, had not rescued his father from certain death
it self with bold bestriding him. And this shall be that Scipio, who grows
up to the destruction of Africa, and shall make a surname to himself out of
her calamities. A. V. C. DXXXI.
After this overthrow at Ticinum followed that of Trebia. This second storm of
war wrought the furious effects thereof, Sempronius Consul. There the crafty
enemies, in a cold, and snowie day, having first well warmed themselves at
fires, and suppled their limbs with oil, men (a wonder to be spoken) coming
out of the South, and sunburned climats, overcame us at home with our own
winter. The third lightnings of Annibal flew random at us by Trasimenus lake,
Flaminius our General. There also, the Carthaginians vented another new trick
of their trade. For the lake lying hidden under a thick mist, the cauallerie
shadowed from sight with twigs, and long osiars which grew in the marsh, gave a
sudde^ charge upon our rere. Nevertheless we cannot blame the enemy, but our
selves. For swarms of bees which clustred upon the Roman ensigns, their gilt
eagles unwilling to come out, and an huge earthquake at the joining of the
battles, all of the^ unlucky signs, had forewarned our rash General of the
event, and prevented it, but that the concourse of the horse, and foot, and the
extraordinary loud clashing of their weapons gave to Flaminius alone the honor
of leading them on, against the other Consuls liking. The fourth, and the
almost deadly wound of the empire was at Cannae, an obscure village of Apulia,
but through the greatness of the blow which was received there, it got to be
famous at the cost of forty thousand lives. In that place the General
himself, earth, heaven, the day, and all things else consented to the fall of
that unfortunate army. For Annibal not content to have put counterfeit
fugitives upon us, who seeing their vantage, forthwith set upon our men at
their backs, but that most dangerous captain having moreover in the open
fields, marked the nature of the place where the sunnebeams did beat hottest,
the dust was infinite, and the eastern wind blew stint as it were, he so
marshalled his battles, that the Romans standing with their faces toward all
these disaduantages, himself had the whole favor of the sky, the wind, the
dust, and sun at once to fight for him. The enemies therefore were so glutted
with the execution of two most mighty hosts, that Annibal himself bade his
soldiers, spare the sword. Of the two Consuls, the one fled, the other was
slain; hard to say, whether of them the more brave therein. Aemilius ashamed
to survive, Varro despaired not of better. Signs of the greatness of the
overthrow were these, the river Aufidus ran blood for a while, a bridge of dead
carcases made at Annibals comma^deme^t over Gellus brook, two bushels of gold
rings sent to Carthage, and the estimate of Roman gentlemen slain, calculated
not by tale, but measure. It was then past all doubt, that Rome had seen her
last day, and that Annibal, within five days, might have feasted in the
Capitol, if (as the Carthaginian, Maharbal, Bumilcar's son, is reported to
have said) Annibal had as well understood how to make use of his victory, as
how to obtain it. But, as the common voice goes, either the fate of Rome
ordained to be empress of the earth, or Annibals evil Genius, or the Gods of
Carthage now auerted, carried him a diverse way. For when he might have put
his victory home, he rather made choice to enjoy it, and suffered Rome to rest,
while he progrest to Campania, and Tarent, where both he, and his army lost,
by, and by their spirit so, as it was truly said, that Capua was Annibals
Cannae. For him whom neither the Alps, nor force of arms could daunt, Campania
alone, and the delicate warm springs of Baiae did (who would believe it?)
subdue. Meanwhile the Romans took breath, and rise as it were from death to
life again. Weapons wanted: they took them down out of the temples. Fresh
soldiers wanted: they minister the oath of war to their bondmen, and make
them free. Treasure wanted: the lords of the counsel bring gladly all they
had, leaving no gold to themselves, but what was in their brooches, belts, and
rings: the knights, and gentlemen followed the Senators example, and the
comoners the gentlemen's: to be brief, Leuinus, and Marcellus Consuls, such
abundance of riches was brought together out of private contributions for the
public service, that the eschequer had scarcely books, and clerks enough to
enter the particulars. What shall we say of them at this time, in the choice of
magistrates? how great was the wisdom of the centuries, or hundred-men, when
the younger sort asked counsel of the ancient, whom they should nominate for
Consuls? For it stood them upon, not to deal with fair force only against so
cunning an enemy, who had so often beaten them, but to meet with him also in
his own policies. The first hope of their empires recovery, and, as I may
say, reuiuall thereof, was Fabius, who invented a new method of vanquishing
Anibal, Not to fight. And from hence it was, that in happy time for Rome he
got the nickname, to be called, The draw-backe, or Cunctator: and from hence
it came, that the people styled him, The shield of the state. He therefore so
ground and punned Annibal, by coasting him through all Samnium, the forests of
Falernus, and Gaurus, that whom plain strength could not break in pieces,
delay might fret, and wear. Soon after, Claudius Marcellus, General, they
durst also encounter him, came hand to hand, drove him out of his Campania, and
forced him to raise his siege from before Nola. They durst in like sort,
Sempronius Gracchus General, pursue him through Lucania, and set upon his back
in his retreat; though, O the shame! the Romans were compelled to fight with
the hands of their bondslaues. O the horrible confidence of a people, among so
many adversities! O the high haughtiness, and bravery of their spirit, in
their so extreme and afflicted estate, that being doubtful of keeping Italy,
they durst notwithstanding tend to other places; and when their enemies flew up
and down at their throats, over all Campania, and Apulia, and made half
Afrike in Italy, did both at one time bear the brunt of his assaults, and at
the same time dispatched forces into Sicilia, Sardinia, Spain, and other parts
of the world. Marcellus was sent into Sicilia, which held not out long: for the
power of the whole Island was put apart into one city. Syracusae, that great,
and till that time, unconquered chiefe-towne, though defended by the wit of
Archimedes, did yield at last. Her treble wall, alike number of castles, her
haven of marble, and her fountain Arethusa, so far renowned, what auayled
they other then thus far only, that the city was spared, in respect of her
beauty? Gracchus seized Sardinia: neither did the wildness of the Ilanders,
nor the monstrous cragges of their mad mountains (for so they were called)
stand them in any stead. A terrible course was taken with their cities, and
with their City of cities, Caralis, that the headstrong nation, scarce worth
killing, might be tamed at last with the lack of their native soil. The two
Scipio's, Cnaeus, and Publius, sent into Spain, had plucked away once all hope
from the Carthaginians, but lost their hold again, being destroyed by the
cunning inventions of the adversary. The Scipio's had gotten indeed great
days, when they gave overthrows; but the one of them was circumuented and
slain by their dangerous devices, as he was busy to entrench; and the other
of them, having fled into a tower, was overwhelmed from round about with
firebrarnds. That Scipio therefore, who dispatched with an army into Spain, to
revenge his father, and his uncles death, was the man to whom the fates decreed
so great a surname out of the conquest of Africa, recovered all Spain, that
brave martial country, ennobled for cheualrie, and men of the sword, that
seed-plot of the enemies armies, that schoole-mistresse of Annibal himself; he
conquered all of it, I say (though incredible to say it) from the pillars of
Hercules to the Ocean, and I know not whether more speedily, or more easily:
the speed, four years speak; the easiness, one only city manifests,
being taken upon the same day in which it was besieged; and it was a fortunate
sign of Africa's conquest to ensue, that Carthage in Spain was so easily
taken. Certain it is notwithstanding, that the admirable continency of the
General was of greatest force to subdue the province: for he restored their
young sons, and daughters, were they never so pleasing, or fair, back to the
barbarous, without permitting them to come in his sight, that he might not
seem to have once sipt or skimd the honor of their chastity so much, as with
beholding them. This was then the carriage of the Romans in diverse countries
abroad, who yet, for all that, could not be rid of Annibal, who stuck close to
them in the bowels of Italy; for most nations had revolted unto him, and
himself, a most smart and excellent captain, used Italian forces against
Italy. We nevertheless had triced him out of most of her towns and countries.
Tarentus came in again of it self. Capua, the seat, dwelling house, and the
other as it were, Carthage of Annibal, was now also gained back, the loss
whereof so greatly grieved the man, that thereupon he turned all his strengths
upon Rome. O people, worthy to be lords of the earth, worthy of all favor,
and to have the government of the affairs of men, and gods! Driven to the
worst of fears, yet gave they not over their enterprise, and doubtful how to
keep their own city, they, for all that, quitted not Capua, but entrusting a
part of their army to Appius Consul, and the residue following Flaccus into
Rome, they fought where they were not, as well as where they were. Why wonder
we therefore? For Annibal encamping within three miles of Rome, was resisted by
the Gods (nor will I shame to confess it) I say by the Gods themselves,
because such store of rain fell at every remove of his, that he seemed put
back by divine provision; not as in defense of heaven, but to keep him off
from the citie-walls, and Capitol. He therefore departed, and fled, and
retired into the farthest nooke of Italy, having done all he could against
Rome, saving only given it assault. It is but a trifle to speak of, but yet of
much efficacy, to show the magnanimity of the Romans, in that the very field
it self, where Annibal encamped, being, during the siege, set to sale, found a
chapman. On the other side, Annibal, to imitate their confidence, cried the
goldsmiths row in the city, but no man would buy of him. And thus we may see
there were presages enough. But so great virtue of men, and so much favor of the
Gods came to nothing. For Asdrubal, brother of Annibal, came out of Spain with
a new army, new strengths, new weight of war. Rome had been undoubtedly
quite ruined, had that man joined with his brother: but Claudius Nero, and
Liuius Salinator, utterly distressed him as he was encamping, Nero kept Annibal
off in the farthest corner of Italy. Liuius marched with ensigns spread, into the
quite opposite quarter, that is, up to the very jaws of the first descence
from the Alps into Italy, the distance as great, from our other camp, as all
the length of Italy. It is not easy to say, with what high wit, and speed,
the two Consuls united their camps, and giving battle to Asdrubal, not aware
of that union, destroid him utterly, Annibal all this while not once dreaming
what was done. Sure it is, that when the news came to Aniball, and he saw his
brothers head tossed out before his trenches, I acknowledge (quoth he) the
vnluckines of Carthage. This was the man's first confession, not without a sure
presage of the fate which hung over his head. And now it was certain out of
Anibals own mouth, that Aniball might be vanquished. But the people of Rome,
full of confidence, after so many fortunate successes, held it a gallant
attempt to make an end of the quarrel, with the sorest enemy they had, and
that at his own home, in Africa. A. V. C. DXLIX.
Scipio therefore captain general, they transported thither the whole weight of
war, beginning to imitate Aniball, and to pay him back in his Africa, for
the mischiefs he did in their Italy. O ye Gods! what forces of Asdruball,
what armies of king Syphax did he overthrow? what, and how great were those
two camps, which he in one night consumed with fire? To conclude, he was not
now within three miles of Carthage, as Aniball had been of Rome, but battred
besieged gates themselves thereof: and thereby wrung Aniball out of Italy, upon
which he lay hard, and heavy. Since Rome stood, there was never a grater day
then that, in which, two the most famous captains that ever were before, or
since, the one of them, conqueror of Italy, the other of Spain, confronted
each the other in battle-ray. But yet they came first to a parley about
articles of peace: at which both of them stood a good while without speaking a
word, as if mutual admiration had fixed them to the ground. But when they could
not agree upon a peace, the trumpets sound a charge. It is clear, by
confession of both parties, that no armies could be better marshalled, nor any
battle be sorer fought, as Scipio reported of Anibal's army, and Anibal of
Scipio's. But Aniball notwithstanding gave place, and Africa became the
conquerours reward, and, after Africa, the whole earths empire also.

CHAP. VII.
The first Macedonian, or Philippian War.
NOne thought it now a shame to be overcome, when Carthage was. Macedonia,
Greece, Syria, and all other nations, as if carried with a certain current,
and torrent of fortune, by and by followed Africa. But the first who followed
were the Macedonians, a people which had once affected the worlds Monarchy.
Though therefore a Philip was king then, the Romans notwithstanding seemed to
themselves to have to deal in him with great Alexander. The Macedonian war
was greater in the name thereof, then was answered in the performances of the
nation: The cause of the war grew by reason of the league which Philip had made
with Anibal, having then a long while tyrannized Italy: which cause increased
when the Athenians implored aid against Philips injuries, in which, exceeding
the rights of victory, he showed his rage upon temples, altars, and moniments
of the dead; The Senate thought good to minister succor to so noble suitors:
For the kings of countries, Captains general, commonweals, and nations, had
sought to this city for protection: Laeuinus therefore Consul, the people of
Rome then first entered the Ionian sea, and trended along the whole coast of
Greece, with, as it were a triumphant navy: for they advanced in open view the
spoils of Sycilie, Sardinia, and Africa, and a laurel growing unplanted out
of the stern of the Admiral promised manifest victory. Attalus, king of
Pergamus, came in with aids to us of his own accord. There came also the
Rhodians, expert men at Sea, and with them on the water, and with horse, and
foot on land, the Consul made all to shake. The king twice overcome, twice put
to flight, twice stripped out of his camp, yet nothing was so terrible to the
Macedonians as the sight itself of their wounds, which being not made with
darts, or arrows, nor with any Greekish weapons, but with huge iauelins, and
swords as huge, were wider then death had need of. Verily, Flaminius General,
we pierced through the Chaonian mountains, till then impassable, we passed
the river Pindarus, running through broken places, and brake through the very
bars themselves of Macedonia; into which to have entered, was it self a
victory. For from that day forward, the king never daring to try his fortune
in battle again, was vanquished at the dogges-heads, or the hillocks called
Cynocephalae, and that in only one encounter, or petie skirmish, rather then a
foughten field, the Consul granting him to be in peace, and leave to enjoy
his kingdom. And to take away all prints, or tokens of hostility; he
repressed Thebes, and Eubaea, and the immoderate enterprises of the
Lacedaemonians under Nabis; and restored the Greeks to their ancient state,
that they might live after their own Laws, and be as free as their
forefathers. O what reioycements were then! O what comfortable cries! when
this proclamation was made by the public officer in the theater of Nemea, at
the Quinquennal, or fiue-yeerly plays! O what were the showts, and clamours!
what abundance of flowrs sprinkled upon the Consul! yea, they made the Herald
speak out that sweet word again, and again, which pronounced Achaia free;
nor did they otherwise relish that proclamation, or edict of the Consul, then
as they would have done some excellently pleasing lesson plaide upon soft
wind-instruments, or violins.

CHAP. VIII.
The war in Syria with king Antiochus.
PResently after the Macedonians, A. V. C. DLXI.
and king Philip, Antiochus took his turn to be conquered, by a kind of
chance, fortune, as it were of purpose, so marshalling matters, that as the
Roman empire went forward by degrees from Afric into Europe; it might also
roll from Europe, into Asia, causes of war offering themselves without
seeking, that the course of victory might sail onward in order as the world
stood sited. There was no war of which there went so terrible a fame as of
this. For those Persians, who were of old, the eastern world, Xerxes, and
Darius, came then to mind, in whose days mountains were cut through, and the
sea was couerd with fails. Besides this, certain prodigious signs which
seemed to threaten somewhat from heaven, bred terror; for Apollo at Cumae was
in a continual sweat. But this was nothing else save the God-heads agony in
favor of his beloved Asia. Nor, to say truth, did any country so abound with
money, riches, and munition, as Syria: but they were all in the hands of so
cowardly a king, as could glory in nothing more, then that he was overcome by
the Romans. Antiochus was thrust into this war, upon the one side by Thoas,
chief of the Aetolians, seeking in vain to draw the Romans into an
honourlesse league with him against the Macedonians; and upon the other side
Annibal, who being foiled in Africa, a fugitive also, and impatient of peace,
sought over the world where to find out an enemy of the Roman people. And what
manner of danger might that have proved, had that king given himself over to
his directions? if Annibal, now quite down, had been trusted with the power
of Asia? But Antiochus, relying upon his own abilities, and the title of a
king, held it enough that he moved war by himself. Europe did now without
controversy belong to the Romans. Antiochus demanded back the city of
Lysimachia, upon the coast of Thrace, built in Europe by his ancestors, as a
parcel of his inheritance. With this as it were star, or constellation, the
tempest of the Asian war being stirred, kings assembling in extraordinary
number; and defiance bravely given, when Antiochus had thus wakened all the
humors of Asia with wonderful noise, and tumult, he betook himself to
sports, and wanton pleasures, as if he had already gotten the garland. The
Island Eubaea was divided from the maine land with Eurypus, a narrow sea having
many ebbes, and flows. here Antiochus pitching his pauilions of silk, and
gold, hard upon the brinke of the murmuring sea, at the sound of flutes, and
other music, and though it were winter, yet had he roses brought fresh from
all parts, and lest he should in nothing seem to play the captain, he took
musters of fine young boys, and girls. Such a king therefore as this, whom his
own riotous humors had already conquered, the people of Rome, assailing that
Island, by Marcus Atilius Glabrio, Consul, at the very first bruit of approach
was glad to fly the place. And albeit he had gotten to so notable a steep
passage as that of Thermopylae (ever to be glorious in the death of those
three hundred Lacedaemonians) yet not dating to trust that strength the Romans
made him give way as well at land, as sea. Without delay he returns into Asia.
The charge of his navy roial he committed to Polyxenes, and Annibal. For
himself could not endure so much as to look upon a fight. So his whole force
at sea was torn in pieces by the galleys of Rhodes, our Aemilius Regillus
their Admiral. That Athens may not flatter it self, we overcame Xerxes in
Antiochus, in Aemilius we matched Themistocles, and did as great an exploit in
taking Ephesus, as the Greeks did in taking Salamina. At that time Scipio
Consul, his brother, that Scipio Africanus who had so lately conquered
Carthage, serving voluntary under him there, as lieutenant general, it seemed
good to make an end of that war. The king was already beaten out of the sea,
but we go farther. Our camp is pitched at the river Meander, and the
mountain Sipylus. It is incredible to be spoken what powers of his own, and
of his friends the king had there. Three hundred thousand foot, and not a less
number of horse, and of seithed chariots; besides these, elephants of an huge
size, glittering in gold, purple, silver, and their own iuorie, stood as
bulwarks on both hands of the battle. But all these preparations were hindered
by their own confusiue greatness, and with a shower, which pouring suddenly
down did, most luckily for us, wet, and weaken the strings of the Persian
bows. There was first a fear, by and by a flight, and then a triumph.
Antiochus overcome, and humbling himself, it pleased the Romans to vouchsafe
him peace, and a piece of his own kingdom, so much the more willingly,
because he had so easily given it over.

CHAP. IX.
The Aetolian war.
THe Aetolian war succeeded, A. V. C. DLXIV.
as good reason would, to this of the Syrian. For Antiochus thus brought under
foot, the Romans prosecuted the vnquencht firebrands of the Asian war.
Therefore Fuluius Nobilior had in commission to execute that revenge, who
forthwith lays siege unto, and batters Ambracia, the city roial of king
Pyrrhus. Yielding followed. The Athenians, and Rhodians became intercessours
for the Aetolian. And we were mindful of their friendship. So it pleased us
to pardon them. But the war crept on farther to the neighbor places about,
of Cephalaenia, Zacynthus, and all the Isles in that sea, between the Ceraunian
mountains, and the cape of Maleum, accessory members of the Aetolian war.

CHAP. X.
The Istrian war.
THe Istrians follow the Aetolians in fortune, A. V. C. DLXXVI.
whose side they had lately taken. The beginnings of the war were successful
to the foe, but were withal the cause of their destruction. For after they had
entered the Roman camp, by force, and were masters of a gallant booty, Caius
Claudius Pulcher sets upon them afresh, as they were for the most part in their
iollitie at sports, and banquets, and so vomited-vp the victory they had
gotten, with their blood, and lives together. Apulo himself, their king, being
shifted away on horseback, and tumbling down drunk oftentimes, ouerswaid as
he was with surfeit, and swimming in the head, was hardly at last brought to
understand he was a prisoner, when he came to himself.

CHAP. XI.
The Gallo-Graecian war.
THe ruin of Syria drew the Gallo-Graecians also after it. A. V. C. DLXIV.
They had sided with Antiochus, It is doubtful, whether Manlius was greedy of
a triumph, or fained, for gaining it, that he had seen them in person;
howsoever, he, though victorious, was certainly denied to triumph, because
the Senate approved not the cause of the war. Those Gallo-Graecians, as their
compound name shows, were a mixed and mongrell people; being the remains of
those Galls which had wasted Greece under Brennus, and proceeding castward
still, seated themselves in the middle of Asia. As therefore the seeds of
plants alter kind by shifting soil, so their natural fierceness was
mollifide with the delicacies of Asia. They were broken, and put to flight in
two battles, though upon our coming they abandoned their habitations, and
retired themselves among the highest of their mountains, which the
Tolistoboges, and Tectosages had now possessed. Beaten from both sides of their
covert with slings, and shot of arrows, they submitted themselves to a
perpetual peace. But they were kept bound by occasion of a kind of wonder,
when they would have bitten, and torn their bonds in sunder with their teeth,
each offering to the other his throat to choke. For Chiomara, wife of Orgiagon,
a petty king of theirs, ravished by a Roman captain, gave a memorable example
of wiuely virtue, for she cut off the fellows head from his shoulders, and
escaping from her guard, brought it to her Lord, and husband.

CHAP. XII.
The war with king Perses, or the second Macedonian.
THough nations after nations were plucked into subjection by the ruin which the
Syrian war drew with it, yet Macedonia lifted up her head again. The memory,
and remembrance of what they had once been noble, would not suffer that most
valiant nation to be in quiet, and Perses succeeded to king Philip, who
bearing the same mind, thought it stood not with the honor of his country, to
have it made vassal for ever. The Macedonians brake forth far more violently
under him then under his father. Forthey had drawn the Thracians to be a part
of their strengths, and so they made a temper in their discipline of war
between the boistrous qualities of Thrace, and the diligence of Macedonia.
Hereunto the kings own policies gave help, who making the top of mount Aemus
his station, took a view from thence of all his confines, and so walled
Macedonia euery-where in with men, and munition, by planting castles in abrupt
places, as there seemed no way left for enemies to invade his Macedonia, unless
it were from out of the clouds. But Quintus Marcius Philippus, Consul, the
people of Rome entering that province, after they had carefully first searched all the passages, got through by the marshes of Ascuris, and those sharp, and lofty
places, doubtful whether hills, or sky, over which it seemed the very fowls
of the air could not find a way, and came pouring down upon the king with a
thunder-crack of war, as he sat secure, and dreamt of no such matter. His
affright was such, that he caused all his money to be drowned in the sea, for
safety; and al his ships to be fired, to keep them from burning. When
greater, and thicker garrisons were afterward planted to guard the passages
against us, Paulus Consul, other ways were invented to conquer Macedonia; the
Consul, with admirable wit, and industry, offering at one place, and breaking
in at another, whose coming it self was so terrible to Perses, as he durst
not be present at the service, but committed the war to be managed by his
captains. Therefore overcome in absence, he fled to sea, and to the Island there
of Samothrace, relying upon the privileges of that sanctuary; as if temples,
and altars could protect the man, whom his sword and mountains could not.
There was never any king did longer retain the conscience of his lost estate;
for when he wrote to the Roman General from out of the temple whither he was
fled, nomenque epistolae notaret.
and styled the letter, he put himself down in it by the name of king.
Neither was ever any one more reverently respective of captive majesty then
Paulus, for the enemy coming into sight, hereceiued him into the temple, and
admitted him to his feasts, warning his sons to stand in awe of fortune, that
was able to do such things unto the mighty. Among all the most goodly triumphs
which the Roman people led, and saw, this over Macedonia was chief, as that
which took up three whole days with the show, upon the first of which were
statues, and pictures presented; upon the second, warlike furnitures, and
money; and upon the third, the captives, among whom was king Perses himself,
who not as yet recouer'd out of his amazement, was as a man astonished with the
unexpected evil. But the people of Rome felt the joy of the glory, long before
the arrival of the conquerours letters which brought the news: for upon the
same day in which king Perses was overcome, it was known at Rome. Two youngmen
mounted on white coursers, washed off their dust and blood at the lake Iuturna.
These brought the tidings, and were generally thought to be Castor, and Pollux,
because they were a pair; to have been at the battle, because they were
gorie; and to have come fresh out of Macedonia, because they were panting hot
as yet.

CHAP. XIII.
The Illyrian war.
THe (as it were) infection of the Macedonian war drew in the Illyrians. A. V.
C, DXXC VI.
They were entertained in pay by king Perses, to trouble, all they could the
Romans at their backs. Anicius, lieutenant- Praetor, subdued them in an
instant. It was enough, that he razed Scodra, their principal city. The whole
nation did forthwith yield it self. To be brief, this war was made an end
of, before they at Rome did hear it was begun.

CHAP. XIIII.
The third Macedonian war with Andriscus.
THE Carthaginians, A. V. C. DCV.
and Macedonians, as if it were agreed upon between them, each to be thrice
overcome, took arms again by a kind of fate, both of them about a time. But
the first who threw the yoke off, were the Macedonians, by so much harder to
be reduced then before, while it was held a matter of nothing to reduce the^.
The cause of the war is in a manner to be blushed at. For Andriscus, a very base
fellow, unknown whether a free man, or a bond, certainly one who took pay,
did enter upon the quarrel, and kingdom at once. And for that he, being but a
mere counterfeit, was notwithstanding called Philip by the people, by reason
of resemblance, it filled his kingly shape, and kingly name, with a kingly
spirit also. Therefore, while the people of Rome, contemning these matters,
employed no greater a person against him, then Iuuentius, a Praetor, they
rashly venture on a man strong at that time, not only in Macedonians, but in
huge ayds out of Thrace. Whereby they, otherwise invincible, were overcome in
battle, not by true, and very kings, but this phantastike, and playerly one.
But Metellus, another Praetor, took a most sound revenge for the loss of
Iuuentius, and of the legion which he commanded: for he both co^demn'd
Macedonia to the state of bondage, and brought Andriscus in chains to Rome,
deliuerd up into our hands, by that Vaiuod, or pety king of Thrace, to whom he
had fled for succor: fortune nevertheless showing him thus much favor in his
miseries, that the Romans carried him as well in triumph, as if he had been a
king indeed.

CHAP. XV.
The third Carthaginian, or Punicke war.
THe third war against Africa was short in respect of the time (for it was but
four years work) and, A. V. C. DCIV.
in comparison of the other two, the least in labor. For the fight was not so
much with the men, as with the city it self, the even whereof was certainly
the greatest that could be: for it made an end of Carthage. To comprehend in
mind the sum of those three times it was thus, in the first, the war was
begun, in the second it was driven away out of our coasts, in the third it was
ended. The cause of this last war was, for that, contrary to the articles of
league, the Carthaginians had once prepared an army at land and sea, against
the Numidians, and often terrifide the borders of Masinassas kingdom. We bare
favor to this good and friendly king. When the war was settled, the Senate
debated what should become of Carthage. Cato, whose hatred admitted no
satisfaction, would have it utterly rased: but when the Consul demanded
another opinion, Scipio Nasica stood to have it preserved, lest the fear of a
rival city removed, the felicity of Rome might grow ouer-ranke, and
riotous. The Senate made choice of a middle way, which was, to remove the city
out of her old seat. For nothing seemed to them more honorable, then to have
such a Carthage as should not be feared. Manilius therefore, and Censorinus,
Consuls, the people of Rome inuading Carthage, the navy thereof (which upon
ouerture of peace they willingly yielded) was, in sight of the city, fired.
Then calling forth the princes, they commanded them, upon peril of their
heads, to depart the country. Which black decree kindled so great choler in
them, as they resolved to endure the worst that could be, rather then obey it.
Lamentations hereupon did forthwith fill the city, and the cry went round, To
ARMS, the final resolution being, whatsoever came of it, to rebel. Not for
that they had now any hope left to free themselves, but because they held it
better that Carthage should be ruind by their own hands, then their enemies.
The fury of the rebels may be coniectured by this, that they plucked down
house-tops, and houses, with that timber to build a new navy; for want of iron
and brass, their smiths wrought gold, and silver into armor; and the matrons
clipped the hair of their heads to make cordage for engines. Mancinus Consul,
the siege waxt hot both at land, and sea. The haven of the fortifications, and
the first, and second wall were dismantled, when the castle notwithstanding,
called The Byrs, made such a resistance as if it had been another city. Though
there was no doubt of overthrowing it, yet the Scipio's seemd ordaind by
destiny for that purpose. The people therefore of Rome require to have a
Scipio for accomplishing that war. And that was the son of Paulus,
conqueror of Macedonia, whom the son of that great Scipio Africanus had
adopted, to uphold the glory of his house, with this intention of the fates,
that the city which the grandfather had humbled, the grand child should
subvert. The enemies being shut up within the castle, the Romans sought also to
cut off the sea. But the Carthaginians dig out a new haven upon another side
of the town, not to fly out at, for no man did believe they could escape, but
from the which a new armada issued, as if it had grown up suddenly of it
self. Meane-while no day, nor night went over their heads, in which some new
work, some new engine, some new band of forlorn fellows appeared not, like
so many sudden flashes of flame rising out of cinders, after the fire has
been buried in ouerwhelming rubbish. But things at last growing absolutely
desperate, forty thousand men yielded themselves, and, that which you would
scarce think, Asdruball was the first man of them. How much more boldly did a
woman, the wife of the captain? who taking her two children, threw herself
with them from the top of the house into the middle of the fires, following
that Queens example, which had founded Carthage. How mighty a city was
destroid, may by the long continuance of the burning (to let other arguments
go) be convinced. For the fire which the enemies themselves had kindled of
their own accord in their dwellings, and temples, with intent, that so much of
the city as they were not able to deliver from the Roman triumphs, might be
consumed, could not be extinguished in seventeen whole days together.

CHAP. XVI.
The Achaian war.
COrinth, A. V. C. DCVI.
the Metropolis of Achaia, presently followed the fortune of Carthage, as if
that were an age for subversion of cities, Corinth, the beauty of Greece, is
situated upon a narrow neck of land between the Ionian, and Aegaean seas, as
a spectacle, or pageant. it was destroyed (alas the wrong!) before it was
registered in the list of proclaimed enemies. Critolaus was the cause of this
war, who made use of the freedom given by the Romans, against the Romans,
and it being uncertain whether he did not also strik their ambassadors with
the hand, he for certain did it with his tongue. Metellus therefore, chiefly
busy in ordering the affairs of Macedonia, had now this also added to his
charge, to take revenge. From hence grew the Achaian war, and Metellus,
Consul, had the chase, and execution of Critolaus his first forces, through
the open fields of Elis all along the banks of Alpeus. One battle made an end
of the war. And now the city it self was begirt with a siege, when, as the
fates would have it, Mummius came to the victory, which Metellus had foughten
for. Mummius, by the advantage of that honor which the other had achieved,
vanquished the enemies army at the very entrance of the Isthmus, or land-necke,
and dyed the heavens on each side thereof with blood. Finally, the inhabitants
abandoning the city, it was first sacked, and then at sound of trumpet quite
defaced. What store of statues, rich garments, and goodly moniments in tables
were torn down, burnt, and cast about? what riches were carred away, and
fired, you may from hence conjecture that all the Corinthian brass which is at
this day so much commended through the world, is found to be but the remain
of these consumings: for the violence used against this most wealthy city set
an higher rate upon the brass thereof, because multitudes of statues, and
pictures, consisting of brass, gold, and silver, melting in the fire, the
veins of the metal ran in one, and mixed together.

CHAP. XVII.
Acts done in Spain.
AS Corinth followed Carthage, so Numantia followed Corinth. And it was not
long first, before no part of the world was free from arms. After these two
most famous Cities were consumed, war did spread it self every where about,
nor that by turns in places, but together, as though it were but one war
over all, so that the whirling flames thereof seemed carried about over the
whole earth, as if dispersed with winds. Spain never had a disposition to
rise universally against us, nor at any time a mind to put all her strengths
into one, either for trying mastries, or for maintayning her liberty in
common, being otherwise so environed with seas, and with the Pyrenaean hills,
that by advantage of her situation she had been inaccessible. But the Romans
had enstraitned her before she was aware thereof, and was of all other
provinces the only one, which never understood her own abilities till she
was conquered. The war lasted here almost two hundred years, from the times
of the first Scipio's till Caesar Augustus, not continually, or cohaerently,
but as causes were ministered: nor with Spaniards at first, but with the
Carthaginians, or Penish-men in Spain. Thence grew the contagion, connection,
and cause of the wars. The first Roman ensigns which ever were displayed over
the top of the Pyraenees, the two Scipio's, Publius, and Cnaeus advanced, and
in terrible great battles slew Anno, and Asdrubal the brother of Anibal, so as
all Spain had been conquered in a moment, had not those most gallant
gentlemen, supplanted by the Arts of Africa, been destroyed in their own
victory, after they had gotten the upper hand both at land, and sea. That
Scipio therefore, who was shortly afterward surnamed Africanus, invaded Spain
in revenge of his father, and his uncle, as a province untouched in a manner,
and new to us as till then. He presently took Carthage in Spain, and other
cities, nor contented to have driven the Penish-men out, laid tribute upon it
also, and subdued all on this side the river Iberus, and beyond; himself the
first of Roman leaders who ran up victoriously, as far as Gades, and the
shores of the Ocean. There is more in it, to keep a province, then to make one.
Captains therefore were sent with forces hither, and thither, part after part,
to compel the siercest people of Spain, and the nations thereof, free till
that time, and for that cause impatient of bearing any yoke, though not
without much labor, and bloodshed, to obey us. That Cato who was termed
Censorius, brake the hearts of the Celtiberians, the stoutest men of Spain, by
certain encounters. That Gracchus, who was father of the Gracchi, punished them
with the subversion of one hundred, and fifty of their cities. That Metellus
who was styled Macedonicus, deserved to be also called Celtibericus, having
gotten Contrebia, by a memorable exploit, and gaind more glory by forbearing
Vertobrigae. Lu-cullus subdued the Turdulans, and Vaccaeans, ouerwhome that
later Scipio Aemilianus, obtained pompous spoils in a single combat, in which
the king was challenger. Decimus Brutus went somewhat farther, ouercomming the
Gallicians, and all the Gallician nations, beyond the river Oblivion, which the
soldiers quaked to behold, and marching along the Ocean shore as conqueror,
he turned not his ensigns another way, till he saw the Sun stoop under the
sea, and his fires over whelmed as it were with waters, not without some
scruple in Brutus, who was chilled at the sight, lest perhaps it had been in
him a kind of sacrilege. But the hardest hold of all was with the Lusitanians,
and Numantines, nor that without cause, for only they in all those countries
were fitted with captains. And we had found no less work with the
Celtiberians, had not Solundicus, chief author of that commotion, been
destroid in the beginning, a most dangerous, and desperate man had he prosperd,
who twirling a certain spear of silver, which was pretended by him to be sent
from heaven, counterfeited the prophet, and drew all to admire, and follow him.
But the same rashness which had put him on, making him also adventure after
twylight toward the Consuls camp, a soldier chopped his iaueline into him,
close at the pauilion it self. But Viriathus made the Lusitanians pluck up
their courages, a man of a most sharp, and cunning wit, from huntsman turning
highway thief, and from highway thief turning prince, and captain general,
and, had fortune said the word, the Romulus of Spain. For not contented to
maintain the freedom of his nation, he destroyed all the countries on either
side the rivers of Iberus, and Tagus, with fire, and sword, fourteen years
together, and, assailing the camps of Praetors, and Presidents, had the
slaughter of Claudius Vnimanus, or One-hand, and of his whole army to almost
the last man, and in his mountains erected tropheas of such ensigns, robes,
and maces of state as he had won away of ours. At the last he was brought
into extremities by Fabius Maximus, Consul. But his successor Seruilius Cepio
staind the victory. For greedy to be rid of the trouble once for all, he
entered into practice with some treacherous companions, familiar friends of
Viriathus, and got him murthred, being already brought low, and ready to yield
upon any terms, and thereby gave the enemy so much honor, as to make it
thought that he could not otherwise be conquered.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Numantine war.
AS Numantia was inferior to Carthage, A. V. C. DCXII.
Capua, and Corinth for riches, so for virtue and honor, it was equal to them
altogether, and if we respect the men thereof, it was simply the greatest
glory of Spain, for having neither wall, nor bulwark, and being but only
situated upon a little rising knoll, or hill by the river Durius; with no more
then four thousand, it endured fourteen years siege against an army of
forty thousand: And not endured only, but gave also terrible overthrows, and
forced us to accept of shameful conditions. And remaining unconquered after
all was done that could be, no other person would serve the turn to subvert
it, but he who subdued Carthage. To speak ingenuously, there was no war of
ours, the cause whereof was more unjust then was this. For the Segidensers,
their friends, and kinsfolk, escaping our hands, were entertained by them. No
intercession used on their behalf would be heard. And albeit they abstained
from intermedling in any broils of war, they were notwithstanding commanded,
if they would have a firm, and formal peace, to purchase it by parting with
their arms. This proposition was so interpreted by the barbarous, as if they
must go hide away their heads in holes. Hereupon they forth with fell to
arms, Megaera a most brave soldier, their captain general; and charging
Pompei home in fight, they did choose to enter league, when they could have
made an end of him. After this they set upon Mancinus, whom they so amated with
daily slaughters, that he had not a soldier in his army durst look a
Numantine in the face, or stand his voice, yet such was their nobleness, that
they were content to make a peace with him also, when they might have had the
killing of all his army to a man. But the people of Rome no less ashamed, nor
storming less at the reproach of these conclusions of peace with the
Numantines, then they did for those at Caudium, discharged themselves from the
dishonor of that base treaty, by yielding up Mancinus to the enemy. But
General Scipio, one thoroughly seasoned for the overthrow of cities by the
burning of Carthage, grew hot at length upon revenge. But he had more work
within his own camp, then in the open field; with his own men, then with the
Numantians. For his army having under other captains been formerly tired
with daily, and iniust, but specially servile labors, such of them as knew not
how to use their weapons, were commanded, for their ease who knew the use, to
carry more stakes, and earth to the rampire, and that those should be rayed
with dirt, who would not be smeared with blood. Besides that, strumpets,
scullions, and all things else which were not of necessity to be used, were
cut away. It is a saying, that Such as the captain is, such is the soldier.
The army, thus reduced under discipline, encounters the enemy, and then came
that to pass which no man did ever hope for; the Numantians, in sight of all
men, ran away. They would likewise have yielded themselves, if the conditions
would have been but tolerable for men to accept. But nothing contenting
Scipio, saving a real, and absolute victory, they in such extremities resolve
to make a desperate sallie, after they first had feasted well, as at their last
viands, with halfe-raw flesh, and a kind of broth, or drink made of corn,
and called by the inhabitants keale, or Caelia. This resolution of theirs
discovered to Scipio, he would not afford, to men so minded, the favor of
battle, but girts them up close with four camps, and hemming them round
within trench, and counterscarph, they besought him for fight, that so he
might dispatch them like men. But when that would not be granted, they agree
to rush out howsoever, and coming so to handy-strokes, very many of them were
slain; and famine now coming fast upon the residue, they lived yet a little
longer. Their last help was to fly, but their wives brake their
horse-bridles, and committing an heinous offense through love, bereft them of
that remedy. Their end therefore being now no longer to be deferred, their
sufferance turns into fury, decreeing among themselves to die in this manner:
They made away their captains, themselves, and town with the sword, with
poison, and with setting all on fire. Go thy ways, O thou most valiant city
of the world, and in mine opinion most happy withal, in the very worst that
happened upon thee, being that, for protection of thy friends thou did defend
thy self with thine own hand, and for so long a time, against that people
which had all the earth to back, and bear them out. To conclude, the city
which was thus taken by the greatest captain under heaven, lest nothing of it
self for the enemy to rejoice in over it. For, there was not a man of all
Numantia left alive to be trail'd in chains; spoil, and booty, as among
poor folks, there was not any; their armor, and munition were burnt. So all
the triumph which could be had, was over a name alone.

CHAP. XIX.
A brief repetition.
ALl this while the people of Rome were in their actions fair, A. V. C. DLXIV.
noble, pious, holy, and magnificent. The ages following as they were as full
of great acts, so were they also more troublesome, and foul vices still
growing as the empire grew. So that if a man divide into two parts this third
age of their power, emploi'd by them in attempts out of Italy, he must worthily
confess, the first hundred years thereof, in which they tamed Afric,
Macedonia, Sicilia, and Spain, to be, as the poets sing them, the golden age,
the other hundred to be plainly the iron, and bloody one, and whatsoever else
is more horribly cruel: as that, which with the Iugurthine, Cimbrian,
Mithridatick, Parthian, Gallick and German wars, whose acts made our glory
mount to heaven it self, did mingle those Gracchian, and Drusine massacres,
yea the bondmens war, and (that no dishonor might he wanting) the war
against the fensers also. And finally turning their weapons each upon the
other, they tore themselves into pieces, with the hands of Marius, and Sylla,
and lastly of Pompei, and Caesar, as it were in fits of rage, and fury, and in
contempt of all religion. Which actions, though they are intricately wrapped one
within the other, and confounded among themselves, nevertheless to make them
the better to appear, and that their heinous facts may not trouble their
heroic, they shall be set forth apart. Therefore, to follow our first method,
we will commemorate those just, and solemn wars against foreign nations,
that the degrees of greatness by which the empire was day by day augmented,
may be manifest. Then will we return to those black deeds of theirs, in
their monstrous foul, and execrable civil battles.

CHAP. XX.
The war in Asia with ARISTONICVS.
SPain being conquered in the west part of the world, A. V. C. DCXX.
the people of Rome enjoyed peace in the East, nor peace only, but a kind of
unusual, and unknown faelicity, the estate of kings, and the riches of whole
realms coming to them as bequests, and legacies. Attalus, king of Pergamus,
son of king Eumenes, once our associate, and fellow-souldier, made his last
will thus, I make the people of Rome the heir of all my goods. And it was a
part of his goods that he did so. The people therefore of Rome entering upon the
whole estate, retained it not by fight, and force, but (which is more just) by
virtue of his device, and testament. It is hard to say, whether they lost this
legacy, or recouer'd it sooner. Aristonicus, a young fierce prince, and of the
blood royal, did easily work the cities, accustomed to be governed by kings,
to acknowledge him for sovereign lord, and those other which resisted him, as
Mindus, Samos, Colophon, he seized by force. He had the slaghter also of the
army of Crassus, Proconsul, and took him prisoner. But Crassus remembering the
honor of his house, and of the Roman name, struck out the eye of his
half-barbarous keeper with the yerk of a wand, to procure his own killing
thereby. And as he wished, so it happened. Perperna, soon after this, overthrew,
and took Aristonicus in battle, who yielding himself, was kept in chains.
Marcus Aquilius made an end of the remains of the Asian war, by poys'ning (O
base!) the well-heads of certain cities, to compel them thereby to yield.
Which fact as it ripened the victory, so it made the same infamous. For,
against the will of the Gods, and the custom of ancestors, it blemished the
luster of the Roman arms, (preserved till then religiously pure) with impure
drugges, and sorceries.

The end of the second book of Lucius Florus.
THE HISTORY OF THE ROMANS. The third Book.
CHAP. 1.
The war with IVGVRTH.
THese things past in the Orient. But there was not the like quiet in the
South. Who would look for any war in Africa, after Carthage was subdued? But
the kingdom of Numidia gave to it self a great blow, and though Anibal was
rid out of the way, yet Iugurtha had that in him which was to be feared: for
he, the most false and crafty prince under heaven, ventured upon the people of
Rome, glorious, for great acts, and not to be conquered by the sword: and yet
things fell out beyond all men's imaginations, that he the king, who surpast all
others in cunning, should himself be surprised by cunning. This prince,
gra^d-child to Masinissa, and by adoption the son of Micipsa, moved to it by
ambition of sovereignty, having resolved to murder his brothers, and yet not
fearing them so much as the Senate, and people of Rome, under whose protection,
and wardship they were, wrought his first black feate by practice, and upon
that plot geting Hiempsals head, as he was contriuing how to kill Adherbal
also, and he flying to Rome for refuge, Iugurtha by soundly monying his
Ambassadors, to bribe others with, drew even the Senate also to take his part.
And this was the first victory which he gaind of us. Afterward, when Scaurus
was appointed by the state to make partition of the kingdom between himself,
and Adherbal, he conquered the noble qualities of the Roman commonweal by
corrupting him, and effected thereby his undertaken wickedness the more
boldly. But heinous acts never lie hidden long. The bribing of Scaurus came to
light, and a decree was made to revenge the parricidiall murder by war.
Calpurnius Bestia, Consul, was the first emploid into Numidia. But the king,
experimentally knowing, that gold could do more against the Romans then Iron,
bought his peace. Guilty of the premises, he notwithstanding both came upon
summons, and safe conduct to Rome, and with like audaciousnesse suborning the
actors, murdered his competitor in the kingdom, Massina grandchild of
Masinissa. This was another cause for the Romans to take arms up against the
tyrant. The revenge therefore was committed to be taken by Albinus. But (o the
shame!) Iugurtha so ouerbribed his army also, that our men voluntarily giving
way, he got the victory, and our camp withal; and reckning it in as a part of
the price, that he suffered the army which he had bought, to escape his
hands, did put upon us dishonorable terms. At the same time, Metellus steppeth
out against him, not so much in revenge of the Roman empire, as to redeem the
blemishes thereof; and dealing most cunningly, one while by entreaty, another
while by threats, and fayning flight when he meant nothing less, matched him
at his own weapons: nor contenting himself with the waste, and desolation of
fields, and villages, made attempts upon the chief fortresses of Numidia, and
long time sought to get Zama, though in vain: nevertheless he sacked Thala,
where the kings munition, and treasures lay. So having stripped him out of his
cities, he pursued him through Mauritania, and Getulia, flying his own
confines, and kingdom. Last of all, Marius, much augmenting the army, as
having, according to the obscurity of his birth, A. V. C. DCXLII.
admitted the scumme of Rome to the oath of soldiers, sets upon Iugurtha
wounded as he was, and already forced to fly, and yet ouer-came him no more
easily then as if he had been fresh, and unbroken. This man most fortunately
mastred Capsa, a city dedicated to Hercules, seated in the middle of Africa,
environed with sands, and serpents, and scaled Mulucha, built upon a steep
mountain, a certain Ligurian leading up to it upon break-necke clifs, and
high ouer-hanging places; and gave to king Bocchus, who for kindreds sake took
his part, a terrible overthrow at Cirta. Bocchus thereupon distrusting his own
estate, and fearing to be drawn into another man's ruin, as accessarie,
indented for his own peace, and safety at the peril of Iugurtha. So that
most false and slipperie man, by his father in Laws practices ensnared, was
betrayed into the hands of Sulla. Thus in the end the people of Rome had the
gazing upon him, brought laden with yrons in triumph: and he again though
ouerborne, and fast bound, beheld that city, which he like a lying prophet had
sung, would one day perish, if it could once meet with a chapman. Let it
notwithstanding have been never so saleable, it had a chapman in him, and,
seeing he escaped not, sure we are, that it shall never perish.

CHAP. II.
The Alobrogian war.
IN this wise went things with the people of Rome in the South world. A. V. C.
DCXXVIII.
The troubles which brake out North ward, were far more manifold, and
horrible: no quarter is so disquietous, the sky there always lowering, and the
peoples natures harsh, and peevish: the outrageous enemy burst forth upon this
side, and upon that, and from the midst it self of the North. The Salyans, of
all the nations beyond the Alps, were the first who felt our wrath, by reason
of a complaint, which they of Massilia, a friend-towne, most true, and firm to
us, had made of their incursions. The next were the Allobroges, and Aruernois,
for that the Aedui implored our help, and assistance, against them, as using
the like vexations. Varus, and Isara which run through Vindilicia, and the
swiftest of rivers the Rhone, are witnesses of our victory, the thing which
most frighted the barbarous, was the sight of the elephants, as those which
matched themselves in boistrousnes. The brauest object in this triumph was the
king himself, Bituitus, presented to us in discolourd arms, and silver
chariot, just as he fought. How great, and how greatly important the victory
was, in the opinion of both, may be coniectured by this, that Domitius
Aenobarbus, and Fabius Maximus, reared towers of stone upon the places of
battle, and fixed tropheas on their tops, adornd with the enemies spoils,
which was not our wont till then. For the people of Rome never vpbraided the
vanquished enemy with their overthrow.

CHAP. III.
The Cimbrian, Theutonicke, and Tigurin war.
THE Cimbrians, A. V. C. DCXL.
Theutons, and Tigurins, flying from the utmost bounds of Gallia, the Ocean
having swallowed their countries, sought new habitations where they could
find them out, through the world: and being bard all entrance into Gall, and
Spain, they wheeling about to Italy, sent their ambassadors to Silanus, where
he lay encamped, and from thence to the Senate, entreating that martial
commonweal to allot them out some proportions of land, in stead of pay; for
which they should always use the service of their hands, and swords, at their
good pleasure. But what land should the Roman people divide among them, who
were ready to go together by the ears among themselves, about laws touching
the allotting out of grounds? Their petition therefore being rejected, what
they could not compass by entreaties, they concluded to win by force. Nor
could Silanus hold out against them in the first brunt of the barbarous, nor
Manilius in the second, nor Caepio in the third. They were all of them
defeated, and driven out of their tents, and trenches. They had made an end of
us, had not Marius happened to live in that age. Yet even he himself not daring
presently to encounter them, held his soldiers within their strength, till
that invincible rage, and furious onset, which goes current with the barbarous
for true valor, fell. Thereupon, they marched about back, craking, and
vpbrayding us, and asking in scorn (so confident they were of sacking the
city) what they would have home to their wives. Nor more slowly then was
menaced, they rusht through the Alps, that is to say, the very bars of Italy,
in three maine battles. Marius makes wondrous speed after, and out-stripping
the enemy, by shortest cuts ouertakes the Theutons, who had the vantguard, at
the very climb of the Alps, in a place called Aquae Sextiae, and quite
distressed them in their overmuch security. The enemy was master of the valley,
and river, and our men had no water to drink at all. Whether Marius took that
dry ground of purpose, or turned by wit his error to advantage, is doubtful
to say, but courage enforced by necessity, was for certain, the cause of
victory. For his army crying out for water, Ye are men (quoth he) and there
it is: they fought therefore with such courage, and made such slaughter of the
enemies, that the Romans having the day, drank not more water out of the
colored river, then they did of the blood of the barbarous. Surely, king
Theutobocchus himself, who was wont to vawt over four, or five horses let
together, had scarce any time to get one now for himself to fly away upon,
and, being apprehended in the next forest, was single an whole show himself,
being a person of so huge an height, as he ouertopt the tropheas selves. The
Theutons utterly thus destroide, he turns upon the Cimbrians. (who would
believe it?) clambring over at the crags of Tridentum, through the snow, which
makes it winter all ways on the Alps, and raises them higher then naturally
their ridges are, came rolling down upon Italy in plumps. They attempted to
pass the river Athesis, not by bridge, or boat, but according to their
lubberly wits, assaid to stop it first with their bodies: but when they saw
they could not stay the stream with their hands, and targets, they plasht
down trees, and so crossed over: and had they immediately set on toward the
city, the peril had been extremely great. But in the Venetian grounds, whose
mould is in a manner the finest of all Italy, the daintiness of the air, and
soil entendred their spirits; and being otherwise well softened with the use of
bread, sodden flesh, and sweet wines, Marius in very good season sets upon
them: they praid him to assign them a day of battle, which he named to be
the next of all. They joined in a most spacious champaine called Caudium, and
there one hundred, and forty thousand of them left their lives: so they were
fewer now in the whole first number, by another third. They had the execution
of the barbarous for an whole days space. These also taught our captain
general to piece out manhood with martial cunning, imitating Anibal, and his
arts at Cannae: for having to begin with, a mistie day, and by that an
advantage to charge them at unaware, and the same a windy one also, which
might serve to carry the dust into their eyes, and faces, Marius, making use of
all, ranged his battle toward the rising Sun, so that the brightness, and
repercussion of the beams upon our helmets, made the heavens seem as if they
were on fire, as was by and by, afterward understood by the captives, nor was
it a less work to overcome their wives, then themselves. For having made a
barricado about them with carts, and wagons, they struck at us from aloft, as
it were from towrtoppes, with slaves, and lances. Their death was as gallant as
their fight. For when the embassage which they dispatched to Marius, could not
obtain liberty at his hands, and priesthood (nor was it lawful) they
euery-where strangled their infants, or pasht out their brains, and either,
one of them killed the other, or making halters of their tresses of hair trust
themselves up by the necks, upon boughs, or the rails of their carts. King
Beleus fighting courageously was beaten down dead, and not against his will.
The other battle consisting of the Tigurins, which had taken up the smaller
hills of the Norick Alps, as it were for a back, or succor to their fellows,
betaking themselves to base flight, and trading in robberies, slipped away
whither they could, and vanished. These so glad, and glorious news, concerning
the liberty of Italy, and the deliverance of the empire, came first to the
peoples ears not by men, as the manner is, but (if it be not against religion
to believe it) by the Gods themselves. For the same day, upon which the thing
was done, young men crowned with laurel, were seen before the temple of
Castor, and Pollux, reaching letters to the Praetor, and a common rumor
without a known author, luckily ran in the theater, The Cimbrians are
overcome. Then which thing what could be more admirable, or glorious? for Rome,
as if lifting her self on tiptoe, upon her own hills, she had been present at
the sight of the battle, the people, as is usual in a show of sword-players,
clap their hands in applause, at the self-same instant in which the Cimbrians
were overthrown in battle.

CHAP. IIII.
The Thracian war.
AFter the Macedonians, the Thracians (if the Gods will) rebelled, who
themselves were tributaries to the Macedonians: nor content to make inroads
into the next provinces, they did the like in Thessaly, and Dalmatia, running
out as far as to the Adrian sea, and stopping there as at natures entreatie,
they threw their darts into the waves themselves, Meanewhile, there was no
kind of cruelty left unpracticed upon the captives, during all that time. They
sacrifice man's blood to the Gods, quaffing it out of their enemies sculls, by
this kind of mockage defiling death as well with fire, as fume, and tear
infants quick out of their mothers wombs with torments. The Sordiscans were of
all the Thracians the most savage, and had as much craft as wildenesse of
courage. The situation of their woods, and mountains conspired with their
shrewd, and wily wits. All the army therefore which Cato led, was not only put
to rowt, or flight by them, but (which is like a wonder) was wholly entrapt,
and waylaid. Didius beats the^ back into their own Thrace as they straggled,
and dispersed themselves here and there on boot-haling. Drusus drove them
farther off, and forbad them to pass Danubius. Minucius destroyed them all
about Aebrus, not without loss, I confess, of many of his own, while they
ride upon the false crusts of ice breaking under. Piso scowred Rhodope, and
Caucasus. Curio pierced as far as Dracia: but the gloominesse of the woods
coold his courage. Appius ran up as far as to Sarmatia. Lucullus to Tanais,
the bounder of those nations, and to the lake Maeotis. Nor were these most
merciless enemies otherwise tamed, then by using their own measure toward
them: no pity was taken of their prisoners, but all of them rid out of the
world with fire, and sword. But nothing so terrifide the barbarous, as the
chopping off their hands, by which they seemd to ouerliue their own punishment.

CHAP. V.
The war with Mithridates.
THe Pontick nations are planted toward the North upon the sea on the left
hand of us, A. V. C. DCLIX.
and are so called of the Pontick sea. The first king of all these nations, and
countries was Atheas, afterward Artabazes, who descended of the seven
Persians. Mithridates coming of him, was the mightiest of them all. For
whereas four years served against Pyrrhus, and seventeen years against
Anibal, he resisted forty years, till finally subdued in three huge wars,
the felicity of Sulla, the virtue of Lucullus, and the mightiness of Pompei,
brought him to nothing. He pretended for the cause of his hostility, before
lieutenant Cassius, Nicomedes of Bithynia, whom he charged with inuading his
confines. But the truth is, that blowne-out with ambition, he coueted the
monarchy of all Asia, and, if he could, of Europe also. Our vices gave him
hope, and confidence unto it. For being divided among our selves with civil
wars, the very opportunity allured him and Marius, Sulla, and Sertorius
laid that remote side of the empire open. In these wounds of the commonweal,
and amidst these tumults, this sudden whirlewinde of the Pontick war, as if
taking advantage of the times, blew from off as it were the farmost watch-towre
of the Northern world at unawares upon us, being both weary then, and
diuersely distracted. The first blast of this war swept away Bithynia from us
in a trice. Then the like terror fell upon the rest of Asia. Nor were the
cities, and nations thereof slow in reuolting to the king. And he was at hand,
and pressed them hard, using cruelty as a virtue. For what was more deadly dire,
then that one edict of his, by which he commanded all men through Asia, who
were free of Rome, to be massacred? At that time certainly, houses, temples,
altars, and all sorts of laws, as well divine, as humane, were violated. But
this terror upon Asia, unlocked Europe also to the king. By Archelaus
therefore, and Neoptolemus, he disseised us there of all, excepting Rhodes
only (which held for us more firmly then the rest) of the Isles of the
Cyclades, Delos, and Eubaea, yea and Athens also, the glory it self of
Greece. The terror of the kings name breathed now upon Italy it self, and
upon the very city of Rome. Lucius Sulla therefore, an excellent good man,
while he was in action of arms, and of no less violence, shoued the enemy
back as it were with one of his hands, from encroaching any farther. And
first he brought Athens to such extremities by siege, that he made that city
(what man would credit it?) which was the mother of corn, to eat man's flesh
for hunger, and undermining their port Piraeus, and more then six walls of
theirs, after he had tamed them, yet, though himself called them the most
ungrateful men, he nevertheless restored to them their temples, and
reputation, for the honor, and reverence of deceased ancestors: and when
Eubaea, and Baeotia had now chased the garrisons away which the King had
billetted upon them, he discomfited all the royal forces together, in one set
battle at Cheronaea, and in another at Orchomenus: and from thence crossing
forthwith into Asia, distressed Mithridates himself: and there also had been an
end of the quarrel, if his desire had not rather bin to have triumphed speedily
over the enemy then co^pletely: this was the state in which Sulla left Asia.
The league with the Pontickes recouerd Bithynia of Nicomedes, and Cappadocia of
Ariobarzanes; as if Asia had again been ours, as at the beginning: but
Mithridates was but repulsed only. This course therefore daunted not the
Ponticks, but set them more on fire. For the king having had Asia, and as it
were tasted the bait of Europe, sought to recover it now by the law of arms,
not as belonging to others, but, because he had once lost it, as his own.
These fires therefore, as not sufficiently quenched, brake out into a greater
flame then before; whereupon the king repairing his armies, augmented with
greater numbers the^ erst; and to be brief, with the whole powers of his
realm, he invaded Asia again by sea, and land, and rivers. Cyzicum a city
ennobled with a castle, walls, port, and towers of marble, beautifies the
shores of Asia. Against this place, as if it were another Rome, he bent his
utmost abilities: but the city was encouraged to withstand upon the news of
Lucullus his approach, who (a wondrrous thing to be spoken) floting on a
blown bladder, and steering himself with his feet, seeming, to such as
lookt-on a far off, like some swimming whale, escaped through the middle of
the enemies fleet: and calamity forthwith turning it-selfe to the other
side, the king tired with protraction of the siege, and famine bringing plague,
Lucullus ouertooke him in his retreat, and made such work among his men, that
the rivers Granicus and Aesopus ran blood; the crafty king knowing the
Romans covetousness, willed his people to scatter fardles and money as they
fled, to slacken the pursuers speed: neither was his flight more fortunate by
sea, then it was by land; for his navy which consisted of one hundred sail,
deep laden with munition, overtaken with a tempest in the sea of Pontus,
suffered such foul spoil, as answered the mischief of a battle at sea: no
otherwise then as if Lucullus, being as it were in league with the winds, and
waves, might seem to have given order to the weather, for beating down
Mithridates. Though all the strengths of that most powerful kingdom were in
this wise ground to pieces, yet losses made his spirit greater. Betaking
himself therefore to his next neighbor nations, he drew the whole East almost,
and North of the world to accompany his ruin. Iberians, Caspians, Albans, and
eitherr of the Armenia's were solicited to take part, and Pompet's fortune
sought every where about for dignity, name, and titles with which to glorify
him, who beholding Asia on fire with new combustions, and that more kings
sprung still out of other, judging it no wisdom to delay time, while in the
mean space the powers of enemy-countreys might unite themselves, he forthwith
makes a bridge of boats, and, of all men before his days, was the first of
ours who passed over Euphrates, and lighting upon the flying king in the middle
of Armenia, made a dispatch of the war (how great was the happiness of the
man!) in one only battle: this was fought by night, and the moon was also for
us: for shining at the back of the enemy, as if she were in pay on our side,
and in the faces of the Romans, the Pontickes mistaking their own shadows,
proiected long, as at her going down, laid at them as at the very bodies of
their enemies. So Mithridates was that night utterly vanquished. For from that
time forward he was able to do nothing, though trying all the ways possible,
after the manner of snakes, whose head being bruised, they threaten last of all
with the tail. For after his escape, his meaning was to terrify Colchos, the
seacoasts of Cilicia, and our Campania, with his sudden coming: then,
ouerturning the port Pyraeus, to join the countries together as far as
between Colchis, and Bosphorus, from thence to march through Thracia,
Macedonia, and Greece, and so to assail Italy upon the sudden. These were his
projects, and they went no farther. For his subjects reuolting from him, and
himself prevented by the treason of his son Pharnaces, having labourd in
vain to effect it by poison, he killed himself with his sword. Meanewhile
Cnaeus the Grreat, pursuing the remainders of the rebellion of Asia, flew up,
and down at pleasure through diverse countries, and nations. For following the
Armenians toward the east, and taking Artaxata their principal city, he
granted back the kingdom to Tigranes, upon his submission. But in marching
north, toward Scythia, he guided his course by stars* as if he had bin at
sea; puts the Colchians to the sword; takes the Iberians to mercy, spares the
Albanes, and encamping under mount Caucasus ir-selfe, commanded Orodes, the
Cholchian king, to descend from thence into the plain; Artoces, prince of the
Iberians to give in his children for hostages: of his own mere motion he
rewards Orodes, sending unto him out of his Albania, a couch of gold, and other
gifts; then turning his forces Southward, and marching through Libanus in
Syria, and Damascus, he displaid the Roman ensigns round about, passing
through those odoriferous woods, and groves of balm and frankincense. The
Arabians were at his service. The Jews assaid to defend Jerusalem: But he
forced that city also, and saw openly that grand mystery, as under a sky of
beaten gold; the brethren at ods about the kingdom, and he made vmpire,
adjudged the crown to Hircanus; claps Aristobulus into yrons for refusing to
obey the award. Thus the people of Rome by Pompei their captain general
ouerrunning al Asia in the greatest breadth thereof, made that which was the
utmost province of the empire to be now the middlemost: for excepting the
Parthians (who did rather choose our friendship) and the Indians (who knew us
not as yet) all Asia between the red sea, the Caspian gulf, and the Ocean, was
possessed by us, as either tamed, or distressed by the Pompeian legions.

CHAP. VI.
The war with the Pirates.
WHile the Roman people was held bufied in diverse parts of the world, the
Cilicians invade the seas, destroy commerce, break the bonds of humane
society, and hinder all navigations like a tempest. The troubles raised in Asia
by the wars of Mithridates, begat boldness in these desperate, and raging
thieves, while under the tumults of a foreign war, and at the envy of a
stranger king, they roued without punishment; and contenting themselves in the
beginning with the neighboring seas, under Isidorus captain, they practiced
their robberies between Crete, and Cyrenae, Pyraeus, and Achaia, and cape
Maleum, which they entitled Cape gold, by reason of brave booties. Publius
Seruilius was employed out against them, and though he bulged their light, and
nimble friggats, with his heavy, and well-appointed ships of war, yet the
victory he got cost blood: nor satisfied with driving them from of the water,
he subverted their strongest cities, which abounded with daily-gotten pillage,
as Phaselis, Olympus, and Isaurus, the principal fortress it self off all
Cilicia, and, upon the conscience of his great enterprise, loved the surname
Isauricus. Nevertheless, they could not be kept on shore, though broken at sea
with so many calamities; but as certain creatures who have a double gift to
live in either clement, the Romans were no sooner departed from thence, but
impatient of land-life, they lanch again into their water, and somewhat
farther out then formerly. So Pompey, fortunate before that time, seemed now
also worthy to have the glory of this service, as an accession to his
employments against Mithridates. This pestilent plague dispiersed over the
whole sea, he resolving to extinguish at once, and for ever, carried his
attempt with a kind of divine preparation. For having abundance of ships
as well of the Romans, as of our friends, the Rhodians, he guarded both the
sides of Pontus, and the coasts of the Ocean, with many vice-admirals, and
commanders. Gellius was set to waft upon the Tuscan sea; Plotius upon the
Sicilian; Gratillius upon the Ligustine bay; Marcus Pomponius upon the
Gallicke; Torquatus upon the Balearian; Tiberius Nero upon the Gaditanian,
where our seas begin; Lentulus upon the Libyc; Marcellinus upon the
Egyptian; Pompeys young Son upon the Adriatic; Marcus Portius upon the very
jaws of Propontis; who so shrouded his fleet, that he watched at that
passage, as if it had been at a gate. So all the pirates wheresoever, thus
environed, within as it were an hunting toil, at all harbors, bays,
shelters, creekes, promontories, straights, halfe-iles, were utterly
distressed. Pompey undertook Cilicia, the mother, and fountain of this war.
And the enemies were forward to fight, not for any hope they had, but because
that being ouerborne, they would seem to dare: but yet no farther, then as
only to brook the first shocke. For when they beheld the beake-heads of our
clashing galleys charge in ring upon them, they forthwith struck sail, threw
away oars, made a general showt (a sign among them of yielding) and begged
life. A victory gaind with less bloodshed then this, as we at no time had, so
neither did we ever find a people more loyal to us then they. And that was
long of our Generals high wisdom, who transplanted this brood of mariners
far of, out of the very ken of the sea, and as it were teddred them fast in the
vplands. Thus at the same time he recouerd the seas, for the use of merchants,
and restored to land her own men. In this victory what should we first admire?
whether celerity, because it was gotten is forty days? or good fortune, for
that he lost not a vessel? or finally the lastingnesse, for that there never
was any pyrate after?

CHAP. VII.
The Creticke war.
THe Creticke war, A. V. C. DCXXCV.
if we will have the truth, our selves made to our selves, only upon a desire
to conquer that noble island. It seemd to have fauord Mithridates, for which
seemings sake we meant to take revenge by the sword. Marcus Antonius was the
first who invaded it, borne-vp with so wonderful an hope, and affiance of
victory, that he fraught his ships with more fetters, then weapons. Therefore
he had the reward of his dotage. for the Cretensians intercepted most part of
his navy, and hoising the bodies of such as they took prisoners, up in sails
and tacklings, rowed back into their Ports, as it were with a forewinde in
triumph. Then Metellus wasting the whole Island with fire, and sword, pent them
within their castles, and cities, Gnosus, Erythraea, and (as the Greeks are
wont to speak) the mother of cities Cydona: and he so mercilessely plagued
the captives, that most of the ilanders poisoned themselves, other sent their
surrenders to Pompey absent: who busied in the enterprises of Asia, and sending
Octauius to Crete, as governor, was laughed to scorn, for meddling in another
man's province, and provoked Metellus to exercise the right of a conqueror the
more bitterly upon the Cretans, and having vanquished Lasthenes, and Panares,
captains of Cydona, returned victorious, and yet brought nothing greater back
of so famous a conquest, then the surname Creticus.

CHAP. VIII.
The Balearian war.
THe house of Metellus Macedonicus was so far forth accustomed to warlike
surnames, A. V. C. DCXXXI
that the one of his sons obtaining the title Creticus, another of them was
eft-soones styled Balearicus. The Baleares had about the same time made the
seas dangerous with their pyracies. A man would wonder that those wild, and
savage people durst once so much as look from their rocketoppes down upon the
sea: But, more then so, they ventured forth to sea in bungled boats, and now,
and then frighted such as saild by, with sudden on-sets, and now also when
they a far off descried the Roman navy approach in the maine sea, conceiving
it to be purchase, they had the hearts to assail it, and at the first charge
couerd it with an huge shower of small and great stone. Each of them uses
three slings in battle. Who will wonder if they be excellent markemen, when
these are the only arms the nation has, and are bred up in the practice of
them from their child-hoode? A boy gets no morsel at his mothers hands, but
that of which she makes a white, and which himself must hit. But this kind of
hail did not long terrify the Romans. After they came to hand-strookes, and
felt our beake-heads, and iauelines coming, they raised a bellowing cry, like
so many beasts, and fled to shore, where slipping in among the next hillockes,
the first work was to find them out, the next, to conquer them.

CHAP. IX.
The voyage into Cyprus.
THe final destiny of Islands was at hand. A. V. C. DCXX VII.
Cyprus therefore yielded it-selfe without war. Of this i will, abounding in
ancient riches, and, besides that, consecrated to Venus, Ptolomic was king; and
the report of her wealth was such, nor that untruly, that the people which
were conquerours of the world, and accustomed to grant away whole kingdoms,
gave in charge to Publius Claudius, a tribune of theirs, author of the motion,
to confiscate that prince, though alive, and in league with them. At the bruit
whereof he shortened his days by poison. The riches of Cyprus were conueighed
in barges up the river Tiber by Porcius Cato, which brought more treasure to
the treasury of the people of Rome, then any triumph.

CHAP. X.
The Gallick war.
ASia subdued by the hand of Pompey, A. V. C. DCXCV.
fortune transferred upon Caesar the conquest of that which was left untouched in
Europe. And there remained the most terrible of all other nations, the Galls,
and Germans: and Britain though divided from the whole world, yet had
notwithstanding one to conquer it. The first cause of this trouble begun at the
Heluetians, who seated between the Rhene, and Rhodanus, and their countries
proving to narrow for their swarms, came to demand of us other habitations,
having first set their towns on fire. A solemn sign among them of never
returning thither. But we asking time for deliberation, and during that delay,
when Caesar, by cutting down the bridge over Rhone, had taken from them the
means of flying away, he by and by led back that most warlike people into
their old homes, as a shepherd drives his flocks to their sheep-folds. The
following battle which was fought against the Belgia^s, was much more bloody,
as against men who fought for freedom. Here the Romans did many famous feats
of arms, and this of Caesar's was most singular, that his army inclining to
fly, he snatched the target from one who was running away, and charging upon
the face of the enemies, restored the battle with his own hand. After this
he encountered the Veneti at sea, but the combat was greater with the Ocean
then with the enemies ships. For they were bungerly made, and misshapen, and
had presently been split with our beake-heads, but the shallow places hindered
the fight, that the tide withdrawing upon course, during the skirmish, the
Ocean might as it were seem to have been stickler in the battle. He had
elsewhere also to deal with difficulties which grew from the nature of the
nations, and places. The Aquitans, a subtle generation, betook themselves to
grots, and holes under ground: Caesar had damd them up. The Morini slipped aside
into the woods: he commanded to fire them. Let no man say the Galls are only
fierce, they use fraud also. Induciomarus assembled the Treuirists, Ambiorix
the Eburones, and making a combination among themselves in Caesar's absence,
both of them found out his several lieutenants general. But Titus Labienus
stoutly repulsed the one of them, and brought that kings head away. The other
laying an ambuscado in the valley, overcame us by craft, and so the camp was
sacked, and the gold thereof taken. There we lost Cotta, with Titurius Sabinus
lieutena^t general. Nor could we ever bee-meet with that king after, for he
plaide least in sight beyond the Rhene perpetually. But Rhene, for all that,
escaped us not, as neither was it fit, that it should be a free receiver, and
defender of our enemies. But Caesar's ground of war against the Germans was
at first most just. For the Sequani complained of their incursions. How great
was then the pride of Ariouistus? when our ambassadors said, Come thou to
Caesar? What is that Caesar? quoth the king? And let him come to me if he
will, and what concerns it him what our Germany does? am I a meddler in the
Roman affairs? The terror therefore of this new nation was so great throughout
the camp, that they who were of the maine battle, made euery-where their last
wills, and testaments. But those giant like bodies, by how much the huger they
were, by so much were they the fairer mark for a sword, or dart to hit. What
the fervor of our soldiers was in the fight, cannot be set forth in any
example more clearly then in this, that when the barbarous whelmed their
shields over their heads, covering themselves as under a roof, or pent-house,
or as a tortoys under the shell, the Romans sprung up upon the shields, and
from thence did cut their throats. Again, when the Menapians complaind to us
of the Germans, Caesar passes over the Mose, upon a bridge of boats, seeks
out Rhene it self, and the enemies, among the Hercinian woods. But all the
whole race of them was fled into the wilds, and marshes, the army of the
Romans appearing on a sudden on this side the bank of Rhene, struck such an
amazement among them. Nor did we cross that river only once, but again also,
and that by a bridge made over it. At which time their affright was much
augmented, when they beheld their Rhene taken prisoner as it were, and yoaked
with a bridge, betaking themselves afresh in flight to their forests, and
fennie places; that which most fretted Caesar, being that he had not whom to
conquer. Thus all made ours both at land, and sea, he casts his eye upon the
Ocean, and as if the Roman world sufficed not, his mind was set how to
atchieue another. For this cause gathering a navy, he made for Britain. He
crossed into Britain with marvelous speed; for weighing anchor out of the
harbor of the Morini, at the third watch, he was landed in the Island before
noone. The shores there, were full of the enemies troubled troops, and the
chariots of war whirled up and down disorderly, their riders quaking at the
wonder of the sight: their fear therefore was instead of a victory. The
timorous Britans yielded up their arms, and gave hostages: and Caesar had then
marched farther, had not the Ocean given his shatterd fleet a sore scourging
with his billows. Thereupon he returned into Gall, and with a greater armada,
and more forces then before, did thrust out once again into the same Ocean,
and again pursuing the same Britans into the Caledonian woods, he also caused
Cauelianus, one of their kings, to be fast bound in chains. Contenting
himself with this (for his intention was not to get provinces, but glory) he
makes back into Gall with more spoils then at first, the Oceans self more
quiet, and favorable, as if it confessed it self too weak for Caesar. But the
last mightiest conspiracy of the Galls, was, when that prince so dreadful for
stature, martial skill, and courage, and whose very name seemed devised to
strike a terror, Vercingetorix, drew at once all the Aruernois, and Bituriges
the Carnutes, and Sequani into a league, by speaking big among them, when the
assemblies of people were thickest, as in their groves upon festival, and
counsel-dayes, erecting their minds thereby for recovery at their ancient
liberty. Caesar was at this time absent out of Gallia, busy in taking fresh
musters of Rauenna, and the Alps themselves heapt high with winter snowes, and
so the ways cloyed up, they presumed he was fast, and safe enough. But of
how fortunate a rashness was he at the news? Over cragges, and cliffes of
mountains, through ways, and drifts of snow, till that time pathlesse, he
with lightarmed bands of soldiers got into Gall, united his winter-camps
there, which stood far distant, and was himself in person in the middle of
Gallia, before the remotest part feared his coming. Then assaulting the
heart-strengths of the war, he destroyed Auaricum, and a garrison in it of
forty thousand, and leuel'd Alexia to the ground with fire, which had two
hundred, and fifty thousand fighting men to rescue it. The whole stresse of
the war was about Gergouia. For that most spacious city, having four score
thousand defendents, walls also, a castle, and craggie cliffes, was girt-in
round by Caesar with works, stakes, and a ditch through which he drew the
river, and with eighteen several camps in the whole compass, and an huge
counterscarpe, by which means he tamed it first with famine, and such of the
defendents as durst sally out, being either cut in pieces in the trenches with
the sword, or gored upon the stakes, he at last constrained it to yield. That
very king himself, the principal glory of Caesar's conquest, both came like
an humble suitor into the camp, and throwing his caparisons, and arms at his
foot, said thus unto him, O thou most valiant of men, thou have conquered a
valiant man.

CHAP. XI.
The Parthian war.
WHile the people of Rome utterly distressed the Galls toward the North of the
world, they receive a grievous wound in the East, by the Parthians. For which
we cannot blame fortune. The discomfiture afforded no kind of comfort. The
greedy humor of Crassus, Consul, which had neither Gods, nor men to friend,
gaping for Parthian gold, cost eleven legions their lives, and him that head of
his, upon which Metellus, Tribune of the people, had powered hostile curses at
his setting out. And when the army was past Zeugma, sudden whirle-windes threw
our standards into! Euphrates where they sunk: and when he encamped at
Nicephorium, ambassadors, from king Orodes summoned him to remember the
leagues which Parthians had formerly made with Pompey, and Sulla; but his mind
wholly bent how to swallow the treasures of that realm, without pretending so
much as an imaginary cause of war, only said, he would answer at Seleucia.
The Gods therefore, who take revenge for violating public leagues, did both
prosper the stratagems, and strokes of the enemies. For first, Euphrates, the
only river to conueigh our victuals, and defend us, was now between us, and
home; then again, credit was given to a certain counterfeit fugitive, one
Mazara, a Syrian, who trayning the army out into the midst of the open deserts
of the country, betrayed it to the enemy on all sides, Crassus therefore was
scarce approached to Carrhae, when Syllax, and Surena, the kings chief
captains, displayed and florisht their flags wouen of silk, and gold. And
presently thereupon the enemies Cauallery gave in on every hand, pouring their
shot of arrows upon us as thick as the drops of hail, or rain. So the
legions beaten miserably to the earth, himself allured out to a parley, had,
upon a sign given by the enemy, come quick into their hands, if the resistance
of the Tribunes had not moved the barbarous to prevent his escape by killing
him. That notwithstanding, they chopped off his head, and made themselves merry
with it. As for his son, they ouerwhelm'd him with shot, even almost in his
fathers sight. The remains of that unfortunate host shifting each man for
himself, and scattered by flight into Armenia, Cilicia, and Syria, did scarce
afford a man alive to bring the news. The head, and right hand of Crassus were
brought to king Orodes, and made sport for him, nor that unfitly. For they
powered molten gold in at his open mouth, that he who was on fire with the
thirst of gold while he lived, his dead, and bloudlesse carcass might have
enough thereof to serve his turn.

CHAP. XII.
The recapitulation.
THis is that third transmarine age of the people of Rome, in which employing
themselves upon exploits out of Italy, they displayed their aduenturous arms
over the whole earth. Of which age, the first hundred years were holy, pious,
and (as we have already said) the age of gold, void of heinous fact, or foul
black deed, all the while the simpleness, and purity of that shepheardish
original continued, and the immiuent fear of the Paenish-men maintained among
us ancient discipline. The other hundred years (which we reckon from the
destruction of Carthage, Corinth, Numance, and from the date of the last will,
and testament of king Attalus (in which he devised his kingdom in Asia) up to
Caesar, and Pompey, and to Augustus, who followed them) as the glory of
martial acts made stately great, of so vast domestic mischiefs made wretched,
and worthy to be blushed at. For as it was noble, and goodly to have
conquered Gallia, Thrace, and Cilicia, most fertile, and most powrfull
provinces, the Armenians also, and Britans, great names, but more for the
honor of the empire, then for the uses thereof: so was it a brutish, and a
shameful thing to fight, and bicker at home, at the same time, with our own
citizens, associates, bondmen, fencers, and the whole Senate with it self. And
I know not, whether it had not been better for the people of Rome to have
rested content with Sicilia, and Africa, yea, or to have wanted them also,
having Italy at command, then to grow to such greatness as to be consumed
with their proper strengths. For what other things else bred civil furies, but
the too much rankness of prosperity? The first thing which corrupted us, was
the conquest of Syria, and next after that, the heritage of the king of
Pergamus in Asia. The wealth, and riches of those countries were the things
which crushed under them the moral virtues of that age, and overthrew the
co^monweal drowned in her own vices as in a common sink. For what cause was
there why the people of Rome should stand so hard for fields, or food, but as
they were driven by the hunger which prodigality had procured? From hence
therefore sprang the first, and second Gracchan seditions, and that third
Appuleian. And out of what other ground did it grow, that the knights, and
gentlemen of Rome separated themselves from the Lords, to have sovereign power
in seats of judgment, but merely out of covetousness, that so they might
convert to private lucre the customary paiments due to the State, and even
judgments in law it self? This brought in the promise of making all Latium
free of Rome. from whence rose the war with associats. And what bred the war
with bondmen? what? but the great number of them in families? whence came the
armies of fensers against their owners, but for the excessive prodigality used
in shows for gaining popular favor? While the Romans give themselves over to
shows of sword-players, they brought that to be a profession, and Art, which
was before those times the punishment of enemies. And, to touch our more
gallant vices, was it not overmuch wealth which stirred among us riualities in
honors? Or did not the storms of Marius, and Sylla, and the magnificent
furniture of feasts, and sumptuous presents, rise out of that abundance, which
are long would bring forth beggerie? This was it which made Catiline fall foul
upon his country. To be brief, what other fountain had that very desire in
some of sovereignty, and to rule alone, but too much store of wealth? But that
desire did mutually arm Caesar and Pompey with those mortal enmities, which
like the furies firebrands set Rome on a bright blaze. Our purpose therefore
is, to handle these civil quarrels, distinguished from just, and foreine
wars, in order as they fall.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Gracchan Laws.
THe power of the Tribunes stirred the causes of all seditions, under pretext of
defending the common people, for whose help that power was ordained, but in
very truth that the Tribunes might ingrosse absolute authority to themselves,
and for that cause courted the commons for their special favor, and good
will, by enacting laws which allotted them land, corn, and seats of
judgment, gratis. There was a color of equity in each; for what so just, as
the people to receive their right at the hands of the Fathers of the State? for
them who were the lords of nations, and possessors of the earth, not to live
like strangers to their own homes, and temples? what more reasonable, then
that the poor should live upon their own eschequer? what could be more
effectual to make the templer of liberty even, and indifferent? then the
Senate governing provinces, that the cheualrie, and gentlemen of Rome, to
support their authority at home, should have the as it were kingdom of
iudgementseates? Yet even these very things turned pernicious, and the woeful
commonweal came thereby to be the wages of her proper overthrow: for the
cheualrie, and inferior nobles being made judges, which till then the lords of
Counsel were, they purloynd the public incomes, that is to say, the
patrimony of the empire; and the paying for the common peoples corn out of the
public money, sucked dry the very sinews of State, the treasury: and how could
the common sort be made landed men, without eiecting the^ who were already in
possession, and were themselves also a portion of the people? and who held
their seats of abode, left them from their ancestors, by prescription, as a
title of inheritance.

CHAP. XIIII.
The sedition of Tiberius Gracchus.
TIBERIUS GRACCHVS, who had not his equal for birth, person, and eloquence,
kindled the first firebrand of contention. This man, whether for fear that the
yeelding-vp of Mancinus, might also reach to him, because he was a surety for
our part of the league at Numance, becoming popular; or carried as in point of
honor for the common good, because pitying to see the people of Rome, thrust
out of their own lands, though conquerours of nations, and owners in
possession of the world, he would provide that they should not live like
persons banished from their household Gods, and houses; or what other motive
soever else did set him on work to dare so mighty a matter; true it is, that
when the day of propounding the law was come, he having an huge troop to
guard him, mounted the Rostra, nor wanted there in readiness all the nobility
against him, and the Tribunes of the people in sides. At which time Gracchus
seeing Marcus Octauius cross his propositions, he pusht him down from the
Rostra with his hand, contrary to the religious respect of brotherhood in
office, and the nature of their authority, and put him into that fear of
present death, as he was compeld to give over his Tribuneship: and after this
sort getting himself to be created one of the three for parting the lands,
when upon a comitiall day he labourd to have his authority continued for a
longer time, thereby to make good his beginnings, the nobility, and those whom
he had disseised opposing him, they fell to killing in the Forum, Caedes a
faro coepit.
and then through the city; and flying from thence to the Capitol, when
touching his head with his hand to exhort the people, as by a sign, to stand
upon their guard for their lives, it seemd as if he demanded a diadem:
thereupon Scipie Nasica inciting the people to run to their weapons, he was
beaten to the earth, and slain, as it were by course of justice.

CHAP. XV.
The sedition of Caius Gracchus.
Caius Gracchus waxt forth with no less hot in revenge of his brothers both
death, A. V. C. DCXXX II.
and laws, and with equal uproar, and terror, as he, putting the common sort
into possession of their forefathers lands, promising to share among them the
late bequeathed kingdom of Attalus, for their maintenance. And now grown
ouer-mighty, and powerful by being made Tribune again, he was followed with
the commons as he flung up, and down, so that when Minucius the Tribune
adventured to abrogate his laws, he trusting to the strength of his accomplices,
invaded the Capitol, a place fatal to his house, and family. But beaten from
that attempt with the slaughter of his nerest friends, he withdrew himself to
mount Auentine. But the forces of the Senate meeting him, there he was
destroyed by Opimius, Consul. There was insulting upon the dead carcass also,
and they who muthred him, had for reward the weight of his head in gold, the
head of a Tribune of the people, religiously sacred, and not to have been
violated.

CHAP. XVI.
The Appulcian sedition.
ALl this notwithstanding, A. V. C. DCLIII.
Appuleius Saturninus desisted not from pressing to make good the Gracchan
laws. The favor of Marius gave so much boldness to the man, being ever an
enemy to the nobility, and presuming the more because Marius was Consul, that
openly killing Aulus Nonius, in the general assembly, his competitor in the
Tribuneship, he attempted to bring in Caius Gracchus in his stead, a fellow of
no tribe, nor name, but foysting in a pedigree, adopted himself into the
family. Thus keeping such tragical revels in the state without being once
called to account for them, he bent his wits so earnestly to establish the
Gracchan laws, as he forced the Senate to swear to what he would, threatening
the refusers to forbid them fire, and water. There was one nevertheless found,
who did rather choose to be banished. Therefore when Metellus was once fled,
all the lords quailing, and Appuleius tyrannizing, now the third time Tribune,
grew so outrageous, as he troubled even the very general asse^blies made for
election of Consuls with new slaughter. For, that Glaucias, the vpholder and
minister of his madness, might be made Consul, he commanded his competitor
Caius Memmius to be slain: and when in that embroilement those of his guard
called him KING, he heard them gladly; but then, by the joint opposition of the
Senate, Marius the Consul himself now also making one, because he was not
able to bear him out, the battles joined in the Foru^. From whence Appuleius
being beaten, he seized upon the Capitol. But there they besieged him by
cutting off the condit-pipes. Whereupon his lieutenants assuring the Senate he
was sorry for what was passed, he came down out of the castle, and was
received, together with the leaders of his faction, into the Curia. Into which
the people breaking forceably, ouerwhelm'd him with clubs, and stones, and tore
him also to pieces as he was in dying.

CHAP. XVII.
The Drusin sedition.
LAST of these boute-feus was Liuius Drusus, A. V. C. DCLXII.
who bearing himself strong not only upon the force of his Tribuneship, but
upon the authority of the Senate also, and having the consent of all Italy,
attempted to induce the same laws; and while he serves turns of one thing
after another, he kindled such a fire, that the very first flash thereof could
not be endured: and himself taken off by sudden death, left a long hereditarie
quarrel upon his posterity. Caius Gracchus by enacting that law, Which took
the office of judges from the Senate, and conferred it upon the knights, and
gentlemen, had divided the people of Rome, and made it a double-headed city,
which was but single before. And the Gentry, bold upon their so mighty power,
as having thereby the fates, and estates of the Senators, and the lives of
princes in their hand, forestalled the public revenues, and excises, and
robbed the commonweal in their own right. The Senate, weakened by the
banishment of Metellus, and the condemnation of Rutilius had lost all the grace
of majesty. In this condition of things, Seruilius Caepio standing for the
Gentry, and Liuius Drusus for the Senate, two men of equal riches, courage,
and calling (which bred that emulation against Drusus) ensigns, standards, and
banners were upon the point to advance. Thus differed they together in one
city, as if it had been in two camps. Caepio gave the first onset to the
Senate, and culled out Scaurus, and Philip, the chiefes of the nobility, as
persons guilty of practicing for places. Drusus, to resist these commotions,
wanne the people to him by the Gracchan laws, and drew the associats of Rome
to the people, by giving hope that they should all be made free of the city.
This speech of his is yet remembered, that he had left nothing in the state to
be given to any one, unless that party had a mind to make a partition of
mudde, and clouds. The day of promulgation of the law was come, and so great
was the concourse from all quarters about, that the city seemed as if besieged
with the approach of enemies. Philip, Consul, durst notwithstanding speak
against the laws. But the usher of the Court taking him by the throat, did not
let him go till the blood started into his face, and eyes. So the laws were
enacted perforce, and commanded to pass for current. Our fellows, or
associats called out of hand for the reward of their partaking. Which Drusus
unable to perform, and sick of the troubles into which he had rashly entered,
died in season, confidering the danger. But our fellows in arms forbear not
nevertheless to seek the accomplishment of Drusus his promises, by hostility.

CHAP. XVIII.
The Social war.
THe war against our fellows and associats, A. V. C. DCLXIII
howsoever it be termed but the Social war, that so we might extenuate the
envy; yet, if we will have the truth, it was a civil war. Because the
people of Rome having mixed the Etruscans, Latins, and Sabins, and deriuing one
blood out of all, made an entire body out of parts, and of them all together is
but one. Nor was the rebellion of our associats within Italy, less heinous
then that of the Romans within the city. When therefore our fellows, and
allies most justly demanded equal privilege with the Romans, whose greatness
they had increased with their supports, and to the hope whereof Drusus had
raized them upon a desire to predominate; and when also he was oppressed by the
wickedness of those at home; the same firebrand of mischief which consumed
him, inflamed our companions and allies, to take arms, and force the city:
what thing could be sadder the^ this vast mischief? what more calamitous? when
all Latium, and (...) Etruria, and Campania, finally Italy, rose jointly in
arms against the mother, and foster city? when every army of our most
valiant, and most loyal fellows had under each ensign those municipall bad
members, and monsters of men? Popedius led the Marses, and Latins, Afranius the
Vmbrians, the whole Senate, and Consuls, Samnium, Telesinus led Lucania, when
the people, which was the disposer of kings, and nations, could not govern
it-selfe, so that Rome conqueresse of Asia, and Europe might be assailed from
Corfinium. The beginning of the war was plotted to be in mount Alban, where,
on the festiuali day of the Latins, Sextus Julius Caesar, and Marcius
Philippus, Consuls, should have been sacrificed between the rites, sacra.
and the altars: but that treason being frustrated by discoury, the whole
co^spiracie brake out in Asculum, our ambassadors who were then present in
that city, being killd in the assembly itself, at the public plays. This
was the solemn sign of the wicked war, and from thence the alarm was
euery-where taken by all the parts of Italy, Popedius posting up and down, as
the captain, and author of it. Neither Pyrrhus, nor Aniball committed so great
a spoil. Behold, Ocriculam, behold Grumentum, behold Faesulae, Carscoli,
Nuceria, and Picentes are wasted with slaughter, sword, and fire. The army of
Rutilius is discomfired, discomfited also is that of Caepio's: for Lucius
Julius Caesar himself, when the army, which he led, was overthrown, and his
dead body brought all bloody into Rome, made such a solitariness with the
pitious spectacle, that one might have even past through the middle of the
city quietly. But the great good fortune of the people of Rome, always better
when at worst, puts at last their universal forces to the work, singling out
several captains against several people; Cato scatters the Etruscans,
Gabinius the Marses, Carbo the Lucans, Sylla the Samnites. But Strabo Pompeius
having made havoc of all with fire, and sword, never gave over destroying,
till he had sacrificed the subversion of Asculum to the ghosts of so many
Consulary armies, and to the Gods of so many ransackt cities.

CHAP. XIX.
The bondmens war.
THough we fought with our associates (an heinous matter) yet were they
freemen howsoever, and at leastwise generous persons. Who can patiently brook,
that the sovereign people of the earth should arm against their slaves? The
first troubles of that base nature were attempted in the younger days of Rome,
and within the city it-selfe, by Herdonius Sabinus, captain, when the state
busied with the quarrels stirred by the Tribunes, the Capitol was besieged,
and taken by the Consul. But this was rather an uproar then a war. But now,
the empire being mightily enlarged with diverse countries, who would believe
that the Island of Sicilie should be more cruelly wasted in the war against
slaves, then in the Carthaginian? An excellent corn country, and as it were a
purlieu of Rome, where the Latin people had their farms, and granges; for
furniture of tillage there were very many bride-wels, and husbandmen kept in
chains, which ministered matter for war. A certain Syrian called Eunus (the
great mischiefs he did, makes us remember his name) faining himself inspired
with a divine fury, while he vaunts the ceremonies of his Syrian goddess,
called bondmen to arms, and liberty, as it were by authority from heaven:
and to get credit in that point, he iuggled a nut into his mouth, filld with
brimstone, and fire, and blowing it softly, spat fire as he spoke. This
coozning wonder drew at the very first two thousand of such as came in his way,
and eftsoons breaking up the worke-iails, or bride-wells, by right of war,
he made up an host of above forty thousand: and that nothing might be wanting
to the evil, he pranckt himself up like a king in royal ornaments, and made
miserable spoil of castles, towns, and villages: for a last disgrace, the
camps of our Praetors were taken by him; nor shames it to tell their names;
the camps of Manlius, Lentulus, Piso, Hysaeus. They therefore who ought to have
been fetched back by officers as fugitives, pursued our Pratorian Generals,
whom they had made to run away in set battle. In the end yet we had the
punishing of them, Publius Rupilius, our captain General: for after he had
vanquished them in the field, and last of all besieged them in Enna, where
hunger, like a plague of pestilence, consumed them, he bound the remaynes of
those strong thieves, in chains, and fetters, and trussed them on gallowses:
and for this service contented himself with anouation, lest he should
dishonor the dignity of triumph, with carrying in the inscription, the title
of villains. The Island had scarce taken breath, when by and by we came from
the bondmen, and the Syrian to the Cilician. Athenio, a shepherd swain,
murders his master, and freeing his fellows out of the work-iayle, puts them
under banners into battel-ray: himself in a robe of purple, with a staff of
silver, and about his head a royal wreath, pieceth together no less an army
then the former mad man, but rages far more eagerly against masters, and
bondmen, as if against fugitives, and as if he would revenge the Sicilian
bond-slaues cause, sacking castles, towns, and villages. This varlet also had
the killing of Praetorian armies, the camp of Seruilius taken by him, and that
of Lucullus in like sort. But Aquilius, using the example of Publius Rupilius,
utterly distressed the enemy by staruing, and they who were otherwise hard to
overcome by force, he easily destroid by famine: it was their desire to have
yielded, but through the fear of the pains of punishment, they preferred
voluntary death: nay, we could not take vengeance upon the ringleader
himself, though he came alive into our hands: for very many striving together
whose prisoner he should be, the prey was torn in pieces while they wrangled
about that interest.

CHAP. XX.
The war with Spartacus.
But be it that we brook the dishonor of the bondmens war; A. V. C. DCLXXX
for they are liable to good, or evil at fortunes pleasure, and though they are
but as it were a second kind of men, yet by enfranchiseme^t they are
nevertheless adopted sometime into the sweets of our freedom; the war which
Spartacus raised, I am ignorant how to call it: for where villains were the
soldiers, and sword players the captains, those the basest of men, these
augmented the worst of evils with the scorn of so vile indignity. Spartacus,
Crixus, and Oenoma breaking up Lentulus his schole of fence, with three score
and ten such companions as themselves, or more, burst out of Capua, and calling
bondmen to their banners, and assistance, when above ten thousand sturdie
bodies were assembled, they were not then contented only to escape, but they
would also be revenged. The first, as it were alter, which pleased them, was
mount Vesuuius. There being besieged by Clodius Glaber, they slipped down the
rifts of the hollow mountain by ropes of twigges, and descended to the lowest
roots thereof, and suddenly forcing an entry at an issue of the camp, where
no such danger was dreamt of, did surprise it: after that, other camps also.
Then roue, and wander they over Vhora, and all Campania* nor satisfied with
wasting villages, and hamlers, they make a terrible destruction in Nola,
Nuceria, Thurij, and Metapont. Their numbers daily so increasing; as that now
they were a full army, they make bucklers of wouen osiars, couerd with hides of
beasts, and forge out the iron of their worke-iayles into swords, and tools of
war. And that no grace of a full host of men might be wanting, they back
the horse which they found at adventures, to raise a cauallery, and brought to
their captain the ensigns, and fasces which were taken from our Pretors. Nor
refused he to use them, though of an hireling Thracian becoming a soldier,
of a soldier a fugitive, then a strong thief, and last of all, upon trust of
his abilities of body, a sword-player: who celebrated the death of his own
captains slain in battle, with princely exequies, commanding such as he
took prisoners, to fight at sharp about the funeral fire, as if it would
clear all passed disgrace, if of a sword-player, he became a giver of
sword-games. After this, setting also upon Consuls, he cut in pieces the army
of Lentulus in the Appennine, raised the camp of Caius Cassius at Mutina. Puffed
up with these successes, he deliberated (which is enough to shame us) of
inuading Rome it self. So, in the end, we were glad to put al our strengths
against a challenger at sharp, mirmillo.
and Licinius Crassus was the man who recovered our honor: for the enemies (it
is a shame to give them that style) beaten, and chased by him, fled into the
farthermost nooks of Italy: there they being shut up into a corner of Brutium,
prepared to escape into Sicilie, but wanted shipping, and having tried to
supply that defect with boats of hurdles, and barrels bound together with
twigs, but al in vain, by reason the current was too swift, at last making a
sally, they dyed like men, and (which was as it should be where the captain
was a sword-player) they fought without leave. sine missisne.
Spartacus himself behauing himself most valiantly in the front, or head of
the battle, was slain as Prince and General.

CHAP. XXI.
The civil war of Marius.
THis only thing was wanting to make up the evils of the people of Rome to the
full, A. V. C. DCLXV.
that there should be a paricidiall war among themselves at home, and that
citizens should encounter citizens, as if they were fencers, or sword-players,
in the heart, and Forum of the city, as in a fighting ground, or theatrall
Sand. Howsoever, it would grieve me the less, had the leaders of that
wickedness bin base companions, or if noblemen borne, yet debosht in their
manners. But O the sin! what men! what chiefes! when they were the ornaments,
and glories of their age, Marius and Sulla, who vpheld that worst of heinous
evils with their utmost countenance. Things, so to say, were planetstrucken
with three bad influences; the first slight, and little, and more properly a
broyle, then a war, the cruelty, such as it was, staying among the captains of
the quarrel themselves; but the next was more grimme, and bloody, such as had
the upper hand embrewing their weapons in the bowels of all the Senate; the
third outwent, in the rage thereof, not civil only, but hostill fury, when
the madness of revenge had all the strengths of Italy to bolster it, their
hatred one of the other raging so long, as till none were left to kill. The
beginning, and cause of the war, was the insatiable thirst of honor in
Marius, while he labourd by the law of Sulpitius to take from Sulla his decreed
employment: but Sulla, impatient of the injury, forthwith turned about with
the legions which were under his command, and deferring the war of
Mithridates, marched into the city at port Esquiline, and Colline gate in two
great battalions: from whence, when Sulpitius, and Albinouanus had suddenly
repulsed them, and logges, and stones, and tools were hurld upon all sides
from off the walls, Sulla also falls to throwing, opens his passage with
fire, and possesses as a conqueror the captive Capitol, that fort which had
escaped the Paenish-men, yea and the Galli Senones also. Then by an act of the
Senate, Sulla's adversaries proclaimed enemies of the State, they had law on
their side to rage against the present Tribune, and most of the contrary
faction. Marius by seruill flight saved himself, or rather, fortune kept him
in store for another war. Cornelius Cinna, Cnaeus Octauius Consuls, the fire
which was not well put out rose afresh, and that certainly by reason of the
disagreement, when it was referred to the people, whether such as the Senate
had proclaimed enemies should be recalled. They came to this general assembly
with their swords about them: but they prevailing who wished quietness, Cinna,
leaving the city, posted to his party. Marius returns from Africa, the
greater for calamity, because prison, chains, flight, and banishment had
endeare his dignity. At the name therefore of so great a man, there is
flocking to him from far, and near, bondmen (O the heinousness!) and sturdy
rogues were armd: and the distressed General easily found an army: so that, as
demanding restitution to his country, out of which he was expelled by force,
he might well seem to have good reason for his doing, had he not otherwise
wrought his cause by cruelty: but returning discontented with Gods and men, the
hauen-towne Ostia a pupil, and foster-child of Rome, was at the first assault
taken, and with horrible destruction pillaged. From thence he enters the city
in four battles, Cinna, Marius, Carbo, and Sertorius leading them, where,
after that the whole band of Octauius was beaten from mount Ianiculum,
presently, upon a sign given, they fell to killing the princes, and chief
lords, much more sauagely then is used either in a Paenish, or a Cimbrian
city. The head of Octauius, Consul, was pitched upon a pole before the Rostra,
and the head of Antonius, a Consularie man, was set on the board before Marius
himself: Casar, and Fimbria were murthred in that place of their houses where
their household Gods stood, and Crassus the father, and son, each insight of
other. Bebius, and Numitor were drawn with the hangmans hooks through the
middle of the Forum. Catulus freed himself from being made the scorn of his
enemies by smothering. Merula, Jupiters priest, bespurtled the eyes of Jove
himself, with the blood which sprung out of his veins in the Capitol.
Ancharius was run through, Marius himself looking on, because when Marius
saluted him, he reached not out forsooth that fatal hand of his. These
Senators he massacred between the Calends, and Ides of January, in that seventh
Consulship of his. What would have become of things, if after that proportion
of killing he had been Consul but a year? Scipio, and Norbanus Consuls, that
third worst whirlwinde of civil surie thundered forth with all the violence it
had; at which time seven legions of the one side, on another five hundred
cohorts stood in arms, and Sulla hastened out of Asia with a victorious army.
And certainly, Marius having showed himself so merciless toward Sulla's
friends, how great cruelty was there need of, for Sulla to be even with
Marius? Their first encounter was at Capua by the river Vulturnus, and there
the army of Norbanus was quickly overthrown, and all Scipio's forces, upon
colorable ouerture of peace, speedily oppressed. Then Marius the younger, and
Carbo, Consuls, as if the hope they had to get the victory were quite dead,
yet not to perish unrevenged, they parentated to themselves with the blood of
the Senate. And besetting the Senate House, such of the Senate, whose throats
they meant to cut, were drawn out from thence, as out of a sheep-penne, or
prison. What slaughters were there in the Forum, in the Circus, and open
Temples? For MVTIVS SCAEVOLA, the priest, embracing the altar of Vesta in his
atmes, is only not buried in her fire. Lamponius, and Telesinus, ringleaders
of the Samnits, waste Campania, and Etruria more dreadfully then Pyrrhus and
Annibal did, and under the color of siding, revenge themselves. The whole
forces of the enemies were quite distressed at Sacriport, and port Collin, or
Hill-gate. There Marius, and here Telesinus were destroyed. But war, and
slaughter ended not together. For the sword was unsheathed even in peace, and
they who freely yielded themselves, were also deprived of their lives. It is
not less heinous, that Sulla, at Sacriport and Hill-gate, did cut in pieces
above threescore and ten thousand. But then it was war. He commanded above
four thousand unarmed citizens, who had yielded themselves, to be put to the
sword in the public village. These though so many slain in cold blood, yet
are no more then four thousand. But who can number them who were killed
euery-where thorowout the city by any one who lifted? till Furfidius
admonished, that some ought to be left alive, that there might be over whom to
command. Hereupon was that huge table hung out, in which two thousand by name,
culled forth of the very flower of the Senate, knights, and gentlemen, were
proclaimed to die. A new kind of edict. It were tedious, after al these
things, to historifie the killing in cruel sport of Carbo, of Soranus, the
Praetor, and of Venuleius, and how Baebius was not slain with the sword, but
torn in pieces with hands, as with the paws of savage beasts. How Marius,
brother of the General Marius, was thrust with his eyes, hands, and thighs
into the earth, before the tomb of Catulus, and in that state kept so alive,
as he might sensibly feel himself die in every part. To let pass almost all
the several forms of death used upon several persons: the statelyest
free-townes of Italy were sold as at an outrop, who would give most, Spoletum,
Interamnium, Praeneste, Fluentia. For as for Sulmo, that ancient confederate,
and friend-citie, not yet conquered, Sulla (O unworthy fact!) commanded it to
be utterly razed, condemning it no otherwise then as hostages condemned by the
law of arms, and accordingly sentenced to death, are commanded forth to
execution.

CHAP. XXII.
The war with Sertorius.
WHat other thing else was the Sertorian war, A. V. C. DCLX XIV.
then the inheritance of Sulla's proscription? Whether I should style it an
hostile, or a civil war, I know not, as that which the Lusitanians, and
Celtiberians acted, having a Roman to their General. He was a man of an
excellent rare, but of a disastrous valor, out-lawed for his life, and flying
that most deadly proclamation, he tossed both sea, and land with mixture of
his miseries: and trying his fortune now in Africa, then in the Balearies, and
sent from thence into the Ocean, past through to the Fortunateilands, and lastly
armed Spain, where, as a man with men, he easily made head, nor did the
courageous bravery of Spanish soldiers appear in any place more plainly,
then when a Roman led them, though not contented with Spain alone, he minded
Mithridates also, and the Ponticks, ayding him with a navy. What had been
able to resist so potent an enemy? The world could not withstand by only one
captains means. Cnaeus Pompeius was joined to Metellus. They wasted the
puissance of Sertorius in battle, though it was long first, and never but with
doubtful fight, nor at last by fair war; for he was dispatched through the
villainy, and treason of his familiar friends: and our captains having traced
his armies almost over all Spain, did never encounter his, but the battle was
always long, and hazardous. The first proof we made of his abilities was by
lieutenants general, when Domitius, and Thorius upon the one side, and the
Herculeij upon the other made some light skirmishes: but these being eftsoons
slain at Segouia, and those at the river Anas, the Generals themselves coming
to try it out in person at Lauro, and Sucron, parted each with equal mischief
done to either. They turning then their power to waste the country, and these
to the subversion of cities, wretched Spain smarted for the quarrels of the
Roman captains one against the other, till such time as Sertorius muthered by
practice of his household friends, and conquered Perperna, submitting
himself, the cities Osea, Term, Tutia, Valentia, Auximia, and, which had
endured the worst of hunger, Calaguris, swear feaulty to the Romans. So Spain
received into peace, the victorious Generals had rather it should seem a
foraine war then a civil, because they would triumph.

CHAP. XXIII.
The civil war under Lepidus.
MArcus Lepidus, A. V. C. DCLXXV.
Quintus Catulus, Consuls, the civil war was almost sooner determined then
taken in hand. But how much, and how far soever in compass the firebrand of
that commotion blazed, it rose all out of Sylla's ashes: for Lepidus, in his
insolency, desirous to innouate, prepared to annull the acts of that mighty
man, nor without good cause, if at least wise it could have been done without
great calamity to the commonweal. For when Sulla, the Dictator, had by the
advantage of the upper hand, proscribed his enemies; such of them as ouerliued,
being recalled from banishment by Lepidus, to what else were they called but to
war? and when the goods of attainted citizens were adjudged, and given away
by Sulla unto others, though they were but badly taken, yet being they were
taken by law, the repleuin of them did doubtlesly endanger the green raw peace
of the State. For which respect it was expedient that the commonweal sore
sick, and hurt, should rest it self howsoever, lest the wounds thereof should
break out, and bleed afresh in the curing. When therefore he had frighted the
city with his turbulent orations, as with an alarm, he went into Etruria, and
from thence presented an army against Rome. But, before this time, Lentulus,
Catulus, and Cnaeus Pompeius, the captains, and as it were ensigne-bearers of
Sulla's tyranny, had planted an army at Miluius bridge, and mount Ianiculus:
and by them repulsed at the very first brunt, and proclaimed traitor by the
Senate, he fled back without bloodshed into Etruria; from thence retired to
Sardinia; and there in sickness, and repentance ended his days. The victors,
a thing rarely seen in civil wars, moderated their affections, and
contented themselves to hold all quiet.

Deo gratias.
THE HISTORY OF THE ROMANS. The fourth Book.
CHAP. I.
CATALINES war.
CATALINE, A. V. C. DCXC.
moved to it, first with riot, and then with want, the effect of that excess,
together with the opportunity, our armies being then in warfare at the utmost
bounds of the earth, was thrust into a treason for inthralment of his native
country, for assassinate of the Senators, for murder of the Consuls, for
firing the city in many places at once, for robbing the Exchequer, and in a
word, for utter extirpation of all commonweal, and for doing that, whatsoever
else, which even Anniball himself would not have seemed to have wished. All
which purposes, with what accomplices (O the sin!) were they by him attempted?
himself a Patritian, a Senator of the highest rank; but that is not so much:
there were in of the Curij, Porcij, Sullae, Cethegi, Autronij, Vargunteij, and
Longini: and what potentates were they by birth? what ornaments of the Senate?
Lentulus likewise, chiefly at that time Praetor, had all of these for a black
guard to his most black designs. Man's blood was added as a pledge of the
conspiracy, which carried about in cups and goblets, they drank: a most
horrible thing, had not the end, for which they drank it, been more horrible.
The goodliest empire under heaven had seen the last days of it self, had not
that plot happened in the Consulship of Cicero, and Antonius, one of which
discovered the same by his diligence, the other confounded it by force. The
intelligence of this so vast a treason was given by Fuluia, a base cheap
trull, but not so wicked as to be guilty of paricide. Then Cicero the Consul,
calling a Senate, made an oration against the heinous traitor to his face,
against the guilty person there in presence, but wrought no greater effect
then only to make the foe shift for himself, and openly professing to be
such, threatened to put out the fire with pulling down all. So he departs to
the army which Manlius had prepared in Etruria, with purpose to assail the
city. Lentulus, divining that himself was the man of his family, to whom
sovereignty was destinated in Sibylls verses, had in fit places, against the
set day, dispersed men, fireworkes, and weapons over the whole city: nor
contented with accomplices at home only, the ambassadors of the Allobroges, at
that time, as it happened, in town, were dealt with, to stir their nation to
arms: and the frenzy had gadded over the Alps, if upon another discovery
made by Vulturius, the letters of the Praetor had not been attached in the
going. Hands were hereupon forthwith laid, at Cicero's commandment, upon the
Allobroges: and the practice was openly proved against Lentulus in the Senate.
It being put to the question what should be done with the malefactors, Caesar
was of opinion, their lives should be spared, because they were persons of
great honor: Cato censured them to death for their treason: which opinion was
seconded by all, and they were strangled accordingly in prison. Though thus a
part of the conspiracy was choakt, yet Catiline desisted not from his
enterprise, but with ensigns spread marches out of Etruria, against his native
country, and encountered on the way by the army of Antonius, is beaten down,
and slain. How grimly they fought, the event shows: not a man of the enemies
was left, and look what place each one fought in, upon the same he lost his
life, and couerd it with his body. Catiline was found stark dead far off
from his own company among the carkases of his enemies: a most brave end, had
he made it for his country.

CHAP. II.
The war of CAESAR, and POMPEY.
THe whole world almost being now in peace, the Roman empire was greater then
that it could be extinguished by any foraine violence. Fortune therefore beating
envy to that people, which was sovereign of al other, armd their own selves
to their own destruction. The madness of Marius, and Ginna confined it-selfe
within the city, as if she tried how it would do; the tempest of Sulla spread
wider, yet did it not thunder out of Italy; but the fury of Caesar, and Pompey
did hurrie, and suck into it both the city, Italy, races, nations, and in a
word the universal empire, with a kind as it were of deluge, and gulf of
fire, so far forth, that it cannot rightly be only called a civil, neither
yet a sociall, no nor a foraine, but rather a certain, common of all together,
and more then a war. For if we look upon the captains, the whole Senate was
in sides; if the armies, on the one part eleven legions, on the other,
eighteen, the flower, and strength together, of all the Italian blood; if the
aides of the confederates, on this side, the choice of the Galls, and Germans,
on that, Deiotarus, Ariobarzanes, Tarcondimotus, Cothus, the whole powers of
Thrace, Cappadocia, Cilicia, Maccdonia, Greece, Italy, and all the Orient; if
the space of the war, four years, and that, considering the destructions it
wrought, but a short time; if the place, and flage, upon which it was acted,
Italy, from whence it turned it self into Gall, and Spain, and fetching a
compass from the west, it sat down with the whole burden thereof upon Epirus,
and Thessaly; thence it crosses suddenly into Egypt; then it glanced into
Asia, and lay heavy upon Africa; last of all, it reeled back into Spain, and
there at length it went out, and died. But the war, and hatred of the
factions ended not together. For that rested not, til the rancour of the
conquered parties had in the heart of the city, and middle of the Senate,
satisfide it self with the blood of their conqueror. The cause of so monstrous
mischiefs was the same, which it uses to be of al, too too much prosperity.
For Q. Metellus, and Lucius Afranius, Consuls, when the majesty of Rome
prevailed through the world, and the people chanted the fresh victories of
Pompey, the Pontick, and Armenian triumphs, in Pompeis theaters, his ouer-great
power (as it often falls out) moved envy among the leysurable citizens,
Metellus for abatement of his triu^ph over Crete, Cato, who always ran bias
to the mighty, detracted Pompey, and found fault with his actions. The grief
hereof drove him awrie, and compelled him to provide strengths for upholding
his dignity. It happened Crassus at that time flourished in honor of blood,
riches, and authority, and yet still coueted more. The name of Caius Caesar
was up, for eloquence, and spirit, and had the honor of a Consulship. But
Pompey ouertopt them both. Caesar therefore struggling to get dignity, Crassus
to increase it, Pompey to keep what he had, and all of them alike greedy of
great power, easily made a match to set upon the commonweal. Therefore, while
each of them uses the others strengths for his own glory, Caesar invaded Gall,
Crassus* Asia, Pompey Spain, three most puissant armies. And thus the whole
world was now become to be held by three princes in partnership. This
domination wore out ten years time. From that time forward, because til then
they were balanced among themselves through a mutual fear, upon the
slaughter of Crassus by the Parthians, and the death of Iulia, Caesar's
daughter, who marrying to Pompey, maintained concord between the son, and
father in law, by the league of nuptial love, emulation brake forth presently.
Pompey now was jealous of Caesar's greatness, and Caesar badly endured Pompeis
supereminencie. The one brookt no equal, the other no superior. But O the
sin! they strove in such sort for principality, as if so great a fortune of
empire had not been ennough for two. Therefore Lentulus, and Marcellus being
Consuls, and the affiance of the first pact among them once broken, the Senate
consulted to disemploy Caesar, and Pompey labored the same; nor was Caesar
himself against it, if in the first comitiall assembly, or choise-moot, there
had been respect had of him, for the Consulship; which honor ten Tribunes had
with Pompeis good liking decreed him in his absence, and was afterward, upon
Pompeis dissembling, denied it. He should have come, and sued for it after the
more maiorum.
old wont. On the other side, he earnestly demanded execution of the decree,
and would not cashier his army, unless they at home were as good as their
word to him. For this cause he was proclaimed enemy. Caesar, thoroughly nettled
at the news, resolved to maintain with the sword, the rewards of his sword.
The first field, and arena.
Sand-plot of civil war was Italy; whose castles Pompey had furnished with
slight-garrisons. But all of them were as it were overwhelmed with Caesar's
sudden comming-on. The first alarm was sounded at Ariminu^. Then was Libo more
the^ al Etruria, Thermus then Vmbria, Domitius then Corfinium. And the war had
bin made an end of without blood, if, as he attempted it, he could have
oppressed Pompey at Brundisium. But he escaped by night through the closures of
the besieged haven. A shamful matter to be spoken: the late president of the
Senate, vmpire of peace, and war, fled in a torn, and almost naked vessel,
over that sea, which himself had triu^pht. Nor is Pompey sooner driven out of
Italy, then the Senate out of the city, into which almost empty of people
through fear, Caesar entering made himself Consul. The sacred inmost treasury,
because the Tribunes opened it somewhat too slowly, he commanded to be broken
up: and violently seized the reuenew, and patrimony of the people of Rome,
sooner then he did the sovereignty. Po^pey driven away, and fled, he had a more
mind to take order for securing the provinces, then to pursue him. He kept
Sicilia, and Sardinia, the public pledges of corn, by deputies, or lieutenants
general: there was not an enemy in Gall, himself had made it all peace there.
But passing in person against the Pompeis in Spain, Massilia was so bold as to
shut her gates. Poor Massilia, while it would feign have peace, fell into a
war, through fear of war. But because it had strong walls, he commanded it
should be taken for him in his absence. A Greekish city, but which more hardly
then for the name it had lopt bauins for rampire, durst burn the engines bent
against it, and encounter us at sea. But Brutus, who had the charge of the war,
tamed them quite both at land, and sea: whereupon yielding themselves, they were
stripped out of all they had, excepting that (which they prized above all) their
common liberty. Caesar's war in Spain with Petreius, and Afranius,
lieutenants general to Cnaeus Pompeius, was doubtful, various, and bloody,
attempting to besiege their camp at Ilerda by the river Sicoris, and to thrust
between them, and the town. In the meanewhile by stopping the stream, whichin
the springtime used to swell, verni fluminis obundatione.
they deprived him of victuals. So his camp was assaulted with famine, and the
besieger himself remained as it were besieged. But so soon as the water was
down, sed vbi pax fluminis redit.
he scowres the coasts with fire, and sword, and fiercely re-enforceth his
pursuit, and ouertaking them upon their retreat into Celtiberia, he drew a
trench about, and so compeld them to yield for thirst. Thus was the hither
Spain taken in, and the farther Spain delayed not. For what could one legion
do, when five could do nothing? Varro therefore of his own accord giving way,
the Gades, the streights, the Ocean, and all, followed the luckinesse of
Caesar. But fortune durst do somewhat against that captain in his absence, on
this side Illyricum, and in Africa, as if his fair successes were of purpose
to be styrped, and inter-wouen with cross accidents: for when Dolabella, and
Antonius being commanded by Caesar to guard the jaws of the Adriaticke gulf,
and the one had pitched his camp upon the Illyrian shore, the other on the
Corcyrean, Pompey being master then at sea, Octauius his lieutenant general,
and Libo, with huge numbers of mariners, closed them in upon all hands, and
Antonius, despite of his most resistance, was enforced to yield through famine:
and those long boats sent to his aid by Basillus, such as for lack of ships
they were feign to shift with, were taken as it were in an hunting toil, by a
new stratagem of the Cilicians on Pompeis side, the fastening of ropes under
water: but the tide coming in, freed two of the vessels: one of them which
carried the Opitergins was entangled in the cords, and produced an effect
worthy to be commended with honor to posterity: for a band of scarce one
thousand young fellows held play from morning till night, against the force of
an whole army, enuironing them on all sides: and when by manhood they could
find no way forth, at the encouragement of Vulteius, their Coronel, they slew
one the other. In Afric also, such like was the valor, and adversity of
Curio, who sent by Caesar with commission to receive that province, and proud
for having repulsed, and put Varus to flight, was unable to stand the sudden
comming-on of king Iuba, and the cauallerie of the Mauritanians. He might have
fled, but shame persuaded him to die together with that army which his temerity
had cast away. But fortune now importunately demanding to make scores even,
Pompey had chosen Epirus for the seat of war: nor was Caesar slow: for having
made all safe at his back, though it were the depth of winter, and so the
season unfit, yet he embarkt for battle; and encamping at Oricum; when that
part of his forces which was left behind with Antonius, for want of shipping
staid with the longest at Brundisium; he was so impatient, that for fetching
them, he attempted at midnight, and in a frigate to venture over, though the
sea was terrible rough. His words to the master, afraid at so great a danger,
are not forgotten. What fear thou? thou carryest Caesar. When all the forces
which either side could make, were drawn together, and their camps confronted
each the other the generals gouernd themselves by diffre^t courses. Caesar
naturally fierce, and longing to dispatch, offers battle, eggeth, and
provoke to it: one while by besieging the camp, about which his works ran
sixteen miles (but what could besieging hurt them, who having the sea open,
abounded thereby with all provisions?) another while with assaulting
Dyrrhachium in vain (for the situation of it made it inexpugnable) and besides
all this, with daily skirmishes, as the enemy sallied forth (at which time
captain Sceua's manhood was admired, in whose target one hundred, and twenty
shot were found sticking) now with sackage of Pompeis confederate cities, as
when he wasted Oricum, and Gomphi, and other fortresses of Thessali, Pompei,
on the contrary, contriues delays, and ways of putting of, that, by closing
the enemy on all parts, he might break his heart with lack of victuals, and
the violent humor of his most fiery adversary might cool, and falter. This
wholesome counsel did not long avail the author* the soldier, he blames lying
idle, confederates cry out upon delay, and the great lords tax him with
ambition. So the destinies thrusting things headlong on, in Thessaly, and the
champain fields of Philippi, chosen for the place of fight, the fortunes of
Rome, the world, and all mankind were set upon a cast. The people of Rome
never saw in one place together so great forces, nor fortune so many mighty
persons at a time. There were above three hundred thousand in both the armies,
besides the aides of kings, and Senators. Signs of an imminent downfall were
never more apparent; runnings away of beasts ordaind for sacrifice, swarms of
bees, notable ouercastings of the sky in day time. Pompey himself dreamt
ouernight, that he heard a noise in his own theater at Rome, sounding about
him in the nature of a mourning, and in the break of day he was seen (fie
unlucky!) before his maine battle in a black upper garment Caesar's army was
never more fresh, pullo amiculo.
and fuller of spirit. The sound of the charge came first from Pompeis side,
but the shot from the other. The iauelin of Crastinus, who began the fight, was
noted: and being run into the gaping mouth with a sword, and found dead with
it so, among the carcases, did by the nouelty it self of the wound, well
declare, with what choler, and madness he fought: neither was the issue of
the battle less admirable: for whereas Pompey had such multitudes of horse,
as he thought to circumuent Caesar easily, himself was circumuented: for
after they had fought a long time upon even terms, and, at a sign given them
by Pompey, his troops of horse fell on in flank, the Germane cohorts made so
boystrous an impression upon the riders, that they seemd footmen, and these to
have come on horsbacke: the overthrow of the light-armd soldiers ensued upon
the slaughter of the flying horstroupes: then the terror striking farther, one
company putting another into rowt, the rest of the destruction was made as it
were at a stroke. Nothing was more the bane of that day, then the hugeness
it-selfe of the army. Caesar was much in that battle, and half between
soldier and sovereign: speeches of his were ouer-heard as he rid up, and
down; the one bloody, but according to the Art of the sword, and powerful for
gaining the day, Soldiers, foine at the face; the other tending to vain
glory, Soldiers, spare our contrymen; when his own self notwithstanding
chased them. Happy Pompey, for all this misery, had he shared in the fortune
of his slaughtred army: but he ouer-liued his own glory, that with the more
dishonor he might post for his life through Thessalian Tempe; be beaten from
Larissa; and upon a forlorn rock of Cilicia, study, whether he should fly
into Parthia, Africa, or Egypt; briefly, that upon the Pelusian shore, by the
command of a most unworthy king, by the counsel of gelded-men, and (to take
all the misfortunes together) that murthred by the sword of Septimius, his
fugitive, under the eyes of his wife, and children, he should conclude his
days. Who would think that the war should not be determined with Pompeis
life? But the embers of the Thessalian fire waxt much more hot, and forceable
then ever: and in Egypt there was war without any partakings of ours: for
when Ptolomea, king of Alexandria, had committed the most heinous act of all
those other which were committed during the civil war, and had, by means of
Pompeis head, settled his own terms with Caesar, fortune casting about for a
revenge, thereby to appease the ghost of so great a potentate, wanted not
occasion. Cleopatra, that kings sister, throwing herself at Caesar's feet,
besought restitution to her part of the realm. To plead for her, came the
ladies beauty, which was doubled by this, that so rare a creature seemed to
have wrong, and the hatred born to the king himself, who, in killing Pompey,
gratifide the fortune of the contrary faction, not Caesar, against whom he
would also, without all question, have dared as much, if it would have served
his turn. When Caesar's pleasure therefore was, that she should be restored to
her kingdom, by as it were a Gauelkind, he being forthwith be-set in the
palace roial, by the same instruments who murthred Pompey, with wondrous
valor, and a slender company, did bear the brunt of a mighty army. For, by
firing the next tenements, and the Arsenal, he dislodged the enemy, who plide
him from thence with shot. From thence he suddenly escaped to the penile of
Pharus. Beaten out of that, and glad to plunge into the sea, he got, with
admirable good fortune, to the next ships, by swimming, fain to leave his robe
in the waves, whether by chance, or of purpose, that the adversary might pelt,
and mawl it with stones, and shot, in stead of him. Received at last among his
own mariners, and assailing the enemy in all quarters at once, he paid the
ghost of his son in law the vengeance due to it, upon that cowardly, and
traiterous nation. For not only the kings tutor, Theodorus, (author of the
whole war) but not so much also as those maskes of men, the Eunuchs,
Photinus, and Ganymedes, flying by sea, and land, came to evil ends. The young
kings body was found as it lay wallowed under mud, and known by the honor of a
golden curace, or breast plate upon it. New stirs were likewise in Asia, begun
in Pontus, fortune watching as it were of set purpose, to make this the end of
Mithridates kingdom, that the father should be conquered by Pompey, and the
son by Caesar. King Pharnaces, rather upon trust of our discord, then his
own valor, fell upon Cappadocia with an offensive army. But Caesar setting
upon him, in only one, and that too (so to say) not an whole battle, ground
him as it were to dust, after the manner of lightning, which at one, and the
same moment of time, came, hit, and went away: neither was it a vain brag
which Caesar made of himself, that the enemy was overthrown there, before
ever he set eye upon him. Thus went matters in foreign parts. But in Africa,
the fight of Romans with Romans was more deadly, then it had been in
Pharsalia. Hither the remains of the shipwrackt faction were driven by a
certain pang, or fit of fury: nor would you call them remains, but a whole,
and entire war. Pompeis forces were rather scatterd then consumed. His
tragedy made them more solemn, and zealous to fight. Nor did the succeeding
Generals degenerate. For Cato, and Scipio founded full enough in the place of
Pompeis name. Iuba, king of Mauritania, made one in the quarrel, forsooth that
Caesar might have the more to conquer. There was therefore no difference, nor
odds between Pharsalia, and Thapsus, saving that the eagerness of the
Caesarians was both the more, and the more sharp, as chafing that the war grew
though Pompey was dead. To be brief, a thing which never happened till then,
the trumpets sounded a charge, through the soldiers forwardness, without the
commandment of the General. The overthrow began at Iuba, whose elephants not
thoroughly manned to fight, and but lately taken wild out of the woods, quite
confounded at the sudden shrilnesse, forthwith dis-ranked their friends army,
and made that the captains could not escape by flying, all of them coming to
their ends remarkably. For Scipio was now gotten on ship-boord, but his enemies
ouertaking him, he ran his sword through his own belly; and one asking after
him in search, he answered in these very words, The General is well. Iuba
gotten into his palace, after a royal banquet made to Petreius, the companion
of his flight, among his cups, and dishes called upon him for a killing. And
Petreius had enough of that both for the king, and himself: so the viands,
half as it were eaten, and the funeral messes swam mixed with royal, and
Roman blood together. Cato was not at this battle, but encamping at Bagrada,
he lay for defense of Vtica, as at the other maine fort, or bar of Africa.
But hearing the defeat of his partners, he dallied not at all, but (as it
became a wiseman) did even joyfully hasten his own death. For after he had
embraced, and bidden good night to his son, and companions, he reposed
himself awhile in his bed, having perused by a light Plato's book of the
Immortality of the soul, and then, about the first releeuing of the watch,
unsheathing his sword, he therewith thrust himself with a re-enforced stroke
into the body. After which, the physicians presumed to wrong the brave man with
laying salues, which he permitted till they were out of the room: but then he
rashed them away, and the blood following amain, he left his dying hands in
the very wound. War, and sidings brake out again, as fresh, as if there had
never past a stroke in the quarrel: and by how much the troubles in Africa
were beyond those in Thessaly, by so much Spaines surpassed those in Africa;
and the brother linesse of the Generals drew exceeding savor to that side, when
for one Pompey there stood up two. The encounters therefore were no where so
terrible, or hazardous. The first conflict was in the very mouth of the maine
Ocean, Varius, and Didius oppositely lieutenants general. but the strife with
the sea it self, was sorer then that of Fleet with Fleet: for the Ocean, as
it were to chastize own countrymen for their madness, dashed indifferently of
either of their nauies in pieces. What a ghastly, and hideous sight was that,
when at one, and the same instant, seas, storms and tackle fought together!
Add to all this, the fearful situation of the place, where the shores of
Spain, and Mauritania on this coast, and on that, do offer in a manner to
claspe, and meet the sea both mediterranean, and maine Ocean, and Hercules
pillars, opposite mountains, hanging over. At which time, foul weather, and
fierce battle raged round about. After this, both parts ranged here and there,
employing themselves in the siege of cities; whose case was miserable, while
between the leaders of several sides, they smarted deeply for their
friendship with the Romans. The last battle of all was at Munda. Here the
fight was not answerable to the felicity of other fights, but doubtful for a
long time, and discontentiue; so as fortune plainly seemed to deliberate upon
the doing of some, I know not what, thing. Certainly, Caesar himself was
seen before the army sadder then for his wont, whether in regard of humane
frailty, or as suspecting that the excess of prosperity would not hold out
always, or as fearing the same things which Pompey found, so soon as once he
came to be what Pompey was: but in the very battle it self, after the armies
had with equal slaughter done nothing for a long space but kill, suddenly (the
like whereof no man living could remember) in the most heat of the fight,
there was a deep silence on both sides, as if they were agreed* this was every
ones coneit of it. Last of all, which Caesar in fourteen years before had
never seen, the selected tried band of his old soldiers (an heinous matter)
gave back: so that although they fell not as yet to flat running away, nothing
was playner notwithstanding, then that they resisted more for pure shame, then
valor. Caesar therefore putting his horse from him, ran like a madman into
the head of the battle: there he staid such as were shrinking, co^firming
them, and finally cried, and flew through all the squadrons with his eyes, and
hands in that perturbation, it is reported he debated within himself, what to
do with himself, if the worst befell, and his countenance was, as of a man,
who meant to make his own hand his own executioner, had not five cohorts of
the Pompeian horse crossing the battle, as sent by Labienus to guard the camp
in danger, given a semblant of flying: which either Caesar did himself
believe, or cunningly laying hold upon the occasion of that seeming, charged as
upon flyers, and did thereby both put fresh spirit into his own people, and
did also daunt his enemies: for his people thinking they had the upper hand,
followed the more boldly, and the Pompeians, while they supposed their fellows
ran away, did fall themselves to running. How great the slaughter was of the
enemies, and the wrath, and fury of the victorious, may be by this
coniectured: such as escaped out of the field, betaking themselves to Munda,
and Caesar commanding them to be forth with besieged, a rampire was made by
piling up dead bodies, dragged thither from all about, and fastened together
with spears and iauelins. An abominable spectacle even among the barbarous.
But Pompeis sons despairing, in truth, of victory, Cnaeus Pompeius flying
out of the battle, and, wounded, as he was, in the leg, seeking to save
himself in the deserts, and unfrequented places, was overtaken at the town
Lauro, and there (so little he as yet despaired) was slain by Pesennius who
had him in chase. Meanewhile, fortune hid Sextus Pompeius safe in Celtiberia,
reserved for other wars after Caesar's death. Caesar returns victorious home:
the pomp of his first triumph was furnished from the Rhene, and Rhone, and with
the image of the captive Ocean in gold. The stuff of the second was bay tree
of Egypt; and, for shows, the images of Nile and Arsinoe, and of the
watchtowre Pharus, as it burnt in the top like a flaming beacon. The third was
the chariot of Pharnaces, and the spoils of Pontus. The fourth represented
king Iuba and his Moors and Spain twice conquered. Pharsalia, Thapsus, and
Munda (those greater arguments, and matters then over which he triumphed) were
not mentioned. Here, for a while, were weapons laid aside, the following calm
without blood, and the cruelties of war were made amends for with goodness:
not a man put to death by commandment, except Afranius, (for whom once
pardoning was enough) and Faustus Sylla, because Caesar had learnd to fear him
for his father in law, and Pompeis daughter, with her uncles by Sylla's side:
in this he took care to make posterity secure. His country therefore not
ungrateful, all sorts of honors were heaped upon this one prime man; images
about the temples; in the theater a crown decked with rays; a chair of state
in the Senate House; a pinnacle upon his house top; a month in the Zodiac; and
besides all these, himself proclaimed Father of his country, and perpetual
Dictator: last of all (and it was unknown whether it were with his good
liking) Antonius, Consul, the ornaments of a king were offered: all which
proved but as ribbands, or trimmings of an host ordained to be slain in
sacrifice. For the mildness of this prince was looked upon with envious eyes,
and the power it self, which conferred benefits, was to free minds
cumbersome. Nor was the forbearance of him an acquitall any longer: for Brutus,
and Cassius, and other Patricians, Lords of the highest rank, conspired to
assassinate him. How great is the force of fate! the conspiracy was known far
abroad; a scroll was given also to Caesar himself, upon the very day of the
fact; and though an hundred beasts were sacrificed, yet not one of them had any
sign of luckines. He came into the Senate House with a meaning to advance a
war against the Parthians: there the Senators stabd at him, as he sat in his
court-chair, and with twenty three wounds he was driven to the ground. So, he
who had embrewed the whole earth with civil blood, did with his own blood
ouerflow the Senat-house.

CHAP. III.
CAESAR Octauianus.
CAesar, and Pompey slain, the people of Rome seemed to have returned to the
state of their ancient liberty, and had returned indeed, if Pompey had left no
children, nor Caesar an heir; or, which was more pestilent then both, if once
his fellow in office, and then his rival in honor, that firebrand of Caesar's
power, and whirlewind of the ensuing age, Antonius, had not ouer-liued. For,
while Sextus Pompeius seeks to recover his fathers estate, no part of the sea
was free from fear of him; while Octauius reuengeth his fathers blood,
Thessalia was again to be stirred: while Antonius, variable-witted, either
disdained that Octauius should succeed to Caesar, or for love to Cleopatra,
takes upon him to be a king: for he had no other way to be safe, but by
turning vassal. In so great preturbation we are to be glad notwithstanding,
that the whole power of Rome came to be settled upon Octauius, first Caesar
Augustus, who by his wisdom, and dexterity reduced into order the body of
the empire, shaken, and distempted on all sides, which without all doubt could
never have been brought together, and made to agree, unless it had been
gouernd by the authority of some worthy one, as with a soul, or mind. Marcus
Antonius, and Publius Dolobella, Consuls, fortune now busy in transferring the
empire to the house of the Caesar's, the troubles of the city were various, and
manifold: that as in the change of yearly seasons, the stirred heavens do
thunder, and signify their turnings by the weather; so in the change of the
government of the Romans, that is to say, of all mankind, the world troubled
throughout, and the whole body of the empire was turmoiled with all sorts of
perils, and with civil wars both at land, and sea.

CHAP. IIII.
The Mutinensian war.
THe first cause of civil breach was Caesar's last will, and testament, in
which Antonius being named but in the second place, he grew stark mad, that
Octauius was preferred, and for that cause opposed the adoption of that most
spiritfull yongman with an inexpiable war. For seeing him not fully eighteen
years old, tender, and fit to be wrought upon, and open to abuse, both defaced
the dignity of Caesar's name with reuiling terms, and diminisht his
inheritance with privy thefts, disgraced him with foul phrases, and gave not
over, by all the ways he could inue^t, to impeach his adoption into the
Julian family: lastly, enterprised a war for ouer-bearing the young noble
gentleman, and with an army, raised in Gall on this side the Alps, besieged
Decimus Brutus for resisting his practices. Octauius Caesar, pitied for his
youth, and wrongs, and gracious for the majesty of that name which he
assumed, calling his adoptiue fathers old soldiers to arms, he then a private
person (who would give credit to it?) sets upon the Consul, delivers Brutus
from siege, and strips Antonius out of his camp: at that time he did nobly
with his own hand: for bloody, and wounded as he was, he carried upon his
own shoulders the eagled ensign into the camp, which the eagle-bearer
deliuerd to him, dying slain.

CHAP. V.
The Triumuirate.
ANtonius, of his own nature, troublesome to peace, and troublesome to
commonweal, Lepidus comes in like fire to flame: because there was a
necessity of entering into the bond of a most bloody league against two armies.
The intentions of the boutefeus were several in kindling these firie-blazes:
Lepidus, covetous of riches, the hope whereof stood upon troubling the state,
Antonius desirous to be revenged upon them, who proclaimed him traitor, and
Caesar for the death of his adoptiue father upon Cassius, and Brutus, offensive
to his unrevenged ghost. Upon these terms of as it were a league, A. V. C.
DCCXI.
peace was established among the three captains, and at Confluents between
Perusia, and Bononia they join hands, and their armies embrace: so the
triumuirate is entered upon with no good fashion. The commonweal oppressed with
force, Sulla's proscriptions return, the hideous cruelty whereof containd no
less then the number of one hundred, and forty Senators: the ends of such as
fled for their lives over all the world, were ghastly, foul, and miserable.

CHAP. VI.
The war with CASSIVS: and BRUTUS.
BRutus, and Cassius seemed to have put by Julius Caesar from the tyranny, as
another Tarquinius Superbus. But common liberty, the testitution whereof they
principally aimed at, was lost by this assassinate of the common Father. So
soon therefore as the fact was committed, they fled out of the Senate house,
or Curia, into the Capitol, as fearing Caesar's old soldiers not without
cause, who wanted not the mind to take revenge, but a captain for it. And
when it now appeared what destruction hung over the state: the murder was
disliked, and by the Consuls consent a decree of Oblivion was enacted: yet to
be out of the eye of the public grief, they departed into Syria, and
Macedonia, provinces given them even by Caesar himself, whom they slew,
revenge was rather deferred then buried. The commonweal therefore being settled
upon the pleasure of the Triumuirs, rather as it might be, then as it were fit,
and Lepidus one of the three, left at home for defense of Rome, Caesar
addresseth himself, with Antonius against Cassius and Brutus. They having
drawn huge forces to an head, took the selfsame field which was fatal to
Cnaeus Pompeius, where the tokens of their destinated overthrow were not
obscure: for the birds which used to gorge themselves upon carrion, houerd about
the camp as if it were already theirs, as they marched out to batel, a black
Moore meeting them, was too too plainly a sign foreboding dire success: and to
Brutus himself at night, when light being brought in, he meditated somewhat,
as his manner was, all alone, a certain gloomie Image appeared to him, which
being by him demanded what it was, I AM (it said) THINE EVIL SPIRIT, and
therewithal vanished out of his admiring sight. In Caesar's camp all presages
were as much for good, as they were in the other for the bad; birds, and beasts
promising alike fair fortune: but nothing was in present more luckie, then
that Caesar's physician was warnd in his sleep, that Caesar should not stay in
his own camp, for that it would be surprised, accordingly as it fell out. For
the battles joining, and the fight maintained on both sides with equal manhood
for awhile, although the Generals were not present, the one withdrawn through
sickness of body, and the other for sloth, and fear; yet the vnvanquisht
fortune both of the revenger, and he for whom the revenge was undertaken,
stood for the side. The danger was as doubtful at first, and as equal on both
parts, as the event of the fight declared: Caesar's camp taken here, and
Cassius his camp there. But how much more forceable is fortune then virtue!
and how true is that speech in which he breathed out his last! THAT VERTVE WAS
ONLY A VERBAL THING, AND NOT A REAL, Mere mistaking gave away that battle:
for when Cassius, a wing of his armies shrinking, saw his own troops of horse
gallop back upon the spur, after they had taken Caesar's camp, supposing they
fled, got himself to an hillocke; from whence not being able to discern what
was done by reason of the dust, noise, and night at hand, and when the scout
whom he had emploid for discovery, staid somewhat long before he returned, he
verily thought the day was lost; and thereupon caused one of them who was next
him, to strike off his head. Brutus, when he had in Cassius, lost his own life
also, not to break in any point that faith which each of them had plighted to
the other, for otherwise they meant not to ouer-liue the battle, laid his side
open to the deadly blow of one of his own companions. Who would not wonder
that those most wise men used not their own hands at their last? unless in
this point also they had a joint persuasion, not to distaine their hands, but
in letting out their most pure, and pious souls they meant the direction
should be theirs, but the heinous execution other men's.

CHAP. VII.
The war at Perusia.
THE partition of such lands as Caesar divided in camp among the old soldiers
for reward of service, A. V. C. DCCXII.
raised another war. Lucius Antonius, who was always in his own nature a most
wicked man, was stirred up the more by Fuluia his wife, a virago, who had
served in the wars like a man. Therefore by encouraging such as were
disseised of their tenements, there was going to arms again. In this case,
Caesar sets upon him, not upon his own head, or opinion, but as upon a person
who^ all the Senate sentenced an enemy: and shutting him up within the walls of
Perusia, compelled him to the extremest terms of yielding, by such a famine as
had left no filthy thing unfed upon.

CHAP. VIII.
The war with SBXTVS POMPEIVS.
THe killers of Julius Caesar being made away all, A. V. C. DCCXVII.
there only now remained Pompeis house. One of the brothers fell in Spain, the
other saved himself by flying, who assembling the scattered remains of that
unfortunate war, and arming moreover, to his aid, the sturdy bodies in the
worke-iails, or bride-wells euery-where, held Sicily, and Sardinia. And now his
navy wafted up, and down in the middle of the sea. O how differently from his
father! he rooted out the Cilicians, but this man stirred pirates to take his
part. It was so mighty a piece of martial work to master, and utterly to
distress him in the straights of Sicilie, that he had carried with him to his
grave the reputation of a gallant commander in the war, had he attempted
nothing after that, but (which is an argument of a noble mind) TO HOPE
ALVVAYES. For his powers quite defeated, he fled, and sailed into Asia, where
he was to fall into the hands of his enemies, and be cast into fetters, and
(which of all other things does most afflict an heroicke spirit) to die by an
executioner, at the pleasure of a foe. There was no flight since that of Xerxes
more miserable. For he who late was Lord of three hundred, and fifty ships
of war, escaped away with only six, or seven of them, putting out the light
in the admiral, throwing his rings into the waves, quaking, and ever looking
back, and yet not fearing lest he should perish. Though in Cassius, and
Brutus, Caesar had ridded the power of the faction out of the world, and in
Pompey had abolished the whole name, and title of it, yet could not he settle
a sound peace, while Antonius the rock, the knot, and the common let of
assured quiet, was alive, and there was no want in him why vices made not an
end of him: nay his pride, and riot having made trial of all things, he first
overcame enemies, then citizens, and lastly the times with the terror he had
raised of himself.

CHAP. IX.
The war with the Parthians by General VENTIDIVS.
THe miserable overthrow of Crassus made the Parthians higher crested, and they
were glad to hear the news of the civil wars of Rome. So soon therefore
as any occasion glimmer'd out, they stuck not to break in upon us, Labienus
even inuiting them, who employed by Cassius, and Brutus, dealt with the enemy
(O the madness of wickedesse!) for their assistance, who thereupon chase away
the garrisons of Antonius, led on by the gallant young king Pacorus. Saxa,
deputy of Antonius, obtained of his own sword to keep him out of their
fingers. After Syria was won away, the mischief had crept farther, the
enemy, vndercolour of giving aid, conquering for himself, had not Ventidius
(who also was Antonius his deputy) with incredible good fortune, both defeated
the forces of Labienus, slain Pacorus himself, and followed in execution upon
all the cauallerie of Parthia, over the whole space of country between the
rivers Orontes, and Euphrates. The slain, were above twenty thousand, as
Ventidius handled the matter. For counterfeiting a fear, he suffered the
enemy to come up so close to his camp, that they wanted room to plie their
shot of arrows. The king himself most valiantly fighting was killed, and
his head carried about, and showed to all the revolted cities. Syria was thus
recovered without war, and so, by the slaughter of Pacorus we were even for
Crassus overthrow.

CHAP. X.
The war of ANTONIUS with the Parthians.
THE Parthians, and Romans having made trial each of other, Crassus, and
Pacorus being lessons to both sides of eithers forces, league was made again
with equal reverence, and entirenesse of amity, and that by Antonius
himself. But the infinite vanity of the man, while he coueted to add the
conquest of Araxes, and Euphrates to the titles of his images, suddenly leaves
Syria, and inuades the Parthian, without any either cause, or wise counsel,
or so much as an imaginary color of war, as if so to steale-vpon were also
a part of a captains duty. The Parthians, besides affiance in their peculiar
weapons, pretend likewise to be afraid, and fly into the open fields. He
forthwith pursues them as victorious; when, upon a sudden, though in no great
numbers, they burst out near twilight at unawares, like a shower, upon the
Romans now weary with travail, and with their arrows ouerwhelme two legions.
But this was nothing, in comparison of the calamity which hung over their
heads the very next day, had not the compassion of the Gods come between.
One, whose life was spared in Crassus his overthrow, comes ryding to the
trench, attired like a Parthian, and hayling them in Latin, after he had
gotten to be believed, informs them what was at hand, that the king would
come upon them with all the power of the realm: that therefore they should
march back, and recover the mountains; though even so perhaps they should have
store of enemies. By this means a lesser force came against them, then was in
readiness. Yet they fell on, and the remains of the army had been quite
destroyed, but that when the Parthian shot flying as thick as hail, the
soldiers, taught we know not how, dropped on their knees, and casting their
targets over their heads, seemed as if they had been slain, then staid the
Parthians their bows. whereupon the Romans starting up on their feet again,
did again move such wonder, as that one of the barbarous used this speech; Go
Romans, and fare well; fame with good cause terms you the Conquerors of
nations, who can outstand the shot of Parthia. Water afterward did no less
mischief then the armed enemy: first the country was naturally dry
offsprings, then the river Salmadicis was to some more noyous then the drouth,
and last of all when the weak drank deep of the river, even the sweet
waters also, proved poisonous. Moreover, the heats of Armenia, and the snowes
of Cappadocia, and the sudden change of one air into another, was itself in
stead of a plague. So a third part of sixteen legions hardly remaining, when
the silver which he had in the army was euerywhere chipt with chisils, and
himself between the fittes of the mutiny called ever, now and then to a
sword-player of his to kill him, the doughtie General fled at last into Syria:
where, like a man in a manner besotted, he became somewhat more brag, and
lofty then before, as if he who had brought himself away, had gotten the
victory.

CHAP. XI.
The Actian war with ANTONIE and CLEOPATRA.
THe fury of Antonie which ambition could not kill, A. V. C. DCCXXII.
was quenched with wanton lust, and riot, for after his Parthian iourny growing
into hatred with war, he gave himself over to rest, and surprised with the
love of Queen Cleopatra, solaced on her bosom, as freely as if all other
matters had succeeded well. This Egyptian woman did value her company at no
less a rate to Antonie drunken with love, then the whole Roman empire. and he
promised it: as if the Romans were more easily to be dealt with then the
Parthians. Therefore he began to plot a tyranny, nor that covertly, but
forgetting his country, his name, his gown, his fasces, he absolutely
degenerated into no less a monster in his understanding, then he did in his
affection, and fashion. he went with a staff of gold in his hand, a Persian
sword by his side, a purple robe buttond with huge precious stones; and a
diadem in readiness. that a king might enjoy a Queen. At the first brute of
these stirs, Caesar crosses over from Brundisium, that he might give war
the meeting; and, pitching his tents in Epirus, did beset the island Leucades,
and the rock Leucades, and the points, or nesses of the Ambracian bay, with
his ships of war, we had above four hundred sail; the enemies not fewer
then two hundred, but what they wanted in number, was made up in bulk: for
they had from six to nine banks of oars, besides that, their fights were
raised so high with decks, and turrets, as they resembled castles, and cities,
making the very sea groan under, and the winds out of breath to carry them:
which hugeness of theirs was it self their bane. Caesar's navy had not in it
any vessel but from three banks of oars, to six, and none above: therefore
they are yare, and ready for all the needs of service, whether to charge,
recharge, or turn about. those of the other side were mere slugges, and
vnwieldie for all work: upon every of which many of ours setting, and plying
them what with darts, and all sorts of flingings, what with beak-heads, or
prows, and castings of fire, scattred them all at pleasure. nor did the
greatness of the enemies preparations appear at any time more then after the
victory: for the huge armada, bulged, and split in the fight, was carried in
the wracks thereof, up, and down over the whole sea, containing the spoils of
Arabia, and Saba, and of thousand other nations of Asia, and the waves stirred
with the winds, did daily belch up gold, and purple upon the shores. the first
who led the way to running away, was the Queen, who in a galleon whose poope
was of gold, and sail of purple, thrust into the deepes, Antonius forthwith
following her: but Caesar was at his heels. So that neither the preparations
which he had made to fly into the Indian Ocean, nor Paraetonium, and Pelusium,
the two corner coasts of Egypt, stuffed by him with garrisons, stood him in any
stead, all were so quickly seized. Antonius was the first of the two who slew
himself. the Queen kneeling at the feet of Caesar, laid baits for his eyes;
but in vain; her beauties were beneath that princes chastity. nor was life
her suit* for that was offered, but her care was for a part of the kingdom:
which when she despaired to obtain of the prince, and saw her self reserved
for triumph, the guard put about her being negligent, she betook herself to
the Mausolie (so call they the sepulchers of their kings) where attired in most
pompous habit, as her custom was, she seated herself in a throne, sweetened
with rich perfumes, close to her Lord Antonius, and clapping serpents to her
veins, died away in a slumber.

CHAP. XII.
Wars against foraine nations.
HEre ended the civil wars. the rest were against strangers, who, while the
empire was turmoild with these intestiue miseries, sallied out against us in
diverse quarters of the world. For peace was but green, and the stif-swoln
necks of nations, not yet inured to the curb of servitude, slipped the yoke
which had but newly been imposed. the climat which is almost under the
northpole, bare it self more roughly: the Noricks, Illyrians, Pannonians,
Dalmatians, Mysians, Thracians, and Dacians, Getes, and Sarmatians, and
Germans. The Alps, and snow upon them, whither war could not climb, gave
encouragement to the Noricks. But Caesar thoroughly quieted all the nations of
that tract, the Brenns, Senons, and Vindelicians, by his son in law whose
mother he had married, Claudius Drusus. How savage those crafty people were,
appeared well enough by the women, who for want of mischievous weapons, pasht
their sprawling babes on the ground, and hurld them in the soldiers faces, as
they came against them. The Illyrians also live under the Alps, possess the
valleys between, and guard certain passages, at it were bars, themselves
wrapped in with abrupt water-falls. Against them he went in person, commanding
bridges to be made. Here the waters, and enemies empeaching him, as our
soldiers were slack to scale, he rasht a target out of one of their hands,
and led the way, the troop then following thick: but the Illyrian having with
their multitude sawed in sunder the bridge, his hands, and legs were wounded
in the fall; so the blood which dropped from him, making him show the brauer, and
his danger it self the more maiesticall, he assaild the enemy at the back. The
Pannonians are walled in with two wild forests, and three great rivers,
Drauus, Sauus, and Ister, and they, having first foraged their next neighbors,
retired themselves within their defenses. For taming these he sent out Vibius:
who slew them on either bank of their rivers. The armours of the vanquished
were not consumed with fire, as the fashion of war was, but were preserved,
and thrown into the streams, that the news of their fellows overthrow might
so be conueighed to the residue. The Dalmatians, for the most part, dwell close
at wood-sides, which makes them wondrous forward more then all other, to commit
robberies: Marcius, by burning Delminium, their principal city, had now as it
were cut off their head: Asinius Pollio amerced them with the loss of their
cattle, arms, and tillage: but Augustus commanded Vibius to subdue them
utterly: Who made those fierce nations dig in mines, and to refine gold-oare,
which they, the most covetous men of the world, do search for with careful
diligence, that they may seem to hoord it for their proper uses. How wild,
and grimme the Mysians be, and how barbarous above all barbarism, is horrible
to be spoken. One of their captains stepping out before the army, prayed
silence, and said; Who are ye? answer was made; We are lords of the world.
They replide, Ye may well say so, if you conquer us: Marcus Crassus, General,
took the word as a fair forebodeing. The Mysians forthwith offer-vp an horse
before their battalions, vowing to sacrifice, and eat the bowels of those
captains of ours whom they should kill. I may very well believe the Gods heard
their speech: they could not stand out the sounding of a trumpet. Domitius, a
captain, struck no little terror into the barbarous, himself a man of a
barbarous blunt wit, but which did well enough among his likes, who carrying,
for as it were his crest, a chafing dish, or little harth upon his helmet, and
the coals thereof kindling with the motion of his body, the flames seemed to
blaze as if his head were on fire. Before them in time, the most mighty people
of Thrace rebelled, who as barbarous as they were, yet were accustomed to
military ensigns, and discipline, yea and to Roman weapons also: but being
utterly subdued by Piso, they showed their wood rage in their very bondage it
self. For attempting to gnaw their chains in sunder with their teeth, they
punished their own wildenesse. The Dacians keep them to their mountains, till
the ice have knit both the banks of Danubius together; and then as often as it
is hard frozen over, they pass it, as under the guidance of Cotiso their king,
and destroy the border-countreys. Caesar Augustus thought good to make that
practice too hot for them, though it was a most difficult matter to come where
they were. Sending Lentulus therefore against them, he drove them beyond the
farther bank, and planted garrisons on the hither. If Dacia was not conquered
then, it was put by, and deferred. The Sarmatians gallop, and ride in champaine
fields: and it was held enough, to command them by the same Lentulus not to
approach Danubius. They have nothing but snow, and thin woods. Their
barbarousnesse is so great, as they understand not what peace means. Would
Germany also had not thought it so great a matter to overcome. It was more
basely lost, then gloriously gained. But Augustus, for so much as he knew his
father having twice past over Rhene by bridge, had sought war there in honor
of his memory, he desired to make a province of it: and it was done, could the
barbarous as well have brookt our vices, as obeyed our commands. Drusus, sent
into those regions, first tamed the Vsipetes, then ouer-ran the Tencthers, and
the Catti. For he had trimmed a certain high hillock in manner of a trophea
with the most special spoils of the Marcomanni. After that, he invaded these
other most puissant nations, the Cherusci, Sueuians, and Sicambrians at once:
who burning twenty captains of ours, had bound themselves by that fact to
maintain war against us, with so assured hope of victory, that they divided
the prey by bargain beforehand. The Cherusci they would have the horse, for
their share; the Sueuians the gold, and silver; the Sicambrians the prisoners.
But all went quite backward on their sides. For Drusus prevailing, did share,
and sell their horses, cattle, and chains of gold, and themselves, as lawful
prize. Moreover, he left garrisons euery-where behind him, and guards for
defense of the provinces. Upon the river of Mose, of Albis, of Visurgis, and
the bank of Rhene, he planted above fifty castles. He joined Bonna, and
Gelduba together with bridges, and strengthened them with shipping. He opened
the Hercinian wood, till that time pathlesse, and unseen. To conclude, such
was the peace in Germany, that the men seemed not the same men, the soil
seemed other then it had bin, and the air it self more mild, and temperate
then ever. And that most gallant young gentleman (I call him not so, out of
flattery, but as he well deserved) dying there, the Senate, which it never had
done to any other, surnamed him of Germany, Germanicus. But it is more
difficult to keep a province, then to conquer it. Provinces are achieved by
the sword, but retained by justice. Therefore that reioycement was short. For
the Germans were rather overcome then tamed, and under General Drusus they
rather admitted our customs, then submitted to our forces. When he was once
dead, they began to hate the lawless humor, and pride of Quintilius Varus
no otherwise, then as they would have hated cruelty. But he durst set up a
Law-Court, and sit in judgment within his camp, as if he had been able to
restrain the violence of the barbarous, with his serieants rods, and cryers
voice. But they, who now a good while since had seen their blades cankered
with rust, and their horse of service grown foggie with ease, no sooner saw
our gowns, and laws more cruel then our weapons, but they make Arminius
captain, and fall to arms. When Varus, in the mean space, was so aduenturous
upon trust of peace, as he took no heed at all, though the conspiracy of the
captains was foretold, and disclosed to him by Segestes, a prince among them.
Therefore (O strange securenes!) as he sat upon the tribunal, citing parties,
they at unawares assail him on all hands, taken absolutely unprovided, and
fearing no such matter, sack his camp, and destroy three legions. Varus
followed the utter loss of things there, with the same fate, and mind that
Paulus Aemilius did the deadly blow at Cannae. Nothing was more bloody then
the slaughter which was made through the woods, and marshes; nothing more
intolerable then the insultings of the barbarous, specially against pleaders at
the bar, plucking out the eyes of some, and lopping-off the hands of other
some; one had his mouth stitcht-vp, after his tongue was first cut out, which
the savage actor grasping in his hand, said to it: Thou viper, at last give
over hizzing. The body of the Consul himself, which the soldiers had in their
piety buried, was dug out of his grave. The barbarous do as yet withhold
two of our ensigns, and two of our eagles; the third the eagle-bearer plucking
off, before the enemies laid hand upon him, and carrying it hidden in the
hollow of his belt, was plunged so into the bloody marsh. By this overthrow it
came to pass, that the course of empire which had not stopped at the Ocean,
stayed upon the bank of Rhene. These things happened northward. In the South of
the world there were rather hurly-burlies then war. The Musulanians, and
Gaetulians who border upon the Syrts, were chastised by Cossus captain
general, at Caesar's commandment, who was therefore proper-named Gaetulicus.
The victory spreds wider. He left the Marmarians, and Garamants for Furnius,
who subdued them: and might have returned entitled Marmaricus, but that his
modesty rated not his conquest so high. In the orient, there was more to do
with the Armenians. Thither Caesar sent one of his nephews. Both were of short
life, and the one of them inglorious. For Lucius died of sickness at Massilia:
Caius died in Lycia of a wound, as he recouerd Armenia, withdrawing it self to
the Parthians. Pompey, having vanquished king Tigranes, tide the Armenians to
this only point of bondage, that they should have no governors but at our
appointment. This right of ours, hitherto intermitted, was revived by Caius,
not without bloodshed, and yet without much bickering: for Domnes, whom the
king had made governor of Artaxat, faining a revolt, assailes him as he was
busy in perusing a scroll, which himself had reached unto him, pretending it
containd an account of the treasures; and with his drawn sword, runs him
into the forehead. but the Barbarian was tilted at on all sides by the army,
who being destroyed with sword, and fire, into which he threw himself wounded,
superstiti etiam non Caesari satisfecit.
satisfied Caius ouerliuing him, but did not satisfy Caesar. In the west part
of the world, all Spain was at quiet, excepting that quarter which abutting
close upon the rocks where the Pyrenaean mountains end, is washed with the
hither Ocean. Here, two most puisant nations, the Cantabrians, and Asturians
lived free from command. the Cantabrians were the more forward of the two, the
haughtier also, and stifer in holding out a rebellion: for not contented to
maintain their own freedom, they sought to encroch upon their neighbors,
and wearied the Vaccaeans, Curgonians, and Autrigons, with often incursions.
against these men, because they were said to deal more outragiously then
ordinary, Caesar commanded not an expedition to be made by any other, but went
in person: came himself to Segisama; pitcheth his camp; and from thence even
then, dividing his army into diverse parts, hemd all Cantabria about, and
conquered that wild nation, by inuironing them as beasts within a toil. nor
was the Ocean theirs: for our army well-appointed for war, played upon the
backs of the enemy. His first battle against the Cantabrians was under the
walls of Vellica. from hence they fled into that most steep high mountain
Vindius, whither they believed the waves of the Ocean might as soon have
clambred, as the Roman army. thirdly, the town Arracillum made great
resistance, but yet was taken at the last. In the siege of mount Edulius, about
which he had drawn a trench of fifteen miles in compass, the Romans mounted
on all sides: and when the barbarous saw no possibility to escape, their
strife was who should kill themselves first with fire, and sword amidst their
feasts, or with poison, which is commonly there scruzed out of Tax-trees, and
so the greater part of them deliuerd themselves from that which seemd to them
captivity. Caesar had these services done for him by Antistius, Furnius, and
Agrippa, his deputies, while himself wintred upon the seacoasts of Tarracon.
He present in his own person at the doing, drew some of the vanquished from
dwelling on the mou^tains, of some he took hostages, and of others he made
slaves, and sold them under garlands. It seemed to the Senate an action worthy
of laurel, and a chariot: but Caesar was now at that height, as he might
contemn to triumph. About the same time the Asturians came pouring down from
their mountains in an huge troop, nor did they stay their own, vt barbari
impares.
(as the barbarous are unruly) but pitching their camp by the river Astura,
and, dividing their force into three armies, they prepared to assail three
several camps of the Romans all at a time. the fight had been doubtful, and
bloody, and had made an end of both parts, they coming then, as they did, so
strong, so suddenly, and with such sound deliberation, but that the Brigaecins
betrayed them, by whom Carisius having intelligence, he came upon them with an
army, and destroyed their device, nevertheless, the battle even so was not
unbloody, such as remained vnflaine of that most puisant assembly, retired
themselves into the city Lancia: where the fight was so sharp and hot, that
when our soldiers demanded leave to set fire on the city after it was taken,
the General could hardly obtain the favor at their hands, that it might
rather be a moniment of the Roman victory, standing, then burnt to the ground.
This was the last war of Augustus Caesar, and the last rebellion of Spain.
Constant allegiance, and eternal peace forthwith ensued, as well by reason of
their own inclination more bent to peace, as by Caesar's courses, who fearing
the boldness which mountains bred in them, commanded them to inhabit from
thenceforth in those camps of his which were upon plain ground. This began to
be found a matter of high wisdom. The region round about was naturally full
of gold-oare, of vermilion, orpiment, and other colors. He therefore
commanded the ground should be searched, and wrought. For while the Asturians
dug their own treasures, and riches which lay deep hidden, to serve others
turns, themselves also began to understand their value. All the West; and
South of the world being at peace, and Northward also (excepting only the
Rhene, and Dababius) as likewise in the East, between Taurus, and Euphrates,
those other countries who were free from our power, had a feeling
notwithstanding how great it was, and reverenced the people of Romes victory
over nations. For both the Scythians sent their ambassadors, and the
Sarmatians also, desiring friendship. The Seres moreover, and the Indians
inhabiting right under the Sun it self, came with precious stones, and
pearls, and dragging elephants also along after them among their presents,
thought not so much of any thing as of the length of the way, which took up
four years travel: and the very color it self of the men spoke for them,
that they came from under as it were another Sun. The Parthians in like sort,
as if they repented their victory, restored of their own accord the ensigns
taken at the destruction of Crassus. So all mankind had euery-where an entire,
and continual either peace, or paction. And Caesar Augustus seven hundred
years from after the building of Rome, durst shut the Temple of doublefaced
Ianus; twice only clozed before that time; once under king Numa, and the other
time when the first war of Carthage was concluded. From henceforth, bending
his mind to peace, he corrected many things in the times which were prone to
all mischief, and which ouerflowed in riotous looseness, with grave, and
severe edicts. For these so many, and so wondrous great deeds of his, he was
called perpetual Dictator, and Father of his Country. It was also debated in
the Senate, whether, because he had founded the empire, he should be styled
Romulus. But the name Augustus seemed to be a more holy, and venerable word
then the other, that so even now while he lived on the earth, he might be as
it were deifide by the name it self, and title.

FINIS.
The end of the four books of the Roman Histories, written anciently in Latin
by LUCIUS FLORVS, and translated into English by E. M. B.

Soli Deo gloria.

