MILES CHRISTIANVS, OR THE CAMP ROYAL Set forth in brief Meditations on the
words of the Prophet Moses, Deuteronomy. 23, 9, 14. here under following, preached in
the army at Dungen-Leager, profitable for all sorts of men to read; and
published for the general good of all that will read, By SAMVEL BACHILER,
Preacher to the English at Gorinchem.

Deuteronomy. 23, 9. When the host goes forth against thine enemies, then keep thee
from every wicked thing.

verse. 14. For the Lord thy God walks in the midst of the Camp, to deliver
thee, and to give up thine enemies before thee: therefore shall thy Camp be
holy, that he see no unclean thing in thee, and turn away from thee.

AMSTERDAM, Printed by R. P. in the year M.DC.XXV.

To all my dear and loving Countrymen in service to the States of the
United Provinces: the honorable Officers, and all honest Soldiers of the
English nation residing in the Netherlands; and specially (as service binds
me) to those of Gorcom in Holland: S. B. wishes all happy success, and
further access of true noblenes and worth. And after an end of a wearisome
warfare in this life present, eternal welfare in the life to come.
BEloved Countriemen:
The cause we have to maintain (Vi and armis) is the same in substance with
that which the Israelites had: they, the defense and propagation of Religion in
spite of the Canaanites: we, the mystical war of these Provinces for the
same ends, against the Papacy. And the cause remaining, the effect continues
justly. What simple Sectarie might not see (if perverse opinion had not cast a
mist before his eyes) the urgent cause of wars (the worlds insurrection
against the truth) necessary, and so conclude the effect, in arms borne by
us, to withstand hellish malice; of no less consequence, till that be wholly
verified Ies. 2, 4. Mich. 4, 3. They shall beat their swords into plowshares,
and their spears into pruning hooks: Nation shall not lift up a sword against
nation; neither shall they learn war any more.

I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed, and her
seed: it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise is heel. Genesis 3.15. is
an old quarrel, a grudge inveterate, which will never out. The Church of God
ever was maligned, ever will be. And Christ came not to send peace, but a
sword; that is in a word: to rouse up the world by accident against himself,
and his everlasting Gospel, which when the world will not receive, the world
will persequute and prosequute to the extirping of it, if it were possible. Yet
God defends his little flock; but by means external ordinarily, though not
the most potent, strong, and likely in outward show, the which notwithstanding
he is pleased to bless for the preservation of his.

And is it not apparent (as though written with the beams of the Sun) that
God shall put into the hearts of the ten Horns (the Kings of the earth) to
fulfill his will in the judgment of the Whore by war against her? Rev. 17,
16, 17.18, 9.
And so by outward force overthrow her outward usurped power, and state
politic at length; as by the breath of his mouth, he has in great measure
already (and so does daily, and will do more and more) and shall utterly
abolish that Spiritual jurisdiction pretended by her Clyents to be given her.

So then, your Cause (Beloved, wherein with others you are interessed) is good
and sure: only look to it, that misdemeanour in your wars do not
disadvantage you. Now, what was spoken to the Warriers of God heretofore; to
do no evil, and to be holy: may well be spoken to us now, and applied as
needfully, peradventure more: for, as the world is older it grows wickeder,
and men of all conditions are more dissolute in this last and worst age,
whereupon the ends of the world are fallen. And, if there were one Achan then
lurking in the Camp, Number. 25, 6.
there will be ten now more notorious: and for an impudent pair of Zimri and
Cozbie then, that will come in the sight of all, while Moses and the rest are
weeping before the door of the Tabernacle, many skores I fear me now durst do
as much: and for one Korah and his Accomplices of Mutiners then, what legions of
rebels may we look for now? Wherefor if ever, it is needful to press divine
law upon us.



Secondly, were it not hard to do, it were less praise-worthie to do, but
being difficult, it will argue the more spirit in thee.

Thirdly, it suffices that it is possible in some measure to do
Euangelically, if we be careful: so that the difficulty is not so absolute to
excuse us.

Fourthly, some practice and proof of holy resolution will make it more
tolerable, only get a desire from God, to approve thy self unto him. But, he
that refreineth himself from evil makes himself a prey. True, a prey to
evil men, to whose disgrace and obloquie he cannot but expose and prostrate
himself (for by and by, he is a Puritan or Precisian, ( Bottondise. of true
happiness.
honorable nicknames of Christianity and grace) that will not give freedom
and liberty to himself, though it be to damn his own soul) but while they
give themselves the raines to all evil, they make themselves a prey to the
Devil.

Having by occasion thought upon the subject of my ensuing discourse, to
explain and apply those words of Moses; and then considering how behoofefull
it might be for these times, I have thought to give it further vent, especially
upon the judgment and approbation of some godly-learned, deeming it might be
useful; hoping, that as the least hair has it shadow, so the least endeavor
of good might do some good.

Thus much would I crave of you, to whom I appropriate this, what ever it is.
First to accept of an honest purpose and intent in him who wishes he could be
more serviceable to you, and profitable to Gods Church. And sure I am, the good
and honest will not reject it, because they will see, and I trust say, he meant
well, and had a mind to further us in piety: As for the Profane, while he
scoffeth me, I will pity and pray for him. Secondly, Vouchsafe to put it up
in your pockets, and at your Vacancie read this little manual. This my mind
does give me, you will say does please you: He is not prolixe by extravagant
digressions from the purpose of the words, or observations therein taken up; if
any thing else does savor with you, I hope it will the more profit you. The
Ship that puts out to sea has his helm and Pilot to govern her. James 3.
The horse that is taken up for a journey, his bridle to rule him (for their
mouths must be kept in with bit and bridle. Psalm. 32, 9.) And when we go out
to war against our enemies, Gods law must order us, turn us about, and bridle
our ways. If this little unworthy thing prove better then I can presage it
will, I shall be the more willing to publish another " Essaies on Joshua, wherein
the propriety of the Hebrew and what the Targum, and Rabbis have useful is
set down: parallel places of the Scripture conferred; and matter of observation
throughout that book of the Lords wars; Whereof I may say: Venit silius usque
ad matricem: sed non est virtus ad pariendum.
subject, at this time by me, for fitter opportunity when it serves. In the
mean time I commend this to your practice, and you all to Gods grace, and
remain

Your Servant in Chirst: Samuel Bachiler.

To the Reader whosoever. An admonitorie Postscript.
READER,
It may be, when thou see the title in the frontispiece, and read the
text, thou will think, that as the profession whereunto thou art a stranger,
(as suppose no Soldier) so the matter of this book concerns thee not, who
perhaps art a Burger, or homedweller. But let not this hinder further
inspection; and let me assure thee, that what is here spoken to them abroad,
does deeply concern thee at home, though thou should never be called, or
once constreined to follow that course of life. For this being a
Scripture-subject is profitable for all. And howsoever we have too much cause
to lament the vices, the outrages, the enormities of the Camp; yet know thou,
and confess, that all sin is not there alone. And take these words of Moses to
be spoken to thee also, whose calling is domestique and at home, in town or
country: When the host goes forth to war, then keep thee (even thee, who
stayest at home for thy ordinary employments) from every wicked thing. Keep
thou thy self I say, from the tap-house, the whorehouse, the playhouse; and
the execrable evils of those accursed places. Keep thee from idleness, and be
diligent in thy calling, and in the holy exercises of prayer, hearing, and
meditating Gods word, etc. And let us fear, least not only their sins
abroad, but our sins at home also, do help mightily to pull the wrath of God
upon them, who for our sakes are employed abroad, and endure the parching
heat, and the pinching cold, while we sit still under our own vines. Yea this
concerns you Magistrates, and Governors, public or private, to look to
good order in your towns and families, and that profane liberty be not given
to break the Sabbaoths, to frequent and wear the thresholds of ryotous
places, for heathenish May-games, and Whitson-ales (as they call their mad
sports.) And suffer not youth to dis-order themselves as they do, to the shame
and scandal of those places where they are. Oh, what need have we in these
troublous times, when the host is gone forth to war upon our enemies, to be
more careful of our selves and ours at home, if (as I hope we do) we wish
prosperity to those who are gone out. We have more need to give our selves to
watch, and pray, and fast and mourn for their sins and our own, and to
cover the Altar of the Lord with tears, that so he may have mercy upon us.

You that are at home, and worthily complain of the sins of the host, look
into your towns, and cities, and houses, and be ashamed of the stews and
brothel-houses among you, shamefully connived at under the nose of Authority,
by those whom God will charge, for having so little heart, and zeal, and
courage, and conscience to suppress them. Look and behold the breaches of the
Sabbath by carriage and re-carriage, look into the beastly excess of
drunkenness, chambering and wantonness among you. Is your host gone forth to
war, and are you (o Citizens) free at home, to commit all uncleanness, and
that with greedines? Know, that for these things unreformed, and persisted in
without repentance, God will search you out with lights, and visit those that
sit frozen upon their dregs. Know, you are to guard against evil at home in
your streets and houses, as they that are abroad, to withhold from evil in
their Camps. For is it not all one, whether their sins abroad, or yours at
home, do undo and mar all lawful designs? 2 Samuel 11, 11. The arc and
Israel and Judah abide in tents, and the servants of my Lord Ioab encamp in the
open fields, shall I then go into mine house, and eat and drink, and lie
with my wife? etc. As their Camps therefore should be holy Camps; so should
your houses also be holy, that holiness dwelling in your streets and houses, God
who walks in the mids of their Camps, may see no uncleanness in you, and may
walk in your streets and houses, and take pleasure to dwell among you, and his
soul may not abhor you. Refuse not then to take up this, whosoever thou art,
and make that use thereof which thou may do. And God bless the reading of
it to thee. To God I commend thee, and the word of his grace. and bid thee
farewell, and am

Thine, if thou will make use of me. S. B.

In Rev. Doctissimique viri D. SAMVELIS BACHILERI, Militem Christianum.
Beata Castra, quae suprema Numinis
Autoritate diriguntur unice!
Castra o tremenda Copiis vel maximis
Hostis ferocis, praepotentis, impij!
Illis Bilhami nullius sacri doli
Levissimum molirier malum queunt.
En ergo Christi qui gregem defenditis,
Recta hic docetur semita ad victoriam,
Vtare Miles hoc libello; and tu, Dei
Sincere cultor, quisquis es; been rem geres.
Johannes Spiljardus, Ecclesiastes Gorinchemensis.

Prosopopaeia PIETATIS, optantis interesse and praeesse Castris Christianorum,
juxta Dei Oraculum egregie illustratum a D. S. B
IPsa ego, qua sola possit benedicier Armis,
E Castris PIET AS cogor abireprocul.
O utinam Christi qui nomine Castra sequuntur
Me Comitem vellent atque Ducem esse sibi!
Sic nunquam misere caderent hostilibus armis;
Hostibus ast ipsis damna parata forent.
Oraculum Summi Ducis hoc testatur abunde
Hic SAMVEL cuius Praeco fidelis adest.
Idem.

Of M. Samuel Bachiler his Campe-Royall or Campe-Christian.
THE Campe's a Schole, where th'understanding part
Improuement makes, in every Liberal art.
Where practice perfects, what in books we learn;
And Dullards from the pregnant does discern.
The Camp 's a Court, where all Heroic seeds
Of Courage, freedom, Noblesse, virtue breeds,
Where native comelynes is man-like brave,
And inward worth may unbought honor have.
The Campe's a Theater, where men truly do,
What others wonder at to see in show.
Where some do act brave deeds, that others may
Live afterward, by acting them in play.
The Camp's a City, Discipline the law,
Which does encourage Grace, keeps vice in awe.
Where order rules within, and round about
The armed-living walls keeps danger out.
The Campe's a world, where men at once may see
With little travel, what varieties be
In several Countries, and with easy toil
Fetch home the goulden glories of each soil.
The Campe's a Church, where God is truly served,
And where the faithful are in death preserved
From lasting danger; for his numerous host
Of warlike Angels pitch where danger's most.
Then idle Truant, from this Schole depart.
And Sloven, get thee from this Court to Cart.
And Coward go make faces at a play,
There stand and fight, that here did run away.
Drudge to thy yoke, thou art no freeman here.
And wandering Puff, seek suites and belly-cheere.
Devil get thee from the Church, from the elect;
"One Achan may an host of Saints infect.
Vainglorious Pride, that over-valuestall
Thy own hand does, making great things of small.
Effeminate floath, that dare not march, watch, fight;
Whom wind, rain, cold, heat, hunger does affright.
Envy that do detract from others worth,
And smotherest due desert from shining forth.
Lust that the body weakens, and the mind
Makes feminine, as if it altered kind.
Drink that do wash wit, wealth, and worth away,
And like a whore thy lovers do betray.
Foole-frantike Fury that do, Aiax-like,
Thy friend with fist, thy God with curses strike.
Cursed Avarice that grind'st the poor to dust,
And let'st the soldier starve to feed thy lust;
Avaunt to Hell, and leave the honored train,
Who love religion, and count grace a gain.
For here thou read'st all cloudie vices dampe,
The glorious splendour of the Christian Camp,
Which should resemble heaven, where Michael fought
With the old Dragon, and his rebel rout,
And cast them headlong down: so chase away
Serpentine sin, which does thy soul betray
To Death and Hell; then look to outward foes;
For these o're-come, because we yield to those.
This BACHILER most clearly has expressed.
And who art thou, that wilt be to the rest
A Devil to tempt, as he a Saint has bin
To teach, to woe, to weane thy soul from sin?
Him imitate, abhor thine own base mind,
Which were of God-like, art of Divel-like kind.
And if thou think, I praise the Camp too much;
Know but for thee, it is, or would be such.
THO. SCOT Minister to the English in Virecht.

MILES CHRISTIANVS, OR THE CAMP ROYAL.
Deuteronomy. 23, 9. When the host goes forth against thine enemies, then keep thee
from every wicked thing.

verse. 14. For the Lord thy God walks in the midst of the Camp. etc.


THE Laws and ordinances for Israel were various, according to their several
States and occasions: And for as much as they had many enemies to interrupt
and trouble their peace, by a kind of necessity they must wage war;
therefore in sundry places we find many wholesome laws and ordinances for
that also. Here in particular we meet with orders from God, by the hand of
Moses to them. The Order in these two verses given, is negative in the 9 ver.
affirmative in the 14 verse, which (by reason of a fit coherence between them)
I have joined together.

In the words of the 9 verse two things are generally to be noted: 1, The
substance of a precept, to forbear all evil. 2, The circumstance of the time,
when that precept is most to be regarded; viz. when the host goes forth, which
is the time of war.

The host] mahhaneh, so called from encamping or quartering: Yet tetze going
before mahhaneh may be of form masculine, according also as the Spanish,
Italian, French, our former English and other versions read; When thou go est
forth etc.
otherwise called tsaba, importing order for battle. When the host goes
forth] Mahhaneh though of the common gender is here made feminine by the form
of the verb: though such should not their minds be, that go out like an
army, but masculine and manlike. Against thine enimie] or, upon thine enemy,
viz. to battle, as chapter 20, 1.21, 10. to war. An usual Ellipsis of the verb
infinite, easy to be understood and supplied.

The antecedent part of the words occasion this observation in the first place,
(in that Moses orders their going out to war, and speaks of the subject of
their war, an enemy, saying; When the host goes forth against thine
enemy.) Observe. Which point has two branches. Iud. 11. Such were the
Ammonites upon whom they went out.
1, The subject against whom we war must be our enemy. He speaks not of
going out simply, as if it were no matter against whom they went out, but of
going out upon an enemy. An enemy seeking their hurt, Enemies invading,
unquiet, turbulent enemies, and such as would oppress them, Justice is the
same to an action, that a foundation is to an house.
Number. 10, 9. The reason is; 1, we must look as near as may be, that our war
be a just war. That which is altogether just shall thou follow, Deuteronomy. 16, 20.
That war is no just war, where it is not against an enemy. 2. That it may
appear, we are not a people that delight in war, who have a curse denounced
against them Psalm. 68, 30. Scatter the people that delight in war; who out of
a delight to prove troublesome to neighbour-bordering nations, ever and anon
put occasions of war on foot. 3, It is against the nature of war, to be
moved against any but an enemy. Such hostility is a plain robbery.

Consect. This therefore warreth against the practice of those, 1, who will go
out to war upon any humor whatsoever, and not always against an enemy, but
against such as wrong them not, to make a vain ostentation of their might, and
what they are able to do, to enlarge their borders, and make their names grow
great in the world: Then which, what more wicked, out of mere ambition to make
combustions among men? Devise not evil, says the wise man, Prove. 3, 29.
against thy neighbor, seeing he dwells securely by thee. And the Prophet
threatens a woe Ies, 33, 1. against such as are so unreasonablie forward to
spoil, when they were not spoiled. Woe to thee that spoylest and wast not
spoiled, that dealest treacherously and they dealt not treacherously with thee,
when thou ceasest to spoil thou shall be spoiled, and when thou shall make an
end to deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee.

2. This is against them also, who are ready for any employment in wars,
whether against friend or foe, they care not, so they may find pay, booty,
and preye, regarding only their own private ends, and particular gains. Such
whether they be enemies or no, against whom they go in service of war, shall
give an account to God for their going out: and may look, never to go in
again, in peace.

The second branch of the observation is, that against an enemy there may be
wars, and the Scripture does not disallow it. Gods word does not take away wars
upon just occasion, only it orders them. It takes away the abuse of wars,
but not the use, where there is just cause. Exo. 17, 8, 9.
When (says Moses) the host goes forth to war, etc. It is lawful and
warrantable then to go forth to war in some cases, but when needs we must:
this is the rule of the Scriptures, that we look well unto our selves, as
afterward we shall see. See Deutr. 20, at large, and 1 Kings 8, 44. If my
people go out to war against their enemy, etc.

Least any object and say, Luke 3, 12, 13, 14. where many coming to know
their duty, among the rest, the Souldjers they resort to John, to learn
what they should do, who instructs them to a harmeles life, not to be rude,
but disapproues not of their profession, only he labors to bring them to a
lawful use of it. Moreover, 1 Cor. 9, 7. Who goes a warfare any time at his
own charges? and 2 Timothy 2, 4. No man that goes a warfare, entangleth himself
in the affairs of this life. In both which places, the Apostle makes
honorable mention of wars, duly undertaken. The reason is: just wars are
grounded upon the Law of nature, which requires defense of our selves, and
rescuing of ours. So Abraham goes out to redeem his kinsman Lot, and to
recover his goods, Which was approved verse. 20. though he took up arms not by
any special commandment from God, but from the law of nature.
Genesis 14, 14. When Abraham heard, that his brother was taken captive, he armed
his trained servants, etc. grounded also upon the law of God, which requires
defense of religion. 1 Timothy 2, 1, 2, 3.

2. The fruit hereof in a just quarrel (the slaughter of Gods enemies) is
called the work of the Lord. Ier. 48, 10. Cursed be he, that does the work of
the Lord negligently, and that withholdeth his sword from blood. Now, it cannot
be Gods work, but in a calling, which God allows. It is also a work of
faith. For the Lords worthies Heb. 11, 32, 33. are said by faith to have
subdued kingdoms. In which place, as the course of the Apostles dissertation
shows, under faith is comprehended a persuasion, whereby is believed, that
what is done is well-pleasing unto God.

This then may encourage, settle, and assure you in your way. Only be strong,
and very courageous. Ios. 1. Let your hands be strengthened, and be ye valiant.
2 Samuel 2. Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and for
the cities of our God. 2 Samuel 10, 12 But of this by the way. The consequent
part of the words, and that which is of greatest consequence, is that which he
warnes them of, when they draw forth. In these words, then keep thee from
every wicked thing. Then] at that time especially keep thee] beware, take
heed: The Hebr. may answer here to (...), a military word used for guarding,
see Phil. 4, 7. the peace of God shall keep, (...) shall guard your hearts 1
Petr. 1, 5. kept by the power of God ((...)) guarded. So when Moses bids them
keep themselves, it is such a keeping, as is a most special guarding of
themselves: it may answer also to that other word (...), sometime of the same
signification in our Saviors Sermons. From every wicked thing] [dhabbar] is
both a word and a work or business. And then, here is forbidden, wickedness in
word or in deed, whether moral or ceremonial, as afterward. There be two
sorts of evil things, as evil air, ill diet, cold, heat, in their extremes,
and this natural discretion shows a man to keep himself from, and no need
was there to speak hereof, for as every thing does naturally seek it good,
so does it avoid the contrary. 2, There is the evil of sin, and that is
it, which is here forbidden: and first he bids them beware of evil, and
secondly to beware of all evil. The observatian is; when we are going to
confront our enemies, is to be taken heed of always; we have no liberty at
one time to be more free for sin, then at other times simply. Gods word does
never conniue at our extravagancies and excursions to evil. Sin is always
perilous, and full of danger to our souls and bodies; Sin always stands in
our light, and is a cross bar in our ways; there never came good of sin at
any time. But there are some times of more special interdiction, and of worse
consequence if we sin, and when there ought to be strictest watch against
evil. At some times it may be more perilous, do more scath and mischeife.
evil. Not so, And take heed to your selves (says Christ) least at any time
your hearts be overcharged with surfeting, and drunckennes, and cares of this
life, and so that day come upon you unawares. Take heed (says he) least at
any time: He gives no time of sinning. Watch ye therefore and pray always, as
our Savior adds.

Abraham when he came home from the wars, according to his vow, kept
himself from meddling with the goods of that king, which to have received, had
been a wicked thing. See Josh. 6, 18. And you in any wise keep your selves
from the accursed thing (all sin is an accursed thing) least ye make your
selves accursed, when ye take of the accursed thing, and make the camp of
Israel a curse and trouble it. 2 Samuel 11, 11. Vriah said unto David, The arc
and Israel and Judah abide in tents, and my Lord Ioab, and the servants of my
Lord are encamped in the open field, shall I then go into mine house, to eat,
and to drink, and to lie with my wife; as thou live, and as thy soul
lives, I will not do this thing. Whosoever failed therein, he would not,
though things in themselves not unlawful, only at that time unseasonable. The
reasons are many and weighty, why we should then forbear sin above all.

The first is, least evil weaken us before our Enemies, and so we become a fit
prey unto them, in the just judgment of God. Sin takes away those spirits,
that life, that heart from men, which ought to be in them at such times. Hos.
4, 11. Wine and strong drink, and whoredom take away the heart. In the 20 of
Deuteronomy. they are bid not to fear, but sin and wickedness does justly disanimate.
Nothing in the world does so emasculate a man (and as it were unman him) as sin
does. Sin will cut our sinews, and disioint us, wholly enfeeble, and disarme
us in the sight of our enemies. Exodus 32, 25. 2 Chr. 28, 19. the people were
made naked before their enemies. [pharang] is to strip or draw off, uncover.
What, did Aaron or Judah take their armor from them? in no wise, but had
occasioned God (for the sin they caused them to commit) to take his armor of
defense from them. Stripped them they had in a manner, of Gods wonderful and
mighty protection, and so they were as a people stark naked. Their defense and
protection was gone from them, as is said Number. 14, 9. Fear them not, they are
bread for us: their defense is departed from them. the meaning is, God had left
them for their wickedness, and so they became naked, and as weak as water.
Deprived they were of the power and providence of Almighty God, for that time.
Though we have no defense in the world, if we have Gods protection, and his
arm over us, we want no furniture and covering: on the otherside, if we have
all outward fense, wanting Gods protection, we are but bare and open to our
enemies.

Secondly, we cannot do evil then, without great presumption, inasmuch as we
have least time to repent us of any evil done. Our days are never of the
longest. What is your life? says James, it is even a vapor, which appears
for a little time, and then it vanishes. If our lives be always so momentanie,
much more when we go with the host against our enemies. Soldiers are
specially mortis stipendiarij. We need not prove unto you the evidence of
this, which experience in the wars does ever show: yet for our remembrance,
look upon these places of Scripture, where you shall see the hazards of the
wars. Deuteronomy. 20, 5, 6, 7. order is given for such and such to return, and the
reason is, from very great likelihood, least they dye in battle. Judge. 9, 17.
My father (says he) fought for you, and adventured his life far. So that, the
life of a man in the wars is in the greatest peril, and venture that may be: 2 Samuel 11, 25. The sword devoureth one as well as another. Chap. 15, 21. Surely,
in what place my Lord the King shall be, whether in death or life, there will
thy servant be. 18, 3. Thou shall not go forth (said the people to the king)
for if we flee away, they will not care for us, neither if half of us die, will
they care for us, etc. by all which we may see the continual hazards we are
in: at that time we carry our lives in our hands, and there is but a step
between us and death. What time will there be, or place for repentance, in
case we do, especially if we will, sin. Then to sin must needs be a
sinning, with a high hand, and presumptuously, when we know, that for that, and
other reasons, we ought then to sin least.

Thirdly, how heynously was God offended with the whole host of Israel and
Joshua for the sin of Achan, Ios. 6. and Number. 25, with all the people, yea
with the Heads, v. 45. Take all the heads of the people, and hang them up
before the Lord against the Sun, etc. Number. 16. And they fell upon their faces
and said, O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and
will thou be wroth with all the Congregation?

Fourthly, because it is the greatest honor, when the occasions are greatest,
to be abstemious from sin. At other times perhaps, we have not that freedom
of our selves, we cannot always do the evil we would, we are pent and walled
in perhaps, then if we do no evil, it is no marvail, but when the door is
open, as it were, and we have more opportunity to sin abroad, then not to
sin, is a greater glory. As it is a greater grace to abstain from
drunckennes and surfeting at feasts and meetings, when the occasions will be
more, because of more freedom and plenty of the creatures, and because of the
vile provocations through profane healths, which one or other commonly puts
afoote. And change of place brings change of objects. Achan had not had the
occasion but there where he was, to have played the thief. And for Achan to
abstain at other times, was no praise to Achan, but then to have forborne, had
been his glory. If thou faint in the day of adversity (or, if thou art
remiss in the day of streights) thy strength is small, (or, narrow is thy
virtue) Prove. 24, 10. If thou show not thy self a man, when occasions come
upon thee, thy resolution and courage is but weak.

Fifthly, he that has power over himself abroad, will undoubtedly keep him self
at home. Let a man live soberly, Tit. 2.
godly, and righteously abroad, and such a one shall be safer from evil doing
at home.

Sixthly and lastly, we should so mind our calling (hoc agere) and be so
employed and exercised, so intent and taken up therein, as to find no leisure
to sin.

This serves for complaint, for (alas!) when are we more sinful, we run into
forbidden evil, because it is forbidden, and then especially, when it is most
forbidden. So malignant is our nature, such peccant humors are we repleat of,
unless purged with a great deal of grace. It is this does aggravate our sin,
that we then sin most, when and wherein we ought to sin least. We are sinful
enough at home, but when we are gone forth with the host, to fight against the
common adversary, then, then we are excessive, and fall together by the ears,
and fight unmanly one with another, then we ring of prophanenes, then town and
country, and all places where we come, are filled with the noise and clamor
of our evils, our drinking, and drabbing, and stabbing, and pillaging without
respect of persons. I wish we might not speak so often of these things. It Is no
pleasure to us, to grate your ears with the unpleasant and harsh sound hereof.
Yet, as he that will have his sores cured, must suffer them to be touched, yea
sometime launced: so, if you will have these evils healed, you must hear of
them, and sometime with bitter reproof to them.

Is this to keep us from evil, to run into the wilful and headie practice
thereof, as the horse rusheth into the battle? And is it not usually seen,
God, who yet, when they betake themselves to the wars, loose all civilitie,
all frugalitie.

Secondly, let this admonish you to look better to your selves, for keeping
your selves from sin, as at all times, so in the Camp, especially. Have
special care, when the host goes forth to battle against your enemy, to do
no wicked thing. Take ye therefore (says Moses) Deuteronomy. 4, 15. good heed unto
your selves, least you corrupt your selves. So, be more then ordinarily
careful, that no unseemely thing be done by you, or any of you, at that time
above all other. Lay all those foresaid reasons before you, and consider well
what arguments disswasiue they may be unto you, from sin and wickedness, when
we are come out with the host to war. And first, remember how it may weaken
your hands, enfeeble your hearts, so that when you shall think your selves, in a
manner, bewitched, it is nothing but sin has done it. Ies. 33, 14. The
sinners in Sion are afraid, fearfulnes has surprised the hypocrites. And that,
which is your weakness, shall prove your enemies strength, not the sins which
they do, who know no better, but the sins which you do. The danger of sin is
not small, the prophet Moses would dehort them from it, as from a thing most
pernicious. Sin is deadly and hurtful, in as much as it takes away our
strength from us, and gives strength to the enemy against us. You know, how
easily Israel was vanquished by the sin of Achan. Balaam and Balak would have
wished no more, then that Israel might have been more ensnared with sin,
whereby they should soon have felt alteration. Sin cutteth off our locks, as
Dalilah did Sampsons. Sin is as poison, which when a man has taken in, his
hair, his nails fall off, and teeth loosen in his head: Such a poison is sin
to the body of an Army, to the heart of man, it makes all strength to fall
from him, and wholly dissolveth him in a manner. It is like the fish Torpedo,
Plato in Menoue.
which with her deadly, and Narcotick force, benummeth the hand of him, who
comes near to catch her. In a word, it is like the Remora, which beyond
admiration stays our course, as Caius the Emperors ship, Plin. lib. 32, cap.
1.
when the whole fleet went forward; which while they wondered at, and search
was made, they found that little creature cleaving to the Rudder. Is that it
(quoth he) with indignation, that withholds me? It is storied of the Jews that
while they sinned not, they prospered. Judith. 5.16, etc.
Because God (says that Ammonitish captain) who hates iniquity was with
them. But, when they departed from the way he set them in, they were destroyed,
led captive, had their temple cast down. And now one thing (says he) shall be
their ruin, if there be any fault by sin against God in this people, even
this shall be their ruin, let us go up, for we shall foil them: but if there
be no iniquity among them (that is, if they have kept themselves from every
wicked thing) let my Lord (says he to the General) pass by, for we can
prevail nothing. They will have the honor, and we shall go by the shame. For
which speech he hardly escaped with his life. To apply this, when you go out
upon service, know nothing in the world can impede and prejudice you, but
sin, that you may keep your selves from evil, when the host goes out to war.
As when nature striveth with a disease, we will not weaken it by more
distempering our bodies, with what may wrong them, but will keep our selves
within compass, according to the wholesome rules of physic: so, when we
strive with the common adversary, we ought to keep our selves within compass,
according to the wholesome rules of Gods word. Some things there are, we shun,
which would not do us half the harm, which yet we cannot ever avoid, as ill
weather, sickness, fire, water. There be other things again, to wit, our
sins, far worse, and more pernicious, which we may avoid, if we would.

Secondly, remember how presumptuously you sin, and with an extreme high
hand; when you sin now, when as you know you ought to sin least, not being
ignorant what little space thou may have, or none at all, for grace and
repentance. If thou will put forth thine hand to evil, thou may be dead,
before thou shall have a heart to consider, or time to say; 2 Kin. 22, 34
Lord, what have I done? Ahab was slain by a bow drawn at a venture, and
smitten between the joints of his harnasse, when he little thought of any such
thing. One Jesus the son of Ananus (as Josephus makes mention) going about
the walls, in the seige of Jerusalem, Joseph. lib. 7. cap. 12.
with a stone shot from out an Engine, was sodeinly killed. I note it, not as
wonder, but give instance of a thing, though ordinary, yet worthy to be made
use of.

Thirdly, remember that if God were so offended with others, and a people as
well beloved as we, for one or two evils, that he will not be well pleased with
us, except we be more careful then they were. He is angry at sin alike in all.

Fourthly; remember what an honor this will be to you, to keep your selves
from evil, when you have the greatest occasions to run into evil. You must
not think to make that an excuse; who can in a leager keep himself from the
common evils? I confess it is hard; but so much the rather should thou keep
thy self from doing evil, if thou respect thine own honor, which then is seen
most, when the occasions, to have been wicked, were not the least. It is a
testimony, of the greater measure of grace in thee.

Fifthly; remember to keep thy self from evil abroad, and thou will with less
difficulty do it at home, that so both abroad and at home, it may be well with
thee, and God may bless thee.

Lastly; remember that one thing is necessary, thy calling, thy employment,
Luke 10.
which for the most part should so take up thy thoughts, that thou should not
have time to do evil. Obj. But must we have no time to recreate our selus?
Ans. Yes, but not with sin. He that says there is a time for all things under
the sun Eccles. 3. of a nature evil in it self, or of evil consequence.

Keep thee, (says Moses) from evil, when the host goes forth. First, he spoke
of the general body, then of the particular. The particular less careful of
himself, to keep himself from evil, but giving liberty to himself, draws on
the general. Sin is of a spreading nature: and when one goes before, (like
beasts that leap over a pale into a corn field, or out of the park) all
follow. The prayer, Deliver us from evil, requires your diligence and care,
not to run into evil. Who will madly run into a ditch or well, and yet say,
deliver us from evil? We must think sin to be to us, as the forbidden fruit
to Adam, which he might not eat of, upon pain of death. We must let evil be to
us, as the honey to them 1 Samuel 14. which Saul too strictly forbad his soldiers
to meddle withal. Sin must be to us, as the wine to the Rechabites,
abominable to sip of. Yea, we must keep our selves, and every one his brother,
as near as is possible, for that sin we may keep others from, and do not,
becomes our sin. The Apostle bids us, not to partake in other men's sins:
then do we partake in other men's sins, not only, when we join with them,
but when we do not, (if it lie in us) hinder them from evil. And the evil
which any do, by our connivence, shall trouble us, as well as them, perhaps
more. And such as are in place must watch and keep others from evil, as much
as in them is, (and much is in them to do, a great deal more then they do)
visit their unlawful haunts, and have a vigilant eye, to them. And one another
must we keep by good counsel, by forbearing to join in evil, and by
discovering intended evil. But especially, let every man keep himself, least
we be exemplarie to others in evil, and since a man's own good, should chiefly
be tendered by himself. 1 These. 4, 4, 5. This is the will of God, even your
sanctification, that ye should abstain from fornication. etc. 1 These. 5, 22.
Abstein from all appearance of evil. 1 Pet. 2, 9. I beseech you as pilgrims
and strangers, absteyn from fleshly lusts. 1 Timothy 5, 22. Keep thy self pure,
and in another place, 1 Timothy 4, 16. Take heed unto thy self. Iam. 1. to keep
himself, unspotted of the world, is pure religion. Jude 23. hating even the
garment spotted with the flesh. And Rev. 18. touch no unclean thing. hold all
sin for unclean, to keep thy self from it.

And that we may do thus the better, consider briefly, what means may be used
by us. The means may be reduced to this method and order: viz. they are either
general or special. Of the former sort, is to gird to ones self the whole
armor of God. Ephesians. 6, 14. And of that armor, to remember the sword, which is
the word of God, and specially such places of the Scriptures, as this, and the
like before. And let thy heart, be the sheath of this spiritual sword. Psalm.
119, 11. I have hid thy word within my heart, that I might not sin against
thee.

Secondly, think of prayer, which though it be no proper piece of that armor,
yet necessarily belongs thereunto. With prayer join vows, from a resolved
spirit. Pray, I say, to God, to keep thee, as the prophet Ier. 17, 14. to God
do thou pray for his grace, The Lord is faithful, who shall stablish you, and
keep you from evil. 2 These. 3, 3. And his grace is powerful 1 Pet. 1, 5. to
guard thee. Forget not vows, which is the bond of the soul. Number. 30, 3. And
the Greek word (...), is both a prayer, and a vow in sense, and we shall do
well to join them together in practice.

Of the latter sort of means, to wit, the particular, are these four, which
follow. The first is, to look to the heart, and to the very first risings of
evil there. The heart is the fountain. Other evils lie without you, but the
evils of sin lie within you, in Ambuscado, even in our very hearts. Salomons
counsel is, Pro. 4. Above all keepings keep thy heart. Let not thy heart
consent, nor give it leave, to think of evil, and thy hand shall never act
any unworthy thing.

Secondly; keep from outward occasions, and make a covenant with thine eyes.
And if thou will indeed keep thee from wickedness, keep thee from wicked
company. Prove. 1, 10. If thou be a child of wisdom, hear the wholesome
counsel of thy mother, saying: My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou
not. If still they urge thee (as sin is impudent, and importunate, and will
hardly be said nay) and say ver. 11. Come with us, let us lay wait for blood,
etc. ver. 14. Cast in thy lot among us, let us all have one purse. My son,
walk not thou in the way with them, refrain thy foot from their path: for
their feet run to evil. etc. There is no more devilish occasion to all
wickedness, then wicked and vicious company.

Thirdly, betake thy self to the opposite good thing, or busy thy self in
well-doing, about thy calling, general, as a Christian, in prayer, in reading
profitable books, divine or politic when thy leisure serves thee, not in
those bawdy and wicked Playbooks, or Amorous toys, the scumme and scurf of
scald and scabby heads, as one calls them.

Particular, in the place that thou art in. And sometimes unbend thy self thou
may to the moderate exercise of some lawful recreation.

Fourthly; labor for a greater measure of Gods fear. What is the reason we are
so headlong in sin, and so void of all care, but the want of this grace? There
is a slavish fear, and a fear filial: if it be but from a slavish fear that
thou fears to do evil, to avoid punishment, which will certainly follow thy
sin ( for be sure thy sin will find thee out. Number. 32, 23. And the stipend
of sin is death. Romans 6, 23. And if you live in the works of the flesh you
shall dye. Romans 8, 14.) even that is somewhat, and shall lessen thy punishment
in hell. If it be from a filial fear and respect, that withholds thee, it is
so much the better, that like a child, the love of thy Father, mixed with an
awful fear of his displeasure, restreineth thee. Were such a fear, or any
fear of God before our eyes, and in our hearts, it would keep us from a great
deal of sin. It would tie our tongues from lyings, slanders and false
accusations, from hideous blasphemies, which fly up and down among you, from
filthie-speaking. Would bind our hands from revenge, and shackle our feet,
from running to any evil whatsoever. But this fear of God being away, (as it
is from the most) we make no scruple, no conscience, no matter of any wicked
thing or word. If thou had the fear of that glorious God, whose order this
is, which is here given, thou would not dare to put forth thy hand to evil.
Compare Mal. 3, 5. with Romans 3, 14-18. and there may be seen that the want of
Gods fear, is the cause why me^ dare do any wickedness.

The second thing to be noted here, is, that this prohibition is absolute, and
universal, to forbear all evil. Then keep thee from every wicked thing, or,
from all. Observe. 2. There is a twofold prohibition from evil, as one shows.
The one absolute, and simple: as to blaspheme, to lie, which are directly
against Gods nature, which we may in no wise do, upon any terms whatsoever.
The other respective; as not to kill, work on the Sabbath, plunder, burn, and
fire houses, and corn, which things God himself does sometime, and is lawful
to be done against an enemy. The evil we are here forbidden, is of the former
nature, in manners and behavior, from all which we are to abstain.

When Adam was in paradise, Gen 2, 16, 17.
God gave him the liberty of all trees in the garden, except the tree in the
midst of the same, which he enjoined him not to touch. Allowing him all trees,
exempting him of one. But in this case, God allows no tree of sin to be
approached unto: he has exempted us from every one. Lev. 18, 24. Defile not
your selves in any of these things. and 2 Cor. 13, 7. I pray God (says the
Apostle) that ye do no evil, not that ye should appear approved, but that ye
should do that which is honest. etc.

The reason is; Gods hatred, and mind, does go against evil universally; all
as well as any; who therefore has forbidden all evil in the moral Law. And
in the 14 v. here following, God must not se any unclea^nes in them.

Secondly; Conscience, where it is of evil, as it is evil, forbeareth one as
well as another, every one, as well as any one: for conscience is universal
in good or evil.

Consect. Hence then you see, that we would not have you more precise and
scrupulous in your carriage, and conversation among men, then Gods word would
have you; wherein you see no dispensation, for any wicked thing. The Word
whereby you must be judged at the last day. We dare give you no more liberty,
then that does; and wish, that you would take no more.

But let us enquire, what evils specially of all evils, we are to forbear. And
some species and particulars contained under this general.

First; thou must keep thee from those evils in particular which Gods word
does mention to be evils, and wicked things, more specially, in his sight; as
namely: Violence, to those we ought to offer no violence unto. See these
places: Deuteronomy. 2, 4. a strict command. And command thou the people saying; ye
are to pass through the coast of your brethren, etc. take good heed unto your
selves, meddle not with them. Deuteronomy. 20.19. God would not suffer them to do
violence to the trees. Luke 3.14. Do violence to no man, etc. Psalm. 62, 10.
David's speech to his Soldiers; Trust not in oppression, become not vain in
robbery. This is one of that all, which we are forbidden, and yet too rife
among us, and too commonly practiced by us.

Another is fornication or adultery. See 1 Samuel 21.4. David's young men must
keep them selves from women. Which (as it seems (respected not so much the
holy bread in that place spoken of as their journey with David in the wars,
although their own women.
and 2 Samuel 11, 11. Vriah also speaks against lying with his own wife at that
time, much less would he have his whore by him, at any time.

Another wicked thing is; abuse of the creatures in drunkenness and riot:
which excess in a camp, is contrary to that, required in those that go a
warfare. See 1 Cor. 9, 25. Every man that striveth for the masterie is
temperate in all things.

Another wicked thing; is murmuring and mutining in the Camp. See this taken
notice of in those rebels Number. 16, 1, 2, 3, 11. which was to be punished with
death. Josh. 1, 18.

In a word; evil speaking is wicked. And that is under this Hebrew word,
forbidden in the text, which signifies word, as well as thing; keep thee from
every evil word, as well as keep thee from every wicked thing. See Lev. 24,
11, 14. he that blaspheamed (or, as the word signifies, that pierced through)
the Lord his name, all the Congregation stoned him.

And, these be specially the evils, when the host goes forth we are to keep
our selves from. And whatsoever else is wicked: and think no evil to be too
little to be eyed. Consider him Number. 15, 32. that having gathered sticks upon
the Sabbath day, he must be stoned without the Camp,

Secondly; thou must keep thy self, as from every evil and wicked thing, so
from thy particular evil; which is, the evil of sin thou art most by nature
prone unto. David calls it, his iniquity. Psalm. 18, 24. I will keep my
self from mine iniquity. As every wise and careful man will look most to
that humor, which is most naturally predominant in him, and correct it. Psalm.
39, 1. I said, I will take heed to my ways: and because he might soonest do
amiss with his tongue, he would so take heed to his ways, that he would not
offend with his tongue, which he most feared, it semes: I will keep my mouth
with a bridle.

Consect. 2. Therefore again, in case we have failed against this caveat, and
have done any evil, our hearts should smite us, for as much as we have sinned
against the express charge of Gods word. And this is a sign of true grace,
and of Gods good spirit, and of a tender conscience in a man, to feel the
evil he has done. A man of a tender stomach, or, who has this or that grief
about him, if he venture to eat or drink of a thing that is hurtful, he shall
presently hear of it, in that part ill affected: so, whosoever has a true
conscience of all evil, having unhappily done any, drawn away of his own lust,
and entised; will soon complain thereof. David, when he had stretched out his
hand against Saul, the Lords anointed, the fact did not a little perplex him.

And thus much of this Caveat given the people, to forbear evil, and every
wicked thing, when the host especially is gone forth against the enemy.

Now it follows, that we consider the words of the 14 verse. For the Lord thy
God walks in the mids of thy Camp, to deliver thee, and to give up thine
enemies before thee: therefore shall thy Camp be holy, that he see no
uncleannes in thee, and turn away from thee. Which words, follow as a reason
of the former, why they must do no wicked thing in the host. The argument has
two things in it, to be generally noted:

First, a proposition, concerning Gods presence among them: For the Lord thy
God walks in the mids of the Camp.

Secondly; the consequence or conclusion: Therefore shall thy Camp be holy.
etc.

The first, is amplified from the final cause of Gods presence among them;
which is, to deliver them, and to give up their enemies before them.

The Lord thy God.] The Chalde applies it to the Divine Majesty, or presence;
so called, from dwelling, and fitly applied to Christ, who dwelt among us, Ioh.
1. And doubtless, the ancient Hebrews meant it of the Messiah.

Walketh] mithallech, the form of the word, notes the frequencie of the
action, walking up and down, and as it were, to and fro, here and there,
continually, like a diligent inspectour or overseer. In the midst] that is,
among or within the Camp, as the parallel phrase elsewhere betokens; not
precisely respecting the midst, the heart, but the Camp generally. See Genesis
2.9.3, 3. and 23, 6. Genesis 24, 3. for the meaning of this phrase.

The first observation is; God has his walk among us, where we are encamped
against his and our enemies.

In the 20 chapter he is said, to be with them, and to accompany them in their
wars.

Levit. 26, 11, 12. I will set my tabernacle among you, and my soul shall not
abhor you. And, I will walk among you. Chald. My Word shall walk among you.
Compare it with Ioh. 1, 1.) and will be your God, and you shall be my people.
Gods walk is every where, He has his paths in the sea, and strideth over the
land. But, he is specially said, to be in some places. As Joshua, lodged among
his people Ios. 8, 9. so, God encamps among his, and lodges in the midst of
them, as a King in his army. Job 29, 25. Job compares himself in the days of
old, speaking how it was wont to be with him in elder times, the years of his
prosperity, when the light of God shined upon his tabernacle, says, he sat
chief in the gates, as a King in the army. God walks in the mids of his
Camps, as a King in the army, as the mighty Lord General, and Lord of hosts
and armies, like a man of war. Exodus 15, 3.

Consect. 1. Does the Lord God walk in the mids of our Camps? then should we
take him in. Does he walk abroad, as it were, and shall we let him alone, and
not seek to enjoy him? oh, let him have a room in your hearts, in your tents
and Cabins, he knocks, and would enter in to you, if you will open unto him.
Yet I must tell you, God will not go in to all. He will abhor to go into
Achans tent, for there lies the accursed thing. In the 16 of Number. 26 ver. they
are bid to depart the tents of the wicked; and will God himself go in to
them? He will not go into these filthy places, that are nests, and cages of
unclean birds, and where no goodness, no holiness dwells, no prayer, nor
praising of him, no reading of his word, nor fear of his majesty resideth:
nothing but lewdnes, wantonness, oaths, and all manner of impiety. Nay, God
will turn away from such, as follows here in the words. If thy tent be a
tent of wickedness and sin, God is a consuming fire, and will scatter fire,
and burn up the tents of wickedness, and the wicked in them. Purge out
therefore the old leaven, that the Lord may delight to come into us. But as
there was no room for Christ in the Inn: so I doubt me, there is little room
for God, in the tents and tabernacles of many of us. He walks in the midst of
us, to see who will give him the best corner of his heart, the best
entertainment in his tent. If some great man of worth and presence should make
his walk continually among us, if we thought, he would vouchsafe to come in
unto us, we would make him the best welcome we could: but there is not the
meanest of us, if by prayer we invite God unto us, though our tents be never so
poor, to whom he will not easily vouchsafe to come. But we unkindely neglect
him, being naturally strangers unto him Ephesians. 4. Yet as the Spouse in the
Canticles took hold of Christ, and pulled him in: so take thou hold on God,
and draw him in to thee. But, there is no man, that calls upon thy name, and
that stirs up himself to take hold of thee: as the Prophet complains Ies.
64. speaking of God. Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at peace, thereby
good shall come unto thee, put away iniquity far from thy tabernacle. Job
22.21.

Secondly; Is God walking among us? therefore, we have, and see the more reason
to keep our selves from every wicked thing, as before we heard. A most
effectual argument must this needs be, to consider him, who is invisible, and
has his walk in the midst of our Camp, for every man to bind himself to
the good behavior. As a King has many times, his secret unknown pacings,
invisible walkings among his subjects, and hears all that they say, beholds
all that they do, and sometimes, hears them speak of things far unmeete
for them to interesse themselves in; possibly speaking treason, against his
crown and dignity, reviling his person, disgracing him, or some of his,
depraving his government, his actions or doings. And all this, with a silent
ear passing it by, or else takes hold of them in the manner. Even so does God
walk in the mids of us, we see him not, a cloud covering him, a Canopy
overshadowing him and his brightness, least we be consumed by him, who sees
and hears, though we think not.

And, as in the third of Genesis; he was walking in the mids of the garden,
when Adam and Eve had hid themselves, and called unto them: so can he call unto
us, whatsoever we are about, whenever we speak, or do amiss, as he called
sodeinly to them three for speaking evil of Moses Number. 12, 1, 2, 4. And can he
choose but hear us blaspheaming his name, and tossing his glorious attributes
up and down, in our unsanctified mouths? Shall not he, who walks in the midst
of us hear our disgracing his messengers, reviling his ordinances? Can he
choose but see our mis-carriage and misbehaviour toward him, and one toward
another? Cannot he see one reeling in his filthiness of riot and excess, in his
drink and vomit; another smiting with the fist of wickedness? another idle,
negligent in his service, or sinfully employed? Thou give thy mouth to evil,
and thy tongue frames deceit. Thou sit and speak against thy brother,
and slandrest thine own mothers son. These things have thou done, and I kept
silence, thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy self: but I
will reprove thee, and set them in order before thee. Psalm. 50, 19. For the
ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his goings.
Prove. 5.21. Mine eyes are upon all their ways, they are not hid from my face,
nor is their iniquity hid from mine eyes. Ier. 16.17. The greatest incentuie
to all good comportment and carriage, is this; to remember, God is walking
before us. And, he which made the eyes shall not he see? he that made the ear
shall not he hear? Psalm. 94. If thy Prince or General were walking in the
midst of us would thou dare to do what thou do, for evil, when thou
dreamest, he is not near thee? Offer this (says Malachie) unto thy Prince.
So, do that which thou should not do, before thy Prince, and see how he will
take it at thy hands. And, shall the glorious God, of pure eyes walk up and
down among us, and we boldly and presumptuously sin against him, just before
him? oh, set God before you. But, says David of the wicked, God is not in all
their thoughts. Let his respect rule and sway, in the hearts of us all. Stand
in awe therefore, and sin not. Psalm. 4, 4. He shall not need to come down
(as according to men is said of him) now, and see whether we have done
altogether after the cry of our sins, and if not, that he may know.
Wherefore, does the Lord walk in the midst of our ways, of our walks, of our
Camps? what should we be careful to do then? but, to take heed to our ways
and walks, that they be not to evil, but to walk before him, and be upright,
as he spoke to Abraham, Genesis 17.1. and walk humbly with our God: Mich. 7. What
does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to show mercy, etc. and to walk
humbly with thy God? Let us neither do nor speak any more, then what we durst
do or speak before the Lord, who walks in the midst of our Camps.

Consect. 3. Then here may we perform service to him, even in our Camps, where
he is, where he treads. Tied we are not to any remote place, to go and
worship the Lord, or if we would enquire at God. His arc in the mids of them 1 Samuel 4.5.6. was a Symbolicall sign of his presence among them. And that he who
walks in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, walded also, Revel. 1.
in the mids of their armies. Here may we, here ought we, to erect and set up
his worship. For this cause we find the Levites were dispersed among their
Camps, and quarters, as we may read in Numbers and Ioshuah. And when Saul was
in the field, the Lords Priest was with him, 1 Samuel 14.3. And if indeed the
Lord walk in the mids of our Camps, let him have his Sabaoths sanctified, and
those duties performed, which he expects from us. Let him have his morning,
and evening sacrifices among us. Oh, let his walks smell and savor with the
reake of all good things done to him. And that he may delight to be among us,
let us, oh let us perfume his ways with the odoriferous incense of prayer and
praise, and strew his walks with the sweet spices of faith and repentance, as
with roses and lillies.

This first part is illustrated, from the end of his walking in the midst of
our Camps: Namely, to deliver thee from thine enemies, Vnde Apollinis (...),
quod ambiguis ambagibus, responsa consulentibus daret.
and to give up thine enemies before thee. Gods oracles are plain, and labor
with no ambiguities, like those of Pyrrhus and Craesus, whereof no certain
meaning could be gathered, whereupon to go boldly forth.

to give up thine enemies before thee] to deliver before, here, and 2 Chronicles.
6.36. is to deliver unto. Confer Deuteronomy, 7, 2. with 23. as if he should have
said. In thy Camp does the Lord thy God abide, there does he walk purposely,
to deliver thee from thine enemies, and to deliver thine enemies unto thee.

Observat. Gods walk, and presence amids our Camps, is with a purpose to do
us all good, to keep us from our enemies, and to give us power over them. Not
only, to deliver us from them, that they put us not to the worse, but to give
them into our hands. See Deuteronomy. 20.4. The Lord your God is he that goes with
you, to fight for you against your enemies to save you.

The reason is: first, because his people have the right and the cause. See 1
Kings 8, 45. And the Lord is bound after a sort, to maintain their judgment,
their right or cause.

Secondly, the war is his. 2 Chronicles. 20, 15. the battle is not yours, but
Gods. And the cause is the Lords own Psa. 74.22. And the Lord is their
Captain. 2 Chronicles. 13, 12. And, he has taken them on, who are therefore his
armies and troops, 1 Samuel 17.26.45. So that his honor lies upon it, and is
interessed in it, in regard of the enemy, who otherwise will blaspheame, if he
save not his people, they will insult. Deuteronomy. 32, 27. Psalm. 79, 4. Again in
regard of his people, they cannot glorify him, as were meet they should. Psalm.
50, 15.

Thirdly, God will make his people revenge the quarrel of his Covenant upon
them.

This sets before us an argument of Gods love and providence, and care for his,
in being thus propitious to them in their wars, as to be among them, for so
gracious an end. Here some may object; how is it then, from, but to their
enemies, and in stead of having their enemies, their enemies have them: which
Israel oftentimes had experience of between Egypt and Canaan, and afterward.
See Josh. 7. They smote Israel even unto Shebarim, a place so called, from the
mighty breach, which was made at that time. So in the 20 of Judges the
Beniamites smote the Israelites once and again: and many times the people of
God are put to the worse. To which I answer two ways.

First, that so it may be for a time, God will make this good. Mark then the
end, see what he has done at the second, third or fourth bout, his people
shall carry it away at length, and have the day. Secondly, that at any time it
falls out otherwise then this seems to promise them, is by accident for his
peoples sins. And so we must understand this with limitation, and qualified
with this condition: if that we be not in fault God is ever ready to help us
and stand by us, ever prone and forward for our deliverance and victory. When
it is not according to this, the fault is in our selves. Oh that my people had
hearkened unto me, and would have walked in my ways I should soon have
subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries. The haters
of the Lord should soon have submitted themselves unto him, but their time
should have endured for ever. Psalm. 81, 13. Would we approve our ways unto
God, among us he would walk to deliver us from our enemies, and them to us;
but, if we will not, but break out to every wicked thing, against his
express word, among us he will be, but in judgment, to deliver us to our
adversaries, and to the will of those that hate us. If they sin against thee,
and thou be angry with them (says Solomon 1 King. 8.46.) and deliver them to
the Enemy, etc. Where we see, it is sin that makes Gods presence fruitless,
and bootelesse to us for good. It is not because the Lord, who is armipotent,
could not always deliver us from our enemies, and give them to us; but because
the Lord will try us, and for that we prove him with our sins. Or, Either we
use not the means God would have us use, and then God will not deliver us, who
ordinarily, will not save his people without his people, that is, without their
diligence. Though the means and our industry be nothing without God, yet is
it his pleasure, we should not neglect them, which when we do, he will be
nothing to us. He will have us up, and be doing, and leave him to be at our
Elbowes, to fall on and second us. Or secondly, we trust too much to the means,
our hearts being too much set upon them, and hanging after them. We are apt, to
think of our own strength and policy, and not to regard God, whose power and
providence it must be to deliver us from our enemies, and them to us. Whence
many a day is lost, and fair exploit vanished, many an inglorious assault made
upon us, to our just reproach.

Secondly; we must then expect this in faith, and in the apprehention of God,
and his divine presence among us, look to be delivered from our enemies, and
not only that, but have them fairly delivered unto us, be they never so many,
so mighty, and warlike a nation. If God were in the midst of their Camp, for
this end, in mercy to rescue them, and to give up those miscreants their
enemies unto them, should not this greatly encourage them, in hope of victory?
But, this is a fruit of faith in God, wherefore, look unto me, and be ye
saved, oh all the ends of the earth. Ies. 45, 22.

And thus much for the first branch of these words: The proposition, touching
Gods presence among them, and walking in their Camps to cover their heads.

The second branch of these words, is the conclusion or consequence, wherein
note; first, an order: Secondly, a reason of that order.

The order is laid down two ways, affirmatively, or positiuely, touching
holiness required: Therefore shall thy Camp be holy. Negatiuely or privatiuely,
against uncleannes. That he see no uncleannes in thee. The reason of the order,
is from the dangerous effect of this; Gods turning away from them.

We have heard Moses telling them of Gods presence with them, now we shall see
what ought to follow thereupon.

therefore the Camp must not be unclean. Where he speaks of the place, and of
the men likewise, and the cleannes of the one, implies the purity of the
other. Of the place, their Campground must be holy. There was a twofold
sanctity: Ceremonial and Moral.

The earth they lay upon must be ceremonially clean: Also their men, their
persons must be morally holy.

Note further, that holiness may be either faederall, or practical. Faederally
and by league, they were a holy people. Deuteronomy. 7, 6. by dedication holy; here is
required, that they be practically holy.

Observe. 3. Forasmuch as God is among us, Camps, and holy leagers. Oh (says
Moses) if the Lord our God be among us, our Camps and tents should be holy. But
the Lord is among us, in the mids of us. Therefore shall your Camp be holy.
According to that, Lev. 20, 7. Sanctisie your selves, and be ye holy, for I the
Lord your God am holy. Where we have a precept to be holy, and a reason, the
Lord our God is holy. A Camp of Saints is mentioned Revel. 20, 9. It becomes
all the Lords people to be holy, 1 These. 4.
as he is holy. This is the will of God, your sanctification, that every one
of you should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification, and in
honor. God would have his people delight in holiness, as he himself does.
Holy they must be in all things, in their assemblies and meetings, of what
sort, or for what end soever; and holy in their Camps and wars.

This was figuratively enjoined: first, in their washings verse 11. When the
evening comes on, he shall wash himself, to wit, any man that was not clean,
by any nocturnall pollution, he must go out of the Camp, and not come within
the Camp, till he was cleansed.

Secondly; by burying their excrements, verse 12. Thou shall have a place
without the Camp, whither thou shall go forth abroad, and thou shall have a
paddle upon thy weapon, and it shall be, when thou will ease thy self abroad,
thou shall dig therewith, and shall turn back and cover that which comes
from thee.

Reasons for holiness in our Camps. The first reason is; because God can
presently smell out any unholynes, who is of perfect sight, Psalm. 44, 20, 21.
least he see (says Moses) uncleannes in thee. As who should say, God will
quickly spy it out, having pure eyes, nothing can hide it from him. And of
perfect sent, if I may so speak.

Secondly; that holiness may distinguish between our Enemies and us, without
which we differ not from them, they from us. For men they are as well as we,
such warlike furniture they have as we. And this shall difference more then any
distance of place, or other qualities. Impuritie does in a manner, make a
consimilitude between them and us. See Ies. 1, 10. they are called rulers of
Sodom, and people of Gomorrah, because though by nation and profession, they
were Jews, and the people of God, yet in manners they were like Sodom and her
neighbors. So Ezech. 16, 3.45, 46. Thy birth and thy nativitie is of the land
of Canaan: thy father was an Ammonite, and thy mother an Hittite. So that the
impuritie of those nations which they declared in their works, made them
altogether like them. In this sense Saul was a Cushite Psalm. 7. So that,
nothing will distinguish us from our enemies, but holiness only, for want
whereof, take away the title of Gods people, we are as they are. And, our
Camps, if holiness reign not in them, are not the Camps of Israelites, but of
Philistims, of Sodomites, of Spaniards.

Thirdly; For our Camps and armies to be holy, would make our enemies blush and
be ashamed; yea, would dazzle their sight to look at us, would throw them to
the ground, and make them fall backward, as the Soldiers did, when they came
to apprehend Christ, John 18, 6. The very holiness of Isreal's Camp, would
confound the armies of the Aliens. Holiness would drive our enemies from us. All
sin and sinners sink, and fall at the presence of holiness. The same
excellency in God, is that which scarres all from coming near unto him, who
dwells in that light of holiness, which none can attain unto: 1 Timothy 6, 16.
in so much that Iesay cried out, he was undone, chap. 6, 3, 5. because of his
own uncleanness, and that wonderful holiness in God. Peter, in the sense of
his own impuritie, bids Christ to depart from him, Luke 5, 8. or he must run
away from Christ. Yea holiness in an Angel, which is but a sparcle of Gods
holiness, made them so affrighted Dan. 10, 7. and Zachary so perplexed, he knew
not what to do. Luke 1, 12. And certainly, holiness in Gods people, which they
have by communication, and participation from God, is that, which if it were in
a more excellent degree, would skarre their enemies, and make them shrink
before them. This Romans 13, 13. is called their armor of light, which in truth
so flasheth in the sore eyes of the world, and dazeleth them, that they are
able to do nothing against them who wear it. As sin and impuritie has a
secret kind of force, whereby we are weakened, and does fight against us; so
holiness has a secret virtue to work as much for us.

Fourthly; holiness is to be chosen for it self, it is a quality so glorious.
In regard of this, no question, Balaam cried out, when he viewed the Camps of
Israel: saying; How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, and thy tabernacles, O
Israel. Number. 24, 5.

Fifthly; every place should be suitable to the Majesty and sacred nature of
the person therein. Therefore, our Camps where God walks, should be holy:
which to be is suiteable to his Majesty and nature. If a King should come and
walk among us, there would be such care to have all things comely and pure:
so, in that God has his residence among us, his place must be holy. Yet cannot
he contract any impuritie, be the place what it will be. As the sun shyning
with his light into the most noisome and filthy vault, yet is free from
impuritie notwithstanding; no more is God defiled, by any the most noisome
place: yet he delights to find his own cleanness, where he is pleased to
come.

What remains then, but that we labor and strive to be holy, to have holy
Camps, and holy leagers. It was prophesied Zach. 14.20. that on the bells of
the horses should be written, Holiness to Jehovah. Meaning, that the wars, and
Camps under the Gospel should be holy wars and holy Camps. The horse is a
warlike beast. See Job 39. Prove. 21, 31. and by Synechdoche in that place of
the Prophet, may comprehend other things belonging to the Camp. And when
holiness is engraven upon the horse, what should the Rider have on him, but
holiness also? That so our Camps and wars may be answerable to that the Lord
requires here. Object. But, will some say, leagers to be so? Ans. Is it
possible? God would not have required it of them or us. Possible it is through
grace, and the means conscionably improved. And we see holiness in some,
therefore I see not, but it may be more general: which takes away the vain
objection of many, who think because they are Soldiers, and follow the wars,
they have nothing to do with holiness, supposing it enough for Preachers and
others to be careful for holiness. But, God would have the Camp holy; now what
is the Camp, but those who make the Camp, which are Soldiers: wherefore
Soldiers must not cast off the care of holiness. This holiness stands in
absteyning from all evil, whereof before. Secondly, in doing the contrary
good: and the rule of holiness, is that of the Apostle, Phil. 4, 8. Whatsoever
things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are
of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on
these things.

Now the means requisite toward a holy Camp, are specially these.

The first is; that every man begin with himself, to reform himself. If
every man cleanse his own door, we shall have clean streets: so, would
every man cleanse himself, we should have a holy Camp. Wash thy heart, Ier.
4, 14. every one his heart. Purge your hands ye sinners, and purify your
hearts ye double minded. Iam. 4. Every one that has this hope purges
himself, even as Christ is pure. 1 John 3.5. And for example to the rest, let
the Leaders and Chiefteins, Heads and Commanders first be holy. If the eye be
single, the whole body is full of light: if they who are chief in place be
holy: so will the rest be also. It was admirablie spoken of Ioshuah, chap. 24.
that he and his house would serve the Lord: First he, and then his house, never
would his house be, if he would not go before in reformation. So should every
Worthy in the Lords Camp say: I and my Soldiers will be holy, and first be a
pattern himself of holiness to them, and be a living and walking image of Gods
holiness among them. Again Judge. 7.17. Look on me and do likewise, said Gideon
to his men. So they would, no question, behold him, and do as he should do.
Nothing poisons a Camp more, then when the infection begins at the head. If
the fountain be bitter, 2 Kin. 2, 21.
the streams can be no better. When Officers, and such as should be presidents
and patterns of holiness to the rest, when I say, they are unclean, profane,
no marvel though the private Soldier be no better. When they will drink
drunk, when they will swear, and swagger, when they will take licentious
liberty to themselves, it is no wonder, though their followers do so toe.
Secondly; Gods holy ordinances must be in the Camp. The word especially, or
truth of God. and Discipline, divine and military. The Discipline of Gods
word, to suspend from the Sacrament indifferently, all obstinate unholy
persons, to sever the clean from the unclean, the precious from the vile.
Ier. 15, 19. And discipline military, must not lie dead, but must be exercised
impartially, upon one and other offending, and so, second the former: Else your
preachers may teach holiness, till their brains fall out at their brows, and
to none end. This then must be exercised in purging your Camps of open and
notorious sinners and sins, as uncleannes of stews, drunckennes. And none
must be borne with, nor suffered, that will not be reformed. Psalm. 101. I will
early destroy all the wicked of the land, and cut off all wicked doers from
the city of my God. Prove. 20.26. A wise king scatters the wicked, and
brings the wheel over them. that is, incorrigible wicked ones, whom no other
means will do good unto. See, for the exercise of Martial discipline in the
Lords Camp Exodus 32, 27. Put every man his sword by his side, and go in and
out thoroughout the Camp, and slaye, etc. Levit. 24.16. He that blaspheameth
the name of the Lord shall surely be put to death. Numb. 25. The just
punishment of Zimri and Cozbi for their wicked presumption. But as once the
Prophet, so may we complain, Habac. 1, 4. The law is slacked, etc. an elegant
metaphor from the pulse, which in a dying man beats faintly, and retires: so
when the law of just discipline beginns to slacken, it argues a dying
reipublique, and is very ominous. As they had their paddle ready to rid the
Camp of their excrements: so must Discipline be used to rid the tents of all
the wicked excrements of sin. And as Christ whipped the buyers and sellers out
of the Temple: so be courageous, you whom it concerns, to reform all
enormities. And look especially to those tippling-places in your Camps, the
very sincks, and nurseries of all impuritie. It follows in the 17 verse.
There shall be no whore of the Daughters of Israel, nor a Sodomite of the
sons of Israel, meaning none permitted. Number. 5, 2, 3. Command the Children of
Israel, that they put out of the Camp, every Leaper, every one that has an
issue, whosoever is defiled by the dead, both male and female shall ye put out,
without the Camp shall ye put them, that they defile not their Camps, in the
mids of whom I dwell. Must Leapers be put out, and shall they be suffered in the
Camp, who have a worse Leaprosie, of all wickedness, cleaving unto them, to
infect all they come near? So then, the word of God which is holy, his holy
and blessed truth, must be diligently taught, by holy men, whose lives may
cast forth holiness to others. And the ordinances of Discipline Civil and
Ecclesiastical, subordinate to the word. The one is to plant, the other to
preserve holiness in us.

Thirdly; to make choice, as near as we can, of the best men. What hopes of a
holy Camp, when the subject matter is not picked, whereof the Romans were not a
little careful, as may be seen in their wars. By making choice of the best
men, I mean not, the best timbred men, but the best conditioned: not only he
that has not a tattred outside, but whose mind is not ragged. Make option of
the most stayed, civil, and best disposed, and not such as Iepthah and
Jeroboam entertained, vain men Judge. 11.3. 2 Chronicles. 13.7. The skumme of men,
fitter to fill prisons and Iayles, then places of better note; and to become
dens of thieves, then an army of Saints. Such (as one says) who if the
Devil should offer a stipend unto, would not refuse him service, and be more
faithful to him, though it were to bear arms against God himself. How happy
were it, if our Camps were rid of such. And I have often thought, that if, as
we find Deuteronomy. 20. Judge. 7. they that had built houses, and had not dedicated
them; planted vineyards, and had not eaten of the fruit of them, betrothed
wives, and had not taken them, I say, if they must be casheired and be gone
from Isreal's Camp, what should a world of our debauched men, professed
drunkards, robbers, swearers, fornicators and such like cattle, I wonder what
they should have done there? I know, we have not all such (God forbid!) but
some not more noble in blood then in virtue, stayed, sober, religious men,
fearing God, and eschewing evil, in great measure: but the number of such is
rare, and of the other multiplying. What is the reason we have so many of the
one sort, and so few of the other? Is it because the good are fewer, and we
cannot get them? which also is true; but is it not rather, because we stand not
(a great number of us) upon the grace, and goodness of the men we take on,
whether there be any blush, or appearance of any in them, choosing our men, as
Samuel and the rest would have chosen a King, 1 Samuel 16, 6, 7. Sed
quotusquisque est (non iniqua cuiusda^ quaerela) qui non malit strenuu^
milite^qua^ pium: imo ne locus quident amplius in exercitu (horrendum fane!)
piis relinquitur
looking on his countenance, or the height of his stature, things I confess to
be regarded, but that is not all: there is somewhat else to be looked after,
that we may possibly make an holy camp. But, if we cannot do withal, but we
must take such as we can (a miserable necessity) as the Romans sometime were
constreyned, to use sclaues for the defense of their common weal, yet when
they are under us, let us cause them to be outwardly at least conformable to
holiness, and labor, that they may be instructed, to the end, that holiness
which grew not in them before, may now come up. Plant amongst you a godly and
painful ministry, and subject your selves, and your men unto it.

And these be the principal means to make a holy Camp, we can do no more
then propound them, and pray the Lord to give you hearts to improve them. And
the rather to stir you up, hearken to a motive, two or three, for the
conclusion of this point.

Motives toward a holy Camp, and holiness in our persons.

The first is; Holiness will call more unto us, and make men more in love with
our profession, from which many are, and may be justly daunted, because,
holiness is so great a stranger to us. The Complaint has been old, but as true
as ancient: Rara fides, pietasque viris, qui castra sequuntur.

Wherefore, many are out of love with the profession, and forswear the Camp,
which with unsavourie sin of all sorts, does stink in the nosthrils of the
world, or the civiller sort of it. Oh how many would Sanctity and true
reformation in our Camps invite unto us, and what a glory holiness would add
to our profession, honorable in it self, but would be double honorable, by
the acquisition of this further grace.

Secondly; The continual dangers we are in, and subject unto, calls upon us
to labor to be holy. For then, let what come can come, we are ready for death,
if that be ready for us. Then may thou say with Conrades in the history:
General hyst. of the Turks page 33.
Let the Persian Archer strike me, I will dye in an assured hope, and with that
arrow, as with a Chariot, come unto that rest, which shall be dearer to me,
then if I should with a base ordinary kind of death, in my sins, end my
days in my bed.

Thirdly; then shall you be sure of Gods gracious presence among you for good,
and against all evil; plainly intimated here. If they would labor for a holy
Camp, they should have the holy Lord among them, whose presence should be all
in all to them, but if otherwise, let us not expect God among us, unless it be
to confound our armies. It suites not with a King, to walk in dung-hills, or
to be seen in noisome places, and will God walk among our Camps, if we have
no care to sweep his paths?

The second branch of this Conclusion follows: That he see no uncleannes in
thee. Which is the negative part of the order touching their Camp. Holiness
there must be, uncleannes there should not be.

uncleannes] Ervah signifies nakedness, and denotes that uncomely part,
whereon man bestows more abundant honor. Genes. 9. Cham discovered the
nakedness of his Father. So called in Hebrew, because it should always be
covered. Sin being denominated nakedness in the sacred tongue, argues the
manner of sins attaching us by propagation: Psalm. 51. In sin did my Mother
warm me.

Observation 4. Sin is a nakedness: the Greek says, a shame. Genes. 3. Our
first parents were naked; sin had made them so.

Consect. 1. Oh then labor to be ashamed of it. Romans 6. What fruit had ye in
those things, whereof you are now ashamed? Blush for shame, and be confounded
in thy self, O Sinner. We can be ashamed of bodily nakedness, of spiritual
nakedness we are not. A worse nakedness is this then any other, for it is a
nakedness joined with filthy deformity, and misshapenes: men are not ashamed
always to be seen naked, but when they are deformed, mismade, and ugly: this
nakedness of sin, is the greatest deformity, that can be imagined: The ugly,
Ephesians. 4.
monstrous Old man is without al form or beauty. But, as with some people the
purest black is the purest beauty: so is it with some men, the fowlest black
and soote of sin, is beauty in their eyes.

Secondly; labor, oh labor to have sin, which is thy nakedness covered, not
by excusing and hiding it, but rather by uncovering it to God. Blessed is the
man whose iniquity is forgiven, and whose sin is covered. Men will not
suffer their filthy nakedness to be seen, and therefore, they will clap, and
keep their garments about them, and rather wear ragged, then none at all. Yet
all covering external will never hide this spiritual nakedness. Bodily
nakedness requires bodily covering, and that is enough: Spiritual nakedness
requires spiritual covering: Put ye on therefore the Lord Jesus Christ. Romans
13.

That he see no uncleannes in thee.] The Hebrew phrase may be read two ways,
first, the nakedness of a thing, an unclean business, or matter; that he see not
an unseemely thing in thee. Or secondly, any nakedness, or uncleannes, any at
all, so dhabhar is taken, to signify any.

Observation 5. God must see no uncleannes, or impuritie of sin among us.

The reason is, because he cannot abide it. Ies. 1, 13. his rejecting their
oblations, and hating their sacrifices, was the rejecting and hating their
sins. Bring no more vain oblations, incense is abomination, the new Moons
and Sabaoths, and calling of assemblies I cannot away with. (a speech of
extreme indignation) and what is the reason, what cannot he away with his own
ordinances? it is iniquity, says he. Iniquity God cannot endure: verse 14.
Your new Moons and your appointed feasts my soul hates, they are a trouble
to me. I am weary. Sin is a trouble to the Lord. Wash you, wash you, says
he, what do you with this uncleannes upon you, which I cannot away with.
Consect. 1.

Why then, happy are Gods Children; for he, sees no iniquity in Jacob, nor
transgression in Israel. Number. 23. Not because he cannot, but because he will
not, and he casts a covering of his son upon them. Should God see uncleannes
in us, he should break out upon us. Lord if thou beholdest iniquity, who can
stand. Psalm. 130, 3.

Secondly; we must therefore, beware of defiling our selves with sin, the
rather. When Children are unclean by rude behavior, all bemired and dirtie,
they are afraid of their Fathers sight: so should we be afraid, that God should
see the uncleannes of any sin in us, from whom we cannot hide it. In the 24
chapt. of Deuteronomy. verse 1. it was permitted, that if a man had perceived Ervath
dabhar, any uncleannes in her whom he had taken to wife unto him, he might put
her away: and will God join himself to us, if we cherish the uncleannes of
sin in us?

The second general thing is, the reason of the order for holiness, and against
uncleannes in them; follows in these last words saying; And turn away from
thee, or, from after thee. Hebr. The Chalde says here, least his WORD turn
away from doing good unto thee. See this of turning away from them, to do them
good. Ier. 32, 40.

Observation 6. Sin forces God to leave, and that in great displeasure. Is.
59.2. Your iniquities have separated between you and your God. Sin, (says
one) is a Schismatique. And this is the Schism and rent which it makes
between God and us. Hosea 5, 15. I will go and return unto my place, till
they acknowledge their offense. Meaning (as here he speaks) he would turn
away from them. So the Lord turned away from Sampson. Judge. the 16. and 20
verse.

The reason is first; that which was partly given in the former point, he
cannot endure sin, Hab. 1.13. He is a God of pure eyes, and cannot look upon
sin, a most impure object.

Secondly; Sin is that which turns away from his law [(...)] and the
righteousness of his nature, and is most contrary to him.

Thirdly; Sin turns us away from God, therefore the Lord turns away from
sin, and us because of sin.

Consect. 1. Why then, it is no small matter for God to turn away from his
people. And this appears also by the bitter complaint hereof, in the church of
God, among his people, when God had turned from them, and the woeful effects
thereof, threatened Deutr. 31, 17. I will forsake them, and hide my face from
them, and many evils and troubles shall befall them. Lord it is no marvel,
though many evils do befall us, when thou the fountain of all good do
leave us! Hosea 9, 12. Yea, woe unto them, when I depart from them.

As when the Sun goes away from our Horizon, he turns away all his light
and comfort from us, and leaves us to grope in darkness: so when God turns
away from us, we are bereaved of all good. He turns not away alone; The Sun
when he comes to us, comes with a great deal of comfort, with much refreshing
through his bright shyning rays, and sweet influence of his beams. (And
truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing is it to behold the Sun,
Eccles. 11.7.) God is a Sun of blessed influence where he comes, (I will be
a Sun, and a shield Psalm. 84.) and Christ is said to arise like the Sun,
The Sun of righteousness shall arise with healing in his wings, and ye shall
grow up as Calves, and go forth. Mal. 4.2. So, when God comes to a people, he
comes with a great deal of peace, and happiness; and when he leaves any, and
turns himself away, he turns and takes away all his mercies. Your iniquities
have turned away these things, that is, all those good things before spoken of)
and your sins have withholden good things from you. Ierem. 5.25. I have taken
away my peace from this people, even loving kindness and mercies. Ier. 16, 5.
First, God takes himself away, or we by our sins and foul transgressions
turn God away, and loose all blessing with him. As when the King goes away,
his court follows him, his attendants, and all go away with him, and nothing
remains but a naked place: so when God turns away, his Court of attendance,
and all those good things, as Concomitants, do wheel about with him. Which,
above all things in the world, should make us careful, as we tender the
residence of God among us, yea as we tender our lives, the life of our lives,
that by Sin, we turn not God away from us. For the Joy of the Lord is our
strength. Nehem. 8, 10.

Secondly; this should teach us, that we should no sooner see uncleannes and
sin, but like God, away we should turn our selves from it, with loathing
indignation. As when we behold an object less savorie, and pleasing to our
sent and sight, we turn away and go aside, hide our eyes, and stop our noses:
so there should no evil boldly present it self to us, but we should divert
our selves. And so it should appear, that there is somewhat of that true
hatred of sin in us, which is most infinitely in God, which if we did, God
would the less, nay not at all turn away from us.

Thirdly, and lastly; Behold here, the loathsomenes of sin, the vileness and
the filthiness thereof, most intolerable, in that it makes the Lord turn
away from us, yea from his beloved people.

Nothing (my Brethren,) can be so odious to us, to make us turn away in
disdain, to make us forsake and withdraw our selves from it, as sin and
uncleanness is to GOD. It is that which forces him to abandon his people with
a temporary dereliction, until they return: and the wicked with an eternal
desertion.

It must be a great matter must make us turn away from those who are dear
unto us. Gods people are his children, it must be a strange thing must make a
Father turn away from his children. They are his Spowse, and therefore Sin
is some great abomination, that constreineth the Lord to leave them.

When we turn away from any thing, we turn away from a Serpent, from a
Basiliske, from a Toade, from a stinking Carcass, which is most noisome, or,
we turn away from our enemies, whom we hate, and of whom we are hated. Some
displeasing object or other it always is, which we turn away from. We never
turn away from that which is amiable, lovely and fair: but what is accursed,
and miserable, and worthily of it self to be detested, oh what an abominable
and beastly thing is sin, a most unclean uncleanness, and impure impuritie,
which makes God to turn away from us, because of that?

FINIS.

