SICELIDES A PISCATORY,

As it has been Acted in Kings College, in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by I. N. for William Sheares, and are to be sold at his
shop, at the great South door of St. Paul's Church. 1631.

Dramatis Personae.
Perindus, A Fisher, son to Tyrinthus, in love with Gaucilla. Armillus, A
Shepherd, and acquainted with Peri^dus. Thalander, A Fisher, son to Glaucus,
in love with Olinda, disguised and called Atyches. Alcippus, A Fisher. Pas, A
Fisher, in love with Cosma. Fredocaldo, An old Fisher, in love with Cosma.
Olinda, Sister to Perindus. Glaucilla, Sister to Thalander. Cosma, A light
Nymph of Messena. Cancrone, Two foolish Fishers, servants to old Tyrinthus.
Scrocca, Two foolish Fishers, servants to old Tyrinthus. Tyrinthus, Father to
Perindus and Olinda. Conchylio, Cosmaes page. Rymbombo, Cyclops. Dicaus.
Neptunes chief Priest. Nomicus, An inferior Priest. Glaucus, Muti. Circe,
Muti. Gryphus, Tyrinthus his man. Cuma, Perindus his boy. Executioners. Chorus,
of Priests. Chorus, of Fishers.
PROLOGVS CHAMVS.
BEgin, thou royal Muse, Envy nere uses,
^o dwell in gentle Courts, or sacred Muses:
To beg of them that common courtesy
Must grant; were to condemn both them, and thee:
Thy Came assures thee, they will all agree,
Gently to bear their Actors infancy;
Infants often please; the choycest Poet song,
Breeds less delight then the infants prattling tongue.
Then let me here entreat your minds to see,
In this our England, fruitful Sicely,
Their two twinne Isles; so like in soil and frame,
That as two twins they are but another same.
But this they beg, which you may grant with ease:
That all these pains to pleasure you, may please.
SICELIDES,
Act. 1.
Scen. 1.
Enter PERINDVS, ARMILLVS, CVMA. Perindus. CVma! bear home our spoils, and
conquering weapons,
And trusse them on a wreath as our just trophie:
And when Can^rone returns, return to me. Exit Cuma
Thus: if but thus: yet thus my state is better,
While lesser cares do laugh and mock the greater;
This change is best when changing I frequent,
Even now that moist, now this dry element,
When with this scepter, setting on the Land,
The scaly footlesse people I command:
When riding on my wooden horse, I see
The Earth that never mooues, remove from me.
And why my friend does not this guise beseem me?
In this I^ am not wretchlesse as you deem me^

Ar. Not that I censure, but demand the cause,
Why being borne, and bred, in shepherds laws;
You have our Hills, and Downs, and Gro^es forsaken,
And to these Sands, and Waves your self betaken.

Per Sh^pheard or fisher, I am still the same,
I am a sea guest not for gain, but game.

Ar. A gamesome life? thus with unarmed arms
To fight against winds, and winters sharp alarmes,
And paddle in chill Neptuns Icie lap?
But if in fishing any plesaure be,
In Shepherds life there is much more say we.

Per. Yet Fishers life with me does most consort,
This sporting serves to moralize my sport:
Viewing the storms, and troublesome waves; I find
Some thing in nature rest-lesse as my mind:
Each captive fish tells met that in deaths snare,
My heart is not the only prisoner.

Ar. Walk along the shore --
Often there he walks
Often there with me or with the waves he talks.

Per. There in the tide I see fleet fortunes changing,
And state of man, weak state: that is never standing:
But rises still, or falls all as the maine,
That ebs to flow, or flows to ebb again.
Yet fortune I accuse thee not for raging,
Let others plain, I never felt the changing,
Bud wast thou at the first, and so art still,
Before I knew what is good I knew the ill:
And since of all my goods thou first bereau'st me,
I near expected good, thou near deceiud'st me;
Therefore although Oracle from whence
I late ariu'd, would feed vain confidence;
Yet since so sure assurance thou do give me,
Still of the two fortune I must believe thee.

Ar. Vain fear when the Oracle does promise good;
The heavens decrees by chance weere near withstood.
You fear without a cause, often cause-lesse fright,
Is the only cause that makes that on us light
Which most we fear, ever a jealous eye
Makes enemies by fearing emnity.

Per. What fearful tempest do the waves foretell,
When seas without a storm to mountains swell.

Ar. Ill is invited when it is suspected
And grief already come where he is expected.

Per. The greatest evils often are where thee show not.
I fear the more, because my fear I know not.
Music! how sad it sounds; my damped heart
Tells me in these sad strains I bear a part:
I wrong thee fate, or else thou now do strain thee
Which some unused weleomet' entertain me.

Scen. 2.
Enter Dicaeus Neptunes Priest following Olinda, led by two Nymphs Cosma and
Glaucilla, before and after a Chorus of Fishers and Priests singing. Song.
Go go thy countries joy and jewel,
The seas and rocks were ever cruel;
Men then may pity thee in vain,
But not help nor ease thy pain.
Take then these tnares they la^est due,
For ever now alas adieu.
Olin. Glaucus; to thee I friendless maid,
In these last gifts my vows have paid:
These once Olindas, now are thine,
This net, and hook, this rod, and line:
Thou know, why here my sports I give thee,
Hence came my joys, and here they leave me.

Gla. Olinda, if that smiles were proofs of sorrow,
Sure I should think thee full of woe, and sadness,
but in so heaped grief, when every eye
Yields tribute to so great a misery.
Thou only smilst, why every tear thou see, is paid to thee --

Olin. The less I need to pay:
Gladucilla I cannot mourn, when I am married.

Gla. Married? now heaven defend me, if this be marriage^
So to be gript in paws of such a monster,
And bedded in his bowels --

Cos. Olinda I should weep,
And spend the shortened breath that fate affords me,
In cursing fate which makes my breath so short.

Olin. Peace peace my Cosma, thou would
Have me mad with reason!

Cos. No: reason is never senseless.

Olin. Think thou me sense less friend?

Gla. Do not thou prove it?

Olin. Why my Glaucilla I see thy drowned eyes,
I feel thy kind imbracements, and which thou see not,
Nor feelst, I feel and see, more mirth and joy
Spring in my heart; then if I now were leading
To the best bed that Sicely affords me.
Glaucilla if there were but fit occasion
That I might show thee this tormented heart^
It would affright thee friend to hear me tell
How many deaths live in so narrow Hell.

Decae. We stay too long; go on these idle tears
Quench not her grief, but add new kindled fears.

Olen. Decaeus; no fear within this breast is lying.
Who living dies, fears not to live by dying.

Exeunt ad rupem rufam manent reliqui. Scen. 3.
Enter Perindus, Armillus. Ar. Saw you the troop which past along here?

Per. Yes.

Ar. Who is it led with such a mournful show?

Per. My sister.

Ar. Who the fair Olinda?

Per. Yes:

Ar. And do you know the end and purpose?

Per. No:

Ar. Nothing but no and yes? fie fie Perindus
Your too much passion, shows you want affection;
Your sister in such sort conuey'd, and you
So careless of her grief? it much misseemes you
Why learn you not the cause?

Per. Thou counsailst well,
Grief weary of it self, all sense depriving.
Felt neither sense, nor grief, by ouergrieuing: Enter Atyches.
But see my Atyches: what different passions
Strive in his doubtful face, pity would weep,
And danger feign would rock high thoughts a sleep,
Whiles resolution chides the daring fear,
And courage makes poor fear afrade to fear.

Atych. Thou God that rulst the suns bright flaming cart
If thou my grand-sire art, as sure thou art
For in my breast I feel thy powers divine,
Firing my soul, which tells me I am thine:
Direct my hand and guide this poynted dart,
That it may pierce, and riue the monsters heart.

Per. Atyches.

Atych. Ah Perindus this lucklesse hour
Bids thee unwelcome, fly and never more,
Never approach to view this deadly shore.

Per. Why what is the news?

Atych. Thy sister the fair Olinda must die.

Ar. So must we all.

Atych. But none of all as she.

Per^ Can tell the cause and manner?

Atych. yes; and till the sun
Twixt noone and night his middle race shall run,
The rites will not be finished; it is briefly thus.
Thou know by Neptunes temple close their grows
A sacred garden, where every flowers blowe^
Here blushing roses, there the Lillies white,
He^e Hya^inth, and there Narcissus bright^
And underneath, the creeping violets show:
That sweetness o^t delights to dwell below:
Vaulted above with thousand fragrant trees,
And under pa'ud with shamefast Strawberies,
Which creeping low do sweetly blushing tell,
That fairest pleasantst fruits, do humblest dwell.
Briefly a little Heaven on Earth it seems:
where every sweet and pleasure fully streams.

Ar: Fisher thou now describ'st some paradise,
Can any ill from so much good arise?

Atych: Henbane and roses in our garden grow,
Ah that from fruits so sweet, such gall should flow!
Here fair Olinda, with her Mymphs arriues,
And time away, time to fast posting drives,
While Nago that deformed enchanter, ranging
Along these trees, his shape and habit changing
Seemed then Glaucilla, such his statelike eyes,
Such hair, such lips, such cheeks, such rosy dies,
So like Glaucillas self that had she spide him,
More would she doubt her self, the more she eyd him

Ar. Can art forge nature with so true a lie?

Atych. The falsest coin is fairest to the eye,
Singling thy sister forth, they chance to see,
The sacred graft of that Herperian tree,
Whose golden apples much the eye delighting,
Would tempt the hands: the longing taste inuiting:
And now the subtle witch spies fit occasion,
And with fit speech and oaths, and soft perswation,
So words he mind; that she (ha little guessing,
What monster lay under that faind dressing,
Pulls of the unhappy fruit straight down she falls,
And thrice a thundering voice Dieaeus calls;
The priest knew what the fearful voice portended,
And fair Olinda half dead apprehended:
And to the temple bears her, there reserving
Till the third day with death pays her deserving
So Neptune, bids, that who shall touch the tree.
With hands profane, shall by Malorcha die;
Malorcha bread in seas, yet seas do dread him,
As much more monstrous then the seas that bred him

Per. Ah my Olinda who can pity thee
That would not pity the excellent Thalander.
It Is just ye seas well does impartial fate
With monstrous death pnni^h thy monstrous hate.
And whither art thou now thus armed going.

Atych. Down to the fatal rock I go to see
And act a part in this foul Tragedy.

Per. Why can thou hope such losses to repair?

Atych. Who nothing hopes yet nothing ought despair.

Per. What it is impossible? ah cease to prove?

Atych. What ever was impossib^e to love?

Per. It Is certain thou adst thy death to hers

Atych. Unworthy love that life for love prefers

Per. What good can do when thou can not restore her.

Atych to live with her or else to die before her.

Per. It Is fate that in this monster bids engraue her.

Atych. And it is my fate to die with her or save her.

Per. In vain to fight against all conquering Jove:

Atyoh. But in my hand shall fight Jove conquering love.

Per. Atych^s why should thou thus betray thy self?
She was my sister, and as dear to me
As ever was a sister to a brother:
Had fate felt any hope, my willing hand
Should be as Pressed to give her aid as any.
Were not the fight against heaven I might adventure,
But here I needs must leave her, though a brother
She never loved me.

Atych. I loved her ever.

Per. More should thou hate her now:

Atych. Can Seas or Rivers stand can Rocks remove?
Could they? yet could I never cease to love:
Perindus, if now I see thee last, farewell:
Within thy breast all joys and quiet dwell.
Adieu: Olinda now to thee I fly
For thee I lived, for thee i will gladly die,

Exit Atyches. Per. Go choycest spirit: the heavenly love regard thee,
And for thy love, with life, and love reward thee.

Scen. 4.
Enter Perindus, Armillus. Ar. Perindus thou know how late was my arrival,
And short abode in this your Sicely,
And how delighted with these accidents
So strange and rare, I have decreed to make
Some longer stay, but since I saw this Atyches
His love more strong then death, a resolution
Beyond humanity I much desired
To know him, what he is, and what his country
That breeds such minds: let me entreat you then
At large to give me all this story
Somewhat it will east your grief, just are his pains
That sorrow with more sorrow entertaines.

Per. It will be tedious, and my heavy mind
Fit words for such a tale can never find:
Yet I Will unfold it all, that you may see
How beauteous love shows in inconstancy:
Who has not heard of Glaucus love? hapless
Whilst fairest Seylla baths him, love inspires
At once herself she cooles and him she fires.
A sea god burnt in flames, and flames most please him
Glaucus finds neither waves nor herbs to ease him
Cold were his eyes more cold her coy disdain:
Yet none of boeth could quench loves schorching flame:
Till Circe whom scornd love to madness moves
Quenches at once her beauty and his loves.
There stands she now a proof of jealous spite
As full of horror now as then delight:

Ar. The fruit of jealousy is ever cursed,
But when it is grafted in a crab it is worst.
Bad in a man, but monstrous in a woman,
And which the greater monster hard to know
Then ielous Circe, or loathed Scylla now
After when time had easd his grief for Scylla,
Circe with charms, and prayers and gifts had wone him
Her lou^ she reapt in that high rocky frame,
Which ever since has borne fair Circes name:
The Moon her fainting light 10 times had fed,
And 10 times more her globe had emptied:
When two fair twins she brought, whose beauteous shine,
Did plainly prove their parents were divine.
The male Thalander, the female called Glaucilla,
And now to youth arrived so fair they are
That with them but themselves who may compare,
All else excelling; each as fair as other
Thus best compard the sister with the brother.

Ar. So lively to the ear thy speeches show them,
That I must half affect before I know them.

Per. Vain words that think to blase so great perfection,
Their perfectnes more proves words imperfection.
But if these words some little sparkle move,
How would their sight inflame thy soul with love?
Scarce did his hair betray his blooming years,
When with his budding youth his love appears,
My self and sister equally he loves,
And as on those two poles heaven ever moves
So on us two his soul still fixed, still loving
Was ever constant, by his constant moving:
Yet never knew we which was most respected,
Both equally and both he most affected.
In me his worthy love with just reflection,
Kindled an equal and a like affection,
But she my sister most ungrateful maid,
With hate, ah hateful vice, his love repaide^

Ar: Cea'st he not then to love? this sure we hold
That love not back reflected soon grows cold.

Per: No though all spite within her bosom sweld,
Spite of her spite his love her hate excelled;
At length to show how much he was neglected,
His rival ugly rival she affected:
Such rival could I wish whose foul distortion,
Would make seem excellent a mean proportion,
For Mago, thus his hated riuall's named)
All black and foul, most strange and ugly framed
Begot by Saturn, on a sea-borne witch,
Resembling both, his hairs like threeds of pitch
Distorted feet, and eyes suncke in his head:
His face dead pale, and seemed but moving lead
Yet worse within, for in his heart to dwell
His mothers furies have their darkest hell.
Yet when Thalander wooed her, she neglects him,
And when this monster flatterd she respects him.

Ar: I'^t possible. troth Sir but that I fear me,
If I should speak some women should ore: hear me^:
Meet thinks I now could rail on all their kinds,
But who can sound the depth of women's minds?

Per. Shortly to come to'th' height of all their wrong,
So could this Mago fill his smoothe^t tongue,
That she ^halander banished from her sight,
Never to see her more his sole delight:
And he to none his hidden grief in parted,
But full of loving duty straight departed
Leaving our groves in woods he grows a ranger
To all but beasts and senseless trees a stranger.
Thus in a desert like his love forsaken
When nothing but cold death his flames could slacken
Atyches spyed him^ but so grief had pined him.
That when he saw him plain, he could not find him.
And so had sorrow all his graces re^t
That in him, of him nothing now was left
Only his love; with which his latest brea^h
H^ power'd into his ears, so slept i^ death.
The rest when better leisu^e time affo^ds
This ^uck^ess^ day asks rather tears ^hen words.

Exeunt, CHORUS.
Who near saw death, may death commend,
Call it ^oyes Prologue troubles end:
The pleasing s^eepe that quiet rocks him,
Where neither care; nor fancy mockes him.
But who in nearer space does eye him
Next to hell, as he^l defye him:
No state^ no age, no sex can move him,
No beggars prey, no Kings reprove him^
In midst of mirth, and loves alarmes,
He pulls the Bride from Bride grooms arms
The beautous Virgin he contemn^s,
The guilty with the just condemns.
All wear his cloth and no^e denies.
Dres't in fresh colored liueries.
Kings lewe as beggars lie in graves,
Nobles as base, the free as slaves,
Bles't who on virtues life relying,
Dies to vice, thus lives by dying.
But fond that making life thy treasure,
Surfetst in joy, art drunk in pleasure.
Sweetes do make the sower more tart.
And pleasure sharp's deaths keenest dart.
Deaths thought is death to those that live,
In living joys, and never grieve.
Happelesse that happy art and know no tears
Who ever lives in pleasure, lives in fears
Exit. Finis Actus Primi.
Act. 2.
Scen. 1.
Enter Conchylio solus. I Have been studying, what bold hardy fool
Invented fishers art, that tired with safety,
Would needs go play with waves, winds, death and hell,
The sum of fishers life is quickly found,
To sweat, freeze, watch, fast toil be starud or drownd^
Well had my Mistress found no better trade,
I would ere this have left these dabling deities,
But she while other fishers fish on the seas,
Sends me a fishing on the Land for flesh:
No, game arriue's amiss unto her net,
For she is not borne among the cliffs, and rocks
But from Messena comes to sport herself
And fish for fools along these craggie shores,
I took her for a Nymph, but she is a woman
A very woman loves all she sees,
This for his sprightly wit, and that for Music,
Him cause he is fair, another for his blackness
Some for their bashfulnes, more for their boldness,
The wiseman for his silence, the fool for his bibble babble;
And now she longs in haste for another fat cods-head,
A good fat sow, and I must snare one for her
She has (let me see I have the tallie)
Some hundred lovers, yet still desires another
The first that passes all the rest in love
Is called Pas: Hah know you your cue so well? Enter Pas.
He is a malum collum, alas poor fool;
He would engrosse my Mistress to himself
He would have her all alone, let her alone for that
And for that it will not be, he raues and swears
And chides and fights, but what need I describe him
He Will do it himself, come, begin begin.
Scen. 2.
Pas Conchylio. Pas. Who sowes ^he seas, or plowes the easy shore?
Yet I, fond I more fond, and senseless more:
Who strives in nets to prison in the wind?
Yet I in love a woman thought to bind:
Fond, too fond thoughts, that thought in love to tie,
One more inconstant then inconstancy:
Look as it is with some true April day,
The sun his glorious beams does fair display,
And straight a clowd breaks into fluent showers,
Then shines and raines, and cleares and straight it lowres:
And twenty changinges in one hour do prove,
So, and more changing is a woman's love.
Fond then my thoughts, that thought a thing so vain,
Fond love, to love what could not love again.
Fond hopes, that ancho^ on so false a ground,
Fond thoughts that fired with love, in hope thus drowned:
Fond thoughts, fond hope, fond heart, but fondest I,
To graspe the wind, and love inconstancy.
Ah Cosma, Cosma.

Exit Con. Ah Pas, ass passing ass; hah, ha, he:
Fond thoughts, fond hope, fond heart, but fondest I,
To graspe the wind, and love inconstancy; ha, ha, he,
This fool would have I know not what, the sea
To stand still like a pond, the Moon never to change,
A woman true to one he knows not what:
She that to one all her af^ections brings
Cages herself and pinions Cupids wings.
Le^'s see whose the second; O the second
Is an old dotard who though now foure^score
Yet nature having left him some few hot embers
Racked up in cold ashes, thinks himself a^l fire and flame
And therefore like the dwarfes
Who though near so old, ^et still consort with boys
So he among the freshest, you^h in dancing
In songs and sporting spends his fadish time.
When snow on's head, shows in his eye
With winter looks gives summer words the lie
His name is Fredocaldo; he knows his name E^ter Fredocaldo.
No sooner called but comes^ what is it he reads?
Upon my life some sonnet, I Will stand and hear.

Scen. 3.
Fredocaldo Conhilio. ^re. I, I am silver white so is thy check
Yet who for whitenes will condemn it?
If wrinkled, of thy forehead is not flecke
Yet who for frowning dare contemn it.
Boys full of folly youth of rage
Both but a journey to old age
I am not yet fair Nymph to old to love
And yet women love old lovers
Nor yet to wauing light, as false to prou^
youth a foul in^ide fairly co^ers.
Yet when my light is in the waine
Thy suns renew my spring again.
Pretty very pretty, why yet I see
My brain is still as fresh as in my youth.
And quick invention springs as currantly
As in the greenest head: this little disti^ke
I made this morn, to ^end unto my lou^.
See, here is a leg how full, how little waining,
My limbs are s^il accompanied
With their kind fellow heat, no shaking palsy
Nor cramp has taken possession, my swift blood streams
Runs quick and speedy, through their burning channells
Pi'sh I am young, he is not ancient
That has a ^iluer b^dge of hoarie hairs
But he that in sweet love is dead and cold
So old men often are young, and young men old
I Will take my farewell of this pretty verse
It is a pretty verse, I Will read it again Conchyli^ throws down his
spectacles.
If I am silver white and. O ho my spectacles.
Ah naughty boy alas my spectacles

Con. Ha ha he your eyes Fredocaldo take up your eyes hah, ha, he.

Fre. Ah naughty boy alas my spectacles
Whether is he gone? O if I find him

Con. Find me without eyes? hah, ha, he.

Fre. O my ve^ses my verses, Snatches his verses.

Con. A very pretty verse: how fresh a brain that made it
If I am silver white and. nay if you will try your limbs come on.
Exit Fredocaldo. Enter Perindus. Farewell f^ost: how? Perind^^? oh how fitly
After warm winter comes a chill could summer
This youth in all things is that old man's contrary
This a cold May, that a hot January
All my art cannot blow up one sparkle
If I should stay he would blast me, adue sol in Pises
Farewell good Caldofredo, I must after Fredocaldo

Exit. Scen. 4
Enter Perindus Allcippus. Per. Bles't is that fisher swane that sancke in the
flood
He Is food for them whom he would make his food.
But I most wretched, who so many years
Live safe in waters to be drowned in fears.
In fire and sorrow like Titius is my life
A couerd table furnished still for grief.
Hell love your pains, for all poor souls can p^oue
Is felt and spoke but thus careless I love.

Enter Alcipyus. Alcip. Phoebus write thou this glorious victory
And grave it on thy shining axel-tree
That all may see a fisher has done more
Then any age hereafter or before.

Per. Alcippus what news? me thinks I plain descry
Joy mixed with wonder in thy doubtful eye.

Alcip. Perindus most happy have I found thee here

Per. Is'st good ah tell me, yet my grounded fear
Pleads hope impossible.

Alcip. Were you away
To the Ecco I had told it, as grief, so joy
Pressed down is burdensome, for now I see
Joy is no joy i^ bard from company
Olinda by the Priests enchained-fast
Unto the fatal rock down to the wast
Was naked left, which thus was better drea^t
Beauty when most vncloth'd is clothed best:
And now the Priest all rites had finished
And those last words and hidden verses said
Then thus he loud proclaims, who dare adventure
Against this monstrous beast, now let him enter
And if he conquer by his bold ^ndeauour
This goodly maid shall be his prize forever
Straight was the monster loosed, whose ugly sight
Struck every trembling heart with cold affright
Some sweat, some freeze, some shreike, some silent wear
The eye durst neither wink nor see for fear:
Heaven hid his light, the fearful sun did shrowed
His glorious eye under a iet^y cloud.

Per. Saw thou the Orke?

Alcip. Yes, and my panting heart
To think I saw it in my breast does start.

Per. Can'^t thou describe it?

Alcip. Never tongue can tell
What to it self no thought can pourtray well.
More big then monstrous Python, whom men feign
By Phoebus first was bred, by Phoebus slain.
His teeth thick rankt in many a double band
Like to an armed battle ready stand
His eyes sunk in's head, more fearful stood
Like bloody flame or like to flaming blood
Not any ear upon his head appears,
No plaint nor prayer, no threat nor charm he feares^
In sea and land he lives and takes from both
Each monsters part which most we fear and loath,
Soon as he felt him loose, he shakes his crest
And hungry posteth to his ready feast
And as through seas his oars a passage tear
The thronging waves fly fast, and roar for fear.

Per. Me thinks I see him and the unhappy lover
Struck through with fright.

Alcip. In all their shreiks he smiles
Stretching his arms, to fight himself composes
And nothing feared his body enterposes
Shaking a dart the monster he defies
Who scorning such a foe to's banquet flies
But he with certain aim his Iauelin drives
Which as the sender bad at's eye arriues.
And fixed in's hollow sight, deep drenched stood
Quenching the bloody fire with fiery blood
The wounded monster lowdly gins to yell
If Hell do speak such is the voice of Hell,
And to revenge his hurt he flies apace
The other dart met him in the middle race
And as along he blindly fast does post
His way and t'ther eye together lost
Thus blind he quickly dies, and being dead
Leaves to his foe his spoils, his paws his head.

Per. Hercules thy twelve works with this one conferd
This one before thy twelve might be preferred.

Alcip. Perindus then might thou have seen how love
Is not more bold then fearful, he that strove
And conquered such a monster with a dart
To her fair eyes yields up his heart
Ah had thou seen how fearful modesty
Joined with chaste love did chide the hungry eye
Which having long abstaind and long time fasted
Some of those dainties now would feign have ^asted
Ah have thou seen which such fit time he got
How love to much remembering love forgot
How the eye which such a monster did outface
Durst not look up upon her eye to gaze
How the hand which such a bold fight undertook
When her it touched as with a palsy shook.
As all that saw it thou would soon have said
That never lived so fortunate a maid.
Most happy such a danger to recover
More happy far by having such a lover.
And hark the Fishers home the victor bringing
Chant loud his conquest, his due praises singing.

Scen. 5.
Enter in triumph with Chorus of Fis^^rs and Pri^s^s s^nging Atyches crow^d
leading Olinda following Glaucil^a and Cos^a. Song
Olinda if thou yield not now
The Orke less monstrous wa^ the^ thou
No monster to the eye more hateful
Then beauty to desert ungrateful
Yield then thy heart and hand
And sing along this sand
Love rule heaven, sea, and land.
Per. Atyches how farest thou? O let these arms inlace thee
Me thinks I hold half heaven when I embrace thee.

Atych. Will Perindu^ go with us to the temple?

Per. Most willingly and when thou once art there
Then it is a temple ^ may justly swear.

Exeunt omnes. Scen. 6.
Enter Cancrone and Scrocca with their boat from fishing. Scr. Yet more
larboord! hol up against that wave now starboord!


Can. I thin^e we are upon the shallow


Scr. Hold in Cancrone I ^mell the shore Cancrone falls in^


Can. Nay by your leave 'twas I that smelt it, for I am sure my nose kissed it.


Scr. Take hold of the stretcher, and then fasten the rope.


Can. A rope stretch al^ such bo^tle-head botemen, had it been my lot to have
been Master at sea as it is yours, we had near taken such a journey in ^uch a
fly-boate, such a sows-eare, such an egge-shell.


Scro. Come help to laue her.


Can. Its a true she^ boot I warrant she leakes brackish all the year long.


Scr. Will you come Sir you are yet in my jurisdiction on the water.


Can. Will you scale the fish sir, will you bring forth the nets sir, will you
spread them upon the rocks sir you are at my demand Sir upon the land, we will be
known in our place ( Scrocca drinks) is that your lauing.


Scro. Ah ha this is something fresher then Neptuns salt potion, see not what
a pickle I amin, but O those Scyllaes bandogs ( bough wough) our boat bepist
her self for fear.


Can. I and thou thy self for company; faith we were almost in Thetis
powdring tub, but now Scrocca^ lets off with our liquor: Sirrah half to this
blew-beard Neptune, but he gets not one drop on it.


Scr. I and withal remember the roaring boy B^reas (puff puff) hold: you bear
your poope too high Cancrone, y'ad need go pumpe.


Can. So me thinks my brain is somewhat warmer now my wirt gear's on. Let
Neptune rage and roar and foam
For now Concrone's safe at home.



Scr. How now Cancrone! what? poefied?


Can. Why Scrocca is it such a matter for a waterman to be a poet now a days?


Sco. I but I wonder that in all thy Poems thou never madst an Epitaph for thy
grandsire that was eaten up by the Cyclops.


Can, Ah Scrocca I prithee do not ming my grand-sire, thou wilt spoil my poetry
presently; those hungry side slops; they eat him up crust and crum, and then
killed him too and that which grieves me most: he never sent me word who it was
that bit of's head, yet faith, one draught more and have at him.


He drinks. Scr. Nay if one draught will serve, he shall never starve for an
Epitaph.


Can. So: it is coming I have it Scrocca.
Here lies Cancrones grandsire, who sans boat.
Sands wind, sans seas saild down the Cyclops throat.

Scr. Here lies? Why will you grave an Epitaph on the Cyclops belly?
I^me sure he lies yonder.

Can. Mass thou say true, but all our late writers begin so.


Scr. Well sir will you walk home and warm your poetical vain at the
kitchen fire.


Can. Yes I care not if I do, for I shall nere be well till I have got the
chimney corner over my head. Farewell ye rocks and seas, I think yee'l show it
That Sicelie affords a water-Poet



Scen. 7.
Enter Conchylio solus. Hah, ha, he; I have laughed my self weary: is it
possible?
That fire and frost should thus keep house together,
Sure age did much mistake him, when it set
His snowie badge on his blew riueld chin.
Were not his faces furrows filled with snow
His hams vnstrung his head so straightly bound
His eyes so rainy, and his skin so dry
He were a pretty youth.
Scen. 8.
Enter Cancrone and Scrocca. Con. What old acqaintance? lie by Mistress a little
I Will fish a while, I may chance to catch
A Cods-head; I Will stand and hear them.

Sor. Did not I tell you we were wrong? sir.

Can. Me thought, we were at land vile soon.

Sor. I prithee on which hand was the cape of Peloro,
When we left Syllaes bandogs.

Can. That did belong to thy water o^fice to mark,
But sure it stood straight before a little of the on side,
Right upon the left, and then it left, the right,
And turned west by East, and then stood still North, North, By South.

Con. Well bold woodcocke
Without a bias.

Scr. Come look about you to your land office.
I Will hold a ped of oysters the rock stands on yonder side;
Look this way: I prithee is not this Circe's ^ocke,

Can. I like thy reasons wondrous well it is her rock and her distaffe too.


Con. I'^e spin^ some thread out of this distaffe.


Scr. Then I swear by Circes iugling box we come in of the wrong side.


Can Look into my poll, can thou not perceive by the color of my brains
that I have vnlac't her knaue^y? thou know Ci^ces is a plaguie wi^ch.


Scr. I she did translate a good father of mine into an hog.


Can. She with her ^hisking white wand, has given this rock a box o^ the ear^,
and set it one the other side of the country


Scr. I care not where Circes dwells, but I am sure we dwell on this side, and
we have pusht in the clean contrary way, and wat you what, we have leapt
through Hell-mouth: O strange how -- he falls down and cries.


Can. O the Orke the huge huntie, puntie.


Scr. Up cancrone I tell thee we have escaped him.


Can. I tell thee Sirocca we have not escaped him, he has eat us up


Con. These fi^hers are new returned from fishing, and know not that Atyches has
slain the Orke, I Will Orke them.


Can. Ah Sirocca I would this O^rke were in Neptunes belly, that will suffer
such a worm to live in his dominions, I am a very macherell if the very name
be not worse to me then, three nights cold fishing.


S^r. Me thinks I am colder too then I was before.


Con. Let me strike then before the iron be key cold
What hardy fishers dare approach this shore
Vntrod by men this twenty years and mo^e.

Can. Good now Conchyli^ do not the Norke


S^r. We did eat the go^den apples; we.


Can. What old Cancr^ne? I am ^orrie for your chance The best that I advise you
is that you r^turne round about the Cape presently before the O^ke smell you
(if he were within twelve score he might wind them) foh.


Can. Nay I shall be deuourd.


Con. P^ucke out a good heart man.


Can. If I could do so I might save the Orke a labor, that Will be done to my
hand I know I shall be deuourd.


Con. Why man.


Can. Why my grandsire was deflourd, and they say deflouring goes in a blood.


Co^. If I rid you both of this fear will you worship m^e.


Can. O wo^shipfull water-wight.

Scr. O Neptunes father.

Can. O Glaucus Mother.

Con. Why then thus; my deities oracle gives you answer thus
When 2 famous fishers fall upon this sand
Let them for fear of m^ghtie Orke, leave seas sail home by land
I have not pincht them for measure
I have given them Oracle up to ^he elbowes.

Ca^. Sail there is your office Scrocca, you must go:

Scr. By land, there is your office go you.

Con. What can you not expound.
Dragge up your bote and home-ward cr^^^e this shore

Can. W^e are all made, I vnde^stood you sir, but I did not know your meaning.

Scr. Pull you the b^te at nose ^'le lift at the arse.

Can. Manners lack this is a land voyage, I am master.

Con. Hoh; roh; droh;, Horka, Corka, Suga ponto; the monster coms down under
the boat turn it over I Will help: they cover themselves over with their beats
for fear of the Orke and creept over the stage.
Retire thou sacred monster (cre^pe on)
These sweet souls a^e no f^^d for thee (on on)
It Is time these souls were spent they begin
To stink, retire thou great god Neptunes sc^urg^
Retire I say while this twinne tortoise passes
And dare not on^e to touch these fi^h flesh asses.
Hah, ha, he, farewell good tortoise, what good foutch? Haddocke ^are and C^d?
you shall walk with me I Will be your O^ke: yet i will carry the Cod to my mistress
Cosma. I know she loves it well: let Conchilio be turned into an Oyster if he
would not play the O^ke every day for such sport, it shall go hard but ^le with
my friend ^ancr^ne yet once again.

Exit. CHORUS.
Happy happy Fishers swain
If that ye knew your happiness
Your sport tastes sweeter by your pai^es,
Sure hope your labor relishes
Your net your living, when you eat
Labor finds appetite and meat.
When the seas and tempest roar
You either sleep or pipe or play
And dance along the golden shore
Thus you spend the night an^ day
Shrill winds a pipe, hoarse seas a taber
To fit your sports or ease your labor.
First ah first the holy Muse
Raped my souls most happy eyes
Who in those holy groves d^e use
And learn those sacred mysteries
The years and months, old age and birth
The palsies of the trembling earth.
The flowing of the sea and Moon
And ebb of both, and how the tides
Sink in themselves and backward run.
How palled Cynthia closely slides
Stealing her brother from our sight
So robs herself and him of light.
But if cold natures frozen parts
My dull slow heart and cloudie brain^
Cannot reach those heavenly nets
Next happy is the fishers pain
Whose love roofes peace do safely ^ide
And shut out fortune, want and pride.
There shall I quiet fearelesse reign
My boys my subjects taught submission
About my court my sons my train
Nets my pu^naiors of provision,
The steer my septer, pip^ musition
Labor my Physic, no Physician.
So shall I laugh the angry seas and sky
Thus singing may I li^e, and singing di^.
Act. 3.
Scen. 1.
Enter Perindus. When Attyches with better sight I eye,
Some power me thinks beyond humanity,
Some heavenly power within his bosom lies
And plainly looks through the windows of his eyes.
Thalander, if that souls departed rest
In other men, thou live in his breast,
He is more then he seems, or else -- but see. Enter Glaucilla.
My love, my hate, my joy, my misery.
Glau. Perindu^, whither turnst t^^u? if thy wandering love
My love eschew, yet nothing can thou see
Why thou should fly me, I am no monster, friend,
That seeks thy spoil, look on me, I am she
To whom the have vowed all faith and loyalty,
Whom thou with vows and prayers and oaths have plied
And praying wept^ and weeping been denied,
And died in the denial, I am she
Whom by my brothers importunity
Thalanders means thou want, who still persevere,
Though thou art changed, I loving love for ever.
Tell me am I altered in mind or bodies frame?
What then I was am I not still the same?

Per. Yes, yes, thou art the same both then and now
As fair, more fair then heavens clearest brow.

Glau. What have I now deserved?

Per. In heaven to dwell:
The purest star deserves not heaven so well.

Glau. Perindus, I am the same, ah I am she
I was at first, but thou, thou art not he
Which once thou wast.

Per. True, ah too true:
Then was I happy being so distressed,
And now most miserable by being blessed.

Glau. Tell me what thus has changed thy former love,
Which once thou sworst nor heaven nor hell could move:
How has this scorn and hate stolen in thy heart
And on a Commick stage, have learnt the art
To play a tyrant, and a foul deceiuer?
To promise mercy, and perform it never?
To look more sweet, maskt in thy looks disguise,
Then mercies self, or pitties gracious eyes.

Per. Fa, la, la, fa, la, la, lah.

Glau. Ah me most miserable.

Per. Ah me most miserable

Glau. Wretched Glaucilla, where have thou set thy love!
Thy plaints his joy, thy tears his laughter move,
Senseless of these he sings at thy lamenting,
And laughs at thy h^arts tormenting.
Wretched Glaucilla.

Per. More wretched Perindus,
Where by refusing life, thou die, for whom
Thou live, in whom thou drawst thy joy and breath,
And to accept, thy life is more then death.

Glau. Perindus.

Per. Fa, la, la, fa, la, la, lah.

Exit Perindus. Scen. 2.
Glaucilla sola. Hapless and fond, too fond and hapless maid,
Whose hate with love, whose love with hate is paid.
Or learn to hate where thou have hatred proved,
Or learn to love again, where thou art loved,
Thy love gets scorn: do not so dearly earne it,
At least learn by forgetting to unlearn it.
Ah fond and hapless maid, but much more fond
Can thou unlearn the lesson thou has cond?
Since then thy fixed love will leave thee never
He hates thy love, leave thou his hate forever,
And though his ice might quench thy loves desiring
Live in his love and die in his admiring^
Olinda so late abroad? Enter Olinda,
The sun is now at rest, heavens winking eyes
All drowsy seem, love only rest denies:
But thou art free as air, what is the reason?
What glass is this?

Olin. Prithee Glaucilla
Do not thus search my souls deep ranckling wound
Which thou can never help when thou have found.

Glau. Thy soul was wont to lodge within mine ear
And ever, was it safely harbored there
My ear is not accquainted with my tongue
That either tongue or ear^ should do thee wrong
Yet do not tell me, I Will thee^ I spy
Thy burning fever is thy teltale eye.
Thou loust deny it not, thou loust Olinda
In vain a chest to lo^ke up flames we seek
Which now with purple fires thy blushing cheeks

Olin. Thou Art such a mistress in thy loving art
That all in vain I hide my ^oue sick heart
And yet as vain to open't now it is hid.

Glau. Why so loves he another?

Olin. I would he did.

Glau. Strange wi^h in love, much rather had I die,
Is he then perished?

Olin. Yes and with him I.

Glau. I prithee tell me all do not conceal it,
I Will mourn with thee if that I cannot heal it.

Olin. Hear then and who so ere maiyst be a bride^
Learn this of me to hate thy maiden pride.
Atyches tho^ know?

Glau. Thy champion?

Olin. The same
Almost a year since he came to this town
When finding me fishing along the shore
Silent he angles by me, till at length
Seeing me take a sta^fish, and fling't away
He straight demands why I refused that pray
The cause I said was hate, he thus replied
Alas poor fish how wretch'ed is your fate
When you are killed for love saved but for hate;
Yet then that fish much worse the fisher swain
Who for his love by hate is causeles slain,

Glau. Yet happier he that is slain by loves defying
Then she in fate that lives yet ever dying

Olin. But soon as love he named, I straight was parting^
He holding me thus speaks; stay Nymph and hear
I bring thee news which well deserves thine ear
He which most loves thee and thou hate most
Thalander (at his name my guilty heart
Ashamed of it self did in me start)
He thus went on: Thalander's dead and dying
By oath and all his love swo^e me to see thee
With these few words: Thalander quite forsaken
Would send to thee what thou from him have taken
All life and health, and never his love re^oouing
Wishes thee a friend more happy and as loving
And with this prayer these legacies he sends thee
This pipe his mother Cir^es gift, to bind
With this soft whistle the loud whistling wind
And with this pipe he left this precious ring
Whose virtues cuers a venomous tooth or sting

Glau. Thalander were we nothing like the other
Only thy love would prove thou art my brother.
Did not this move thee.

Olin. Glaucilla why should I lie
I took them as spoils from a slain enemio,
And ^or these gifts (says he) his last demand
Was thi^, that I might kiss thy hand:
The last, the only gift thou can impart
To such, so loving, and now dying heart^
I grant; be gone, upon the Ring ^ spy
A Rubie cut most artificially,
Wherein was framed a youth in fire consuming,
And ^ound within it as the Ring I turn,
I found these words, Alive or dead, I burn.

Glau. These words well fit his heart, so you, so I
Thalander living loves, and loving dies.

Olin. But oh those fained flames, such strange desires,
Such true, such lasting, neuer-quenched fires
Have kindled in my breast, that all the Art
Of Triphons self cannot allay my smart:
Ah Glaucilla, tha scornful proud Olinda;
Which at so sweet a love a mockery made,
Who scornd the true Thalander, loves his shade,
Whose thousand graces living could not turn me,
His ashes now he is dead to ashes, burn me.

Glau. If thus you love him, how can^t thou allow
Thy love to Atyches! late did thou vow
In Neptunes temple to be his for ever.

Olin. My hand he married there, my heart ah never.
Glaucilla, I love him for his love to me,
For such his venture, for such his victory,
But most, because in love he is my rival,
Because he is like and love, my Love Thalander.
Ah, if my life will please him, let him take it,
He gave it me and I would feign forsake it.
Had it been mine to give, my wretched heart,
Not worth his dangerous fight, I would impart
But that is thine, Thalander thine for ever
With me it is buried and arise shall never.
And wherefore serves this glass?

Olin. This is a dessamour Cosma lately gave me.

Glau. Olinda, know not yet the treachery
Of Cosma, she thy greatest enemy?
Prithee let me see it: should thou this liquor prove,
I tell thee, friend, 'twill quench thy life and love.
But so I Will temper't, it shall better please thee,
And after few spent hours shall ever ease thee.

Olin, It Is beyond art, who there can give relief.
Where patients hate the cure, more then the grief?

Glau. Yes, by my art, before thou art 12 hours older,
I Will ease thy heart, though never make it colder.

Exeunt. Scen. 3.
Enter Conchilio. Con. Glaucilla and Olinda? I marle what mettle^
What leaden earth and water nature put
Into these Nymphs, as cold, as dull, as frozen
As the hard rocks they dwell on! But my Mistress
She Is all quicksiluer, never still, still moving,
Now is she with some shepherd or some fisher,
And here she sets me to entertain all comers:
This is the hour her Lovers use to muster.
But who should this be? is it you, old boy? Enter Fredocaldo.
Old ten in the hundred, are you the captain? boh,

Fred. Beshrew your heart, you are a very naughty boy,
I shake every joint of me.

Con. No shaking palsy, nor cr^mpe has taken possession
Of your nimble limbes^ ha, ha, he.

Fred. Boy, where is thy Mistress?

Con. Where she would be.

Fred. Where Is that?

Con. Where you would be,

Fred. What, in her bed?

Con. Ah old goate^ do I smell you? yet in her bed?

Fred. May not I speak a word or two with her

Con. what a fool it is? thou have spoken twice a allreadie

Fred. I But I would speak them in her ear.

Can. I know your errand but I preethee tell me Fredocaldoe
How is it possible that all the bellows in loves fathers shop
Should kindle any fire in ^uch a frost?

Fred. ^hou know not what is love, I tell thee boy
I love fair Cosma more then a^l her lovers.

Con. N^w in my conscience he says true, this old wood
Makes a b^ighter fire then the greenest ever:

Fred. Conchylio thou art deceiud, have not seen
That of the May the lust of all the year
Nipt with the hoarie f^ost grows cold and chare?
And often October though the years declining
With many dainty flowers is fairly shining
For as the flaming sun puts out the fire
So may the heat of love quench loves desires.

Con. Could this dotard do as well as speak, he might --

Fred. I ^ell thee boy, when I was young --

Con. That was at the siedge of Troy
Now shall we hau^, more tales then ever poets made
But what will you give me Fredocaldoe
If I help thee in the rockie cave, near to the myrtle grove
To sp^ake with Cosma all alone.

Fred. If thou'l do it, I Will give thee as fair an otter tamd for fishing as
ever was i^ Sicely.

Con. Your hand on that: Ah old Saturn cold and dry we will I Will do it

Fred But when Conchylio when?

Con. Within this hour expect ^er.

Fred. Will thou besure.

Con. Why did I ever deceive you?

Fred: never never:

Con. b^eleeue me Fredocaldoe I say believe me then.

Fred. Farewell; I Will keep my promise.

Con. Fail not within this hour: Exit Fredocaldoe.
I know not what this old man's like, unless
O^r hill of Sicely the flaming AEtna:
Whose parches bowels still in fire consuming
Fills all the valley with flame and pitchy fuming.
Yet on his top congealed snow does lie
As if there were not fire nor Phoebus nie.
Why should we count this strange? when even so
This old man's heart's all fire, his head all snow?
But what fresh soldier's this? Enter Armillus^

Ar. My pretty wagge?

Con. Sure you do mistake me, sir, I am another.

Ar. Thou do mistake me, boy, I know well whose tho^ art.

Con. I doubt you do not.

Ar. Thou Art fair Cosmaes boy.

Con. My mother told me so.

Ar. Thou Art a very wagge, take thi^, my boy.

Con. True sir, now I am yours indeed; what! yellow? yours to command: what
would you with me?

Ar. See thou!

Con. Yes I see very well.

Ar. Thou art too: quick I prithee let me see thy Mistress.

Con. Troth, sir, you cannot, she is taken up with other business, or rather
taken down, yet i will try sir. Exit,

Ar. Often have I maruaild how the erring eye,
Which of his proper object cannot lie,
In other subject, fails so in his duty
When he is to judge of's chiefest object beauty.
None takes the night for day, the day for night.
The Lillies seem alike to every sight:
Yet when we partial judge of beauties graces,
Which are but colors plac'^ in women's faces,,
The eye seems never sure the selfsame show
And face, this thinks a swanne, and that a crow.
But sure our minds with strong affections tainted,
Look through our eyes as through a glass that is painted.
So when we view our loves, we never see
What they are, but what we feign would have them be.
Thus Atyches. Perindus thus affecting
These Nymphs, make them seem worthiest their respecting,
And thus to louo their beauties never move them:
But therefore beauteous seem because they love them.
Me thinks this Cosma far them both excels,
In whose high forehead love commanding dwells.
I like not this same too much modesty,
Commend the Senate for their gravity.
The wanton Nymph does more delight me far,
The modest Nymphs do more seem chaste then are,
Women are all alike, the difference this,
That seems and is not, that both seems and is.
Or if some are not, as they call it, ill, E^ter Conchylo.
They want the power and means, but not the will.

Con. My Mistress as yet is so ouerlayd with sport or business, she cannot speak
with you: may not I know your errand?


Ar^ My errand boy is love.


Con. Love (um) it is light enough, I shall carry it away: it is so short I shall
remember it; but troth sir, another golden star this starlesse night dropped in
my hand, may chance to give light to make my Mistress shine in your arms.


Ar. Hold thee boy, hold thee: will that content thee?


Con. Sir do you know the myrtle grove?


Ar. Yes well.


Con. Your star will conduct you thither straight, within this hour she will
meet you there.


Ar. How can thou assure it?

Con. Trust me I Will procure it;
Else never more let me see golden stars.

Ar. I Will try thee boy, it is but one misspent hour,
If thou perform thy promise good Conchylio,
Many such glittering nights shall shine on thee.

Con. If? make no question sir.

Ar. Farewell.

Con. Adieu. Exit.
This strange new bird, this goose with golden eggs
Must with some grain of hope be cherished,
And yet not fed too fat; now for my Crab,
Here Is his twin, if heavens signs are right. Enter Scrocca.
Next to the crab, the twin must come in sight,
I Will out and seek him.

Scen. 4.
Scroeca, Cancrone. Scr. Sail home by land quotha? well, I Will have that saddle
boat hung up for a monument in the temple of Odoxcom, hard by the everlasting
shoes, and now to see the ill luck on it never mo^e need of ^ish, a bounsing
feast toward, vmber of guests, not a whiting, not a haddock, not a cod-mop in
the house: and in stead of catching fish, we must go fish for our nets,
Cancrone, come along, along, along: the Orke's dead and buried, the Orke's dead
and buried.


Can. I but does not his ghost walk thereabout? within.

On afo^e, I Will follow hintly fintly, by the hobnailes of Neptun^ horse-shooes
--


Scr. Nay if you swear, we shall catch no fish, what Can^rone, sneake you
still? whoop, we shall fish fairly if your searmore be off: Enter Cancro^e
bu^ning his coat.

How now, what all in white?


Can. See not I am busified? do thou think a man can button his coat and
talk all at once?


S^r. My pretty sea-cob, why I preethee why in thy white?


Con. Ino triumph I Ino triumph ^ tell thee this is my triumphing suit, did not
we vanquish the Orke?


Scr. I hope so: ^oo but all our fellow fishers say it was Aty^hes.


Can. Thus Atyches killed him alive, and we killed him dead.


Scr. I preethee on with thy gaberdine again.


Can. My old s^aly slimie gaberdine? why, if I should fish in that, every finne
would smell me.


Scr. Well, our nets are not above ground, what shall we do?


Con. Why then Sir, you must go seek them under ground.


Scr. Well Sir, you will follow. Exit.


Can. Muddie Scrocca, can thou not perceive Cancrones inside by his new
outside? my old Orke apparel, my pitch patch poledauies had no good perfume
for a sweet lover, as I now must be: but why a lover? because I mean to kill
the next Orke hand to hand; for my masters sisters sweetheart Ataches, because
a lover, therefore an Orkekiller.


Enter Conchylio. Con. What? old crab tortoise? has the Orke made you cast your
shell?


Can. Fish me no fishing: I Am all for flesh.


Con. Thy lob has learnt that fishers keep no lent.


Can. Therefore thou blue-beard Neptune, and thou trumphing Triton, and thou
watchet iacket Gl^ucus, Dau^us, Maucus, and all the rest of the salt fish gods,
I denounce you all, and for your formable farewell, I do here reach forth to
your dropping driueling deities my love warm hand to kiss.

So, have you done? Fie flapmouth. Conchylio spits ins hand.

Triton, thou beslauerest me.


Con. O doutie loves! here is more game for my mistresses net, or rather for mine.


Can. Nothing but Venus smock or Cupids wing shall wipe it dry; surmount thy
wagging wanton wing to me, god Cupid.


Con. Are you there? I Orkt you once, and now I Will fit you for a Cupid. Exit.
Conchyl.


Can. Me thinks I am grown very eloquent already; thanks sweet love; O now
for my master Perindus, he has a fine cross cut with his arms, and yet that
Orke-catcher Ataches has a pesslence carriage on's pate: the Nymphs beleare him
partly: so, so, so. Now Cupid do I come to thee,
To thee, upon my bare-head knee:
Knee never bare-head yet before,
Before it begged at thy door.



Enter Scrocca. with his nets. Scr. What? devout Cancrone knocking at Cupids
door?


Can. Ah Scrocca, thou have corrupted the goodest verse! I was making my
supplantation to Trusty Triton for good luck, and see if he have not heard
me: our nets are returned.


Scr. He might well hear thee for this once: for thou do not trouble him
often. But if I had not looked to them better then he had, we might have gone
whistle for them: come Cancrone, will you go?


Can. Yes I warrant you, I Will peradventure my person in a Cocke-boate.


Scr. Why then we will take the gallie foist.


Can. Go foist if you will, the burnt child dreads the water, and good men are
scantie, make much of one, Cancrone.


Scr. Well, if you come, you shall have us at the red roche.


Can. Yes, I Will fish on land for mermaids. Exit.

This dog-fish had almost put me out of my l^ue-lesson.
Now to thee again, courteous Cupid.
All sunk and soust i^ soppy love,
Cupid for thy mothers dove
Help. Enter Con^hylio in Cupids habitt.

Con. All hail, Cancrone, according to thy wish I here am present great King
of hearts, Duke of desires, Lord of love, whom mortals gentle Cupid do ycleape.


Can. Be thou Cupid? thou art vile like our Conchylio.


Con. True, Cancrone, and lest the beams of my bright deity should with their
luster wound those infant eyes, I have vo^chsaf't in this form to appear, lo,
thy Conchylio and thy Cupid here, what would thou with me?


Can. I have a suite to your godship.


Con. So it be not your Orke-suite I embrace it: say on, my darling.


Can. I am in love as they say, but I cannot tell whom to be in love withal.


Con. Here are Nymphs enough, Vrina, Olinda, Lilla, Glaucilla, Bobadilla,


Can. Me thinks that Boberdil sounds like a fine play-fellow for me.


Con. No, I Will tell thee one, her name shall make thy mouth water.


Can. Make water in my mouth? that's Vrina, I Will none of her, she is too high
colored.


Con. No, it is Cosma, the fishers flame, the shepherds hope, whose beauty Pas
admires.


Can. I, but will you throw forth a good word for me?


Con. I tell thee I Will make her all to beloue thee, she shall not rest til^
^hee meet thee here; but first I must arm thee with some magic charms.


Can. What be they? my chops would feign be champing them.


Con. First you must anagramatize her name, then sympathize your own.


Can. Tize, zize, thize. I shall never hit that.


Con. For an anagram I Will fit you: Cosma a smock.


Can. Pretty.


Con. For the sympathy of your own name but thus, your name Cancrone bids you
counterfeite the counter-creeping crab; and go backward to her.


Can. Do I look like a crab? I had rather go forward to a Nymph.


Con. Thirdly, because every fisher is borne under Pisces, therefore the sign
is in the foot with you: you must come therefore with one foot bare.


Con. I but shall I not catch cold and cough and spoil my part?


Can. It mu^t be the right foot: and then see^t thou this myrtle tree? all my
arrows are made of the wood of it, thou must in her sight get up and gather
the highest bough of it.


Con. I but what shall I do with the bough?


Con. O the bough? why, setting thus ^ pretty while, you must wrappe a cockle
garland about it, and then when the poor less melts and consumes with thy
love --


Can. Then I Will throw it at her, and come down to her, shall I not^


Con. Excellent well, I see thou art inspired.


Can. Nay I ^an take it, if you put it to me.


Con. But the just nicke when thou must throw it is, when she says I die, I
cry, I lie.


Can. I die, I cry, I lie. I would have her lie, but not die, but will you make
her come indeed?


Con. I and in her best clothes too.


Can. Nay it is no such matter for clothes, but what must I say? I had almost
forgot it.


Con. Nothing but a short charm, which I Will teach you as we go on before, I Will
follow you.


Can. Let me see: backward?


Con. Blockhead.


Can. Barelegge?


Con. Beetlepate.


Can. Cockleshell?


Con. Coxecombe.


Can. Boughs?


Con. Bussard.


Can. The towne's ours. I no triumph^ I no triumph^


Con. I Will cool my hot lover, he shall sit on a perch for a stale, now must I
be vncupidate, and shortly appear here Cosmafied, it shall be hard but with
the same limetwig I Will catch a bigger bird then this. First I will serve my
self, my mistress after;
My bait is seeming love, my prey true laughter.



Scen. 5.
Enter Pas solus. What art, strength, wit can tame a fish or fly?
The least of creatures used to liberty,
With loss of life shake off base captive chains,
And with restraint all life disdaines.
But I, ah fool, yield up my self a slave,
And what they shun, by death do basely crave:
My grief more then my folly, who deplore
That which all others use to wish before:
My love loves too too much too many,
For while she likes all, she loves not any.
Love, let my prayers yet thus far only move thee,
Let me her falsely, or ^he truly love me. Enter Cosma.
See where she comes; and that so bright a sun
Should have no sphere, no certain race to run:
I Will stand and ouer-heare her.
Cos. I can but smile to think how foolish wise
Those women are, that choose their loves for wisdom.
Wisdom in men's a golden chain to tie
Poor women in a glorious slavery.

P^s. Hark Heavens! O monstrous! hark. O women, women.

Cos. Fond men, that blame the love that ever ranges
To foul and sluttish love, that never changes.
The Muses love by course, to change their meeter,
Love is like linen often changed, the sweeter.

Pas. Thus these neat creatures, dead with love and all,
By shunning beastlines, make it beastiall.

Cos. Our beauty is our good, the cause of love:
Fond that their good toth' best will not improve;
What Husbandman neglects his time of sowing?
What fisher loses winds, now fairly blowing?
Beauty our good: ah good, ah short and bri^tle,
A little little good, for time as little,
How easy do thou slide, and pass away?
Unborn, full grown, and buried in a day.
Thy spring is short, and if thou now refuse it,
It Is gone, when feign thou would, thou shall not use it.
The time and every minute daily spends thee.
Spend thou the time, while time fit leisure lends thee.

Pas. Does she not blush? hark, women, here is your preacher,
Maids, you want a Mistress; here is a teacher.

Cos. Now since Conchylio spoke of this Armillus,
My new found lover, I half long to try him:
Too cruel she that makes her hearts contenting,
To see a heart languish in loves tormenting.
What though i't^' night we live most wantonly?
IN the morn with clothes we put on modesty.
Thus though we sport, and wanton all the night
Next su^ne i will act a part of fear and fright.

Pas. Modesty? marry guipp: these are your modest creatures.

Cos. Long have I hated Olinda, and Glaucilla,
And one of them by this has drunk her la^^,
The next shall follow ere the next day's past.
The ginne is laid, and if it hit aright,
This is her last, this her eternal night.
Perindu^ long I have long loved, who ever scorned me,
Because he loves Glaucilla; I know he will grieve:
But when the tempest once is ouerblowne,
Hoyst up all sails; the prize is sure mine own.
Ill for a woman is that woman placed,
Who like old Ianus, is not double faced.
Now to Armillus who sure expects me.
How dark the night? more fit for Lovers play.
The darkest night is lovers brightest day. Exit Cosma.

Pas. Well M^stris Iana with your double face,
I think I shall outface you by and by.
I Will fit you for a face i'fayth, I could be mad now.
Well, since you are sportiue, i will make one in the play;
You have a fool already, i will act a Devil;
And since you needs must to a new consort,
I Will bear a part, and make or mar the sport.

Enter Perindus. Scen. 6.
Perindus^ Pas. Per. Atyches?

Pas. No: Pas.

Per. If thou see Atyches, send him hither friend; Exi^ Pas.
Of all the plagues that torture souls in h^ll,
Tant^le, thy punishment does most excel.
For present goods, thy evil most express,
Making thee unhappy in thy happiness.
Such are my pains: my blessedness torments me,
I see, and may enjoy what more torments me.
My life then love, I rather would forsake,
Yet for my life, my love I dare not take.
Glaucilla, could thou see this wretched breast,
What torments in it never resting rest,
Whom now thou think the cause of all thy greeuing,
Then thou would judge the wretchedst creature living.
She Is here. Enter Glaucilla.

Glau. Perindus, whither go thou? the day's enough
To show thy scorn, the night was made for rest.
For shame if not for love, let night relieve me:
Take not that from me, which thou will not give me.
Know thou this place? even here thou first did vow,
Which I believe, and still me thinks even now
Cannot vnbeleeu't, that when thy constant heart,
From his first only vowed love should start,
These wauing seas should stand, whose rocks remoue^

Per. Fa, la, la, fa, la, la, lah.

Glau. O dancing leuity, you steady rocks,
Still stand you still? his faith he lightly mocks.
Ye ^leeting waves, why do you never stand?
His words, his love, his oaths, are writ in sand.
In rocks and seas I find more sense and loving,
The rock less hard then he, the sea less moving.

Per. Did never see the rocks in sailing move?

Glau. Not move, but so^ me to mou^.

Per. My picture right.

Glau. What says Perindus?

Per. Ha, ha, he, how scuruily grief laughs!

Glau. Perindus, by all the vows I here conjure thee^
The vow that on thy soul thou did assure me,
Tell me why thus my love thou false refusest?
Why me thy faith thy self thou thus deceiuest?

Per. Ay me.

Glau. How fares my love?

Per. Ah Glaucilla.

Glau. I know thou can^t not hate me.

Per. I cannot hate, but laugh, and dance and sport,
This is not hate, Glaucilla, it is not hate.

Glau. Can thou Perindus thus delude me?
I Have lived enough, farewell: thou laft have viewd me.

Per. Glaucilla?

Glau. How can thou speak that hated name?

Per. Stay:

Glau. To be mocked?

Per. Stay, i will tell thee all.

Glau. Me thinks this forced mirth does not beseem thee:
Sure it is not thine, it comes not from thy heart.

Per. Glaucilla, call back thy wish, seek not to know
Thine or my death, thou winst thine overthrow.

Glau. Thy grief is common, I have my part in thine:
Take not that from me which is justly mine.

Per. if I had any joy, it were thine own,
But grant me to be wretched all alone.

Glau. Now all thy grief is mine, but it vnhiding,
Half thou will take away, by half dividing.

Per. Thou seekst my love, it is my love to hide it,
And I shall show more hate, when I divide it.

Glau. Thy love thus hid, to me much hatred proves,
Vnhide thy hate, this hate will show it loves:

Per. Glaucilla, while my griefs untouched rest,
My better part seems quiet in thy breast.

Glau. So thou art well, but still my better part,
Perindus, sinkes all laden with his smart:
So thou my finger cut'st, and woundst my heart.

Per. Since then thou will not give me leave to hide it,
Briefly it is thus: when thou thy love had vowed me
Most sure, but yet no certain time allowd me;
My marriage day as all my good desiring,
To Prote^s Cell I went, the time enquiring,
There heard these words, the cause of all my sadness,
The ca^se of all my seeming hate and gladness.
Thus went the Oracle.
The day, that thou with grief so long forbearest,
Shall bring thee what thou wishest most and fear.
Thy sisters grave shall be her marriage bed,
In one self day twice dying, and once dead.
Thy friend, whom thou did ever dearest choose,
In loosing thou shall find, in finding loose.
And briefly to conclude the worst at last,
Thou, or thy Love shall from a rock be cast.
Glaucilla, had thy love but with my life been prized,
My life t'enioy thy love I had despised.
But since it may be thine, thy life destroying,
Shall nere be given for my loves enjoying:
Much rather, let me live in fires tormenting,
Then with such purchase buy my hearts contenting.

Glau. Then love's the cause of all thy seeming hate,
What have thou seen in me, that I should seem,
My life more then thy love, or mine esteem?
Perindus thy hat^ has cost me often dying,
So have thou given me death, by death denying:
For the Oracle, with death I am contented,
And will not fear, what cannot be prevented.

Per. Yet though such mischief Proteus did divine,
Much better sped I at my fathers shrine:
Coming to Delphos, where the Pythian maid
Told me my wis^es should be fully paid
And that within few^ days I should arrive
Through many bitter storms, into the hiue.

Glau. Why doubtst thou then? ad^ew love till to morrow,
Next rising sun shall to thee ease thy sorrow.

Per. May thou prove true, or if heaven bad decree
The good be thine, light all the bad on me.

Glau. Farewell. Exit.
Thou give Glaucilla what thou wishest good rest.
This victory my mind has whole possessed,
And from my eyes shuts out all sleep and rest:
If I but slumber, straight my fancy d^eames,
This Atyches is much more then he seems:
Coming to his couch, I found his empty bed
As yet untouched, himself from sleep is fled.
But soft, whom have we here? Enter Atyches.

Atych. The Ox now feels no yoke, all labor sleeps,
The soul unbent, this as her play-time keeps,
And sports it self in fancies winding streams,
Bathing his thoughts in thousand winged dreams.
The fisher tired with labor, snorteth fast,
And never thinks of pains to come or past,
Only love waking rest and sleep despises,
Sets later then the sun, and sooner rises.
With him the day as night, the night as day,
All car^, no rest, all work, no holy-day^
How different from love is lovers guise!
He never opes, they never shut their eyes.

Per. Ha: this is he, I Will stand and ouerheare him.

Atych. So: I am alone, there is none but I,
My grief, my love, my wonted compa^y,
And which best fits a grieved lovers sprite,
The silent stars and solitary night.
Tell me heavens sentinels that compass round
This ball of earth, on earth was never found
A love like mine, ^o long, so truly ser^'d,
Whose wage is hate, have all my pains deserved
Contempt? mine and her; for she dear affected:
The more I loved, the more I was neglected.
Since thou can love where thou have hatred proved,
Olinda, how can thou hate where thou art loved?
Thy body is mine by conquest, but I find,
Thy body is not always with thy mind.
Give both o^ none, or if but one, o'th'two
Give me thy mind, and let thy body go.
If this without thy mind I only haue^
What give thou more to me then to thy grave?
Prove me, my dear, what can thou hate in me?
Unless my love, my love still bent on thee?
My name's Thalander, perhaps it does displease thee,
I will refuse my name, if that may ease thee.
Thalander to exile we will still confine,
And ^'le be Atyches, so I be thine.

Per. Thalander? is it possible? I often suspected
How he is altered! not himself! is it possible?

Aty. Yet what thou hat'st, thy brother loves as well.
Tell me, my dearest love, what have I done?
What has Thalander done? ah tell me.

Per. More
Then thousand such as she can nere re^tore,
Thalander; start not; how have my eyes deceived me?
Ah, let me bless my arms with thy embraces.
My dear, Thalander, my only life, my heart,
My soul, O of my soul the better part.
Is It thee I hold; I scarce dare trust mine eyes,
Which thus deceived me by their former lies.

Aty. Thou welcomst misery while thine arms infold mee^

Per. I am the blessedst man that lives to hold thee.
My heart does dance to find thee.

Aty. Ah Perindus,
When least thou think, thou art deceived most,
My self, my love, my labor I have lost,
When I have lost my self, to find my love.

Per. In losing of thy fame, thou have found
She loves thee friend most dearly,
And though she thought thy love would be her death^
Yet for and in thy love, she would lose her breath,
And nothing else should grieve her in the end
She had one life for such a love to spend.

Aty. Do not deceive me.

Per. Why should thou mistrust me?

Aty. Perindus, my joy, by too much joy enjoying,
I feel not half my joy, by ouer-ioying.

Per. Her self shall speak it. Come, let us go.

Aty. It Is night!

Per. She Will think it day, when thou art in her sight.

Aty. Lead me, for yet my mind, too much affected
To have it so, makes truth it self suspected.

Exeunt, CHORUS.
Love is the fire, damme, nurse, and seed
Of all that air, earth, waters breed.
All these earth, water, air, fire,
Though contraries, in love conspire.
Fond painters: love is not a lad,
With b^w, and hafts, and feathers clad;
As he is faucied in the brain
Of some loose loving idle swain,
Much sooner is he felt then seen,
His substance subtle, slight and thin,
Often leapes he from the glancing eyes,
Often in some smooth mount he lies,
Soonest he winnes, the fastest flies:
Often lurkes h^ twixt the ruddy lips,
Thence while the heart his Nectar sips,
Down to the soul the poison slips,
Often in a voice creeps down the ear,
Often hides his darts in golden hair,
Often blushing cheeks do light his fire,
Often in a smooth soft kin retires,
Often in smiles, often in tears;
His flaming heat in water bears,
When nothing else kindles desire,
Eu^n v^rtues self shall blow the fire:
Love with thousand darts abounds,
Surest and deepest virtue wounds,
Often himself becomes a dart,
And love with love, does love impart.
Thou painful pleasure, pleasing pain,
Thou gainefull life, thou losing gain:
Thou bitter sweet, easing disease,
How do thou by displeasing please?
How do thou thus bewitch the heart?
To love in hate, to joy in smart.
To think it self most bound, when free,
And freest in his slavery.
Every creature is thy debtor,
None but loves, some worse, some better:
Only in lou^, they happy prove,
Who love what most deserves their love.
Act. 4.
Scen. 1.
Enter Perindus and Thalander. Per. BE patient.

Aty. Yes, I am patient,
And suffer all, while all heavens ills are spent.

Per. You give your self to griefe^

Aty. Senseless and mad.
Who in much grief, is not extremely sad?

Per. Alas sir, she was mortal, and must die.

Aty. True, true, and could the fates no time ^spie
But this? to me she never lived till now,
And now Perindus? now! oh --

Per. She was my sister!

Aty. Alas, thy sister!
She was my life, my soul, she was my love,
She was -- words know not what she was to me:
She was -- thou most accursed word of was^

Per. Be comforted.

Tha. Perindus, the very name of comfort, is most comfortless
Comfort, joy, hope, lived in her cheerful smiling,
And now must die, or live in far ex^^ing.
Comfort, joy, hope, for ever I deny you,
And would not name you now but to defy you.

Per. Sir, with more patience you have often borne
Far greater evils.

Tha. Perindus, do not say so,
If thou yet love me, prithee do not say so:
Was ever ill as this? hels breniary^
All torment in this narrow space is laid,
The wo^st of all, in these two words are said:
Olinda dead? dead! whither do thou lead me?
Why, I can go alone, alone can find
The way I seek, I see it best when blind.
I prithee leave me.

Per. Thalander, I Will not leave thee,
Should heaven with thunder strike these arms that claspe thee,
My dying hands should but more firmly graspe thee.

Tha. Thou violat'st thy love in thy mistaking,
And clean forsak'st thy friend, in not forsaking
Olinda: I cannot come, they here enc^aine me.
But neither can, nor shall they here detain me.
In The mean time, all the honor I can give thee,
Is but a grave, that sacred rock, the place
Of my conception, and my burial:
Since Hymen will not, death shall make thee mine,
If not my marriage, my deathbed shall be thine.
Exeunt.
Sc^n. 2.
Enter Rimbombo. Farewell ye mountains, and thou burning AEt^a,
If yet I do not bear thee in my breast,
And am my self, a living walking AEtna,
The Nymphs that on you dwell, are too coy,
Too coy and proud, more fierce then robbed tygre
More deaf then seas, and more inflexible
Then a grown Orke, false, flattering, cruel, crafty,
And which most grieves me, when I would embrace them,
Swifter then c^ased Dear, or dogs that chase them,
You heavens, what have we poor men deserved,
That you should frame a woman, I and make her
So comely and so needful? why should you cloth them
With so fine a shape? why should you place
Gold in their hair, allurement in their face?
And that which most may vex us, you impart
Fire into their burning eyes, y^e to their heart.
Why sweeten you their tongues with sugared charms
And force men love, and need their greatest harms?
And most of all, why do you make them fleet?
Minds as the winds, and wings upon their feet?
Of hundred women that I know,
But one deserves to be a woman:
Whom better heavens have not made more fair,
Then courteous, loving, kind, and debonaire:
She, when she vsd our Mountains, often would stay,
And hear me speak, and vow, and swear, and pray.
Here I have learnt, she haunts along these shores:
Within these rockie clifts i will hide my self,
Till fit occasion, if she have changed her mind,
Then safely may I curse all women. kind. Exit.
Scen. 3.
Enter Armillu^. Love, without thee, all life is tedious,
Without thee, there is no sweet, no joy, no life;
Thou first gave life, and still with new succession,
Continuest what thou gave, with sweet inticements,
Taming the strongst rebellion, thy weapons women,
Whom thou so fram'st, that proudest men are glad,
Beaten with them, gently to kiss the rod.
Either my weighty passions pull too fast
The wheel of time, or else the hour is past:
But this is she, or I mistake it.
Enter Cosma. Cos. Women that to one man their passions bind,
As this man alters, so alters still their mind:
Thus ever change they, as those changing faires,
And with their lovers still their love impaires:
But I, when once my lovers change their graces,
Affect the same, though now in other faces:
Thus now my mind is firm, and constant proved,
Seeing I ever love, what first I loved.
Who blames the speedy heaven, for ever ranging?
Love's fiery, winged, light, and therefore changing.

Ar. True, fairest Nymph, Love is a fire still burning,
And if not slak't, the heart to ashes turning.

Cos. If I could scold, sir you might be chidden,
For coming to my thoughts before you are bidden.

Ar. Blame me not (Sweet) thy words do fan thy fires,
And cool the flames which thy fair eye inspires.

Cos. The fire so lately applied, so lately framed?
Me thinks, green wood should not be yet inflamed.

Ar. Loves flame is not like earths, but heavens fire,
Like lightning, with a flash it lights desire.

^os. I love not lightning: lightning love that flashes
Before't be all on fire, will be all ashes.

Ar. Gather the fruit then while it is yet vnblas^ed.

Cos. Is It worth the gathering? is it pleasing tasted?

Ar. Take say ^f this. kisses her.
Monster?

Enter Pas offering to kiss on the other side, disguised like a fury. Cos.
Help ho.

Exeunt Armil. Cos. several waie^. Scen. 4.
Pas. Fredocaldo. Pas. The Do was almost struck, 'twas time I came,
For once I Will be a keeper of the game.
I see it is Owle-light, Mineruaes waggoner, Enter Fred.
My old rival, who this twenty years
Saw nothing but what shined through gla^se windows,
What comes he for? I Will stay a while and watch him.

Fred. Most happy age that shall be crowned with love
Of thy love, Cosma: I am not as I seem,
Farewell old age, I now am young again
And feel not ages, but a lovers pain,
In love I dare adventure with the best,
Old beaten soldiers are the worthiest:
If all my riualls heard I could dare them,
If ^uries should out-front me, I Would out-stare them. Pas runs upon him, he
falls and lies.

Exit. Pas. Enter Con^hylio in his Mistresses apparel. Con. How well my
Mistress Cosmaes clothes do fit me?
What pity 'twas, I was not made a woman?
I think ^ should have made a pretty Nymph: ha?
I could have been a pitiful creature,
And yet perhaps, a good unhappy wench.
Cosma by this has met with her Armillus^
And sports her self: could I meet Fredocaldo,
I should have sport enough: She stumbles at Fred.
What Fredocaldo dead? cou^age, man.

Fred. I had a fearful dream and scarce am waken.

Con. Come shake off dreams, sleep is not fit for lovers,
We Will to the rocky cave.

Fred. My sun? my fire?

Con. But Fredocaldo, can you think that fire
Can love cold water, the sun can frost desire?

Fred. I tell thee fairest Cosma, those fair eyes
Bring back my spring:
Wrong not thy self, dear love, so fair a day
Cannot but make mid-winter turn to May.
Cold rhewms I feel not, no frost's locked in this chest^
Thy love begets a summer in my breast.

Con. Fie Fredocaldo:
Not in the open air.

Ex^unt^ Scen. 5.
Armillus. Cosma Ar. Wha^ furies haunt this grove? is not this Cosma?
Yes: here again she comes^ most blessed heavens, Enter Cosma
I see that ye are more gracious then Hell's spightfull.
Cosma?

Cos. Armillus.

Ar. My love.

Cos. Sure thou have done some cruel murder,
And the vnexplate ghost thus haunts thee.

Ar. I never thought it, Cosma: rather some power of these woods,
Too envious of my good hap, and iea^ous of thy favor,
Thus crosses our desires^ but if again
He chance to interpose his horrid face,
I Will rather dye, then leave thy wished embrace. Enter Pa^ disguised.
All hell and furies haunt us. Exit A^.

Pa^. Well overtaken, Nymph, start not, you are sure,
S^e I am your familiar.

Cos. Beshrew your heart for thus affrighting me.

Pas. Do you not blush to cast your love upon a man,
Whose love is as himself an alien? to thine own
Thou make thee strange, familiar to unknown.

Cos P^sh, thou art foolish, did I ever bind thee to me
Only? why should thou then confine me
To thy sole passion? so often before
You men have changed, that you can change no more:
From bad to worse, from worse, to worst of all:
There lie you now, and can no lower fall:
And as you wished that we should never roue,
We pray as fast, that you at length could move.
Cease then for shame to rail at women's ranging:
When men begin, women will leave their changing.
Farewell.

Pas. Nay soft, I am dog well bitten,
And will not part so easily with my prey,
I have not tasted venison many a day.

Cos. I cannot well deny thee, it is thy right:
Thou well have purchased it, this be thy right.

Exe^^t. Scen^ 6.
Conchilio. Con. Ha, ha, he: this old dry stubble, how it crackes in the
burning! alas poor saplesse oak: it is time 'twere down, I stayed till he was
ready, all unready, but when he 'gan to put on his spectacles, away slipped I:
he will do my mistress little hurt. Spectacles! hah, ha, he! now for my loving
Lobster, this is his time; and if the Cyclops too do keep his promise, O what
rare compound of mirth^ I Will make, while the one with sha'me, the other with
fear I Will take!

The fish comes already to the net. Enter Cancrone, going backward upon her.
He looks over his shoulders.


Can. To all I speak, but I tell no man,
Whether I love Nymph or woman.

Con. Tell not me, but tell the rocks,
Not words must disciple you but knocks.
I am out of your debt for a rhyme.

Can. I think she knew my cue,
The charm begins to work already.

Con. I know not how this fishers hook has caught me,
I ever for his rudeness love him: it is the badge of innocence.

Can. Somewhat rude if you will, but innocent in your face.

Con. O those glearing eyes that dart the beams,
The beams that drowned my heart with fiery streams.

Can. Now to Cupids arrowe tree, and she sinks downright condoling; Cosma, I
have pity on thee, but it beseemes a man of my confession, to have a negligent
care of his good reparation abroad in the world and elsewhere; I would be loath
to be seen in my loue-worke, i will mount the tree and scry the coast. He goes
up the tree.


Con. Stay not, but come again thy self, sweet heart, to receive me.


Can. O ho, here is bundance of people, bundance a lookers on, I dare not love
thee before them all, we will into the myrtle grove present.


Con. Quickly return, my love, return Cancrone my dearest.


Can. Stand forth Cosma, and say on till thou come to that, I cry, I dye, I lie.


Con. I spy him now approaching, Enter Rimbombo. What though he be all rags
in his limbs? what though his gesture taste of violence? we Nymphs, they say,
like not such wooers worst.


Rim. Thou speak of thy Rimbombo, that myrtle groves which love the winding
shores, deserve to be to Venus consecrate, as faster friend^ to lovers, then
the woods and caves of all the Mounts of Sicily, whose Nymph^ do coyly shun
and mock our troops,


Con. you come somewhat before your time, Rimbombo,
And Yet in love prevention is no crime:
Lovers may come before, not out of time.
And truly I wish, you had come a little sooner.
^uen now a mong^ell crabbed fisher swain
Laid siege to this unconquered fort.

Rim. What wight of brauest blood by sea and land dares share with me in
Cosmaes love? by Polypheme my sea-bred fire I vow, the sand on which he treads,
is not so small, as shall this pestell make his pounded bones.


Con, Nay now he treads not upon these sands, but is fled up to the hills,
and shortly thence will of himself come tumbling down to me.


Rim. I would he durst: I never yet but once did taste of fishers blood, it is
iollie sweet: come fisher, this way or that way I am for you at both weapons,
club or teeth: let us to the grove, see, every myrtle tree bids war to fishers
peace, and joy to me. Why weeps my Cosma? Sweet, fear not that which thou
desire.


Con. Sweet Cyclops, meanst thou to ravish me?


Rim. O heavens thine own appointed time and place, thine, own sweet
Cyclops, and can rauishment? --


Con. Why this know; we Nymphs that long live chaste, and wear our girdle of
virginity -- but lo, Diana stops my tongue, she bends her deadly bow, I dare
not.


Rim. Speak on, here is none but trees, and thy tru^tie true Rimbombo.


Con. By that bright flame which like one only sun gives day to the sphere of
thy maiesticke face, I thee adjure, that thou disclose to none this sacred
mystery.


Rim. Not: to my mother: no not in my dream: say on


Con. We neither yield, nor take in love delight,
Until our girdle first be once vnplight
By lovers hands, and then about his wast,
By our own hands the same be tied fast.
Now all is out.

Rim. A pretty piece of work, my hands do their office nimbly
I have vnfettered thee, come put this sweet yoke on me.

Con. Nay turn about, it must be tied contrary to other girdles, just behind.
Stand nearer to me, yet near.


Rim. As close as thou will, Cosma; I would your filthy fisher saw us now, 't
would make his teeth water.


Con. Hang him stinking Lobster, he da^res not look upon any of thy kin: his
haddocke eyes would start out of his head, if he should see but one hair of
Rimbomboes head.


Rim. How long will thou be tying me?


Con. The more knots I tie, the faster will my love be to you: but you will be
prating of this secret, when you come home among your mounting Nymphs.


Rim. If I do, then ge^d me: have thou done?


Con. I have but three knots to tie: they are all true knots.


Rim. When thou have done, preethee come kiss me, Cosma, Conchylio steals
away, leaving him bound to the tree where Cancrone is. I see thou art a pure
virgin, thou never did this office before, thou art no quicker at it. What
Cosma? what? no Cosma! what a wooden wench? here is a true love knot with a
witness. O faithless Cosma! O witless Rimbombo! O Nymph! O fishers! O
shepherds! O Satyrs! O Cyclops!


Enter Conchylio again. Con. Ha, ha ha: O love! O wit! O tree! O girdle! O
platterface!
O oyster eyes!

Rim. Thou bitch, thou witch, thou spawne of a mermaid.


Con. Thou AEtna, thou Chaos, thou Hell: nay tugge and tugge, my virginity is
tough and strong enough: O for, some Nymphs fishers or shepherds to bait this
Orke. I Will out and call in some bandog: so ho, so ho, ho, ho. Exit.


Rim. The knots are so many, the girdle so strong, and the tree stands so fast.
O anger! O shame! here she will bring in all the country to laugh me to death,
hide yet thy face with some of these lower boughs.


Enter Conchylio. Con. So ho, so ho: O dogged fortune! not one Nymph to be
found not one feate fisher! not one: but that feating fisher that is ready to
wing his sea token net on the Cyclops blockhead.


Rim. Away thou monstrous woman, oh, oh^


Con. Away thou monstrous man's ah ha hey.


Rim. How now! what is that? what, have I another witness of my folly? what
gobbet of man's flesh grows^ upon this tree?


Con. I Will have a graft of this mi^tle tree, it bears fine love worms, on the
s^ocke, a maggot would up in a Cobweb, on the bough a barnacle, which ere long
will fall and turn to a goose: now Cupids gosling, now on your bare-head knee,
go beg at Cupids door.


Can. Ah cursed Cupid^ i will no more of thy service, I had rather fight with
nine Orkes, ha, hei, au.


Rim. Come down thou fished bit; my mouth shall catch thee. Gentle C^sma, i will
forgive thee all, and love thee yet, if thou will help to reach my walking
stick; i will make my young Orke-ketcher believe he shall be his grandsires
heir.


Con. Your staff? marry and shall, it is a pretty pole to bang those boughs
withal, and when thou do it, do but gape, and that rotten plumme will fall
into thy mouth.


Can. Nay, I know of old I should be devoured.


Con. Thy staff, Rimbombo, is not for a weak Nymph to lift.


Rim. Yet a little more to this hand: Oh oh, my shoulder's thunderstrook! While
Rimbombo reaches for his staff, Cancrone leapes on's back, and lies on the
ground.
O coward Jove, to strike me on the back, bu^ wast our fisher lubber? is he
escaped our hands?


Con. Why Cancrone, rise, i will help thee.


Can. Good Charon carry me over gently, my bones are sore, and your boat side
so hard.


Con. Give me thy hand, i will waft thee.


Can. I tell thee Charon, I have nothing to give thee for ferriage, i will help
to row, I have been a poor fisher while I liu'd^


Rim. I would I were there too, but that I should sink Charons boat with a
tree at my back.


Con. Why valorous Cancron^, view thy self and me thy captive Cosma, we are
conquerours, behold our enemies in fetters fast bound.


Can. Am I alive indeed? me thought this leg hung out of Charons boat in the
water, did I tie the Ork^ there; Cancro^^ Come captain, let us go triumphing to
the temple. rises up.


Con. Nay, the Ork's dead and buried, this is the second fatal for the Cyclops.


Can. Is he safe? i will make side-slops on him. I lay studying how to deal with
him upon equal terms: come if thou dare, thou sea-bred brat of Polyphemes
sine, you that would lick your lips at sweet fishers blood! sweet fishers
blood! mark that Cosma: I hope you think so too.


Rim. Sweet fisher, I will turn thy net maker if thou will undo me.


Can. No, it shall nere be said that I was the undoing of any man by
net-making, and besides, I have forsworn the mudd^e trade.


Con. Cancrone^ where is thy spirit? this is that pocketted up thy grandsire in
his wide intrailes.


Can. Me thought, when I was on the tree^ his breath smel^ of fish, my stomach
even foamed at him. Now then, sir Bompelo, as that Orke mouth of thine did
crumme thy por^idge with my grandsires brains, and then gave him his deaths
wound too, so will I first mince out thy scald-pate bones, and give thy flesh
to a fishers boy for haddocks meat, and then, O th^n I will ge^d thee, that
thou never shall run rutting after the Nymphs. How like thou this^


Rim. Shame and scorn make me silent.


Con. Nay, I will tell thee fitter vengeanc^, use him, as sage Ulysses did his
father Polypheme.


Can. That same Fool^shes had ^ pole-cat^ head, I ^^eane to mitigate him: he
was something, as it wa^e about branding a huge stone in a cave, in a goat
skin with Polypheme^ when the firebrand was asleep.


Con. I, I, in the cave ^e br^ded ou^ Polyph^mes eye, when he was asleep, and
you must imitate him ^here (...) his own staff, and make it an ex^^guisher
for that (...) la^pe.


Rim. This sport I like worst of all: help, gods of the woods.


Can. I Will blow the coal while you take your (...), but will your farginity
hold him fast?


Con. I warrant you it has been tried, come be thou my rest, i will tilt on thy
shoulders.


Can. Raunt tara, raunt taunt: and Cancrone falls, and his dagger from him in
the Cyclops reach. I shall make you stumble, let me Come hindermost.


Con. O your Whineyeard, the enemy has seazd on it.


Can. It Is no matter, he will hardly make it fly out of the Eel^skinne, it has
seen no sun this five quarters of a year I am sure.


Con. I hope the salt breath of the sea has sealed it up.


Can. O Cosma, it is out, let us out too.


Con. O Cancrone, lo thy Cosma, Cupid, and Co^chilio. Cyclops, blame not this
my supposed sex, no Nymph, but lad has caught thee in this snare. Exit.


Rim. The greater shame, and fouler scorn to me.
Up to the hill, Rimbombo fly this shore,
And never deal with fisher-Nymph-lad more. Exit.

CHORUS,
This his wives quick ^ate lamenting,
Orp^hus sat his soul tormenting:
While the speedy wood came running,
And rivers stood to hear his cunning^
The hares ran with the dogs along,
Not from the dogs, but to his song:
But when all his verses turning,
Only framed his poor hearts burning:
Of the higher powers complaining,
Down he went to hell disdaining:
There his silver Lute-strings hitting,
And his potent verses fitting:
All the sweets that ere ^e took
From his sacred mothers brook:
What his double sorrow gives him^
And love that doubly double grieves him:
There he spends to move deaf hell,
Ch^rming Devils with his spell:
And ^ith sweetest asking leau^
Does the Lord of ghosts deceive.
Caron amazed his boat foreslowes,
While the boat, the sculler rows,
And of it self to'th' shore does floate,
^^ipping on the dancing moate.
The t^reeheaded Porter preast to hear,
Pricked up his thrice double ^are,
The Furies, plague^ for Guilt vp-heaping,
Now as guilty, fell a weeping:
Ixion, though his wheel stood still,
Still was wrapped with Musickes skill.
Tantale might have eaten now,
The fruit as still as was the bough,
But he fool no longer fearing,
Starved his taste to feed his hearing.
Thus since love has won the field,
Heaven and Hell, to Earth must yield,
Blessed soul that dyest in loves sweet sound,
That l^st in love in love art found.
If but a true-loues joy thou once do prove,
Thou will not love to live, unless thou live to lou^.
Act. 5.
Scen. 1.
Enter Alcippus and Thalander with a torch. Tha. TEll me, Al^ipp^^, is it day
or night?

Al. The light you bear, shows you there is no light.

Tha. This is none^ light was light in her eyes,
In them it lived, put out with them it dies.
The sun is quenched.

Al. Yet soon will shine again.

Tha. Not possible! heavens light will ever plain.
When her two living stars can sink and die,
How can the sun dream immortality?

Al. Sir, if your to me, or mine to you, might give me privilege, I feign
would tell you, that this too fixed love seems rather do^ing.


Tha. Alcippus, did thou ever love?

Al. I think sir never.

Tha. I think so too, nor can know what love is.

Al. Yet this I know, love still is of the fairest,
Fond then the love, that loves the withered,
But madness seems to dote upon the dead.

Tha. True, true, Alcippus, love is of the fairest,
And therefore never tied unto the body:
Which if compared unto the minds fair graces,
Seems like the block that Lunaes face defaces.
But grounded on the mind, whose virtuous parts.
And living beauties are loves surest darts,
Which makes me now as freely love as euer^
Her virtue and my love decays never.
See thou this rock, Alcippus? it is a temple,
Olindaes temple! it is a sacred shrine,
Where virtue, beauty, and what ere divine,
Are to be worshipped, prithee friend now leave me,
Here is an Altar, I must sacrifice.

Al. If you will leave your grief.

Tha. I will, I will:
Indeed I will; leave me: griefs ebb grows low,
When private heart^ the eye-bankes ouerflow.

Al. I will retire, not leave him: well, I fear,
When two such flood-streams meet, love and despair.

Tha. Thou blessed Altar, take these worthless offring^,
The corral's once more drowned in brine of sorrow,
These pearly shells, which daily shall be filled
With my hearts water, through my eyes distild.
You corralls, whose fresh beauti^s are a shadow
O^ her sweet blushes, ^ell her living graces,
Though now as you plucked from their native places,
Are yet as you from your first seat removed,
He^e fresher shining then when first I loved.
Thou rock, that in thy blessed arms do infold her,
Witness my heart as firm as you do hold her.
And now goodnight thou set sun beauties, never,
Never more to be seen, goodnight for ever,
Thou silver forehead and thou golden hair,
My best, my only treasure when you were,
You snowy plains, and you fair modest dies,
You living stars, but now two quenched lights,
Whose fall, heavens stars with feared ruin frights.
You eyebrowes, which like Rainbowes two appear;
A miracle, Rainebowes on sky so clear.
And all you unseen beauties sof^ly rest,
Sleep, quiet sleep you in this stony chest,
I cannot long; I will not long be from you,
Shortly i will come and in this rockie bed
Slumber with my Olinda, with Olinda
I Will sleep my fil^^meane time as near as may be,
Here rest mine eyes, rest close by your Olinda.
He lies down by the rock. Hark, hark; Arion, thou choice Musician,
Sing me a note that may awake pale death,
Such as may move deaf Hell^ and Stygian Io^e,
Such as once Orpheus -- O I am idle, idle:
Sleep, sleep, mine eyes, this short releasement take you,
Sleep, sleep for ever; never more awake you.
Her face your object never more shall be,
Sleep then, vain eyes, why should you wish to see?

Scen. 2.
The Rock opens: Enter Olinda led by Glaucus and Cir^e: they retire leaving
Olinda. Song. Olin. Thou worthie^t daughter of the greatest light,
Most powerful Circe, and thon honored Glaucus,
What duty a poor fisher maid may give you,
In thanks, and vows, and holy offerings,
Shall still be ready at your sacred altars.
Thalander, now to thee, what sacrifice?
What offerings may appease thy wronged love?
What have I but my self? ah worthless prize
Of such, so tried, and so unmoved a faith.
Ah, could I spend my body, wear my soul,
And then resume another soul and body,
And then consume that soul and body for thee,
All would not pay the use of half my debt.
How pale he looks, how strangely altered!
Is he not dead? no, no, his pulse is quick,
His heart is strong, and rising, in his heat,
Threatens with strokes, my churlish hand to beat:
Nature, how could in one so firmly tie
Perpetual motion to fixed constancy?
How can this wonder fall in Notion,
A heart unmoved, yet still in motion!
Alas he weeps, I hope his grief and fears
Swim fast away in those sad streaming tears.
Thou Have mourned enough, more justly may I weep,
Leave me thy tears, rest thou and sweetly sleep.

Thalander starts up. Tha. Morpheus, one more such dream shall buy me.
Where, where art, Olinda? whither, whither flyest thou?

Olin. Nay whither flies Thalander? here is Olinda:
Tell me why waked the substance thou eschewest^
Whose shadow in a dream thou gladly viewest.

Tha. Thou fairest shadow of a Nymph more fair,
^eath yet I see cannot thy light impair.

Olin. Thou dreamest still Thalander!

Tha. Ah too too true;
For such a sight wake shall I never view.

Olin. I live.

Tha. Would I were dead on that condition.

Olin. So would not I: believe me friend, I live.

Tha. Could I believe it, I were happy.

Olin. If me thou will not, trust thy sense, thy eyes.

Tha. They saw thee dead, how shall I trust my eye,
Which either now or then did vowch a lie?

Olin. Credit thy touch.

Tha. Then like a dream thou wilt fly,

Olin. Thou flyest, thou art the shadow love not I:
Thalander, take this, it is thine for ever,
Nothing but death, nor death this knot shall sever.

Enter Alcippus. Al. How is this! have you learnt, have you learnt your mother
Circes art to raise the dead? wonder? think she lives.


Olin. What says Thalander? does he yet believe me?


Tha. If thou art dead, fair hand, how do revive me?


Olin. Thalander, heart and hand had now been cold but for, Glaucilla, she
preventing Cosma, temperd the poisonous vial, changing death for sleep, so
gave me life, thee love.


Tha. Alcippus, art thou there? thou art my friend I prithee tell me true,
true Alcippus! do thou not see Olinda?


Al. I see her in your hand.


Tha. Art sure it is she? tell me, are we alive?
Art sure we wake? are we not both mistaken?
If now I sleep, O let me never waken.

Al. If you would surely know, try if she breathe,

Tha. Thy hand lives: do thy lips live too Olinda!
Alcippus, she lives and breathes, Al^ippus:
And with that sugared bread my heart both fired,
And life and love with thousand joys inspired.
Ah my Olinda.

Olind. My dear, my dear Thalander.

Tha. Is It possible thou live? is it sure I hold thee?
These happy arms shall never more unfold thee.

Olin. Tell me, my love, can thou such wrongs forgive me?

Tha. My joy, my soul.

Olin. I never more will grieve you.
Can thou forget my hate, my former blindness?
If not, boldly revenge my rash unkindness.
Pierce this vile heart my souls ungrateful center,
Pierce with thy dart where loves dart could not enter.

Tha. For thy defense my hand shall still attend thee,
My hand and heart, but never to offend thee:
The only penance that I enjoin thee ever,
Is that we live and love and joy together.
Think not my hand will sacrilege commit,
To break this temple where all Graces sit.

Olin. True, true my love, it is vowed a temple now,
Where ever shall be worshipped love and thou.

Al. You happy pair, since Cosma's spight's defeated,
And Magoe's charmes^ and death by love is cheated,
Why stand you here? it is time from hence to move:
This was the bed of death, and not of love.
Death has his part of night, love challenges
The rest, love claims the night as well as death.

Tha. What says my love?

Olin. What my Thalander, ever
With thee to life or death, but from thee never.

Al. This half persuades me to become a lover. Exe^nt.
Where better could her love then here have neasted?
Or he his thoughts more daintily have feasted?

Manet Alcippus. Scen. 3.
Enter Tyrinthus and Gryphus. Tyr. Know thou Perindus sister, or Olinda?

Al. I know them both sir.

Tyr. Live they yet and breathe?

Al. They live and now most happy. Exit Alcippus.

Tyr. Thou make me happy, in thy happy news.
All thanks ye heavenly powers, when I forget
Your goodness in my childrens life and safety,
Let heaven forget both me and mine for ever.
Gryphus, back to our ship, and fetch me thence
The vestments vowed to Neptune, and the chest,
Wherein I locked my other offerings. Exit Gryphus.
This rock my heart prefers before a palace.
Fond men that have enough yet seek for more,
I thought by traffic to increase my store,
And striving to augment this careful pelf,
I lost my goods, my liberty, my self:
Taken by Persians on the Grecian seas,
So I my captain and the King did please,
Soon was I loosed from my slavish band,
And straight preferred to have a large command,
There have I now consumed these thrice ^iue summers,
There might I have lived long in wealth and honor,
But ah thou little home, how in thy want
The world so spacious, yet seems too too scant^
At my departure hence I left two infants,
Perindus and Olinda, the boy some eight,
The girl but two years old, t^eir mother dead,
Who giving life to'th'girle, so took her death,
And left her own, to give h^^ in^ant b^^ath.
Great Jove and Neptune, I will keep my vows,
Seeing my Children live, two chosen bulls,
With myrtle crowned, and Oak leaves laid with gold,
Shall fall upon your altars.

Enter Pas. Pas. You sacred virtues, truth and spotless faith,
Where will you live, if not in such a Nymph?
Whose breast will you now seek? what mansion?

Tyr. My trembling heart does some great ill divine,
And tells me, every grief and fear is mine.

Pas. Where now can unsuspected friendship rest?
If treachery possess so fair a breast.

Tyr. Fishers what news?

Pas. Sir, little as concerns you.

Tyr. Pray heavens it do not.

Pas. Your habit speaks a stranger,
And yet me thinks, I somewhat else have ^eene,
Some lineaments of that face: are you Tyrinthus?

Tyr. The same.

Pas. O cruel heavens I could you find
No other time, to give him back his country?
If thus you give, happy whom you deny,
The greater good, the greater injury:
Thy only daughter

Tyr. Is dead. Tyrinthus falls.

Pas. I should have said so. Alas, he falls.
Tyrinthus, what, one blow thus strike thee under fortunes feet?
How loath his life returns!

Tyr. How well I had forgot my grief,
And found my rest, with loss of restless life!
Thou much have wronged me, fisher, it is no love,
Death from his just possession to remove:
Heavens, ye have thanks for both, yet one you slew,
Give back half of thy thanks, take but your due:
I owe you nothing for Olinda, nothing.
Ah poor Olinda^ I shall never more,
Never more see thee: thy father must lament thee,
Thy father, wh^ in death should long prevent thee,
How long since died she?

Pas. With the last sun she fell.

Tyr. Sure heavens, ye mock me: alas, what victo^y?
What triumph in an old man's misery?
When you have won, what conquest, that you slew
A wretch that hated his life as much as you?

Pas. Sir, you forget your self: to war with heaven,
Is no less fond, then dangerous^

Tyr. Tell me fisher, have you a child?

Pas. No sir.

Tyr. No marvel then
Thou blam'st my grief, of which thou have no ^ence:
First lose a child, then blame my patience.

Pas. If thou be grieved, this is no way to ease it,
Sooner we anger heaven, then thus appease it.

T^y. But when the heart such weight of sorrow bears,
It speaks from what it feels, and what it fears.
Died she by a natural, or by violent means?

Pas. Nature refuses an office so unnatural.

Tyr. Hard fate, most fitly were you women made:
Since fate unmerciful, unmoved stands,
Well was life's distaffe put in women's hands.
Killed by a man?

Pas. No man was so unnatural.

Tyr. A woman!

Pas. Yes.

Tyr. Fit instrument of women: what was the weapon?

Pas. The cowards weapon, poison.

Tyr. Can tell the murderers name?

Pas. Her name Glaucilla:
A Nymph thought absolute, though now infected,
That heaven it self might sooner be suspected.

Tyr. Tell me the circumstance.

Pas. 'Twill but more grieve you.

Tyr. True, but it is pity in vnhelpt distress,
Condemned souls with all the weight to press.

Pas. Olinda this last night complained to Cosma,
(A Nymph which lately came from fair Messena)
That this Glaucillaes powerful charms had fired her,
And with Thalanders love now dead, inspired her
With such a feeling grief, her grief lamenting,
That she, to help so desperate love consenting,
Gave her a water which she often did prove,
Wo^ld either quench or ease the pains of love,
Which Cosma swore, the other nere denied.
Glaucilla changed, Olinda drank and dyed.
Dicaeus hearing this --

Tyr. Lives then Dicaeus?

Pas. As well and just as ever.

Tyr. His life does somewhat mend
My child's sad death, after a child, a friend.

Pas. Dicaeus by this evidence condemns her
By 'th' law, from that high rock to fall, and she
With smiling welcomed death, and quietly
Steal'd to the rock from whence she must be cast.
Wonder so heavy guilt should fly so fast!
She led her leaders to that deep descending,
The guilty draws the guiltless to their ending:
And thus I left them, and with her just Dicaeus,
To see her execution, who goes not from her,
Till from the rock, in seas she leave her breath,
Die must she as she killed, water her crime and death.

Tyr. Ah my poor Olinda! had I seen thee yet
And closed thine eyes, alas my poor Olinda!

Pas. This grief is vain and can no more revive her, you lose your tears.

Tyr. When that I hold most dear is ever lost, poor loss to lose a tear.

Pas. Your son strives, the good which heaven bereaues you,
You quickly see, but see not what it leaves you.

Tyr. Art sure he lives?

Pas. Two hours since, sad I left him,
But safe.

Tyr. What chances happen in an hour?
By this he may be dead and buried.
But yet Perindus, if thou living be,
My half joy lives, my half joy dies in thee.

Scen. 2.
Enter Cancrone and Scrocca bound: Nomicus ^he Priest. Can. Ah Scrocca, thou
have often heard me say, it would be my luck to be devoured; and to tell thee
true, I ever feared those Cyclops most; I never had any mind to them.


Scr. Why Cancrone, this is the slavery on it, had we been Master fishers, we
should never have been troubled to climb up these Mountains, we should
never have been cast to our old acquaintance the fish.


Tyr. Fisher, know thou these men?


Pas I know the men, but not their meaning.


Can. That would never have angered me, thou know we have fed upon fish this
many year, and for us to have made them one merry meal, had been but the
sign of a thankful nature, but ah those C^clops, clops, clops. Scro^ca, I
cannot digest them.


Scr. I fear they will ^gest us well enough.


Can. And yet I care not much if I were sure to be eaten up by that Cyclops
that ate up my grandsire, for then I might have some hope to see the good old
man once again before I die.


Scr. I care not whose hands I fall into, I Am sure he shall have no sweet
bitte of me now; nothing grieves me, but that having done but one good deed
in all my life, I must die for that.


Nom. Thou foolish fisher, think it good to stop
The course of justice, and break her sword, the Law?
By Law thou li^'st: he justly death deserves,
Who that destroys, which him and his preserues.

Tyr. Are not these my old men, Scrocca and Cancrone?


Scr. Well sir, you may say what you will, but if we live by the Law, how
comes it to pass, that we must die by the Law?


Can. Me thinks I see how busy Rimronce will be about me: he surely will be
upon my back, for my being upon his, a while a go.


Scr. Nay Cancrone, thou die for saving thy master too.


Tyr. Ay me, my son?


Can. I have no mind to climb these Mountains, I begin to be short-winded
already, I shall never hold out; had I thought it would have come to this, I
would have been vilely tempted to ha let my Master drown quickly.


Scr. What, man? thou could never have done thy Master better service then
to dye for him, nay, if Perindus live, I care not.


Tyr. Perindus? I can hold no longer, friend, who is thy Master? why art thou
manacled?


Scr. Mantled hither! marry this Priest has mantled us for saving our Master
Perindus.


Tyr. Ay me, my son.


Can. Vds fish, old Master, where have you been this 20 years and more;


Nom. Tyrinthus! at such a time! sir, your arrival is either ^ery happy, or
else most hapless, either to see, or else prevent a danger.


Tyr. Priest, how is my Perindus?


Nom. Doomed to die.


Tyr. What is the cause?


Nom. His will.


Tyr. Who could persuade him?


Nom. She who most strove to hinder and dissuade him.


Tyr. What had he done?


Nom. That which deserves all li^e and love.


Tyr. How fine the heavens powers can sorrowe^ frame!
The fates will play, and make my woe their g^me.
Where is he?

Can. Safe enough I warrant you, get's leave of the Priest, master, and we will
go fetch him.


Scr. We caught him out of the water.


Can. O, he had supt a bundance of ^ait porri^ge!


Scr. And brought him to the ship where the mariners keep him.


Tyr. Why stand I idle here! O to the shore i will fly,
And either with him live, or for him die.

Can. Master, master, master. Exit Tyrinchus.

Pa^. I Will follow him: nature can do no less
Then either help, or pity such distress. Exit Pa^.

Can. Nay if you go too, then farewell all,
Farewell ye rocks, farewell to thee O love,
You lovely rocks, you hard and rocky love.
Nay I shall turn swain presently and sing my final song.

Nom. I marvel what it is that stays Dicaus.


Con. Marry let him stay till I send for him, the Cyclops shall want their
breakefast this month.


Nom. Here I must stay for him.


Scen. 5.
Enter Cosma. Cos. Feign would I know how my gin^e thriues and prospers. Ol^nda
is fast, and by my disamour has quenched her love with death: if now Glaucilla
be taken in that snare, then am I cunning: well may I prove a fisher, who have
took too maids so soon with one self bait and hook. Is not that Nomicus?
I shall learn of him. Nomicus?


Nom. Who Cosm^?


Cos. Why are these fishers bound?


Con. For you.


Cos. For me?


Can. I for you, had not you cus'd Glaucilla, she had not been condemnd: if
she had not been condemnd, Perindus would not have died for her: if he would
not have died for her, he had not fallen from the rock: had he not fallen from
the rock, we had not saved him: if we had not saved him, we had not been
bound: were we not bound, we would show a fair pair of heels,


Cos. What talks this fool? Perindus fallen from the rock!


Nom. Have thou not heard then of Perindus faith and fal^?


Cos. No, not a word; but feign would hear.


Nom. And shall: my tongue is as ready as thy ear; Mean while lead these
away, soon as Dicaeus returns, I Will overtake you.


Can. I prithee Mr Priest, let me crave one favor; that I may have an Epitaph
for me in Neptunes church porch, I Will never go farther.


Nom. Here Is no time for Epitaphs, away.


Can. Nay, it is soon done, I Will trouble never a poet of them all, I have it
already. Cancrone valorous and kind, where art thou?
Cancrone too kind and valorous to live,
Ingulft in Cyclops guts. Readers, why start you?
His life for his master he did freely give.


Ungrateful Sicelie that want his bones,
Instead of members keeping his memory in stones.
Short and sweet, Mr Priest.

Scr. Cancrone, this is a land voyage, you must lead the way.


Can. But when we sail down the Cyclops throat, I Will giu^ you the
preeminence. Exeunt.


Nom. After that hapless Nymph had heard her doom,
As she was led to'th' rock, in the middle way,
Perindus flying fast, calls out, Stay:
And for he thought his feet too slowly bore him,
Before he came, he sent his voice before.
Stay, stay, Dicaeus, thou art a man, I see,
And well may err heavens not more pure then she.
Yet since the doom i^ past i will, pawn my breath,
And make your fact ^^sse hanious by my death:
I Will lose he^ life in me, and she shall spend
My life in her, so both shall better and.

Cos. This was no ill news to the Nymph.

Nom. Yes, yes: then first she thought her self condemnd,
Death in him she feared and in her self contemnd.
That law it self (says she) should suffer death,
Which one condemns, another punnisheth.
True, says Perindus, my life, my all is in thee,
When thou offendst, why should thou punish me?
But brief to give their words in short contracted,
Was never part of love more lovely acted:
Both loath to live, and both contend to die,
Where only death strove for the victory.
Mean time I could but weep, nor I alone,
That two such loves should die, not live in one.

Cos. Their spotless fayth's a cristall, where I see
Too late my cancred ha^es deformity.

Nom. At length the law it self decides the strife,
That he with loss of his might buy her life.
Then and but then ^he, wept, and to prevent him,
Down fell she with a deadly look and eye,
Acting the prologue of his tragedy,
And waked again, she 'gan to chide and rave,
And vows to live no further then his grave;
While he with cheerful steps the rocks asce^ding:
Fearelesse beholds his death, that steep descending,
And boldly standing on the utmost b^owe,
Thus sp^ke:
Poor life, I never knew thy worth till now,
How thou art oue^ valewed to pay
Her life with thine, gold with base alcumy.

Cos. Just, just, you heavens, I have set a gin
For them, and now my self the first am in.

Nom. Then turning to his love, thus spoke his last:
Farewell Glaucilla, live and in thy breast
As in a heaven my love and life shall rest:
Seek not by death thy self from grief to free,
Remember now Perindus lives in thee.
Cherish my hear^, which in thy heart does lie,
For whilst thou live, Perindus cannot dye:
So leapt he lightly from the cloudy rock.

Cos. Is he then dead?

Nom. No: for the guilty ^ea
With soft embraces wrapped his limbs;
It seems the waves moved with Sympathy,
Would teach unhuman men humanity.
Though they could not prevent, would ease his fall;
And not consenting to his pious death,
Restored him up again to air and breath:
Briefly, those two his servants not regarding,
Dicaeus threatening voice, and just awarding,
With him took up his guilt, and to a ship
That rides in the haven safe conuayd him, there
They left him now revived, themselves were taken
And as the law commands, were doomed to suffer
The death of sla^es: both to be strongly bound,
And in those hills left to the greedy Cyclops:
And now the stay is only in Dicaeus,
At whose return they suffer, just they dye,
Who love their master more then equity.

Cos. O lawless love! this soul offense,
Which when it prosperd, pleased my rauish't sense:
With what a dry aspect, what horrid sight,
Now done, ^t fills my ^oule with guilty fright,
Who ere thou art, if in t^y spotless breast,
Thy undefiled thoughts do quiet rest:
Wake them not, and let no blood-hound with thee dwell,
These murdering thoughts are like the mouth of hell,
Into whose yawning it is more easy never
To fall, then fallen, to cease from falling ever.

Enter Pas. Pas. Nomicus, thou now may let thy prisoners free,
Thalander to Olinda now revived,
Perindus to Glaucilla are to be married,
And all are brought along with singing,
Hymen the shores, Hymen the echoes ringing.
Nomicus, see thou this Nymph? ah could thou think
That treason, envy, murder, spite and hell,
All hell it self in such a heaven could dwell?
This is the knot of all these sorrows; Cosma,
If not for shame, why yet for spite or fashion,
For woman's fashion let some tears be spilt:
A sea of weeping will not wash thy guilt.

Nom. Great nature, that have made a stone descry
Twixt mean^r natures, checking baser metalls,
Which proudly counterfeit the purer gold,
Why have thou left the soul of man no touchstone,
To judge dissemblance, and descry proud vice,
Which with false colors seems more virtuous
Then virtues self? like to some cunning workman,
Who frames a shape in such a form of stature,
That often he excells by imitating nature.
He that should look upon this Nymphs sweet ey^^
Would vow't a temple sworn to purity.

Pas. If murder rest in such a lovely grace,
Here do I vow never to trust a face.
Shall I call back your Prisoners?

Nom. Prithee doe^
Our nets, boats, oars, and hooks shall now go play,
For heaven has sworn to make this holy day.

Scen. 6.
Enter Dicaeus, Tyrinthus, Thalander, Olinda, Perindus, Glaucillae, Alcippus,
Chorus. Song.
Hymen, Hymen, come safe on, Hymen.
That I love for ever constant stands,
Where hearts are tied before the hands,
Where fair virtue marries beauty,
And affection pleads for duty:
Hymen, Hymen, come safe on Hymen.
Al. You honored pair of fishers, see where your love,
So full of constant trial now has brought you,
Se^, blessed souls, through so many tears,
Turnings, despaires, impossibilities,
Your love is now most safe arrived: Thalander,
Is this the Nymph, whom heaven and angry hell,
Her cold desires, and colder death it self
Would have devoured from thy deserving love?
Thalander, these hands are thine, that heavenly face,
Those starrie eyes, those roses and that grace,
Those corrall lips, and that unknown breast,
And all the hidden riches of the rest:
They all are thine, thine is the fair Olinda.
Yet thou, as thou wast wont, all sad and heauy^

Tha. Blame me not, friend: for yet I seem forsaken
And doubt I sleep, and fear still to be waken.

Enter Pas, with Cancrone and Scrocca. Cos. Now is the time of pardon. Ye
happy maids,
Your love in spite of all tempestuous seas,
Is safe arrived, and harbors in his ease,
And all those storms have got but this at last,
To sweeten present joys with sorrows past.
Blessed Olinda, thou have got a love
Equal to heaven, and next to highest Jove.
Glaucilla, thy loss thou now do full recover.
Ah you have found (too seldom found) a lover.
Then do not her too rigorously reprove,
For loving those whom you yet better love.

Olin. For us, we judge not of your hard intent,
But reckon your joys fatal instrument.

Dicae. Yet this her penance: Cosma, mark thy censure,
Whom most tho^ should love, thou shall love never
Dote thou on dotards, they shall hold thee ever:
The best and wisest never shall respect thee,
Thon only fools, fools only shall affect thee.
Loose now those prisoners; so forward to the temple.

Exit Chorus. Can. Ha brave Judge, now Mistress mine, I must confess.

Cos. This charm begins to work already,
I love this fool, and doat upon him more,
Then ever upon any man before:
Well, I must be content thus to be cursed
And yet of lovers, fools are not the worst.
For howsoever boys do hoote and flout them,
The best and wisest often have fools about them.

Can. I and many a fools babble too, I warrant the^.
Sweet heart, shall we go to bed?

Cos. What, in the morning?

Can. Morning? it is night.

Cos. Thou art a fool indeed, see not the sun?

Can. Why that is a candle or the moon, I prithee let us go to bed^

Cos. Content; no time unfit for play,
Love knows no difference twixt night and day.

Can. Nay, all the play's done, gentles, you may goe^
I have another play within to do.
Riddle me, Riddle me, what is that?
My play is work enough; my w^rke is play,
I see to work in the night, and rest 'ith' day:
Since then my play and work is all but one,
Well may my play begin, now yours is done.

Exeunt. EPILOGVS.
AS in a Feast, so in a Comedy,
Two se^ces must be pleased in both the eye,
In feasts, the eye and taste must be invited,
In Comedies, the ey^ and ^are delighted:
And he that only seeks to please but either,
While both he does not please, he pleases neither.
What ever feast could every guest content,
When a^ t'ea^h man each taste is different?
But less a Scene, where naught but as it is newer,
Can please, where guests are more, and dishes fewer:
Yet in this thought, this thought the Author easd,
Who once made all, all rules, all never pleased.
Fain^ would we please the best, if not the many,
And sooner will the best be pleased then any:
Our rest we set in pleasing of the best,
So wi^h we you, what you may give us: Rest.
FINIS.

