Relation of the expongnable attempt and conquest of the Ylande of Tercera, and
all the Ylands thereto adjoining: don by Don Albaro de Bacan, Marquis of Santa
cruz, the chief Comme^dador of Leon, and Captain general of his Majesty.
And of all the enemies that were in the said Ylande, and of the Bulwarks,
Artilerie, and Munitions of the City of Angra, and Towns and Vilages thereto
belonging: and of the dwellers therein, and of all the punishment that was done
upon them.

Done in An. 1583.

AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas Purfoote.

THurseday the 23 day of June, in the year of our Lord 1583, upon the even of
the glorious S. John Baptist, the Marquis Santa-cruz departed out of the river
of the City of Lisburne, with five great ships called Gallions, and two
Galiazes, twelve Gallayes, 30 big ships, 12 Pataxes, and 15 Zabras, 14
Caruels of Portugal, and seven flat bottomed barks to land people: and in all
these ships were 8976 soldiers, Spaniardes, Almaynes, and Italions of the
company of the masters of the field, Do^ Lope de Figueroa, Don Francisco de
Bobadilla, and Don Iuan de Sandouall: And he that was Coronell of the
Almaynes, was the Earl Geronimo de Lodron: And the Italions upon the charge of
Lusio Pinatelo: and over a company of Portugals, was Captain Don Felix de
Aragon. And there were of Mariners 3823: so that there was in all 12799. and 50
particular Gentlemen, and 86 others retained amongst them, and they had six
months vittayles. And at such time as this army did set sail, and was going
forth to the Sea, the sippe called Santa Maria del Socorro, did strike upon
the catchippes against cast Calls: in the which ship was the company of Don
Miguell de Cordona, and were constrained thereby to return again into their
Port. And Sunday being the 26, for that the time and weather did seem to be
pleasant and calm, the Marquis was fully resolved, and did determine to send
the twelve Galies before, in the charge and government of the Captain Diego de
Mediano. And Monday being the 27 day, the Vdder of the ship called Santa
Maria de Acosta, did fall from her, for that it was not well set: and straighte
way they took out of her all the people she had, and put them into the
Pataxes and carried them ashore: and so all the army did follow their vyage,
with very scase winds, all upon the Bowlyne, till it was Wednesday the 17 of
July, that they did discover the Island of S. Mighel. And upon the Thurseday
Don Iorge Manrique, he that was general ouerseer of all the host and army,
went before in a small Pynnise for to view the company of the Master of the
field Augustine Inigues, and to ordain his imbarking in the twelve Galleys
which arrived there the fifth day of the same month, at the city of Punta
Delgada. And to ordain all the Artillery and Moiles for to draw and carry them,
with munitions and other necessaries belonging: and likewise to make in a
readiness the barks and other things fit for the vyage. All the whole
Navy was turning at sea with calmes and winds that came of the Island, and
could not by any means come to an anchor, in which time the Viseadmirall did
gather together all the rest of the Navy, till the thirteenth of the month, at
whithe time they came to an Anchor at the town of Villafranca, and city of
Punta Delgada, in sight and distaunce the one from the other four leagues. And
from thence the Marquis did pass in one of the Galleys unto Punta delgada, to
understand the state of the Island, as well as the imbarking of the 2300
Soldiers, which they found in the muster of the company of Augustine
Iniguez. And because that the wind was contrary, he stayde his going till it
was thurseday the 22 of Iulye, and came thither with all the whole Navy
together on the Saturday, being the 24 of the said month, at nine a clock of
the day: and came to an anchor in the play of the Town of Sansebastian of the
Island of Tercera, nigh unto the Artilery of the Forts, who did shoot many
Canons at the Galyon wherein the Marquis was, and likewise at the rest of the
Nauye as they entered in, for that the Island was fortifyed round about with
Fortes and Trenches, and very much people to defend them. And straighte way
the Marquis did send a particular soldier with a Trumpet, to offer unto the
Frenchemen and Naturalles the pardon and grace that he would give them of their
lives and goods as captain general: And to give unto the strangers shipping
and leave for to depart with their Ensigns, Armor, Drum, and Flute: and he
carried with him the pattents and pardons in writing, the tenor and form
whereof is as follows.

DOn Albaro de Bacan, Marquis of Santacruz, Commendador, Mayor of Leon,
Captain general of the Navy and army for the King Don Philip our Lord, To al
the^ that be dwellers, inhabitants, and abiders in the Island of Tercera, and in
all other places thereto adjoining, as well strangers as naturalles: It is well
known to all, that his catholic Majesty, that being, and as he is, natural
successor of the Kingdoms of Portugal, the Indies, Orientalles, and of all
the Islands and other parts comprehended in the Crown: and so he ought to be
acknowledged and obeyed, for to be Sovereign King and Lord, of all the
naturals of these kingdoms: but forgetting their duetye herein, and far from
this acknowledging, there be some of these said Islands that has admitted into
their company, people which does not only differ from them in nature, but
also in customs and religion, and has conspyred against his royal Majesty,
and has fallen into the danger of Crimen laesae maiestatis, divine and
humayne, worthy of exemplar punishment: yet for all this, his catholic
Majesty being moved with a christian zeal, and using his accustomed cleme^cy
in the service of God our Lord, and in all that in him lies to avoid effusion
of blood, considering that daily increases obstinacy and disorder, besides
the offense that they do unto God, by the great insolence of the Rebels, and
disobedience unto his Majesty, and unto his high name. And for that it is a
thing which touches the ryall conscience, the brevity to put remedy herein,
and to take away before our eyes this lively example of disobedience, for that
he has procured by all means possible to put remedy therein: and now last
of all using all benignity, his Majesty does give and grant grace unto all
the dwellers and inhabitants in the said Island of Tercera and unto all the rest
he does give general pardon, and jointly grants with their lives,
security of all their goods and Cattles, and assuring more besides this, that
they shall not be sacked nor spoiled in no kind of manner, but rather shall be
defended in all their doings with great quietneffe, upon condition that
without making any resistance, they will reduce themselves, and be subject and
obedient unto him, as unto their natural Lord and King, suffering and
permitting to disimbarke alande all the people that does cow in this ryall
Navy, or so many of them as I shall think best. And moreover and besides all
this, in the name of his Majesty I do offer unto all Frenchemen, and unto all
other strangers, of what state and condition soever he be, that will depart out
of this Island, and go to his own country, or whether soever his pleasure
is, I will let him depart liberally and clearly with all his goods and armor and
apparel, and likewise I will give them shipping if that of their own proproper
will, they will yield and surrender up all the fortes that is in their power and
charge, wholly dismamparing the said Island. And I the said Captain general, in
the name of his Majesty, and by his ryall word, do promise to perform and
keep this public pardon, in all, and for all, for that it is the determined
will of the king our Lord that it should be so observed and kept. And here I
do make protestation, that if you do not keep fulfill, and obey all that is
herein contained, but do persevere in your obstinacy, and forcing to go
forwards with your desperate intents, your fault will be the greater, for that
it does proceed of his own good will, and not by any force or constraining
done herein, neither by fear or any other thing that might disturb him, but
your ill purpose against your natural king. And I using the power which his
Majesty in this case has granted unto me, from this time I do pronounce
the^ to be enemies and rebels against their king, and Traitors subject unto
the pain which they shall suffer: and here I do protest, that all public
harms, chastismentes of blood, fyres, deaths, destructions, and deuastaciones
yt shall be done upon all the^ that does not come to acknowledge their
obedience unto his Majesty, but persevere in their obstinacy, that it be not
imputed unto his ryall Majesty nor unto my charge, but imputed unto the
default of those that be the rebels: And for the justifying hereof, and
confusion of their evil and perpetual dishonor, I do make them this
commandment, for that they may remain and live with the time to see a great
demonstration of mercy and Justice.

Made in the Gallion the Admiral of this Navy, called San Martin, being at
the Tercera the 23 of July 1583.

Don Albaro de Bacan, At the commandment of his Lordship. Andres de Morales.

The which pardon they would not admit, but answered them with very much shot
of Cannons and harcabuziers. And the better for to justify them in this case,
they sent unto them two Portugals, which they had taken in the Island of San
Mighel, of the^ which was sent to spy out the Fleet, by Manuel de Silua in a
small bark, by these they sent the security, and never heard any more of
them. In this time the Marquis in person did go and view all the Island, and
had with him other particular persons such as were ingenious: and in the mean
time the Masters of the field, captains, and Ensign bearers, did in diverse
parts sound to armor in the night, with the Galies and other vessels that
went with owers procuring for to disquiet them. In the end after that they had
taken the judgments of those which had seen the view, and being fully
resolved, they entered into counsel, and concluded to give the assault and
enterprise in a narrow gut or creek which was eaten with water like unto a
haven, and was called of the Milles, almost a league from the place where we
were at an anchor, and two leagues from the city of Angra, and a league from
the village of the Play: so that on tuesday the 26 of July at 3 of the clock
in the morning, the Marquis did depart with the Galies, carrying forwards as
well as he could, the great barks, Crares and Pynises, who by reason that
they had so much people in them, they could not profit themselves of their
owers, for they carried at their first disimbarking 4500 soldiers, of the
company of Don Lope de figueroa, and of these captains, Augustine de Herrera,
Lazaro de Isla, Pedro Rosado, who was wounded with a Harquebuz shot, and dyed
in the City of Angra, Miguel Ferrer, Diego Coloma, Don Iuan de cordoua, Miguel
de Benesa, Don Bernardino de cunniga, Sancho de solis, Don Iuan de Viuero and
his Ensign bearer, Alonso de Xeres, (which was one of the two Standard
bearers, that did place the Ensigns upon their Fortes and Trenches) and Pedro
de Santisteuan, who had a Harouebuz shot in his leg, in whose company went
these particular Gentlemen: Don Hugo de moncada, Don Godofre de Mendoca, Don
Pedro Henriquez, Don Luyz Venegas, Don Aluaro de Beneuides Bacan, Don Iuan de
Granada, Mercelo Caracheolo, Don Geronimo capata, Don Bernardino de Mendoca,
Don Diego de baca and the Master of the field, Don Francisco de Bobadilla:
with the Captains Don Antonio de Pasos, who was the first that went upon the
Trenches and Fortes: Captain Castellani, Iuan de Texeda, who did use the
office of the high Sergeante in all the companies: Diego de Cardinas, Soto
Mayor, Bustamante de Herrera, Iuan Fernandis de Luna, Diego de Ouiedo: And with
them went these Gentlemen. Don Philip de Cordona, with the master of the field
Don Francisco de Bobadilla, with them that went first: and Don Alonso de Rosas,
Do^ Gonsalo de Gueuara, Don Fra^cisco de Benauides, Don Antonio de Solis, Don
Fernando de Toledo, Don Francisco de Guzman, Don Geronimo de Virues, Do^ Iuan
de Butro^, Don Iuan de Pisa, Don Francisco de Aronda, Don Pedro Enriquez, the
Captain Melchior de Esparca, and the Master of the field Augustine Inigues de
cerate: with the Captains Diego Xuarez de salazar, Don Christoual de Acunna,
Don Iuan de Castillio, Don Fernando de Viuanco, Antonio Flores, Pedro Ximenez
de Eredia, Christoual de Paz, Francisco Calderon, Hernando Pacho, Pedro de
Angulo, and the Ensign bearer Xaramillo, who was one of the first that put up
their Ensign in their Trenche: And Gentlemen, Don Garcia de Cotes, and Don Iuan
de Sandoual, under whose charge are the sixteen companies of Portugalles with
their Captains, Geronimo Frances, Manuel de Vega, who received an Harquebuz
shot in the Trenches, Antonio Serrano, who also had a harquebuz shot and a
prick in his thigh, Diego Valiente, Don Iuan de Mendoca, Don Iuan de Medrano,
Sancho de Bullon, Don Iuan de Lanuca, Don Sancho de Escobar, Don Esteuan del
Aguila, Iuan de la rea, Francisco de la Rocha, Martin de Herrera, and with them
these Gentlemen: Don Pedro Ponce de Leon, Do^ Iuan de castelui, Don Francisco
de Borja, Nofre de Bernegal, (who was the first that was slain) Don Bartolome
de Maya, and the Earl Geronimo de Lodron, with these Captains: The Earl
Nicolo de Lodron, the captain Carlos, the captain and chief Sergeante
Curcio: and adventurers, Don Francisco Perenot, come^dador de Sparragosa, of
the order of Alcantara, Mos de la Mota: And Lucio Pinatelo, with the Italions,
and the Captain Fray Vicencio of Afflicto, both of them were wounded with
Harquebuziers: and adventurers, Miguel Caxa, a Gentleman of Naples, who being
in a bark, he was wounded with a Harquebuz shot upon one of his arms, and
Don Felix de Aragon with the company of Portugals, who was wounded with two
Harquebuz shot, one on his shoulder, and an other on his thigh, and they slew
his Ensign bearer, and wounded his Sergeant, and Don Cristoual Nieto, who was
wounded likewise with two Harquebuz shot, And at four a clock in the morning
at the break of the day the Marquis did enter with his Gallye and had with him
Don Pedro de Tolledo, Marquis of Villa Franca, and Duke of Fernandina, Don Lope
de Figueroa, Don Pedro de Padilla, Don Iorge Maurique general ouerseer: Don
Cristobal de Erasso, Do^ Iuan Manrique, Don Luys de Sandoual, Don Alonso de
idiaquez, Don Luys de Boria, Don Pedro Ponce de Leon Brothers son unto the
said Marquis, Don Antonio Enriques, Diego de mira^da, Iuan de Vrbina, Iuan
Martines de Recalde, Don Antonio de Portugal in the same, in the sight of the
Mill to give assault against the forts and trenches, and put themselves with
the whole body of the Galley, where as they did receive much shot both of
cannons and muskets which they did shoot from the bulwarks, then straightway
the Galley began to batter and overthrow the Artillery of the enemy, and all
the rest of the Galleys as they did draw nigh did give the battery, so that
with the battery of the Admrial Gally, and of all the rest, the other Barks
went a shore and did land people upon the sides of the fortes, and overthwart
the trenches, although it was done with great difficultnes and labor, and the
soudiours did get up in parts and places that was very aspar and received
great repulse of hargabusses and muskets: but in the end they did get both the
fortes and trenches which the french Soldiers had upon their charge, with
their captain Borgonion, a person of whom they had a great opinion amongst
the^. And straighte way the Marquis went forth in a small bark, and in an
other small bark went forth the Gentlemen that were with him in his Gallye, and
making an end of the first disimbarking a Land, they took the mou^tains and
hills of all parts, and did ordain Don Lope de Figuereo general master of
the field that he should frame the camps with their wings, with Hargubuziers
and Muskets, so that our people of the maine ward did get upon the enemy. And
those which were in the foremost wings, was Don Pedro de Toledo, and Don Pedro
de Padilla with other Gentlemen and Captains that were of the company of yt
first disimbarking, so that becwixt them they began to charge many skirmeges
till such time as they put themselves three quarters of a leage from the Sea
side, whereas was the whole force and strength of their Army, always
skirmeshing very valiantly, charging and receiving, so that our people did
win and lose a place which they had for their security, in such sort, that
it was needeful that the Marquis, who was in the face of his army, to put
himself forward two times for to courage and animate the harquebuziers. And at
this time the second disimbarking did ioin with the first, at the which Don
Iorge Manrique ouerseer general, returned and made them to come forewardes,
with six Pieces of ordinance with the which they shot at their eenimies,
likewise all the rest of munitions vittals and water for to refresh all the
people that was skirmishing, for that in those parts there was none to be had
but must bring it from the ships, by which disimbarking they were
strenghthened with these Captains, Rodrigo de Vargas, Miguel de Oquendo,
Marolin and Carlos, So that they were continually fighting in the face of the
Armies, and the enemy had eight pieces of Artillery with the which they did
shoot at our people, making there assault in strange manner, with much shrikes
and showtes as though they would join together: So in the evening they did
gather together to the number of a thousand kine or cattle wherewith they did
procure to break our array and order, and the Marquis did command the
sargentes Mayors to give order unto the wi^ges of ye Hargubussers that they
should noe shoot of a piece at the cattle, but that they should make them
way without putting themselves out of order, and after that they were passed by
they should trim them selves again as before. There was hurt of our part in
this skirmish to the number of three hundred, and slain threescore and ten,
and by one Portugal on horseback which did pass into our Camp, they did
understand that amongst their enemies there were very many slain and hurt,
amougst whom was the Liefeteuaunt of Manuel de Silua, his brothers son and
certain french captains, so that they as well as the Portugals, were with a
gallante resolution for to fight one power to an other, and would not harken
unto the pardon and grace which the Maques did grauntr unto them, and was
presented unto Manuel de Silua by the two men which the Marquis did send unto
them, as before is sayd^ so that it were evil with them in these skyrmeges and
other attemptes, although there was entered to fuccour them a thous and five
hundred frenchmen, and was general over them the Commendador Mounsieur de
Chatres, confine unto the duke of (...) and brother in law unto the most
christian king of France, besides more the^ a thousand that were there before,
so that with them, and the Natural of the country, they were nine Thous ande
fighting men, and they were all very well encamped, and in good order like
soldiers, and that night our army was in good array, and had well fortifyed
the wings of our Harquebuziers and muske^s, (...) found to armoure: so in the
morning at the break of the day, they returned (...) their skyrmishing, and
our enemies did discharge their artilerie, and our army did still get more
and more, and the wings were still skyrmishing, in such sort that they did
take away the water from the enemies, and straight ways they did win their
Artilerie, and the village of San Sebastian, which was mayntayned and kept by
their army, and they fled away unto the mountains, and when our host had
broken their ca^pe, they took their way to the city of Angra And the Marquis
did send the galies, that they should assault the Navy of Frenchmen and
Portugalles that was within the Port: and to the whole camp did enter into
the said city without any resistaunce, and he did grant them the spoil for
three days, and they did open the Prisons, and took out of them all such as
were there for bearing favor unto his Majesty, and are these that follows.

All such Spanyardes as were Prisoners.
IVan Augustine de Auila was taken Prisoner a ye^re past, coming for Factor to
S. Mighell.

Domingo de insauraga, which came a year paste from the fyrme land in the
Ship of advise.

Iuan de iada, one that came in the same ship. Diego Garcia whom they took
coming in advise to Don Pedro de Valdes. The Ensign bearer Carrion. The
captain Iuan de Aguirre, the sergeant Gutierrez, Iuan Lopez. Catalina and
Eluira Gutierrez, her Daughter with three sons, that came from Florida in the
ship of insauraga, and to the number of thirty Spaniards which they made to
work in the Fortes.

Portugals that were in prison.
The captain Antonio Rebelo, Pedro Ya^nez Curado, Antonio Mendez, Domingo
Ralon, Iuan Aluarez, Antonio Goncalez, Luyz Goncalez, Francisco de Roche,
Benito Mulato, Pedro de Las Vinnias, Iuan Domingues, Constantino Machado, Bras
Noguera, Gaspar Delos Reyes, Diego Perez, Antonio Correa Pisanso, Diego
Aluarez, El Licenciado Iuan Luys homo, Iuan Yannez, and Frutuoso, sanchez of S.
George.

So likewise the Galies entered into the Port of the City of Angra, and did
take all these ships following.

Relation of the Ships and other Vessels which they took of the French army
which brought succor to the^ of the island of Tercera, who was Captain
general over them all the Commendador Monsieur de Chattes: and also of the
Navy that Don Antonio had, who was captain general over them, Manuuel
Serradas a Portugal and natural of the Yland of Madera: and was the same that
did sack Cabo Verde and Arguin.
THere were in the port of the City of Angra, 12 french ships great and small
of al sorts. 2 English ships and 1 Hulk. There were of Don Antonio his ships to
the number of 16 small and great, Caruels and others, which were at Cabo Verde:
captain general over them, Manuell Serradas, Portugal, all these ships
does amount to the number of 31, and had amongst them 91 pieces of Artilerye,
of cast iron and brass. This being done they sent unto the castle of the
city, and unto their houses of munition, and unto all the Fortes round about
the Island, and they found in them all this ordinance and munition as follows.

In the Castle called Sansebastian.
One Cannot of batterye, of brass: one Culuerin of brass of 21 palms or
spannes: two demi Culuerins of brass: two Sacars of brass with their
Chambers: one demye Cannon of brass: five Pieces of iron, and one little
piece: one Cannon of brass broken in the breeche. All these said Pieces were
in the carriage, and had al things in a readiness belonging unto them.

Three hosheads of cannon poulder: 18 bals of wild fire: 270 shot of iron:
four and thirty pellet of stone. One iron bar: 5 Pikes: a carriage with his
wheels without a piece: more, 15 stone balls: seventeen charge of stones.

Relation of the Fortes which were from the city of Angra unto the Forte
called the point of San Mateo, and of all the Ordinance that were in them.
THere was found in the Fort adioining to the city, in the skirte of Brasill
called San Benito, one great murderer of brass to shoot stones, in his
carriage, and had the Arms of Portugal on it: one piece of cast iron, which
wayed 12 kyntals, in his carriage: one other piece of cast iron of the same
bigness without carriage: one base of brass with ye arms of Portugal, of
seven kyntals, with chambers: one demye Cannon of brass for-stones, with the
Portugal arms: one piece of cast iron, of 11 kynt in his carriage: two and
twenty balls of stone for the Cannons, and twenty of iron.

What was found in a trenche adjoining unto the same Forte.
A piece of cast iron of 7 kynt. and 24 pound in his carriage.

In the Fort called San Antonio, which is upon the point of the Brasill.
One demye Culuering of drasse, with the arms of France, full of flower
Delyses, of 36 kincals, and 22 pound: one piece of brass to shoot stone, with
the arms of Portugal in his carriage: one Sacar eight square with the arms of
France of 19 kyntals: one demye Sacar of brass of 10 kyntals 64 pound, in his
carriage: one demye Sacar of brass of 10 (...) li. in his carriage: 1 piece of
cast iron of 15 kintals in his carriage: two other pieces of cast iron of 13
kint. a piece in their cariages: two Bases of brass very big, with the
their chambers: threescore shot of iron: twenty cloven shot of lead, ten
chains, twenty great balls of stone, two half cerses of powder, other six
horse load of sacks of powder.

In an other fort called the cimbrero.
One Sacar of 15 kintals 48 pound, full of flower deluses, three pieces of cast
iron of the same bigness with their carriages, one falconet of bras in his
carriage with two cha^bers, one hundredth and threescore baltes of iron and six
charges.

In an other fort called the Fanaes.
One piece of cast iron of five kintals in his carriage, an other piece of
cast iron of 7 kintals 20 pound in his carriage, one other piece of cast iron
of 13 kintals.

In an other fort called O alcaide.
One Sacar of bras eight square full of flower deluses of 18 kintall with a
new carriage: two pieces of cast iron ye one of 18 kintals and the other of 17
kint. with new carriage and their chargers: eight and thirty shot in all.

In an other fort called the Ladeoua de Pero goncalez.
Two pieces of cast iron of 10 kintals a piece with their new cariages.

In a small fort called La huerta del Bachilor Rubio.
Two pieces of cast iron of 7 kintal a piece in their carriage: one base of cast
iron with his Chambers: certain balls, with their chargers and skowrers.

In a trenche called Pombado.
One piece of cast iron of 10 kintals: his carriage.

In an other for caled the Prayna.
Three pieces of cast iron of 10 kintals and 30 pound a piece in their
cariages: two double bases with their chambers: fifty balls of cast iron, and
10 cloven shot.

In a trenche which is hard by the other forte.
One piece of cast iron of ten kintals with ten balls, with his chargers.

In an other fort called the Azogue.
Two pieces of cast iron of 10 kint. 30 P. a piece in their carriage: one other
piece of cast iron of 9 kint. 20 l, in his carriage: two bases of brass of 149
Pi. a piece, with crowns and half moons upon them: 115. shot of cast iron:
100 lead shot for the bases: 10 cloven shot: 12 balls of wild sire.

In the last fort that was visited called San Matheo.
Two Falcons of brass with their chambers: three pieces of cast iron in their
cariages: two pieces of easy yrnou broken: two hundredth, shot little more or
less.

In the Frenches about this forte.
One Piece of cast iron of a 11 kintals in his carriage: one other Piece of 7
kintals in his carriage: one base of brass, with the arms of Portugal: one
other Piece of cast iron of a 11 kint. in his carriage: twenty iron shot.

Relation of the fortes that is betwixt the City of Angra, unto the point of
the Village of the Play and all the Artillery found in them.
In a Trench that is right against the Ylandes.

TWo Pieces of cast iron in the cariages, and with their chargers.

In a fort called San Antonio de Porto Judio.
TWo Pieces of brass, the one of 25 kint. 43 ll. with the arms of the Turk,
and of France and the other eight square with the same arms. in their
cariages: one Piece of cast iron of 10 kintals in his carriage: one other Piece
of cast iron of 8 kintals 75 ll: one other Piece of cast iron of 11 kintals in
his carriage: one hundredth shot.

In the fort called El Pico de Saluador Coello.
One Piece of cast iron of 18 kintals: one other Piece of cast iron of a 11
kintalles in his carriage without powder or chargers.

In the fort called, El Porto de Casa Salga where as Don Pedro de Valdes was
lost.
One Piece of brass eight square with ye Arms of France of 18 kintalles 83
ll. in his carriage: one Falcon with the Arms of Portugal of 7 kintals: two
Pieces of cast iron of 15 kintals a Piece in their carriage: other two Pieces
of cast iron of 13 kintals a piece in the carriages: one other Piece of cast
iron of 10 kintalles in his carriage: two hundredth and thirty shot for them
all: a carriage without any thing.

In the fort of the Muelas.
One Piece of cast iron in his carriage with twelve shot: two great Faulcones
with the Portugal Arms of 6 kintalles a piece: three Pieces of cast iron in
the cariages: fifty shot without chargers.

In the forte right over against San Sebastian, there was no Artillery for
that they had carried it away unto the mountains, that day the people came a
shore.

In the great and old forte of San Sebastian and now called Porto Nouo.
Six Pieces of cast iron of 20 kint a piece: five other pieces of cast iron of
8 kint. a piece in their cariages. Two hundred shot for the^ all: three Bases:
three cariages, and very much wood, but no chargers nor poulder.

In an other Fort which is at the point of the Ribera Seca.
One Piece of cast iron, of 11 kynt. 75 li. One other Piece of cast iron, of 7
kyntals.

In the Fort of the Perezosas.
One demye Culuerin with the arms of Portugal: one great turkish Falcon of 14
kyntals: two Pieces of cast iron, the one of 11 kyntals, and the other of 7
kyntals, in their cariages.

In the Forte of Porto Martin.
One Piece of cast iron of 20 kyntals in his Carriage: one other Piece of cast
iron of 18 kyntals: three pieces of iron, of 12 kyntals a piece in their
cariages: two bases of brass with the arms of Portugal. Two hundred and
fifty shot, and three barrels of poulder, with their chargers.

In certain trenches which were against the Forte.
Two Falcons for stones, with the arms of Portugal, and their chambers: three
pieces of cast iron in their cariages: 42 shot.

In the Fort of Santa Catalina.
One demye Culuer in with the arms of France of 35 kyntals in his carriage:
One Falcon of brass of 6 kintals with the arms of Portugal: One Base of
brass with the same arms: Four pieces of cast iron of 12 kyntals a piece, in
their cariages. 300 shot for all these pieces, and their chargers.

In the Castle called Dopao.
One demi Culuering with the arms of Portugal in his carriage. Two great Pot
gunnes, with all that belougeth unto them.

In the Fort of Medio Faul which is before this.
Four pieces of cast iron, in their cariages: four score shot, and their
chargers.

In the Fort called San Anton.
Two demye Culuerings of brass in their cariages: one Base of brass: three
Bases of brass: five pieces of cast iron. Three hundred shot with their
chargers.

In a Bulwark which is nigh unto the Play.
One piece of cast iron in his carriage: two bases of cast iron. Six and
twenty shot with their chargers.

In the Forte called the Chagas.
One demye Culuerin, eight square, with the arms of France, of 18 kynt. 95
pound in his carriage: four pieces of cast iron of 12 kintals a piece, in their
cariages: two great pot gunnes of iron: 100 shot for them all, and their
chambers.

In a Fort that is in the Play called San Francisco.
One piece of cast iron of 15 kynt. in his carriage: one other Piece of cast
iron of 14 kint. one other piece of cast iron of 8 kint. one other piece of
cast iron of 12 kintals: one other of cast iron of 8 kint. all these in their
cariages. One barrel of poulder. One hundred shot and chargers for them all.

In the Fort called Nuestra sennora de la ^^uz.
One demi Culuering with the arms of Portugal, of 28 kyntals in his carriage:
one Base of brass with the same arms, and his chambers three pieces of cast
iron, of sixteen kintalles a piece, in their cariages; 90 balls for all, and
their chargers.

In the Fort called San Pedro.
One demye Cannon for stones, with the arms of Portugal, of 13 kintals in his
carriage: one Faulcon of brass, with the same arms, and three of Iron: Two
Bases of brass, with their Chambers: two pieces of cast iron of five kintals a
piece in their cariages, fifty and four shot, with all their chargers.

In the Forte called Sauta cruz.
One cannon of battery of 35 kyntals, 64 l. with the Turks arms, and three
flower deluses, in his Carriage: one other Cannon for stones with the arms of
Portugal: one demi cannon for stones, with the same arms: three pieces of cast
iron of 11 kynt, a piece: two bases of brass with their cha^bers: two barrels
of poulder. One hundred and eyghte shot for them all, and all in their
cariages, and with chargers and scourers.

In the Fort called the Conception.
Two Cannons of Batterye with the Portugal arms, in his Carriage: one Base of
brass in his carriage: two pieces of cast iron of 10 kint. a piece in their
cariages. Three skore and four shot for them all, with their chargers.

In a trenche which is betwixt the two fortes.
Three Bases of brass, and one piece of cast iron in his carriage.

In a Platform which is upon the Point, and thereto they have visited.
One Culuering of brass in his Carriage: One piece of cast iron in his carriage.

In a house which is in the Village of the Play, of munition there was more
then 600 shot of iron, small and great.

Somewhat before that there is another fort called Porto de casa das alga, which
has four pieces, two of brass and two of iron. There is an other Fort before
this, called Porto de cruz, which has four Pieces, two of brass, and two of
cast iron. And from one Fort unto an other, of al these aforesaid that have
their Trenches with their trauerses that does defend and keep them.

Relation of the munition that they found in the high church of the City of
Angra, and in the College of the Teatinos.
Three and twentye hogsheads, the greatest full, fast, and well conditioned,
which seemed to be of poulder, nineteen of them were great, and four small.

In the house of the Fathers of the company of Jesus (which Don Antonio had
taken, and some of them he had banished and sent into England, for that they
were in part of his Majesty) was found: two and twentye hogsheds little and
great, full of poulder, 12 of them were fast shut, and all the rest were open
and some of them begone, there was also a sack full: four and thirty balls of
wild fire artificially covered with matches hanging at them: A chest full of
branches of iron for to make cloven shot: Certain cloven shot of lead of
four and 5 ll. waighte: a small chist of chargers made of white plate:
fourscore and ten horse men's spears with their heads, and sound: ten pickes
of iron: many pieces of corselets very evil entreated, and some old
hargabuziers: certain rols of hempen cords and other bottomes of cotton and of
each a little: four Faulcones of brass, one great, and 3 little ones in the
cariages: two great chambers of iron: a close wagon for to carrye poulder: a
carriage for a Falcon. Certain balls of lead for harcabuziers, muskets, and
Bases.

Relation of that which was found in the custom house of the City of Angra.
Four great hogsheads full of poulder: Four hogsheads full of salt peter,
for to refine withal, and they say that it is of the Island Graciosa: three
hogsheads full of match for Harcabuziers: certain balls of iron, and chains,
and old ropes ends of hemp: seven barels of tar: six chestes full of
rosin: two grapels: six kyntals of small tarred ropes new: five and twentye
Oars for barks: sails for ships great and small, as it seemed for ten ships:
tarred ropes old and other necessaries for the said sayies: a great beam of
timber with chains, and their skuls which belonged unto the custom house: a
little Bell of brass broken: an other Bell whole and sound of a mean
bigness: two cheastes of wood full of Papers: to the quantity of forty
kintals of Biscuit, that was nothing worth: two old Copper Rettles for to heat
tar in: One Hogshead with Copperas one hog shead of Alum: one hogsheade of
Rats bane.

In a Warehouse over against the Custom house.
A great heap of Cannon shot of cast iron of 1000 shot: an other heap of demi
cannon shot, and other lesser shot to the number of more then four thousand:
one hundred shot of stone and Cannon: one hundred Pickares of iron with their
helues: five and twenty Oars for a Gallie: one hundred and fiftye wicker
baskets with their gyrts.

In an other Warehouse was found as follows.
Two Bases of iron: old Ropes with pullyes, and other necessaries for ships.

At the gate toward the Sea on the left hand.
One demye Cannon of brass for stones in his Carriage: one Demye Cannon of iron
in his Carriage: one Demye Sacar of France, of brass, eight square in his
carriage. So that there was taken and found in all the ships, Forts, and in
other places as is said 301 pieces of Artilerie.

And after that they had taken the city, Castles, Fortes, artilerie, and
munitions, and given to the soldiers the spoil for 3 days, as it is said.
The Marquis did ordain that all the dwellers and naturals of the Island should
return unto their houses, and that they should understand in the labor of the
field, and tilling of the same, who straight way began to come together,
although but a few, and the general Auditor did proceed against those that
were culpable, and did apprehend many, as hereafter shall be made mention. In
this time the frenchmen were three leagues from the city of Angra, in a strong
cituation, the which they had trenched and made strong, where they had water
and other commodities and were treating, with Don Pedro de Padilla, that he
would let the^ depart with their ensigns and armor, and to carrye with them such
Portugals as they thought best, and all the artilirie which they brought out
of France, which was more then one hundred pieces, and their ships and
bastements, saying: that they would show pattents of the king of France, and
of his mother. To which the Marquis would not give any ear, nor to any thing
that was asked, but went forth with his camp for to destroy them, but yet
after great hold and keep, the Marquis did resolve himself at the instance
and request of Don Pedro de Toledo, Don Lope de Figuereo, and of the earl
Geronimo de Lodron, Don Pedro de Padilla, Don Iorge Manrique, Don Francisco de
Bobadilla, Don Iuan de Sandouall, Don Cristoball de Erasso, Iuan de Vrbina, who
does remain for Gouernoure and Master of the field of all the Island, and of
Iuan Martines de Recalde, that the Frenchmen surrendering and yielding their
Enstgnes, and Armoure, and to let remain still in the Galies for to be
punished, the two hundred which before they had taken, and all the rest to be
carried to the coast of Spain jointly with our Navy, and from thence to be
carried to their own country, in those ships that the Marquis shall think
best. And so wednesday the third of August, Don Pedro de Padilla, and Do^
Iorge Manrique, with the Marquis order, went unto their camp, a league from
ours, where when they were come, they brought them unto a Fort which was at the
waters side, nigh unto the city of Angra, whereas they did surrender and yield
up eyghteene Ensigns, the most part of them of the most auntientste of
France, and many drums and Flutes, and they were unarmed one by one of their
Harquebuziers and muskets, halberds and Pikes, and being disarmed they did
pass by our armies, and without the City they did lodge them, and gave them
all that was necessary: and the Commendador Monsieur de Chattes, with the
Masters of the field, captains, and chief Sargeants as shall be expressed,
went and kissed the hands of the Marquis.

Monsieur de Chattes, General: Linguadoca Commendador of San Iuan: Monsieur de
carauaques a Gascoyne, master of the field. Baptista Serichi, an Italion and
chief Sergeant. Captain Vasito a Gascoyne. Captain Hernan, of the Province.
Captain Luys an Italyon. Captain Lauaral a gascoin. Captain Campani, an
Italion. Captain Linerola a Norman. Capt. Brebito of the Province. Capt. Lasta
a Frenchman. Capt. Companion a frenchman. Capt. Camipit a french man. Capt.
Labarra, a Frenchman. Captayn Perminet a Frenchman. Captayn Iabino, a
frenchman. Captayn Lagraua a Frenchman.

In these are not counted the captayns that were slain, nor the Ensign
bearers, for that there was slain threescore and ten, and wounded and
Prisoners more then 400, besides the Portugals, who likewise did yield and
surrender their Ensigns and arms: and it is a thing never the like seen, so
great an army against ours, fighting with so much bravery in their own
country and houses, and with so many Fortes, and in them more then 300 Pieces
of Ordinance to come to yield themselves, certainly it was a great spectakle
to behold. In this time the Marquis was very vigilant and careful to apprehend
Manuel de Silua, who did titulate himself Earl of Torres Vedras, Gouernoure
and Captain General of this Island, and the principal and Original of all
these Rebellions amongste them, and of many robberies and insolences which
was done with the ships that they had in the Port, and Frenchmen and
English men which came unto them, and they did accept and retain them. So
they sent captains and other soldiers unto diverse parts to run over the
hills and mountains, and it happened thurseday the fourth of Auguste, a
captain of the Field of the Master of the field, Don Francisdo de
Bobadilla, did apprehend him; and did deliver him unto the captayn Lazaro de
Isla, who went also to seek him, and he brought him unto the city of Angra,
whereas Don Pedro de Padilla did carry him abo^rd the Admiral, and did deliver
him to Iuan Ruyz de Velasco Captain of the said Galiaza, whereas be had
likewise other captains. Prisoners liefetenants, and such as were culpable of
the rebellion, as shall be declared unto you in the punishment done upon them.
And likewise certain Friars which went in indecent habits amongst them was
Friar Simon, of the profession of the order of Saint Dominicke, Sacerdote, and
Preacher, who did declare that which hereafter follows.

How that he went for France, and did ask and and succor of the Queen
Mother for this Island, and how she did grant it unto them, by the intercession
of the Duke of Joyosa, and of Mos de Rochileu, the Abbot of Guadanni, the Duke
of Prenon, the Earl of Brisac, Mos de Serlebus, Governor of Abre de gracia,
all the which does aid, help, an strengthen the causes of Do^ Antonio. So ye
Queen mother did send a thousand five hundredth frenchmen besides those that
were before in the Island with Monsiur de chattres a knight of the order of
Saint John and governor of Deep, and cousin unto the Duke of Joyosa, and
brother law unto the king of France. And for master of the field, Monsiur
de Garabaques, and Monsiur de Camps, and other principal men, all which did
ariue at this Island the two and twenty day of June, in this year of 1583 with
pattents of ye king of France, for that the intention of the king and
particulerly of his mother was to have these Islands in their powers, and to
strengthen them with men and ships, for to disturb and take away the traffic
and commercio of the Indies, and how that the principals which does aid and
help Don Antonio are in great hope that by this means they shall reap great
profit and interest, and now seeing the destruction and loss of victory of
the french men, he shall not find any other that will help him.

So likewise he was in England, and Antonio de Vega dwelling in Lishboorne, who
has his wife in Caparica, and the Queen would not give nor grant unto them
any aid or succor, but all only did consent that for his money he might buy
Artilery and munitions paying for them. Also he said that the twentye of May
Don Antonio was in Deep, and that he was woonte to go unto Parris in
disembling wise with two or three servants, and did lodge in the house of the
abbot of Guadani who is private with ye Queen mother, and for the vittailes for
himself and others which trauails in his service, they are merueilous indebted
in their lodginges and Innes, and how that al there remedy did depend upon
these Islands, although as it is said the Queen mother would have had the
power thereof, and that in substance it was the voice of Jacob, and the hands
of Esau, al such as are in the service of Don antonio, are these persons
following, and how that in portugal there are few that are corespondente unto
them, for that all in general did abide to see the end and the succession
herein, in ye which did depend the quietness of al christendom.

Don Antonio de menes, of Lishborne: Ciprian de figueredo, of Trascoso: Iuan
Corea de Sosa, of Lishborne: Iuan Rodrigez de vejae, of Ebora: Thomas Cachero,
of Lishborne: Diego Rodriguez, of Setubal: Rodrigo de santaren, of Santaren:
Diego Botello, of Lishborn: Manuel Fernandiz, of Lishborn: Gaspar Diaz, chanon
of Ebora: Baltazar Limpo, Deane of Braga: dwelling in Guimarans: Simon Alsonso
d^ caruallo of Guimarans: Manuel de brito, of lish borne: Constantino de brito,
of Ebora: Geronimo de Silua of Viana: Antonio dibrio Pime^tel of Golagan.

AT such time as they were entered into the City of Angra, wednesdaye the 7 and
20 of July, as aforesaid, the Marquis of Santa Cruz did send Don Pedro de
Toledo, Marquis of Villa franca, Duke of Fernandina, unto the Island of Fayall,
which was thirty leagues (...), whereas was five hundred Frenchmen in garrison,
with twelve Galleys (...) Patares sixteen Pinises, and certain small Barks,
and in them two thousand and five hundred soldiers of different companies with
the (...) of the field, Augustine Iniquez de carate, and Captains, Iuan de
salazar, Miguel ferrer, Don Christoval de Acuna, Don Esteuan del Aguila,
Bust^^ante de Herrera, Miguel de bensa, Sancho de solis, Don Iuan de ^^nuza,
Sancho de bullon, Luys de guerara, Pedro pardo de aguiar, Martin de herera and
the Captain Carlos with one hundred and fifty Almains and gentlemen such as
were venturers, Don Vgo de mon cada, Don Iuan manrique, Don phillippe de
cordoua, Don bernardido de me^doca, Don pedro Enriques, Do^ Gonsalo de Gueuara,
Don Hieronimo capata Don Pedro Ponza de Leon, Don Iuan de Acunna, Don Antonio
Enriques, Don Gonzaio Ronquillo, who brought the news that the said Fayal was
taken, and Iuan Fernandez Galindo, Diego de Miranda. And for that was requisite
at the Sea, these captains, Miguell de Oquendo, Rodrigo de Vargas Y Marolin,
Don Antonio de Me^doca, who in this vyage had the charge of the pataxes and
pynises. And passing by the Island of S George, and the Pick, reducing them to
the service of his Majesty, they arrived at the said Island of Fayal, Sunday
being the last of the said Month, and sent them word by a Portugal that they
should surrender and yield themselves, who^ they slew. Upon the monday they
went and viewed the place where they should disimbark themselves. So tuesday
the 2 of Aug. they put the soldiers aland, and the frenchmen and Portugals did
resist the^, til such time as Don Pedro de Toledo did strengthen the^ that did
skirmish with 200 muskets, and 100 Pykes, they gave the^ the repulse with loss
of one hundred frenchmen, and the rest did retire and put themselves into
the Castle, whereas they had 17 great pieces of Ordinance, and great store of
poulder and munition, besides other forty Pieces that were in other Fortes
there about them, all the which the frenchmen did surre^der and yield up to
save their lives, and lost all this, and four ships that was in the port,
and did yield up their Ensigns and arm, And did put into the galies all such
Portugalles as did enter into the Castle with them, and did hang up Antonio
de Guides, a portugal, and governor of the said Island, a man prodigal and
cruel, and left for governor thereof for his Majesty, Don Antonio de
Portugal, with two hundred soldiers, and vittayles for four months.

And when they had conquered the Islands of S. George, and the Pick, and Fayal,
Don Pedro de Toledo did return with the Galies, ships, and such people as
he carried with him. Mondaye the eight of August 1583.

The Commission given unto the Licentiado Mosquera, General Auditor of the
Navy and Army for to punish the Rebels.
FOr so much as by the commandment of his Majesty, I am come hither with
this Navy and army upon the Island of Tercera, and that here they did
withstand me, and made resistaunce whereas I should come unto an anchor with
very much artilerie, and not acknowledging their duty, but with great
disobedience and insolence. I did send and require them with protestation for
to surrender and yielde unto me the ylande, and to suffer me to land in the
Island, and to pardon them all the disobedience past, and unto the naturals
their lives and goods, and likewise unto the strangers that were come thither
in their aid and succor, to give them shipping that they might depart, as
does appear by the protestes and other writings which I do command to be
put adioining unto this commission. And for that neither the one nor the other
would harken unto this grace and mercy which was offered unto them, but
rather at such time as I would disimbarke my army being rewesday the fix and
twenty of this present being saint Annes day, they did make defense against
me, and did resist me with much artillery and force of men, and all that were
in the said Island as well naturals as strangers did put themselves in the
field and with their armies in good order, did give ye atempt against those of
his majesty which I had upon my charge, maintaining themselves one whole day
with skirmishing and representing of battle till such time as the next day
following, being overcome by the force of our soldiers, they ran a way and
put themselves into the Mountains. And for that such like disobedience,
rebellion and tyranny, which unto this day they have used with and unto them
which has been in deuosion unto his Majesty, and many other insolensies and
roberies which they have committed and done, shall not remain without liuelye
ensample of chastisement. By this present I do give power and facultye, as
Captain general of his Majesty in this Navy and Army unto Lecenciado
Mosquera de Figueroa, general auditor of this happy Army and Navy, for that
having taken information of the aforesaid in general and in particular, of
all such persons as be found culpable in the same, and the parties to be
called and heard, and according unto the right, to do Justice upon their
persons goods and Cattelles, for all, and in all, of defaultes paste and now
present depending. I do give unto you power and faculty in as ample manner
as I have it of his Majesty. And the better to perform and accomplish and
execute the same, I do ordain the chief Master of the field and Coronel of
the Almaynes, and all the rest of the Masters of the field: Captains and
soldiers, and of the Galleys, that they do give and deliver unto you the
prisoners which they have, and from this day forewardes shall have, and all the
aid and favor that you shall demand of them. And so likewise I do give
unto you the said power and faculty to proceed against what so ever person
or persons that shall withstand or disturb any part or parsell of all that
is aforesaid, in the which GOD and his Majesty shall be served* Made and
written in the Ylande of Tercera, in the city of Angra, the eight and twenty
of Iulye, in the year of our Lord, 1583.

Albaro de Bacan.
At the commandment of his Lordship. Bartolome de Aguilar.
ANd by virtue of this Commission, the Licenciado Mosquera de Figueroa, did
proceed against the said Islands, and particulers of the same, pronounsing
these sentences following.

In the plyte which in the office of Instice has been followed in the absence
of rebellion, against the Island of Tercera, Fayal, the Pick, and S. George, the
Graciosa, and the Cueruo, and against all the dwellers and abiders in the Island
of the Acores. The process of the cause being seen, and how that the said
Islands has denied their obedience to their King Don Philip our Lord, being
their legitime and natural King, and in prosecuting hereof, have admitted into
their company, people of diverse Nations, Robbers and Pirates, and have
conspyred against his Majesty Ryall, and made resistaunce against his mighty
power, and has defended with armor and blood, the entry into these Islands
which is of his crown of Portugal. The proses and case, and all things
requisite being seen: I do find, and I ought to declare, and do declare and
pronounce the said Islands, and every one of them for Rebels, and partakers of
this delight, in consequence or confideration of the which, I ought to condemn
and do condemn them in loss of all their liberties which has been given and
granted by the kings predecessors, of his majesty, of the kingdom of
Portugal, likewise of their proper lands and goods: and other privileges of
the which they might advance and profit themselves, if they had not
committed this offense of Rebellion and disobedience. And these the said
Antonio Xuares who was Factor for the king Don Sebastian, and at this present
was Judge of the Money house, Baltazar Aluarez, Ramires, disimbargar, and
Domingos Pinnero, and Iuan Goncales Cottea, disimbargar: and all the rest that
be found culpable in this said offense. I do condemn them, and whensoever
and in what place they shall be taken, to be prisoners, and brought unto the
common prison of this city of Angra, whereas I do command that they be
brought forth with ropes about their necks, with the voice of a crier, for to
make manifest their fault, and so to be carried into the public and open
place of this city, whereas they shall be hanged til such time as they do
naturally die, and straighte way to be quartered, and their quarters to be
put in the high ways toward this city. Also I do condemn the aforesaid in
the loss of all their goods, applying them as confiscate unto the chamber of
his Majesty, and that their sons nor Neuewes shall not enjoy any Ryall
office. And I do command that all such money that has the name of Don
Antonio Prior of Ocrato, with the arms ryall, as false evil and usurped, to
be burned in the public place of this city, and not to be currante in these
Islands, and that no person do use the same upon pain of death. (And in the
performaunce of the same, they did burn the said money public) And by this my
last sentence difinitiue, I do pronounce and command with costs. El
Licenciado Mosquera, de Figueroa.

Relation of all such as were put to execution in the City of Angra, in the
public place, the 8 day of August, Anno. 1583.
MAnuel de Silua earl of Torres Vedras, governor and captain general of all
the Islands of the Acores, for a tyrannous manstear, and an occasioner of
alteration in the Islands, a robber and receyuer of Heretics, was condemned his
throat to be cut, and his head to be put in the public place whereas he
commanded to be put the head of Melchior Alfonso, Portugal, for that he said
King Philip was his natural Lord and king.

Domingos Vguel, an Ordinarye Justice of this City, it was proved against
him, that publicly he did show himself to be against his Majesty, and did
execute many for suspicion that he found in them to be faithful and loyal, in
especial upon Iuan de Betancor, and of Melchior Alfonso, who commanded their
heads to be cut off, which was proved, and he confessed the same: he was
hanged, and all his goods consiscate to the chamber, leaving his sons unable
for any office Ryall.

Pedro Come, a Captain of Don Antonio, a public Rebel, who had upon his
charge a trenche, he was hanged, and his goods con fiscate according unto the
other.

Bernardo de Tauora, who was sometimes captayn of a galie, and now captain of
footmen, who had the charge to fortify the trenches, and to punish and plague
the^ that would not labor and travail, he was condemned and hanged.

Anton Fernandez Barrosa, a common maker of tumultes, and one that publiquelye
did intyse and provoke others to take Arms again his majesty, for the defense
of the Ila^d, and said that he did not know him for their natural king, but
Don Antonio, he was condemned as the rest.

Arias de Porras, captain over a company, one of the principal rebellers, and
one of the last that did leave the Camp, was condemned in the same.

Manuel Serradas, one that was in France, and came in the Fleet with Philip
Storcye, the year past, and afterward went forth for captain general in the
Fleet that went to Cabo Verde, and took the spoil unto the ornaments,
challeses, and crosses of the church, his head was cut off.

Goncalo de Pita, captain over a company, and liefetenaunt of the fortes of
San Sebastian, a public persecuter of them that were on the kings behalf, he
was hanged.

Mathias Diaz Pilatos, who publicly with a loud voice did persuade all men
to follow Don Antonio, and at such time as Don Pedro de Valdes came unto this
Island, this Mathias did enter into this city with a Spaniards head, and it is
publicly known that he did eat the livers of Spaniards, he was hanged and
quartred, and condemned in the loss, as all the rest.

Baltazar Mulato, the common crier, he who did execute the cruel justice which
was commanded to be done by Manuel de Silua, and other Judges, did in his
proclayminges and cries, add words of great disobedience against his
Majesty, was hanged and quartred.

Domingo de Toledo, a captain of one of the forts of Porto Nouo, a public
Rebeller, who always said, Live the King Don Antonio, and did always bear
Manuel de Silua company, he was hanged.

Gaspar aluarez chichero, a Mariner who ever since that these Islands did
rebel, he went and came from france with the aduises and judgments of Don
Antonio, and carried prisoners into France, two persons yt came from Lishborne
with Letters from the Council for that they should reduce and return being a
sedicious person, he was hanged.

Amador Biera who came with title of Embasitor from his majesty and fained
himself to be faithful and lyall, did discover all such as were current in
all these Islands, and did denounce upon them that they might have Justice
done one them, this had his head cut off for a traitor, and loss of all his
goods, and his sons and neuewes for infamus.

Gaspar de Gamboa Justice of the City of Angra for that he had condemned to
dye in conformity with all the rest of the Judges, and apeared that he did
fyrme unto the executions that were done upon the Portugalles that were in part
and behalf of his Majesty. And for that he did soliset all their war matters,
he was condemned to be hanged, and loss of goods.

Antonio Alasela chief Aunctiente beater of this City and head sercher, a
great rebel, and a persecutor of all such as was in his majesty's behalf as
does appear in the prosses and books, was condemned to be hanged, and loss
of goods.

Anton. Gomez merino sometimes of the custom house, soliciter and purueier to
ordain the armor, a rebel, and was condemned in two hundredth whips and ten
years to row in the Galleys, and the loss of his goods.

Thomas Gomez who publikelye did say that king Phillip was not his king, but
Don Antonio who had the charche to provide the Camp with water in the Army of
our Enemies, he was condemned in two hundred whips and ten years in the
Galleys, and loss of his goods.

Manuel de Acosta who served Don Antonio, and went in the public streets
speaking foul words and without reverence, two hundred whips and six years
in the Galleys.

Biasio de viualdo for speaking of foul words against his Majesty, and lent
money to maintain the wars and was made purueier of the Army, and caused the
money to be raised, was condemned unto public shame, and eight years to the
Galleys.

Cosme de abreu who was servant unto the earl of Bimioso and now was servant
unto Manuel de Silua, there was proved against him the generality, he was
condemned to be banished out of all the Islands and other damages by money.

Many other persons naturalles of this Island for that it was convenient for the
seruis of his Majesty and quietness of all the rest, were carried unto the
Galleys.

And of the Frenchmen there were some hanged from seventeen years vpwardes,
and put to row in the Galleys more then one hundredth of them that were taken
before that the general of France did yield himself with his company.

In the mean time that this execusion was done, there was great benevolence
showed unto certain widows with the goods of the Rebbels to those that there
husbands were put to death in the service of his Majesty, in the prisons of
these Islands, and other some were hanged, and other some banished into England
and France, and took away all their goods and pulled down their houses, some
of them dyed in the banishment. And likewise it was commanded that there
should restitution be made of the house unto the fathers of ye company of
Jesus. The which was pilled and polled by Don Antonio.

So after that they had made this happy enterprise with great reputation of
valiantness: for that there should be no time lost, the Marquis of Santa Cruz
did send the twelve Galleys unto lishborn which were the whole substance of
this enterprise. And he remained gathering together his Navy, and to set in
order the state of this Island and the rest, and placed in them two thousand
soldiers, and for gouernoure over them Iuan de Vrbina, a knight of the order
of Santiago. The which and all the rest of the Islands of Acores, was brought
under the subjection and obedience of his Majesty, by force of arms, and
amongst them the city of Angra, which has more the^ three thousand
householders, and a cathedral Church, and great traffic with the Indies,
Orientals, and Occidentals, for that it was the harborow and Port for all their
armies.

So likewise they got many other towns and Vilages, and amongst them more
then fifty fortes, which had in them well nigh to the number of four hundred
pieces of Artillerye and other munitions, and five and thirtye ships, small
and great, and surrendered and yielded unto them more then three score Ensigns,
which did fight against them in the field, likewise all the armor of the
strangers and naturals. So that all the whole valor of the Islands and
iurisdiccion, are condemned unto the courtesy, whether his Majesty will
ordain or put them, as of the goods of the rebbles, for that all is judged and
condemned unto his crown all the which is of great value. Made in the City
of Angra, in the Island of Tercera the 11 day of August, a thousand five
hundred eyghtie and three.

FINIS.

