THE FAITHFVLL Shepherdess.

By JOHN FLETCHER.

Printed at London for R. Bonian and H. Walley, and are to be sold at the spread
Eagle over against the great North door of S. Paul's.

To that noble and true lover of earning, Sir WALTER ASTON knight of the Bath.
SIr I must ask your patience, and be true.
This play was never liked, unless by few
That brought their judgments with vm, for of late
First the infection, then the common prate
Of common people, have such customs got
Either to silence plays, or like them not.
Under the last of which this interlude,
Had fallen for ever pressed down by the rude
That like a torrent which the moist south feeds,
Drowne's both before him the ripe corn and weeds:
Had not the saving sense of better men
Redeemed it from corruption: (dear Sir then)
Among the better souls, be you the best
In whom, as in a Center I take rest,
And propper being: from whose equal eye
And judgment, nothing grows but purity:
(Nor do I flatter) for by all those dead,
Great in the muses, by Apolloes head,
He that ads any thing to you; it is done
Like his that lights a candle to the sun:
Then be as you were ever, your self still
Moved by your judgment, not by love, or will
And when I sing again as who can tell
My next devotion to that holy well,
Your goodness to the muses shall be all,
Able to make a work Heroyicall.
Given to your service JOHN FLETCHER.

To the inheritour of all worthiness, Sir William Scipwith. Ode.
If from servile hope or love,
I may prove
But so happy to be thought for
Such a one whose greatest ease
Is to please
(Worthy sir) I have all I sought for,
For no ich of greater name,
which some clame
By their verses do I show it
To the world; nor to protest
It Is the best
These are lean faults, in a poet
Nor to make it serve to feed
at my need
Nor to gain acquaintance by it
Nor to ravish kind Atturnies,
in their iournies.
Nor to read it after diet
Fare from me are all these Ames
Fittest frames
To build weakness on and pity
Only to your self, and such
whose true touch
Makes all good; let me seem witty.
The Admirer of your virtues, JOHN FLETCHER.

To the per^ect gentleman Sir Robert Townesend.
IF the greatest faults may crave
Pardon where contrition is
(Noble Sir) I needs must have
A long one; for a long amiss
If you ask me (how is this)
Upon my faith I Will tell you frankely,
You love above my means to thank ye.
Yet according to my Talent
As sour fortune loves to use me
A poor Shepherd I have sent,
In homespun gray for to excuse me.
And may all my hopes refuse me:
But when better comes ashore,
You shall have better, newer, more.
Til when, like our desperate debtors,
Or our three pild sweet protesters
I must please you in bare letters
And so pay my debts; like iesters,
Yet I often have seen good feasters,
Only for to please the pallet,
Leave great meat and choose a fallet.
All yours John Fletcher:

To The Reader.
IF you be not reasonably assurde of your knowledge in this kind of Poem, lay
down the book or read this, which I would wish had been the prologue. It is a
pastoral Tragic-come die, which the people seeing when it was played, having
ever had a singular guif^ in defining, conclud^d to be a play of country hired
Shepherds, in gray cloakes, with curtaild dogs in strings, sometimes laughing
together, and sometimes killing one another: And missing whitsun ales, cream,
wa^^^^ and morris-dances, began to be angry. In their error I would not have
you fall, least you incur their censur^. Understand therefore a pastoral to
be a representation of shepherds and shepherd desses, with their actions and
passions, which must be such as may agree with their natures a^ least not
exceeding ^ormer fictions, and v^^g^r traditions: they are not to be adorned
with any art, but such improper ones as nature is s^id to bestow, as singing
and Poetry, or such as experience may teach them, as the virtues of hearts, and
fountain the ordinary course of the Sun, moon, and stars, and such l^ke.
But you are ever to remember S^^phe^ds to be such, a^ all the ancient Poets and
m^d^rne of understanding have r^^eaued them: tha^ is, the owners of flocks and
not hyerlings A tragic-comedie is not so called in respect ^^ mirth and killing
^ but in respect it wants deat^s, which is enough to make it no tragedy, yet
brings some near it, which is enough to make it no comedy: which must be a
representation of familiar people, with such kind of trouble as no life be
questiond, so that a God is as lawful in this as in a tragedy, and mean
people as in a comedy. Thus much I hope will serve to justify my Poem^, and
make you v^derstand it, to teach you more for nothing, I do not know that I am
in conscience bound.

John Fletcher.
To my loved friend M. John Fletcher, on his Pastorall^
CAn my approouement (Sir) be worth your thanks?
Whose vnknwne name and mnse (in swathing clowtes)
Is not yet grown to strength, among these ranks
To have a room and bear off the sharp flowtes
Of this our pregnant age, that does despise
All innocent verse, that lets alone her vice.
But I must justify what privately,
I censurd to you: my ambition is
(Even by my hopes and love to Poesy)
To live to perfect such a work, as this,
Clad in such elegant propriety
Of words, including a mortallitie.
So sweet and profitable, though each man that hears,
(And learning has enough to clap and hiss)
Ariues not to it, so misty it appears;
And to their filmed reasons, so amiss:
But let Art look in truth, she like a mirror,
Reflects her comfort, ignorances terror
Sits in her own brow, being made afraid,
Of her unnatural complexion,
As ougly women (when they are araid
By glasses) loath their true reflection,
Then how can such opinions iniure thee,
That tremble, at their own deformity?
Opinion, that great fool, makes fools of all,
And (once) I feared her till I met a mind
Whose grave instructions philosophical,
Tossed it like dust upon a march strong wind,
He shall for ever my example be,
And his embraced doctrine grow in me.
His soul (and such commend this) that command
Such art, it should me better satisfy,
Then if the monster clapped his thousand hands,
And drowned the scene with his confused cry;
And if doubts rise, lo their own names to cleare'em
Whilst I am happy but to stand so neere'em.
N. F.
To my friend Master John Fletceher, upon his faithful Shepherdess.
I Know too well that no more then the man
That travels through the burning deserts, can
When he is beaten with the raging sun,
Half smotherd with the dust, have power to run
From a cool river, which himself does find,
Ere^e be slak'd: no more can he whose mind
Ioies in the muses, hold from that delight,
When nature, and his full thoughts b^d him write,
Yet wish I those whom I for friends have known,
To sing their thoughts to no ears but their own:
Why should the man, whose wit nere had a stain,
Upon the public stage present his vain,
And make a thousand men in judgment sit,
To call in question his undoubted wit,
Scarce two o^ which can understand the laws
Which they should judge by, nor the parties cause,
Among the rout there is not one that has
In his own censure an explicit faith.
One company kowing they judgment lack,
Ground their belief on the next man in black:
Others, on him that makes signs, and is mute,
Some like as he does in the fairest suit,
He as his mistres does, and she boy chance,
Nor wants there those, who as the body does dance
Between the acts, will censure the whole play:
Some like if the wax lights be new that day:
But multitudes there are whose judgments goes
Headlong according to the actors clothes.
For this, these public things and I, agree
So ill, that but to do aright to thee,
I had not been persuaded to have hurld
These few, ill spoken lines, into the world,
Both to be read, and censurd of, by those,
Whose very reading makes verse senceles prose,
Such as must spend above an hour, to spell
A challenge on a post, to know it well,
But since it was thy hap to throw away,
Much wit, for which the people did not pay,
Because they saw it not, I not dislike
This second publication, which may strike
Their consciences, to see the thing they scornd,
To be with so much will and art adornd.
Bisides one vantage more in this I see,
Your censurers must have the quallitie
Of reading, which I am afraid is more
Then half your shreudest judges had before.
Fr. Beaumont.
The faithful Shepherdess.
Actus primi, Scena prima.
Enter Cl^rin a Shepherdess having buried her love in an Arbor. Hail holy
earth, whose cold arms do embrace
The truest man that ever fed his flocks:
By the fat plains of fruitful Thessaly,
Thus I salute thy grave, thus do I pay
My early vows and tribtute of mine eyes,
To thy still loved ashes: thus I free
My self from all ensuing heates and fires
Of love, all sports, delights and games,
That Shepherds hold full deares thus put I off.
Now no more shall these smooth brows be gi^t,
With youthful coronals, and lead the dance,
No more the company of fresh fair Maids
And wanton shepherds be to me delightful.
Nor the shrill pleasing sound of merry pipes,
Under some shady dell^ when the cool wind
Plays on the leaves, all be far away:
Since thou art far away: by whose dear side,
How often have I sat crowned with fresh flowers
For Summers queen, whilst every Shepherds boy^
Puts on his lustly green with gaudy hook,
And hanging scrippe o^ finest cordeuan:
But thou art gone, and these are gone with thee,
And all are dead but thy dear memory:
That shall outliue thee, and shall ever spring,
Whilst there are pipes, or Jolly shepherds sing.
And here will I, in honor of thy love,
Dwell by thy grave, forgetting all those joys,
That former times made precious to mine eyes:
Only remembering what my youth did gain,
In the dark hidden virtuous use of herbs:
That I will I practice, and as freely give
All my endeauours, as I gaind them free.
Of all green wounds I know the remedies,
In men or cattle, be they stung with snakes,
Or charmd with powerful words of wicked art,
Or be they loue-sicke, or through too much heat
Grown wild or lunaticke, their eyes or ears
Thickened with misty filme of dulling rume,
These I can cure, such secret virtue lies
In herbs applied by a virgins hand:
My meat shall be what these wild woods afford,
Berries, and Chestnuts, Plantains, on whose cheeks
The Sun sits smiling, and the lofty fruit
P^ld from the fair head of the strait grown pine:
On these I Will feed with free content and rest,
When night shall blind the world, by thy side blessed.
Enter a Satyr. Sat. Through yon same bending plain,
That flings his arms down to the maine,
And through these thick woods have I run,
whose bot^ome neue^ kissed the Sun
Since the lusty spring began,
All to please my M^ister Pan,
Have I trotted without rest
To get him fruit, for at a feast,
He entertaines this coming night,
His Paramoure the Syrinx bright:
But behold a fairer sight^ He stands amazed.
By that heavenly form of thine,
Brightest fair thou art divine:
Sp^ong from great immortal race
Of the G^ds: for in thy face,
Shines more awful majesty,
Then dull weak mortality
Dare with misty eyes behold
And live, therefore on this mould,
Lowly do I bend my knee,
In worship of thy dietie,
Deigne it Goddess from my hand,
To receive what ere this land,
From her firtile womb does send
Of her choice fruits: and but lend,
Belief to that the Satyr tells,
Fairer by the famous wells,
To this present day nere grew,
Never better nor more true,
Here be grapes whose lusty blood,
Is the learned Poets good,
Sweeter yet did never crown,
The head of Bacchus, nuts more brown
Then the squirrels teeth that crack them,
Deigne o fairest fair to take them,
For these black eyed Driope,
Has often times commanded me,
With my clasped knee to clime,
See how well the lusty time,
Has decked their rising cheeks in red,
Such as on your lips is spread,
Here be berries for a Queen,
Some be red, some be green:
These are of that lussious meat,
The great God Pan, himself does eat:
All these, and what the woods can yield,
The hanging mountain or the field,
I freely offer, and ere long,
Will bring you more, more sweet and strong.
Till when humbly leave I take,
Least the great Pan do awake:
That sleeping lies in a deep glade,
Vnde a broad beeches shade:
I must go, I must run,
Swifter then the fiery Sun. Exit.

Clorin. And all my fears go with thee.
What greatness or what private hidden power,
Is there in me to draw submission,
From this rude man, and beast? sure I am mortal,
The daughter of a Shepherd, he was mortal:
And she that bore me mortal: prick my hand
And it will bleed: a fever shakes me,
And the selfsame wind that makes the young lambs shrink,
Makes me a cold, my fear says I am mortal:
Yet I have heard (my mother told it me)
And now I do believe it, if I keep
My virgin flower vncropt, pure, chaste, and fair,
No Goblin, wood-god, Faiery, Elfe, or Fiend,
Satyr or other power that haunts these groaues,
Shall hurt my body, or by vain illusion,
Draw me to wander after idle ^iers.
Or voices calling me in dead of night,
To make me follow, and so tole me on,
Through mires and standing pooles:
Else why should this rough thing, who never knew
Manners, nor smooth humanity, whose heates
Are rougher then himself, and more misshapen,
Thus mildely kneel to me? sure there is a power
In that great name of virgin; that binds fast
All rude uncivil bloods, all appetites
That break their confines: then strong chastity,
Be thou my strongest guarde, for here I Will dwell
In opposition against Fate and Hell.

Enter an old shepherd, with four couple of Shepherds and Shepheardess^s.
Old Shep. Now we have done this holy festival,
In honor of our great God, and his rights
Performed, prepare your selves for chaste
And uncorrupted fires: that as the priest,
With powerful hand shall sprinkle on your brows
His pure and holy water, ye may be
From all hot flames of lust, and loose thoughts free,
Kneel shepherds kneel, here comes the Priest of Pan.

Enter Priest. Priest. Shepherds thus I purge away,
Whatsoever this great day,
Or the past hours gave not good,
To corrupt your maiden blood:
From the high rebellious heat,
Of the grapes and strength of meat.
From the wanton quick desires,
They do kindle by their fires.
I do wash you with this water,
Be you pure and fair hereafter.
From your livers and your veins,
Thus I take away the stains.
All your thoughts be smooth and fair,
Be ye fresh and free as air.
Never more let lustful heat,
Through your purged conduits beat,
Or a plighted troth be broken,
Or a wanton verse be spoken:
In a Shepheardesses ear,
Go your ways you are all clear.

They rise and sing in praise of Pan. The Song.
Sing his praises that does keep,
our Flocks from harm,
Pan the Father of our sheep,
And arm in arm
Tread we softly in a round,
Whilst the hollow neighboring ground,
Fills the music with her sound,
Pan, o great God, Pan to thee
Thus do we sing:
Thou that keep us chaste and free,
As the young spring,
Ever be thy honor spoke,
From that place the morn is broke,
To that place Day does unyoke.
Exeunt omnes but Perigot and Amoret. Peri. Stay gentle Amoret thou fair browd
maid,
Thy Shepherd prays theee stay, that holds thee de ere.
Equal with his souls good:

Amo. Speak, I give
Thee freedom Shepherd, and thy tongue be still
The same it ever was: as free from ill
As he whose conversation never knew
The court or city: be thou ever true.

Peri. When I fall off from my affection,
Or mingle my clean thoughts with foul desires,
First let our great God cease to keep my flocks,
That being left alone without a guard,
The woolfe, or winters rage, summers great heat,
And want of water, ro^s: or what to us
Of ill is yet unknown, fall speedily,
And in their general ruin let me go.

Amo. I pray thee gentle Shepherd wish not so,
I do believe thee: it is as hard for me
To think thee false, and harder then for thee
To hold me foul.

Peri. o you are fairer far,
Then the chaste blushing morn, or that fair star,
That guides the wandering seaman through the deepe^
Straighter then the straightest pine upon the steep
Head of an aged mountain, and more white,
Then the new milk we strip before day light
From the full fraighted bag^ of our fair flocks:
Your hair more beauteous then those hanging locks
Of young Apollo.

Amo. Shepherd be not lost,
Ye are saild too far already from the coast
Of our discourse.

Peri. Did you not tell me once
I should not love alone, I should not loose
Those many passions, vowes^ and holy oaths,
I have sent to heaven: did you not give your hand,
Even that fair hand in hostage? do not then
Give back again those sweetes to other men.
You your self vowed were mine,

Amo. Shepherd so far as maidens modesty
May give assurance, I am once more thine,
Once more I give my hand, be ever free
From that great foe to faith, foul iealosie.

Peri. I take it as my best good, and desire
For stronger confirmation of our love,
To meet this happy night in that fair grove,
Where all true shepherds have rewarded been
For their long service: say sweet shall it hold?

Amo. Dear friend you must not blame me if I make
A doubt of what the silent night may do,
Coupled with this days heat to move your blood:
Maids must be fearful, sure you have not been
Washd white enough, for yet I see a stain
Stick in your liver, go and purge again.

Peri. O do not wrong my honest simple truth,
My self and my affections are as pure,
As those chaste flames that burn before the shrin^,
Of the great Dian: only my intent
To draw you thither, was to plight our trothes,
With interchange of mutual chaste embraces,
And ceremonious tying of our souls:
For to that holy wood is consecrate,
A virtuous Well, about whose flowery bancks,
The nimble footed Faieries dance their rounds,
B^ the pale mooneshine, dipping often times
Their st^len children, so to make them free
From dying flesh, and dull mortality:
By this fair Fount has many a Shepherd sworn,
And given away his freedom, many a troth
Been plight, which neither envy nor old time
Could ever break, with many a chaste kiss given,
In hope of coming happiness: by this
Fresh Foun^aine many a blushing maid
Has crowned the head of her long loved shepherd,
With gaudy flowers, whilst he happy sung,
Lays of his love and dear captivity,
There grows all h^arbs fit to cool looser flames,
Our sensual parts pro^oke chiding our bloodes,
And quenching by their power those hidden sparks,
That else would break out, and provoke our sense,
To open fires, so virtuous is that place:
Then gentle Shepherdess believe and grant,
In troth it (...) not with that face to scant.
Your faithful Shepherd of those chaste desi^es,
He ever aimd at, and --

Amo. Thou have preuaild, farewell, this coming night,
Shall crown thy chaste hopes with long wishd delight.

Peri. Our great God Pan reward thee for that good,
Thou have given thy poor shepherd fairest bud
Of maiden virtues: when I leave to be
The true admirer of thy chastity,
Let me des^rue the hot polluted name,
Of a wild woodman, or affect some dame
Whose often prostitution has begot,
More foul diseases, then ever yet the hot
Sun bred through his burnings, whilst the dog
Pursues the raging Lion, throwing fog
And deadly vapor from his angry breath.
Filling the lower world with plague and death. exit Am^^

Enter an other Shepherdess that is in love wi^h Perigot. Amaril. Shepherd
may I desire to be believed,
What I shall blushing tell?

Peri. Fair maid you may.

Amaril. Then softly thus, I love thee Perigot,
And would be gladder to be leu'd again,
Then the cold earth is in his frozen arms
To ^l^p the wanton spring: nay do not start,
Nor wonder that I woe thee! thou that art
The prime of our young grooms, even the top
Of all our lusty Shepherds: what dull eye
That n^uer was acquainted with desire,
Has s^ene thee wrestle, run, or cast the stone,
Wi^h nimble strength and fair delivery,
And has not sparckled fire, and speedily
Sent secret heat to all the neighboring veins?
Who ever heard thee sing, that brought again,
That freedom back was lent unto thy voice?
Then do not blame me (shepherd) if I be
One to be numbered in this company,
Since none that ever saw thee yet, were free.

Peri. Fair Shepherdess much pity I can lend,
To your complaints: but sure I shall not love:
All that is mine, my self and my best hopes,
Are given already: do not love him then
That cannot love again: on other men
Bestow those heates more free, that may return
You fire for fire, and in one flame equal burn.

Amaril. Shall I rewarded be so slenderly
For my affection, most unkind of men?
If I were old, or had agreed with Art,
To give another nature to my cheeks,
Or were I common mistress to the love
Of every swain, or could I with such ease
Call back my love, as many a wanton does,
Thou might refuse me Shepherd, but to thee
I am only fixed and set, let it not be
A sport, thou gentle Shepherd, to abuse
The love of silly maid.

Peri. Fair soul, ye use
These words to little end: for know, I may
Better call back, that time was yesterday,
Or stay the coming night, then bring my love
Home to my self again, or recreant prove.
I will no longer hold you with delays,
This present night I have appointed been,
To meet that chaste fair (that enioyes my soul)
In yonder grove, there to make up our loves.
Be not deceau'd no longer, choose again,
These neighboring plains have many a comely swain,
Fresher and freeer far then I ere was,
Bestow that love on them and let me pass,
Farewell, be happy in a better choice. exit

Amar. Cruel, thou have struck me deader with thy voice
Then if the angry heavens with their quick flames,
Had shot me through: I must not leave to love,
I cannot, no I must enjoy thee boy,
Though the great dangers twixt my hopes and that
Be infinite: there is a Shepherd dwells
Down by the More, whose life has ever shown
More fullen discontent then Saturnes browe,
When he sits frowning on the birthes of men:
One that does wear himself away in lonenesse,
And never joys unless it be in breaking
The holy pl^ghted troths of mutual souls:
One that lusts after every several beauty,
But never yet was known to love or like,
Were the face fairer or more full of truth,
Then Phoebe in her fullness, or the youth
Of smooth Lyeus, whose nigh starued flocks
Are always scabby, and infect all sheep
They feed withal, whose lambs are ever last,
And dye before their weaning, and whose dog,
Looks like his Master, lean, and full of scurffe,
Not caring for the pipe or whistle: this man may
(If he be well wrought) do a deed of wonder,
Forcing me passage to my long desires:
And here he comes, as fitly to my purpose
As my quick thoughts could wish for. Enter Sullen.

Sul. Fresh beauty, let me not be thought uncivil,
Thus to be partner of your lonenesse: it was
My love (that ever working passion) drew
Me to this place to seek some remedy
For my sick soul: be not unkind and fair,
For such, the mighty Cupid in his dombe
Has sworn to be aueng'd on, then give room
To my consuming fires, that so I may
Enjoy my long desires, and so allay
Those flames, that else would burn my life away.

Amar. Shepherd, were I but sure thy heart were sound
As thy words seem to be, means might be found
To cure thee of thy long pains: for to me
That heavy youth consuming misery,
The love sick soul endures, never was pleasing,
I could be well content with the quick easing
Of thee and thy hot fires, might it procure
Thy faith, and farther service to be sure.
Name but that great work, danger, or what can
Be compast by the wit or art of man,
And if I fail in my performance, may
I never more kneel to the rising day,

Amar. Then thus I try thee shepherd, this same night,
That now comes stealing on, a gentle pair
Have promised equal love, and do appoint
To make yon wood the place, where hands and hearts
Are to be tied for ever: break their meeting
And their strong faith, and I am ever thine.

Sul. Tell me their names, and if I do not move
(^y my great power) the center of their love
From his sixth being, let me never more,
Warm me, by those fair eyes I thus adore.

Amar. Come, as we go I Will tell thee what they are,
And give thee fit directions for thy work. exeunt.
Enter Cloe. How have I wronged the times, or men, that thus,
After this holy feast I pass unknown,
And unsaluted? it was not wont to be
Thus frozen with the younger company
Of jolly shepherds: it was not then held good,
For lusty grooms to mix their quicker blood
With that dull humor: most unfit to be
The friend of man, cold and dull chastity:
Sure I am held not fair, or am too old,
Or else not free enough, or from my fould
Drive not a flock sufficient great, to gain
The greedy eyes of wealth alluring swain.
Yet if I may believe what others say,
My face has foil enough, nor can they lay
Justly too strict a coyness to my charge.
My flocks are many, and the downs as large
They feed upon: then let it ever be
Their coldness, not my virgin modesty
Makes me complain.

Enter Thenot. The. Was ever man but I,
Thus truly taken with uncertainty?
Where shall that man be found that loves a mind
Made up in constancy, and dares not find
his love rewarded? here, let all men know,
A wretch that lives to love his mistres so.

Cloe, Shepherd I pray thee stay, where haste thou been,
Or whether go thou? here be woods as green
As any, air as fresh and sweet,
As where smooth Zephirus plays on the fleet
Face of the curled streams: with flowers as many
As the young spring gives, and as choice as any:
Here be all new delights, cool streams and wels,
Arbors are grown with wood bines, Caves, and dels,
Choose where thou will, whilst I sit by and sing,
Or gather rushes, to make many a ring
For thy long fingers, tell thee tales of love,
How the pale Phoebe hunting in a grove,
First saw the boy Endimion, from whose eyes,
She took eternal fire, that never dies,
How she conuaid him softly in a sleep,
His temples bound with poppy to the steep
Head of old Latmus, where she stoopes each night,
Gilding the mountain with her brothers light
To kiss her sweetest.

Thenot. Far from me are these
Hot flashes bred from wanton heat and ease,
I have forgot what love and loving meant,
Rimes, Songs, and merry rounds, that often are sent
To the soft ear of Maid, are strange to me:
Only I live t'admire a chastity,
That neither pleasing age, smooth tongue, or gold,
Could ever break upon, so sure the molde
Is, that her mind was cast in: it is to her
I only am reserved, she is my form, I stir
By, breath, and move: it is she and only she
Can make me happy or give misery.

Cloe. Good Shepherd, may a stranger crave to know,
To whom this dear observance you do owe?

Thenot Ye may, and by her virtue learn to square
And level out your life: for to be fair
And nothing virtuous, only fits the eye
Of gaudy youth, and swelling vanity.
Then know, she is called the virgin of the grove,
She that has long since buried her chaste love,
And now lives by his grave, for whose dear soul
She has vowed her self into the holy role
Of strickt virginity, it is her I so admire,
Not any looser blood or new desire.

Cloe. Farewell poor swain, thou art not for my bend,
I must have quicker souls, whose words may tend,
To some free action: give me him dare love
At first encounter, and as soon dare prove.
The Song.
Come Shepherds come,
Come away without delay,
Whilste the gentle time does stay,
Green woods are dumme,
And will never tell to any,
Those dear kisses, and those many
Sweet embraces that are given,
Dainty pleasures that would even
Raise in coldest age a fire,
And give virgin blood desire.
Then if ever,
Now or never,
Come and have it,
Think not I,
Dare deny,
If you crave it. Enter Daphnis.
Here comes another: better be my speed,
Thou God of blood, but certain if I read
Not false, this is that modest shepherd, he
That only dare salute, but nere could be
Brought to kiss any, hold discourse, or sing,
Whisper, or boldly ask that wished thing
We all are borne for: one that makes loving faces,
And could be well content to covet graces,
Were they not got by boldness: in this thing
My hopes are frozen, and but fate does bring
Him heather, I would sooner choose
A man made out of snow, and frecer use
An Euuenke to my ends: but since he is here,
Thus I attempt him: Thou of men most dear,
Welcome to her, that only for thy sake,
Has been content to live: here boldly take
My hand in pledge, this hand, that never yet
Was given away to any: and but ^it
Down on this rushy bancke, whilst I go pull
Fresh blossoms from ^he bows, or quickly cull
The choicest delicates from yonder meade,
To make thee chains or chaplets, or to spread
Under our fainting bodies, when delight
Shall lock up all our sences^ how the sight
Of those smooth rising cheeks renew the story
Of young Adonis, when in pride and glory
He lay infolded twixt the beating arms
Of willing Venus: me thinks stronger charms,
Dwell in those speaking eyes: and on that brow
More sweetness then the painters can allow,
To their best pieces: not Narcissus he:
That wept himself away in memory
Of his own beauty, nor Siluanus boy,
Nor the twice ravished maid, for whom old Troy,
Fell by the hand of Pirrhus, may to thee,
Be otherwise compared then some dead tree
To a young fruitful Olive:

Daph. I can love, but I am loath to say so, least I prove
Too soon unhappy.

Cloe. Happy thou would say,
My dearest Daphnis, blush not if the day
To thee and thy soft heates be enemy,
Then take the coming night, fair youth it is fre^
To all the world, shepherd I Will meet thee then
When darkness has shut up the eyes of men,
In yonder gro^e: speak shall ou^ meeting hold?
Indeed ye are too bashful, be more bold,
And tell me I.

Daph. I am content to say so,
And would be glad to meet, might I but pray so
Much from your fairenes, that you would be true.

Cloe Shepherd thou have thy wish,

D^ph^ Fresh maid aduie,
Yet one word more, since you have drawn me on
To come this night, fear not to meet alone,
That man that will not offer to be ill,
Though your bright self would ask it^ for his fill
Of this worlds goodness: do not fear him then,
But keep your pointed time, let other men
Set up their bloods to sail, mine shall be ever,
Fair as the soul it carries, and unchaste never. exit.

Cloe. Yet am I poorer then I was before.
Is it not strange, among so many ascore
Of lusty bloods, I should pick out these things
whose veins like a dull river far from springs,
Is still the same, slow, heavy, and unfit
For stream or motion, though the strong winds hit
With their continual power upon his sides?
O happy be your names that have been brides:
And tasted those rare sweetes, for which I pine,
And far more heavy be thy grief and tine.
Thou lazy swain that may relieve my needs,
Then his upon whose liver always feeds
A hungry vulture. Enter Alexis.

Alex. Can such beauty be
Safe in his own guard, and not draw the eye
Of him that passes on to greedy gaze,
Or covetous desire, whilst in a maze
The better part contemplates, giving rain
And wished freedom to the laboring vain?
Fairest and whitest, may I crave to know,
The cause of your retirement, why ye go
Thus all alone? me thinks the downs are sweeter
And the young company of swains more meeter,
Then these forsaken and untrodden places.
Give not your self to lonenesse, and those graces
Hide from the eyes of men, that were intended
To live amongst us swains.

Cloe. Thou art befriended,
Shepherd in all my life, I have not seen,
A man in whom greater contents has been,
Then thou thy self art: I could tell thee more,
Were there but any hope left to restore
My freedom lost: o lend me all thy red,
Thou shamefast morning, when from Tithons bed
Thou risest ever maiden.

Alex. If for me,
Thou sweetest of all sweets, these flashes be,
Speak and be satisfied, o guide her tongue,
My better angel, force my name among
Her modest thoughts, that the first word may be,

Cloe. Alexis when the sun shall kiss the sea,
Taking his ^est by the white Thetis side,
Meet in the holy wood, where I Will abide
Thy coming Shepherd.

Alex. If I stay behind,
An everlasting dullness and the wind,
That as he passes by shuts up the stream,
Of Reine or volga whilst the suns hot beam,
Beats back again, ceaze me, and let me turn
To coldenesse more then ice: oh how I burn
And rise in youth and fire! I dare not stay. exit.

Cloe. My name shall be your word.

Alex. Fly fly thou day,

Cloe. My grief is great if both these boys should fail,
He that will use all winds must shift his sail. Exit.

Actus secundus Scena prima.
Enter an old shepherd with a bell ringing, and the Priest of Pan following.
Priest. Shepherds all, and maidens fair,
Fold your flocks up, for the Air
Ginns to thicken, and the Sun
Already his great course has run,
See the dew drops how they kiss
Every little flower that is:
Hanging on their velvet heads,
Like a rope of crystal beads.
See the heavy clouds loud falling
And bright Hesperus down calling,
The dead night from under ground,
At whose rising mistes unsound,
damps, and vapors fly apace,
Houering ore the wanton face,
Of these pastures, where they come,
Striking dead both budd and bloome,
Therefore from such danger lock
Every one his loved flock,
And let your dogs lie loose without,
Least the Woolfe come as a scout
From the mountain, and ere day
Bear a Lamb or Kid away:
Or the crafty theeuish Fox,
Break upon your simple flocks,
To secure your selves from these,
Be not too secure in ease,
Let one eye his watches keep,
Whilst the the other eye does sleep.
So you shall good Shepherds prove,
And for ever hold the love
Of our great God: sweeeest slumbers
And soft silence fall in numbers
On your eyelids: so farewell,
Thus I end my euenings knell. exeunt.
Enter Clorin the Shepherdess sorting of herbs, and telling the natures of
them. Now let me know what my best Art has done,
Helped by the great power of the virtuous moon,
In her full light, o you sons of earth,
You only brood, unto whose happy birth
Virtue was given, holding more of nature
Then man her first borne and most perfect creature.
Let me adore you, you that only can,
Help or kill nature, drawing out that span
Of life and breath, even to the end of time,
You that these hands did crop, long before prime
Of day, give me your names, and next your hidden power.
This is the Clo^^ bearing a yellowe flower:
And this black Horehound, both are very good,
For sheep or shepherd, bitten by a wood
Dogs venomd tooth, these Ramuns branches are,
Which stuck in entries, or about the bar
That holds the door fast, kill all the enchantments, charms,
Were they Medea^ verses that do harms
To men or cattle: these for frenzy be
A ^peedy and a sovereign remedy.
The bitter Wormwood, Sage, and Marigold,
Such simpathy with man's good they do hold:
This Tormen^l whose virtue is to part
All deadly killing poison from the heart,
And here Narcissus root, for swellings best:
Yellow L^cimacus, to give sweet rest
To the faint Shepherd, killing where it comes,
All busy gnats, and every fly that hummes,
For leprosy, Darnell, and Sellondine,
With Calamint, whose ve^tues do resine
The blood of Man, making it free and fair,
As the first hour it breathed, or the best air.
Here other to, but your rebellious use,
Is not f^rme, whose goodness is abuse,
Therefore foul standergrasse, from me and mine
I banish thee, with lustful Turpentine,
You that entice the veins, and stir the heat
To civil muteny, scaling the seat
Our reason moves in, and deluding it
With dreams and wanton fancies, till the fit
Of burning lust be quenched by appetite,
Robbing the soul of blessedness and light:
And thou light Var^in to, thou must go after
Provoking easy souls to mirth and laughter,
No more shall I dip thee in water now,
And sprinckle every post, and every bow
With thy well pleasing juice, to make the gromes,
Swell with high mirth as with joy all the romes.

Enter Thenot. The. This is the Cabin where the best of all
Her sex, that ever breathd, or ever shall
Give heat or happiness to the Shepherds side,
Does only to her worthy self abide.
Thou blessed star, I thank thee for thy light,
Thou by whose power the darkness of sad night
Is banished from the earth, in whose dull place
Thy chaster beams play on the heavy face
Of all the world: making the blew sea smile,
To see how cunningly thou do beguile
Thy brother of his brightness, giving day
Again from Chaos^ whiter then that way
That leads to Jove's hye Court, and chaster far
Then chastity it self: yo^ blessed star
That nightly shines, thou all the constancy
That in all women was, or ere shall be:
From whose fair eye-balles flies that holyfire,
That ports style the mother of desire,
Infusing into every gentle breast,
A soul of greater price, and far more blessed
Then that quick power which gives a difference
Twixt man and creatures of a lower sense.

Clor. Shepherd how camst thou hither to this place?
No way is trodden, all the verdent grass
The spring shot up stands yet vnbrused here
Of any foot, only the dappld dear:
Far from the feared sound of crooked horn
Dwells in this fastness.

Then. Chaster then the morn,
I have not wandered, or by strong illusion
Into this virtuous place have made intrusion,
But hither am I come (believe me fair)
To seek you out, of whose great good the Air
Is full, and strongly labors, whilst the sound,
Breaks against heaven, and drives into a stround
The amazed Shepherd, that such virtue can
Be resident in lesser then a man.

Clor. If any art I have, or hidden skill,
May cure thee of disease or festred ill,
Whose grief or greenenesse to another eye,
May seem impossible of remedy,
I dare yet undertake it.

Shep. It Is no pain
I suffer through disease, no beating vain
Conuaies infection dangerous to the heart,
No part impostumde to be curde by Art:
This body holds, and yet a feller grief
Then ever skillful hand did give relief
Dwells on my soul, and may be heald by you,
Fair beauteous virgin:

Clor. Then shepherd let me sue
To know thy grief that man yet never knew
The way to health, that durst not show his sore.

Shep. Then fairest know I love you,

Clor. Swain no more.
Thou have abused the strictnes of this place,
And offered Sacriligeous foul disgrace
To the sweet rest of these interred bones,
For fear of whose ascending fly at once,
Thou and thy idle passions, that the sight
Of death and speedy vengeance may not fright.
Thy very soul with horror.

Shep. Let me not
Thou all perfection merit such a blot,
For my true zealous faith.

Clor. Dare thou abide
To see this holy earth at once divide
And give her body up, for sure it will,
If thou pursuest with wanton flames to fill
This hallowed place: therefore repent and go,
Whilst I with prays appease his Ghost below,
That else would tell thee what it were to be,
A rival in that virtuous love, that he
Embraces yet.

Shep. It Is not the white or red
Inhabits in your cheek, that thus ^an wed
My mind to adoration: nor your eye,
Though it be full and fair, your forehead hye,
And smooth as Pelops shoulder: not the smile
Lies watching in those dimples, to beguile
The easy soul, your hands and fingers long,
With veins inameld richly, nor your tongue,
Though it spoke sweeter then Arions Harp,
Your hair wouen into many a curious warpe,
Able in endless error to unfold
The wandering soul, not the true perfect mould,
Of all your body, which as pure does show,
In Maiden whitenes as the Alpsien snow,
All these, were but your constancy away,
Would please me less then a black stormy day
The wretched Seaman toyling through the deep.
But whilst this honored strictnes you dare keep,
Though all the plagues that ere begotten were,
In the great womb of air were settled here
In opposition, I would like the tree,
Shake off those drops of weakness, and be free
Even in the arm of danger.

Clor. Would thou have
Me raise again fond man, from silent grave,
Those sparckes that long ago were buried here,
With my dead friends cold ashes?

Shep. Dearest dear,
I dare not ask it, nor you must not grant,
Stand strongly to your vow, and do not faint:
Remember how he loved ye, and be still,
The same opinion speaks ye, let not will,
And that great god of wowen Appetite,
Set up your blood again, do not inuit
Desire, and fancy for their long exile,
To seat them once more in a pleasing smile:
Be like a Rock made firmly up against all
The power of angry heaven, or the strong fall
Of Neptunes battery, if ye yield I die
To all affection: it is that loialtie
Ye tie unto this grave I so admire,
And yet there is something else I would desire,
If you would hear me, but withal deny,
O Pan, what an uncertain desteny
Hanges over all my hopes! I will retire,
For if I longer stay, this double fire,
Will lick my life up.

Clor. Do, and let time wear out,
What Art and Nature cannot bring about.

Shep. Farewell thou soul of virtue, and be blessed
For ever, whilst I wretched rest
Thus to my self, yet grant me leave to dwell
In kenning of this Arbor, yon ^ame dell
Ore topt with mourning Cipresse and sad Ewe,
Shall be my Cabin, where I Will early r^w,
Before the Sun has kissed this dew away,
The hard uncertain chance which Fate does lay
Upon this head.

Clor. The Gods give quick release
And happy cure unto thy hard disease. Exeunt.

Enter Sullen Shepherd. Sullen. I do not love this wench that I should meet,
For never did my unconstant eye yet greet
That beauty, were it sweeter or more fair,
Then the new blossoms, when the morning air
Blows gently on them, or the breaking light,
When many maiden blushes to our sight
Shootes from his early face: were all these set
In some neat form before me, twould not get
The least love from me: some desire it might,
Or present burning: all to me in sight
Are equal, be they fair, or black, or brown,
Virgin, or careless wanton, I can crown
My appetite with any: sweat as often,
And weep as any, melt my words as soft
Into a maidens ears, and tell how long
My heart has been her servant, and how strong
My passions are: call her unkind and cruel,
Offer her all I have to gain the jewel
Maidens so highly praise: then loath and fly,
This do I hold a blessed desteny.

Enter Amarillis. Amar. Hail Shepherd Pan bless both thy flock and thee,
For being mindful of thy word to me.

Sul. VVelcome fair Shepherdess, thy loving swain
Gives thee the self same wishes back again:
Who till this present hour nere knew that eye,
Could make me cross mine arms or daily dye
With fresh consumings: boldly tell me then,
How shall we part their faithful loves, and when^
Shall I belly him to her, shall I swear
His faith is false, and he loves every where?
I Will say he mocked her the other day to you,
Which will by your confirming show as true,
For he is of so pure an honesty,
To think (because he will not none will lie.
Or else to him I Will slander Amoret,
And say, she but seems chaste, I Will swear she ^e^
Me among the shadie sycamoures last night,
And loosely offered up her flame and spright,
Into my bosom: made a wanton bed
Of leaves and many flowers, where she spread
Her willing body to be pressed by me,
There have I carved her name on many a tree,
Together with mine own, to make this show
Morefull of seeming: Hobinal you know,
Son to the aged Shepherd of the Glen
Him I have sorted out of many men,
To say he found us at our private sport,
And roused us fore our time by his resorts
This to confirm, I have promised to the boy
Many a pretty knack, and many a toy,
As grinnes to catch him birds with bow, and bolt,
To shoot at nimble squirrels in the holt:
A pair of painted buskins and a lamb,
Soft as his own locks, or the down of Swan,
This I have done to win ye, which does give
Me double pleasure, discord makes me live.

Amar. Loved swain I thank ye, these tricks might prevail
With other rus^icke shepherds, but will fail
Even once to stir, much more to overthrow,
His fixed love from judgment, who does know,
Your nature, my end, and his chosens merit,
Therefore some stronger way must force his spirit
Which I have found: give second, and my love
Is everlasting thine.

Sul. Try me and prove.

Amar. These happy pair of lovers meet straight way,
Soon as they fould their flocks up with the day
In the thick grove bordering upon yon hill,
In whose hard side Nature has carved a well:
And but that matchless spring which Poets know,
Was nere the like to this: by it does grow
About the sides, all herbs which witches use,
All simples good for medicine or abuse,
All sweetes that crown the happy nuptial day.
With all their colors, there the month of May
Is ever dwelling, all is young and green,
There Is not a grass on which was ever seen,
The falling Autumn or cold winters hand
So full of heat and virtue is the land:
About this fountain: which does slowly break
Below yon Mountains foot, into a creek
That waters all the valley, giving fish
Of many sorts, to fill the shepherds dish.
This holy well, my Grandame that is dead,
Right wise in charms, has often to me sed,
Has power to change the form of any creature,
Being thrice dipped over the head, into what feature,
Or shape it would please the letter down to crave,
Who must pronounce this charm to, which she gave
Me on her death bed, told me what and how
I should apply unto the patients brow,
That would be changed, casting them thrice a sleep
Before I trusted them into this deep.
All this she showed me, and did charge me prove,
This secret of her Art, if crossed in love,
I Will this attempt, now Shepherd I have here
All her prescriptions^ and I will not fear
To be my self dipped: come, my temples bind
With these sad herbs, and when I sleep you find
As you do speak your charm, thrice down me let,
And bid the water raise me Amoret,
Which being done, leave me to my affair,
And ere the day shall quite it self out wear,
I will return unto my Shepherds arm,
Dip me again, and then repeat this charm,
And pluck me up my self, whom freely take,
And the hotst fire of thine affection slake.

Sul. And if I fit thee not, then fit not me,
I long the truth of this wels power to see. Exeunt,

Actus secundus Scena quarta.
Enter Daphnis Here will I stay, for this the covert is
Where I appointed Cloe, do not miss:
Thou bright eyed virgin, come, o come my fair,
Be not abused with fear, nor let cold care
Of honor slay thee from thy Shepherds arm,
Who would as hard be won to offer harm
To thy chaste thoughts, as whiteness from the day,
Or yon great round to move another way.
My language shall be honest, full of truth,
My flame as smooth and spotless as my youth:
I will not entertain that wandering thought,
Whose easy current may at length be brought
To a loose vastenes.
Alexis within. Cloe!
Daph. It Is her voice
And I must answer, Cloe! o the choice
Of dear embraces, chaste and holy strains
Our hands shall give! I charge you all my veins
Through which the blood and spirit take their way,
Lo^ke up your disobedient heats, and stay
Those mutinous desires, that else would grow
To strong rebellion: do not wilder show
Then blushing modesty may entertain.
Alexis within. Cloe!

Daph. There sounds that blessed name again,
And I will meet it: let me not mistake, Enter Alexis.
This is some Shepherd, sure I am awake,
What may this riddle mean? I will retire,
To give my self more knowledge

Alex. Oh my fire,
How thou consum'st me? Cloe answer me,
Alexis, strong Alexis, high, and free,
Calls upon Cloe: see mine arms are full
Of intertainement, ready for to pull
That golden fruit which too too long has hung,
T^mpting the greedy eye: thou stayest too long,
I am impatient of these mad delays,
I must not leave unsought those many ways
That lead into this center, till I find
Quench for my burning lust, I come unkind. Exit Alexis.

Daph. Can my imagination work me so much ill,
That I may credit this for truth, and still
Believe mine eyes, or shall I firmly hold her
Her yet untainted, and these sights but bold
Illusion? sure such fancies often have been
Sent to abuse true love, and yet are seen,
Daring to blind the virtuous though with error,
But be they far from me with their fond terror:
I am resolud my Cloe yet is true. Cloe within.
Cloe hark Cloe sure this voice is new,
Whose shrilnes like the sounding of a bell,
Tells me it is a woman: Cloe, tell
Thy blessed name again Cloe within. Here.
Oh what a grief is this to be so near
And not encounter? Enter Cloe.
Shepherd we are met,
Draw close into the co^ert, least the wet
which falls like lazy mistes upon the ground,
Soake through yous startvps.

Daph. Fairest, are you found
How have we wandered that the better part
Of this good night is perished? oh my heart!
How have I longd to meet ye? how to kiss
Those lilly hands? how to receive the bliss
That charming tongue gives to the happy ear
Of him that drinks your language? but I fear
I am too much vnmannerd, far to rude,
And almost grown lasciuous to intrude
These hot behauiours, where regard of fame,
Honor, and modesty, a virtuous name,
And such discourse, as one fair sister may
Without offense unto the brother say,
Should rather have been tenderd, but believe
Here dwells a better temper, do not grieve,
Then ever kindest that my first salute,
Seasons so much of fancy, I am mute
Hence^orth to all discourses, but shall be
Suting to your sweet thoughts and modesty:
Indeed I will not ask a kiss of you,
No not to wring your fingers, nor to sue
To those blessed pair of fixed stars for smiles,
All a young lovers cunning, all his wiles:
And pretty wanton dyings shall to m^
Be strangers, only to your Chastity
I am devoted ever.

Cloe, Honest swain,
First let me thank you, then return again
As much of my love: no thou art too cold
Unhappy boy, not temperd to my mold,
Thy blood falls heavy downward, it is not fear
To offend in boldness wins, they never wear
deserved favors that deny to take
When they are offered freely: do I wake
To see a man of his youth, years and feature,
And such a one as we call goodly creature,
Thus backward? what a world of precious Art,
Were merely lost, to make him do his part?
But I will shake him off, that dares not hold,
Let men that hope to be beloud be bold,
Daphnis I do desire since we are met
So happily, our lives and fortunes set,
Upon one stake to give assurance now,
By interchange of hands and holy vow,
Never to break again: walk you that way,
Whilst I in zealous meditation ^tray
A little this way when we both have ended
These rights and duties by the woods befriended,
And secrecy of night, retire and find
An aged oak whose hollownes may bind
Us both within his body, thither go:
It stands within yon bottom^^

Daph. Be it so Ex^it Daphnis.

Cloe. And I will meet there never more with thee,
Thou idle shamefastness, Alexis within, Cloe!

Cloe It Is he.
That dare I hope be bolder.

Alex. Cloe.

Cloe. now
Great Pan for Sirinx sake bid speed our plow. Exit Cloe.

Actus tertius Scena prima.
Enter the Sullen Shepherd with Amarillis in a sleep Sull. From thy forehead
thus I take
These herbs, and charge thee not awake,
Till in yonder holy well,
Thrice with powerful magic spell,
Filled with many a balefull word,
Thou have been dipped, thus with my cord
Of blasted hemp, by moone-light twinde,
I do thy sleepy body bind,
I turn thy head into the East,
And thy feet into the West,
Thy left arm to the South put forth,
And thy right unto the North:
I take thy body from the ground,
In this deep and deadly sound:
And into this holy spring,
I let thee slide down by my string:
Take this maid thou holy pit
To thy bottom, nearer yet,
In thy water pure and sweet,
By thy leave I dip her feet:
Thus I let her lower yet,
That her anckles may be wet:
Yet down lower, let her knee
In thy waters washed be,
There stop: Fly away Every thing that loves the day,
Truth that has but one face,
Thus I charm thee from this place.
Snakes that cast your coats for new,
Camelions, that alter hue,
Hares that yearly sexes change,
Proteus altring often and strange,
Haecatae with shapes three,
Let this maiden changed be,
With this holy water wet, To the shape of Amoret:
Cinthia work thou with my charm,
Thus I draw thee free from harm,
Up out of this blessed lake,
Rise both like her and awake. She awakeh

Amo. Speak shepherd, am I Amoret to sight?
Or have thou mist in any magic right?
For want of which any defect in me,
May make our practices discovered be?

Sull. By yonder moon, but that I here do stand,
Whose breath has thus reformd thee, and whose hand,
Let thee down dry, and plucked thee up thus wet,
I should my self take thee for Amoret,
Thou art in clothes, in feature, voice and hew
So like, that sense can not distinguish you.

Amore. Then this deceit which cannot crossed be,
At once shall loose her him, and gain thee me.
Hither she needs must come, by promise made,
And sure his nature never was so bad,
To bid a virgin meet him in the wood,
When night and fear are up, but understood,
It Was his part to come first: being come, I Will say
My constant love made me come first and stay,
Then will I lead him further to the grove,
But stay you here, and if his own true love
shall seek him here, set her in some wrong path,
Which say her lover lately trodden has:
I Will not be far from hence, if need there be
Here is another charm, whose power will free
The dazeled sense read by the moon beams clear,
And in my one true shape make me appear. Enter Perigot

Sul. Stand close, heeee's Perigot, whose constant heart,
Longs to behold her, in whose shape thou art.

Peri. This is the place (fair Amoret) the hour
Is yet scarce come, here every siluane power
Delights to be, about yo^ sacred well,
Which they have blessed with many a powerful spell,
For never trauailer in dead of night,
Nor straied beasts have fallen in, but when ^ight,
Has faild them, then their right way they have found,
By help of them, so holy is the ground,
But I will farther seek, least Amoret
Should be first come and so stray long vnmet.
My Amoret, Amoret! Exit. Amaril. Perigot!
Per My love! A^arill. I come my love. exit.

Sul. Now she has got
Her own desires, and I shall gainer be
Of my long looked for hopes as well as she;
How bright the moon shines here, as if she strove
To show her glory in this little grove Enter Amoret.
To some new loved Shepherd: yonder is
Another Amoret: where differs this
From that, but that she Perigot has met,
I should have taken this for the counterfeit:
Herbs, woods, and springs, the power that in you lies,
If mortal men could know your properties.

Amo. Me thinks it is not night, I have no fear,
Walking this wood of Lion, or of Bear,
Whose names at other times, have made me quake,
When any shepherdess in her tale spoke,
Of some of them, that underneath a wood
Have torn true lovers that together stood.
Me thinks there are no goblins, and men's talk,
That in these woods the nimble Faieries walk,
Are fables, such a strong heart I have got,
Because I come to meet with Perigot,
My Perigot, whose that my Perigot?

Sul. Fair Maid.

Amo. Ay me thou art not Perigot.

Sul. But I can tell ye news of Perigot,
An hour together under yonder tree,
He sat with wreathed arms and called on thee,
And said, why Amoret staiest thou so long:
Then starting up down yonder path he flung,
Least thou had mist thy way: were it day light
He could not yet have borne him out of sight.

Amo. Thanks gentle Shepherd and beshrew my stay,
That made me fearful I had lost my way:
As fast as my weakelegs, (that cannot be
Weary with seeking him) will carry me,
I Will follow, and for this thy care of me,
Pray Pan thy love may ever follow thee. Exit.

Sul. How bright she was? how lovely did she show?
Was it not pity to deceive her so?
She plucked her garments up and tript away,
And with a virgin innocence did pray
For me, that periurd her: whilst she was here,
Me thought the beams of light that did appear,
Were shot from her: me thought the moon gave none,
But what it had from her: she was alone
With me, if then her presence did so move,
Why did not I assay to win her love?
She would not sure have yielded unto me,
Women love only opportunity
And not the man, or if she had denied
Alone, I might have forcd her to have tried
Who had been stronger: o vain fool, to let
Such blessed occasion pass, I Will follow yet,
My blood is up, I cannot now forbear.
Enter Alexis and Cloe. I come sweet Amoret, soft who is here?
A pair of lovers, he shall yield her me,
Now lust is up, alike all women be.

Alex. Where shall we rest, but for the love of me,
Cloe I know ere this would weary be.

Cloe. Alexis let us rest here, if the place
Be private, and out o^ the common trace
Of every shepherd: for I understood,
This night a number are about the wood,
Then let us choose some place where out of sight,
We freely may enjoy our stolen delight,

Alex. Then boldly here, where we shall nere be found,
No shepherds way lies here, it is hallowed ground,
No maid seeks here her straied Cow, or Sheep,
Faieries and Fawnes, and Satires do it keep,
Then carelessely rest here, and clip and kiss,
And let no fear make us our pleasures miss.

Cloe. Then lie by me, the sooner we begin,
The longer ere day descry our sin.

Sul. Forbear to touch my love, or by yon flame
The greatest power that Shepherds dare to name,
Here where thou first under this holy tree,
Her to dishoner thou shall buried be.

Alex If Pan himself should come out of the lawnes,
With all his troops of Satyrs and of Faunes,
And bid me leave I swear by her two eyes,
A greater oath then thine, I would not rise.

Sul. Then from the cold earth never thou shall move,
But loose at one stroke both thy life and love.

Cloe. Hold gentle Shepherd.

Sul. Fairest Shepherdess,
Come you with me, I do not love ye less
Then that fond man that would have kept you there
From me of more desert.

Alex. O yet forbear
To take her from me, give me leave to die
By her.

The Satyr enters, he runs one way and she another. Saty. Now whilst theme one
does rule the sky,
And the stars, whose feeble light
Give a pale shadow to the night,
Are up, great Pan commanded me
To walk this grove about, whilst he
In a corner of the wood,
Where never mortal foot has stood,
Keeps dancing, music and a feast,
To intertaine a lovely guest:
Where he gives her many a rose
Sweeter then the breath that blows
The leaves: grapes, beries of the best,
I never saw so great a feast.
But to my charge: here must I stay,
To see what mortals loose their way,
And by a false fire seeming bright,
Train them in and leave them right:
Then must I watch if any be
Forcing of a chastity,
If I find it, then in haste,
Give my wreathed horn a blast,
And the faieries all will run,
Wildely dancing by the moon,
And will pinch him to the bone,
Till his lustful thoughts be gone.

Alex. O death^


Sat. Back again about this ground
Sure I hear a mortal sound,
I bind thee by this powerful spell,
By the waters of this well:
By the glimmering moon beams bright,
Speak again thou mortal wight.

Alex. Oh

Sat. Speak again thou mortal wight,
Here the foolish mortal lies,
Sleeping on the ground, arise,
The poor wight is almost dead,
On the Ground his wounds have bled,
And his Clothes fould with his blood,
To my Goddess in the wood,
Will I lead him, whose hands pure,
Will help this mortal wight to cure,

Enter Cloe again. Cloe. Since I beheld, you shaggy Man, my breast,
Does pant, each bush me thinks should hide a Beast,
Yet my desire, keeps still above my fear,
I would feign meet some Sheapheard knew I where,
For from one cause of fear, I am most free,
It is Impossible to Ravish me,
I am so willing, here upon this ground,
I left my love all Bloody wi^h his wound,
Yet till that fearful shape made me be gone,
Though he were hurt, I furnished was of one,
But now both lost^ Alexis speak or move,
If thou have any life thou art yet my love,
He Is dead, or else is with his little might,
Crept from the Bancke for fear of that ill spright,
Then where art thou that struck'st my loue^ o stray,
Bring me thy self in Change, and then I Will say,
Thou have some Justice, I will make thee trim,
With Flowers, and Garlands, that were meant for him,
I Will Clip thee round, with both mine arms as fast,
As I did mean, he should have bin embraced.
But thou art fled what hope is left for me?
I Will run to Daphnis in the hollow tree.
Who I did mean to mock, though hope be small,
To make him bold, rather then none at all,
I Will try him, his heart, and my behavior to
Perhapes may teach him, what he ought to do. Exit,
Enter the sullen Sheappeard. This was the place, it was but my feeble sight,
Mixed with the horror of my deed, an night,
That shapt these feares^ and made me run away,
And loose my Beauteous hardly gotten Pray,
Speak Gentle Sheappardess I am alone,
And tender love, for love, but she is gone,
From me, that having struke her lover dead:
For filly fear left her a lone and fled:
And see the wounded Body is Removed.
By her of whom it was so well beloved.
Enter perigot and Amarillis. in the shape of a Amor^. But all these fancies
must be quite for go^t,
I must lie close here comes young Perigott,
with subtle Amarillis in the shape,
Of Amoret pray love he may not escape.

Amo. Beloved Perigot, show me some place,
Where I may rest my Li^bes, weak with the Chace^
Of thee^ an hour before thou came at least

per. Beshrewe my Tardy stepps, here shall thou rest
Upon this holy bancke no deadly snake,
Upon this Turffe her self in foulds does make,
Here is no poison, for the Toad^ to feed.
H^re ^oldly spread thy hands, no venomd weed,
Dares blister them, No sly my snaile dare creep,
Over thy face when thou art fast a sleep,
Here never durst the bablinge Cuckoe spitt.
No slough off ^ing Starr did ever hitt.
Upon this Bancke^ let this thy Cabin be.
This other set with violets for me.

Amo. Thou do not lone me Perigot?

Per. Fair maid
You only l^ue to hear it often said;
You do not ^oubt,

Amo. Believe me, but I do.

Per. What shall we now begin again to woe,
It Is the best way to make your lover last,
To play with him, when you have caught him fast,

Amo. By I an I swear, beloved Perigot,
And by you Moon, I think thou love me not.

Per: By Pan I swear and if I falcely swear:
Let him not guard my flocks, let Foxes tear,
My Earelyest lambs, and wolves whilst I do steep
Fall one the rest a Rott among my sheep,
I love the better, then the careful Ewe,
The new yeand lamb that is of her own hew,
I dote upon thee more t^en that young l^mbe.
Does on the Bagg, that feeds him from his dam.
Were there a sort of wolves go^t in my fould,
And one Rann after thee both young and old,
Should be devoured, and it should be my strife,
To save thee, whom I love above, my life,

Amo: How should I trust thee when I see thee choose
Another bed, and do my side refuse,

Per: It Was only that the chaste thoughts, might be showen,
Tw^xt thee and me, although we were alone,

Ama: Come Perigot will show his power that he
Can make his Amoret, though she weary be,
Rise nimbly from her Couch and come to his.
Here take thy Amoret embrace, and Kiss:

Per. What meane^ my love;

Amo: To do as lovers should.
That are to be inioyed not to be woed.
There Is ^ere a Sheapard esse in all the plain,
Can kiss thee with more Art, there is none can feign.
More wanton tricks,

Per: Forbear dear soul to t^ye,
Whether my heart be pure, I Will rather dye,
Then nourish one thought to dishonor thee,

Amo: Still think thou such a thing as Chastity,
Is amongst women. Perigot there is none,
That with her love is in a wood alone,
And wood come home a Maid be not abusd,
With thy ^ond first belief, let time be vsd,
Why do thou rise,

Perigot: My true heart, thon have slain,

Amo. Faith Perigot, I Will pluck thee down again,

Per. Let go thou Serpent that into my breast,
Have with thy Cunning diu'd art, art not iniest;

Amo: Sweet love lie down,

Per: Since this I live to see,
Some bitter North wind blast my flocks and me

Amo. You swore you loved yet will not do my will,

Per: O be as thou were, once, I Will love thee still,

Amo: I am, as still I was and all my kind,
Though other shows we have poor men to blind,

Per: Then here I end all love, and lest my vain,
Beleei^e should ever draw me in again,
Before thy face that have my youth mislead,
I end my life my blood be on thy head,

Amo: O hold thy hands thy Amoret does cry,

Per: Thou c^unsayl'st well, first Amoret shall dye,
That is the cause of my Eternal smart,

Auso: O hold.

Per: This steel shall peirse thy lustful heart, He ^uns after he^

The Sullen Sheapheard stepes out and vncharmes her^ Sullen. up and down every
where,
I strewe the herbs to purge the Ayer^
Let your Odor drive hence,
All mistes that dazell sense,
Herbs and springs whose hydden migh^^
Alters shapes, and mocks the sight.
Thus I charge ye to undo;
All before I brought ye to^
Let her fly let her escape,
Give again her own shape:
Enter Amarillis. For bear thou gentle swayne thou do mistake;
She whom thou followedst fled into the brake^
And as I crossed thy way I met thy wrath;
The only fear of which near slain me has,

Per: Pardon fair Sheapardes^e my rage and night,
Were both upon me and beguild my sight;
But far be it from me to spill the blood.
Of harmless maids that wander in the wood, Exit
Enter Amoret. Many a weary stepp in yonder path Amoret.
Poor hoplesse Amoret twice trodden has,
To seek her Perigot, yet cannot hear,
His voice, my ^erigot, she loves thee dear:
That calls.

Per: See yonder where she is how fair.
She shows, and yet her breath infects the Air.

Amo. My Perigot:

Per: Here.

Amo: Happy.

Per: Hapless first:
It lights, on thee, the next blow is the worst,

Amo: Stay Perigot, my love, tho^ art unjust:

Per. Death is the best reward, that's due to lust;

Exit Per: Sullen. Now shall their love be crossed, for being struck;
I Will throw her in the Fount least being took:
By some Night Trauayler, whose honest care,
May help to cure her, Sherpardesse prepare,
Your self to dye,

Amo: No mercy I do craue^
Thou can not give a worsse blow then I have;
Tell him that gave me this, who loved him to^
He struck my soul and not my body through:
Tell him when I am dead my soul shall be.
At peace if he but think he iniurd mee^ He flin^es her into ye well

Sullen. In this Fount be thy Grave, thou were not meant,
Sure for a woman, thou art so Innocent^
She cannot escape for underneath the ground,
In a long h^llowe the clear spring is bound,
Till on you side where the Morns sunn does looke^
The struggling water breaks out in a brook, Exit.

The God of the River Rises with Amoret, in his arms God what powerful
Charms my streams do bring
Back again unto their spring?
With such force that I their god,
Three times stricking with my rod,
Could not keep them in their Rancks
My fishes shute into the banks.
There Is not one, that stays and feeds,
All have hidd them in the weeds
Here Is a Mortal almost dead,
Fallen into my River head,
Hollowed so with many a spell,
That till now none ever fell,
Ti^ a Feamale young and clear,
Cast in by some Rauisher,
See upon her breast a wound,
On which there is no plaster bound,
Yet she is wa^me, her pulses beat,
It Is a sign of life and heat,
If thou be a virgin pure,
I can give a present cure,
Take a droope into thy wound
From my watery lock more round,
Then Orient Pearl, and far more pure,
Then unchaste flesh may endure,
See she pants and from her flesh,
The warm blood gusheth out a fresh,
She is an vnpoluted maid:
I must have this bleeding stayde,
From my banckes, I pluck this flower.
With holy hand whose virtuous power,
Is at once to heal and draw^
The blood Returnes^ I never saw,
A ^ayrer Mortal, now does break,
Her deadly slumber, virgin, speak,

Amo: Who has restored my sense, given me new breath,
And brought me back out of the Arms o^ death,

God. I have heald thy wounds:

Amo: Aye me,

God. Fear not him that succord thee:
I am this Fountayne^ God below,
My waters to a River grow,
And twixt two banckes with Osiers set,
That only p^o^per in the wet,
Through the Meddowes do they glide,
Wheeling still ^n every side,
Sometimes winding round about.
To ^ind the Euenest channel o^t,
And if thou will go with me,
Leaving Mortal company.
In the Cool streams shall thou lie:
Free from harm as well as I,
I will give thee for thy food,
No fish that vse^h in the mudd,
But Trout and Pike that love to swim,
Where the Gravel from the bri^,
Though the pure streams may beseene,
Orient Pearl fit for a Queen,
Will I give thy love to winn^
And a shell to keep them in,
Not a fish in all my brook,
That shall disobeye thy l^oke,
But when thou will come slyding bye,
And from thy white h^nd take a^lye,
And to make thee understand:
How I can my waves command,
They shall Bubble whilst I sing,
Sweeter then the silver string.

The Song.
Do not fear to put thy feet,
Naked in the River sweet,
Think not leach, or Neu^e, or Toad,
Will byte thy foot, when tho^ have trod,
Not ^et the water rising hye^
As thou wadest in make thee cry:
And sobb, but ever li^e with me.
And not a wave shall trouble thee.
Amo: Immortal power, there rul'^t this holy ^lud,
I know my self, unworthy to be woed,
By the a God, for ere this, but ^or thee:
I should have shown my weak Mortallitie,
Besides by holy Oath betwixt us twain,
I am be throthd unto a Sheaphard Swain,
Whose comely face; I know the Gods above:
May make me leave to see; but not to love,

God: May he prove to thee as ^rewe:
Fairest virgin now adue,
I must make my waters fly,
Least they leave there Channells dry.
And beasts, that come unto the spring
Miss there mornings watringe.
Which I would not, for of late.
All the Neighbor people sat.
One my banckes and from the fold,
Tow white Lambs of three weeks Old,
Offered to my Dietie,
For which this year they shall be free
From raging floods that as they pass,
Leave their gravel in the grass,
Nor shall their Meades be over flowne,
When their grass is newly moan,

Amo: For thy kindness to me shown,
Never from thy bancks be blown,
Any Tree; with windy force.
Cross thy streams to stopp thy Course,
May no Beast that comes to drink
With his Horns cast down thy brincke
May non that for thy fish do look,
Cut thy banckes to damme thy Brook:
Bare-foote may no Neighbor wade:
In thy cool streams? wife nor maid,
When the spawn^s one stones do lie,
To wash there Hemp and spoil the frye.

God. Thanks Virgin, I must down again.
Thy wound will put thee to noe pain.
Wonder not, so soon it is gone;
A holy hand was laid upon. Exit.

Amo: And I unhappy borne to be.
Must follow him, that flies from me,

Finis Actus Tertis Enter Perigot. P^r She is untrue unconstant, and unkind,
She Is gone^ she is gone, blow high thou North west wind,
And raise the Sea to Mountains: let the Trees,
That dare oppose thy Raging fury leese
Their firm foundation: Creep into the earth,
And shake the world as at the monstrus b^rth,
Of some new Prodegey, whilst I constant stand,
Holdinge this trusty Bore-Speare in my hand,
And falling thus upon it.
Pe^igot to Enter, Ama ri^lis ^^nu^ng Stay ^hy dead doing hand thou art to hott,
Against thy self believe me comely Swain,
If that thou dyest, not all the showers of Rain.
The heavy Clouds send down can wash away:
The ^oule unmanly guilt, the world will lay,
Upon thee, yet thy love untainted stands:
Believe me she is constant, not the sands,
Can be so hardly numbered as she wunn:
I do not triffle, Sheapard, by thee Moon,
And all those lesser lights our eyes do vewe
All that I could thee Perigot is true,
Then be a freeman, put away despair,
And will to dye, smooth gently up that fair,
Dejected forehead: be as when those eyes,
Took the first heat,

Per: Allas he doeble dies,
That would believe, but cannot, ^is not well,
Ye keep me thus from dying here to dwell,
With many worse companions: but oh death,
I am not yet inamourd of his breath,
So much, but I dare leave it, it is not pain,
In forcing of a wound: nor after gain,
Of many days, can hold me from my will,
It Is not my self, but Amoret. byds kille^

Am^: Stay, but a little^ little but on hour,
And if I do not show thee through the power?
Of herbs and words I have, as dark as Night?
My self, turned to thy Amoret, in sight?
Her very figure, and the Robe she wears;
With tawny Buskins, and thee hook she bears
Of thine own Caruing, where your names are set,
Wrought underneath with many a Curious frett
The prim-Rose Chaplet? taudry-lace and Ring,
Thou gave her for her singing with each thing,
Else that she wears about her let me feel;
The first tell stroke of that Revenging steel?

Per. I am contented if there be a hope;
To give it Entertaynement for the scope;
Of one poor hour; go you shall find me next?
Under you shady Beech? even thus perplexed;
And thus beleiuing.

Amaril. Bind before I go;
Thy soul by Pan unto me, not to do,
Harm or outrageous wrong upon thy life,
Till my Return.

Per. By Pan and by the strife;
He had with Phoebus for the Masterye,
When Goulden Mydas, judged their Minstralcye;
I will not. Exeunt;

Enter Satyr with Alezis hurt. Satyr: Softly glyding as I go;
With this Burden full of woe;
Through still silence of the night?
Guided by the glooe-wormes light.
Hither am I come at last;
Many a Thicket hane I past;
Not at twigg that durst deny me;
Nor a bush that durst descry me.
To the little Bird that sleeps:
On the tender spray nor creeps,
That hardly worm with poynted Tail;
But if I be under sail;
Flying faster then the wind;
Leauinge all the Clouds behind,
But does hide her tender head,
In some hollow Tree o^ bed;
Of ^eeded Nettells not a Hare
Can be started from his fare;
By my footing nor a wish;
Is more sudden, nor a fish?
Can be found; with greater ease,
Cut the vast unbounded seaes;
Leaving neither print nor ^ound.
Then I when nimbly on the ground,
I measure many a leage an hour;
But behold the happy bower,
That must ease me of my charge,
And by holy hand enlardge;
The ^oule of this sadd man that yet,
Lies fast bound in dead lysi^t,
Heaven and great Pan, sucker it,
Hay^e thou beauty of the Bower,
Whither then the Paramore:
Of my Master; let me crave,
Thy virteous help to keep from Grave,
This poor Mortal that here lies,
Waiting when thee destinyes.
Will undo his thread of life,
Veiwe the wound by cruel knife,
Trencht into him^

Cl^r: What art thou? call'st me from my holy Rightes
And with the feared name of death a frightes
My tender Ears, speak me thy name and will,

Satyr I am the Statyre that did fill,
Your lapp with early fruit and will,
When I happ to gather more,
Bring ye better, and more store:
Yet I come not empty now,
See a blossom from the bow,
But be shrewe his heart that pulld it,
And his perfect Sight that Culld it,
From the other springinge bloomes
For a sweeter youth the Gwomes
Cannot show me nor the downs:
Nor the many neighboring Towns,
Low in yonder glade I found him,
Softly in mine Arms I bound him,
Hither have I brought him sleeping,
In a Trance, his wounds fresh weepinge,
In remembrance such youth may
Spring and perish in a Day.

Clor: Satyr: they wrong thee, that do term thee rude
Though thou be outward rough and tawny hued:
Thy manners are as gentle and as fair,
As his who bragges himself, borne only heir,
To all Humanity: let me see thie wound:
This Herb will stay the Current being bound,
Fast to the Or^physe, and this restrain,
Vicers, and Swellings, and such inward pain,
As the cold Air has forced into the sore,
This to, draw out such Putrifiing gore,
As inward falls.

Satrye: Heaven grant it may do good,

Clor: Fayrely wipe away the blood,
Hold him gently till I fling,
Water of a virtuous spring:
On his Temples tu^ne him twice:
To the Moon beams pinch him thrice:
That the laboring soul may draw.
From his great ecclip^e.

Satry: I saw.
His Eyelids moving.

Clor: Give him breath,
All the danger of cold death:
Now is vanished, with this plaster:
And this unction do I master:
All the festred ill that may:
Give him grief another day.

Satyr: See he gathers up his spright
And begins to hunt for light,
Now a gapes and breathes again:
How the blood runns to the vain:
That east was emply.

Alexis. Oh my heart,
My dearest, dearest Cloe O the smart,
Runs, through my side: I feel some poynted thing,
Pass through my Bowels, sharper then the stinge,
Of Scorpion.
Pan, preserve me, what are you,
Do not hurt me. I am true,
To my Cloe though she fly
And leave me to this Destiny,
There she stands, and will not lend,
Her smooth white hand to help her friend,
But I am much mistaken, for that face,
Bears more Austeritye and modest grace,
More reproving and more awe.
Then these Eyes yet ever saw,
In my Cloe, oh my pain:
Eagerly Renewes again:
Give me your help for his sake you love best:

Clor: Sheapheard thou Can not possible take rest.
Till thou have laid a side all heates, desiers,
Provoking thoughts, that stir up lusty fires.
Commerse with wanton Eyes: strong blood and will,
To execute these must be purged until,
The vain grow Whiter then Repent and pray:
Great Pan, to keep you from the like decay,
And I shall undertake your cure with ease.
Till when this verteous Playsters will displease,
Your tender sides. give me your hand and rise.
help him a little Satyr. for his Thyghes.
Yet are feeble.

Alexis. Sure I have lost much blood.

Satyr. It Is no matter, it was not good,
Mortal you must leave your woing,
Though there be aloye in doing,
Yet it brings much grief, behynd it,
They best ^eele it, that do find it,

Clor: Come bring him in, I will attend his sore,
When you are well, take heed you lust no mo^e,

Satyr: Sheapeard see what comes of kissinge
By my head twere better missing,
Bryghtest if there, be ramayning,
Any service, without fayninge,
I will do it, were I set,
To catch the nimble wind or get,
Shadows glydinge on the green,
Or to steal from the great Queen,
Of Fayryes, all her Beautye,
I would do it so much duty,
Do I owe those precious Eyes,

Clor: I thancke the honest Satyr, if the Cries,
Of any other that be hurt, or ill,
Draw thee unto them, prithee do thy will?
To bring them hither,

Satyr: I will and when the weathe^:
Se^ues to Angle in the brook,
I will bring a silver hook,
With a line of finest silk,
And a rodd^ as white as mi^ke,
To deserve the little fish,
So I take my leave and wish,
On this bower may ever dwell,
Spring, and summer.

Clor: Friend farewell. Exit.

Enter Amoret, seeking her love Amo: This place is Ominous sor here I lost,
My love and almost life, and since have crossed,
All these woods over, never a Nooke or dell,
Where any little Byrd, or beast does dwell,
But I have sought it^ never a bending browe,
Of any hill or Glade, the wind sings through,
Nor a green bancke or shade where Sheapeards use,
To si^t and Riddle sweetly pipe or choose,
Their valentynes^ but I have mist to find.
My love in, Perigot, Oh to unkind.
Why have thou fled me? whether art thou gone,
How have I wronged thee? was my love alone,
To thee, worthy this scorned Recompense? it is well,
I am content to fee^ eit; but I tell
Thee Sheapeard: and these lusty woods shall hear.
Forsaken Aomret^ is yet as clear,
Of any stranger fire, as Heaven is.
From foul Corruption, or the deep: Abisse,
From light, and happiness, and thou may know,
All this for truth and how that fatal blow,
Thou gave me, never from desert of mine,
Fell on my life, but from suspect of thine,
Or fury more then Madness therefore, here.
Since I have lost my life, my love, my dea^e,
Upon this cursed place, and on this green,
That first devorced us, shortly shall be seen,
A sight of so great pity that each eye,
Shall daily spen^ his spring in memory.
Enter Amarillsi. Of my untimely fall.

Amaril: I am not blind,
Nor is it through the working of my Mind.
That this shows Amoret, for sake me all,
That dwell upon the soul, but what men call
Wonder, or more then wonder Miracle,
For sure so strange as this the Oracle,
Never gave answer of, It passes dreams,
Or maddmens fancye when the many streams,
Of new Imagination rise and fall:
It Is but an hour since these Ears heard her call,
For pity to young Perigot? whils^hee,
Directed by his fury Bloodelye,
Lanch't vp^ her breast, which bloudlesse fell and cold,
And if belief may Credit what was told,
After all this the Mellancholly Swayne,
Took her into his Arms being almost slain.
And to the bottom of the holy well,
slung her for ever with the waves to dwell,
It Is she, the very same, it is Amoret.
And living yet, the great powers will not let,
Their verteous love be Crossed, maid wipe away,
Those heavy dropps of sorrow, and allay,
The storm that yet goes high, which not deprest,
Breaks, heart, and life, and all before it rest:
Thy Perigot:

Amo: where: which is Perigot.

Amaril Sits there below lamenting much God wott:
Thee, and thy fortune, go and comfort him,
And thou shall find him under neath a brim,
Of sailing Pynes that edge yon Mountaiue in,

Amo: I go, I run Heaven grant me. I may winn:
His soul again.
Enter Sullen: Stay Amarillis stay,
Ye are to fleet, it is two hours yet to days
I have performed my promise le^t us sit;
And warm our bloodes together till the sit;
Come lively on us;

Amaril: Friend you are to keen;
The Morning, Rises, and we shall be seen,
For bear a little;

Sullen: I can stay no longer;

Amaril: Hold Sheapeard hold, learn not to be a wronger;
Of your word, was not your promise laid,
To break their loves first:

Sullen: I have done it Maid?

Amaril: No they are yet unbroken, met again,
And are as hard to part yet as the stayne?
Is from the finest lawne,

Sullen. I say they are.
now at this present parted, and so far,
That they shall never meet,

Amaril Swayne it is not so,
For do but to yon hanging Mountain go,
And there believe your eyes,

Sullen: you do but hold:
Of with delays: and trifles, fare well cold,
And frozen bash^ullnes, unfit for men,
Thus I sallute thee virgin,

Amaril: And thus then,
I bid you follow, Catch me if ye can, Exit.

Sullen.: And If I stay behind I am no Man. Exit running after her
Enter Perigot. Night do not steal away: I woe thee yet?
To hold a hard hand ore the Rusty bytt,
Tha^ Gydes thy Lazy teame^ go back again,
Boots thou that driu'st thy frozen wane,
Round as a Ringe and bring a second Night,
To hyde my sorrows from the coming light,
Let not the Eyes of men stare on my face,
And read my falling^ give me some black place,
Where never sunn beam, shot his wholesome light,
That I may sit, and power out my sadd spright,
Like running water never to be known:
After the forced fall and ^ound is gone,
Enter Amoret looking of Perigot This is the bottom: speak if thou be here,
My Perigot, thy Amoret, thy dear,
Calls on thy loved Name,

Per: What thou dare,
Tread these forbidden paths, where death and care,
Dwell on the face of darcknes,

Amo: It Is thy friend,
Thy Amoret come hither to give end,
To these consuminges look up gentle Boy,
I have forgot those pains, and dear annoy,
I sufferd for thy sake, and am content,
To be thy love again why have thou rent,
Those curled locks, where I have often hunge,
Ribandes and damask Roses, and have flunge,
Waters distilld to make thee fresh and gaye,
Sweeter then Nose-gayes on a Bridal day,
Why do thou cross thine Arms, and hang thy face,
Down to thy Boosome, letting fall apace,
From those too little Heavens upon the ground
Showers of more price, more Orient, and more round
Then those that hang upon the moons pale browe
Cease these complainings Sheapheard I am now,
The same, I ever was, as kind and free,
And can forgive before you ask of me,
Indeed I can, and will.

Per: So spoke my fair,
O you great working powers of Earth, and Air,
Water, and forming fire, why have you lent,
Your hydden virtues of so ill intent,
Even such aface, so fair so bright of hew,
Had Amoret, such, words ^soe smooth and new,
Came flowing from her tongue, such was her eye,
And such the poynted sparckle that did flye^
Forth like a bleeding shaft, all is the same,
The Robe, and Buskins, painted, hook, and frame,
Of all her Body O me Amoret,

Amo: Sheapeard what means this Riddle who has set,
So strange a difference, twixt my self and me,
That I am grown annother, look and see.
The Ring thou gave me, and about my wrest.
That Curious Braeslet thou thy self did twist.
From those fair Tresses, know thou Amoret.
Has not some newer love forced thee forget,
Thy Ancient faith,

Per: Still nearer to my love;
These be the very words she often did prove,
Upon my temper, so she still wod take,
wonder into her face, and silent make,
Singes whith her head and hand as who wod say
Sheapeard remember this annother day:

Amo: Am I not Amoret. where was I lost,
Can there be Heaven, and time, and men^ most
Of these unconstant? faith where art thou fled?
Are all the vows and protestations dead:
The hands held up? the wishes and the heart?
Is there not one remayningne not apart,
Of all these to be found why then I see:
Men never knew that virtue constancye

Per Men ever were most blessed, till Cross fate,
Brought love, and women forth unfortunate,
To all that ever tasted of their smiles,
Whose Actions are all double, full of wiles,
Like to the subtle Hare, that fore the Hounds,
Makes many turnings leapes and many roundes,
This way and that way, to deceive the sent,
Of her p^rsuers:

Amo: It Is but to prevent,
There speedy coming, on that seek her fall,
The hands of Cruel men^ more Bestiall,
And of a nature more refusing good,
Then beasts themselves, or fishes of the flood,
Thou art all these, and more then nature meant,
When she created all, frowns, joys, content:
Extreme fire for an hour, and presentlye:
Colder then sleepy poison: or the sea,
Upon whose face sitts a continual frost
Your Actions ever driven to the most,
Then down again as low that none can find,
The rise or falling of a woemans mind,

Amo: Can there be any Age, or days, or time,
Or tongues: of Men, guilty so great a crime:
As wronging simple Maid, O Perigot:
Tho^ that wast yesterday without a blott,
Thou that wast every good^ and every thing,
That men call blessed: thou that wast the spring.
From whence our looser grooms drewall their best:
Thou that wast always Just, and always blessed,
In faith and promise, thou that had the name,
Of virtuous given thee, and made good the same:
Even from thy Cradle: thou that wast that all,
That men delighted in, Oh what a fall,
Is this to have been so, and now to be,
The only best in wrong, and infamye,
And I to live to know this, and by me.
That loved thee dearer then, mine Eyes or that,
Which we esteem our honor virgin state,
Dearer then swallows love the early morn,
Or dogs of Chase the souud of merry Horn,
Dearer then thou can love thy new love, if thou hast^
Another and far dearer then the last,
Dea^er then thou can love thy self, though all,
The self love were within thee, that did fall.
with that coye swayne: hat now is made a flower
For whose dear sake, Echo weeps many a shower
And am I thus rewarded for my flame,
Loved worthily to get a wantons name,
Come thou forsaken willowe wind my head,
And noise it to the world, my love is dead:
I am forsaken I am Cast away,
And left for every lazy Grome to say,
I was unconstant light, and sooner lost,
Then the quick Clouds we see or the Chill ^rost,
When the hott sun beats on it tell me yet,
Can thou not lone again thy Amorett?

Per. Thon art not worthy of that blessed name,
I must not know thee, flynge thy wanton flame,
upon some lighter blood: that may be hott,
With words and feigned passi^ns, Perigot,
Was ever yet vnstaynd, and shall not now.
Stoop to the meltings of a borrowed browe:

Amo: Then hear me heaven: to whom I call for right.
And you sayre twinkling stars that crown the night,
And hear me woods and and silence of this place,
And ye sad hours, that move a sullen pace,
Hear me ye shadows, that delight to dwell,
In horred darkness, and ye powers of Hell,
Whilst I breath out my last, I am that maid,
That yet vntaynted Amoret tha^ played:
The careless Prodigal: and gave away:
My soul to this young man that now dares say:
I am a stranger, not the same, more wild,
And thus with much belief, I was be guild,
I am that Maid, that have delayed deny,
And almost scornd the loves of all that tryded,
To win me but this swayne, and yet confess,
I have been woed by many with no less.
Soul of affection and have often had:
Ringes Rellts and Cracknels. sent me from the lad.
That ^eeds his flocks down westward, Lambs and Doves
By young Alexis, Daphnis sent me gloves,
All which I gave to thee not these nor they
That sent them, did I smyle one, or ere lay.
up to my after memo^ye but why,
Do I resolve to grieve and not to dye
Happy had been the stroke thou gave if home,
By this time had I found a quiet room.
Where every slave is free, and every breast,
That living bread, new care, now lies at rest,
And thither will poor Amoret,

Ver. Thou must,
Was ever any man, so loath to trust,
His Eyes as I, or was there ever yet,
Any so like, as this to Amoret,
For whose dear ^ake, I promise if there be
A living soul within thee thus to ^ree,
Thy Body from it, He hur^s her again.

Amo: So this work has end.
Farewell and live be constant to thy friend,
That loves thee next,

Enter Satrye: Perigot runus of. Satyr. See the day begins to break,
And the light shutts like a streake,
Of subtle fire the wind blows cold,
Whilst the morning does unfold,
Now the Byrds begin to rouse,
And the Squyrrill from the boughs,
Leps to get him Nutts and fruit,
The early Lark erst was mute,
Carr^lls to the Risinge day,
Many a Note, and many lay,
Therefore here I end my watch,
Least the wandering Swayne should catch,
Harm or loose him self^^ Amo: ah me.

Satyr: speak again what ere thou be,
I am ready speak I say,
By the dawning of the day,
By the power of Night and Pan;
I enforce thee speak again,

Amo: O I am most unhappy.

Satyr. Yet more blood,
Sure these wanton Swaynes are wood,
Can there be a hand, or heart,
Dare commit so vild a part,
As this Murder, by the Moon,
That hydd her self when this was done,
Never was a sweeter face,
I will bear her to the place,
Where my Goddess keeps and crave,
Her to give her life, or grave,

exeunt, Enter Clorin, Clorin, Here whilst one patient takes his rest secure
I steal a broad to do annother Cure,
Pardon thou buried body of my love,
That from thy side I dare so soon remove,
I will not prove unconstant nor will leave,
Thee for an hour alone, when I deceive,
My first made vow, the wildest of the wood,
Tear me, and ore thy Grave let out my blood,
I go by wit to Cure a lovers pain,
Which no herb can, being done, I Will come again, Exit,
Enter Thenot Poor Sheapeard in this shade for ever lie,
And seeing thy fair Clorins, Cabin dye,
O happlesse love which being answered ends,
And as a little Infant cries and bendes,
Hist tender Brows, when rolling of his eye,
He has espied some thing that glisters nigh.
Which he would have, yet give it him, away,
He throws it straight, and cries a fresh to play
With some thing else such my affection set,
On that which I should loath if I could geett
Enter Clorin. See where he lies did ever man but he,
Love any woeman for her Constancy,
To her dead lover which she needs must end,
Before she can allow him, for her friend,
And he himself, must needs the cause destroy,
For which he loves, before he can inioye,
Poor Sheapeard, Heaven grant I at once may free,
Thee from thy pain, and keep my loyalty,
Sheapheard look up,

Thenot Thy brightness does amaze,
So Phoebus may at Noone bid mortals gaze,
Thy glorious constancy appears so bright,
I dare not meet the Beams with my weakesight

Clorin. Why do thou pyne away thy self for me

Thenot Why do thou keep such spottlesse constancy?

Clorin. Thou holy Sheapheard see what for thy sake,
Clorin, thy Clorin, now dare undertake, he starts up

Thenot. Stay there, thou constant Clorin if there be,
Yet any part of woeman left in thee,
To make thee light think yet before thou speak,

Clorin. See what a holy vow, for thee I break,
I that already have my fame ^arr spread,
For being constant to my lover dead

Thenot. think yet dear Clorin of your love, how true,
If you had dyed, he would have been to you

Clorin Yet all I Will loose for thee.

Thenot. Think but how blessed,
A constant woeman is above the rest,

Clorin. And offer up my self, here on this ^round,
To be disposd by thee,

Thenes why do thou wound,
His heart with Malice, against women more.
That hated all the Sex, but thee before,
How much more pleasant had it been to me,
To dye then behold this change in thee,
Yet, ye^^ return: let not the woeman swaye,

Clorin: In sult not on her now, nor use delay
Who for thy sake has venturd all her fame,

Thenot: Thou have not venturd but bought Certain shame,
Your Sexes Curse, foul falsehood, must and shall,
I see once in your lives light on you all;
I hate thee now: yet turn

Clorin, Be just to me:
Shall I at once^ loose both my fame and thee,

Thenot. Thon had no fame, that which thou did like good
Was but thy Appetite that swayed thy blood,
For tha^ time to the best, for as a blast,
That through a nouse comes, usually does cast,
Things out of order: yet by chance may come,
And blow some one thing to his proper rome,
So did thy Appetite, and not thy zeal.
Swaye the by chance to do some one thing well.
Yet turn.

Clorin: Thou do but try me if I would.
Forsake thy dear embraces for my old
Loves though he were alive, but do not feare^

Thenot I do contemn thee now: and dare come near.
And gayse upon thee, for me thinks that grace:
Austeritye, which satt upon that ^ace,
Is gone, and thou like others false maid see,
This is the gain of foul Inconstance, Exit.

Clorin: It Is done great: Pan, I give thee thanks for it,
What Art could not have heald, is curd by wit,
Enter: Thenot again: Will ye be constant yet, will ye remove,
Into the Cabin to your buried love,

Clorin: Noe let me dye, but by thy side remain,

Thenot. There Is none shall know that thou did ever stayne,
Thy worthy stricknes, but shall honnerd be
And I will lie again under this tree,
And pine and dye for thee with more delight,
Then I have sorrow now to know thee light,

Clorin. Let me have thee, and I Will be where thou will.

Theonot. Thou art of women's race and full of guilt,
Farewell all hope of that sex, whilst I thought,
There was one good, I feared to find one naught
But since there minds I all alike epsy
Hence forth I Will choose as there is, by mine eye,

Clorin. Blessed be ye powers that gave such quick redress,
And for my labors sent so good success,
I rather choose though I a woman be,
He should speak ill of all,
then dye for me.
Finis Actus quartus.
Actus Quintus. Scena. 1.
Enter Priest, and old Shepherd. Priest. Shepherds, rise and shake of sleep.
See the blushing Morn does peep,
Through the windows, whilst the Su^e
To the Mountain topps is run,
Gilding all the vales below,
With his rising flames which grow,
Greater by his climing still.
Up ye^ lazy grooms and fill,
Bagg and Bottle for the field,
Claspe your cloakes fast lest they yield,
To the bitter Northeast wind,
Call the Maidens up and find.
Who lay longest, that she may,
Go without a friend all day.
Then reward yonr dogs and pray,
Pan to keep you from decay,
So unfold, and then away
What not a Shepherd stirring sure the grooms,
Have found their bed^ to easy, or the Rooms.
Fillde with such new delight, and heat that they,
Have both forgot their hungry sheep, and day,
Knock that they may remember what a shame,
Sloth and neclect, lays on a Shepherds name.

Old. It is to little purpose, not a swayne,
This night has known his lodging, here; or layne,
Within these cotes: the woods or some near town,
that is a neighbor to the bordering down:
Has drawn them thither, bout some lusty sport;
Or spiced wassal Boule, to which resort.
All the young men and maids of many a coat,
Whilst the Trim, Minstrell strikes his merry note.

Priest. God pardon sin, show me the way that leads,
To any of their haunts.

Old. This to the Meades.
And that down to the woods,

Priest. Then this for me,
Come Shepherd let me crave your company. exeunt.

Enter Clorin in her Cabin, Allexis with her^ and Amorillis Clorin. Now your
thoughts are almost pure:
And your wound beginns to cure.
Strive to bannish all that's vain,
Lest it should break out again.

Allexis. Eternal thanks to thee, thou holy maid:
I find my former wandering thoughts, well stayed,
Through thy ^ise precepts, and my outward pain,
By thy choice herbs is almost gone again.
Thy sexes vice and virtue are reueald,
At once, for what one hurt another heald.

Clorin. May thy grief more apease,
Relapses, are the worst disease:
Take heed how you in thought offend,
So mind and body both will mend.

Enter Satyr with Amoret. Amo. Be thou the wildest creature of the Wood,
That bearst me thus a way drowned in my blood.
And dying, know I cannot iniurd be
I am a maid, let that name fight for me:

Satire. Fairest Virgin do not fear,
Me that does thy body bear,
Not to hurt, but held to be,
Men are ruder far then we.
See fair Goddess in the wood,
They have let out yet more blood:
Some sauadge man has struck her breast
So soft and white, that no wild beast,
Durst a touched asleep or wake,
So sweet that Adder, Neut, or Snake.
Would have layn^ from arm to arm,
On her Bossome to be warm,
All a night and being hot,
Gone away and stung her not.
Quickly clap herbs to her breast,
A man sure is a kind of Beast,

Clorin. With spottlesse hand, on spotless Breast,
I put these herbs to give thee rest.
Which till it heal the there will bide
If both be pure, if no^ of slide.
See it falls of from the wound,
Sepheardesse thou art not sound,
Fall of lust.

Satyr. Who would have thought it,
So fair a face:

Clorin. Why that has brought it.

Amo. For ought I know or think, these words my last:
Yet Pan, so help me as my thoughts are chaste.

Clorin. And so may Pan bless this my cure,
As all my thoughts are just and pure,
Some uncleanness nigh does lurk,
That will not let my medcines work.
Satyr search if thou can find it,

Satyr. Here away me thinks I wind it.
Stronger yet, Oh here they be,
Here here in a hollow tree.
Two fond mortals have I found,

Clorin. Bring them out they are unsound.

Enter Cloe, and Daphinis. Satyr. By the fingers thus I wring ye,
To my Goddess thus I bring ye.
Strife is vain come gently in,
I sented them, they are full of sin,

Clorin. Hold Satyr, take this Glass,
Sprinkle over all the place,
Purge the Air from lustful breath,
To save this Shepherdess from death.
And stand you still, whilst I do dress
Her wound for fear the pain increase,

Satyr. From this glass I throw a dropp,
Of Crystal water on the topp.
Of every grass on flowers a pair:
Send a fume and keep the Air,
Pure and wholesome, sweet and blessed,
Till this virgins wound be dressed,

Clorin. Satyr help to bring her in,

Satyr. By Pan, I think she has no sin.
She is so light, lie on these leaves,
Sleep that mortal sense deceaues.
Crown thine eyes, and ease thy pain,
May thou sone be well again,

Clorin. Satyr bring the Sheph^ard nere,
Try him if his mind be clear,

Satyr. Shepherd come,

Daphinis. My thoughts are pure,
The better trial to endure.

Satyr. In this flame his figer thrust,

Clorin. Which will burn him if he lust.
But if not away will turn,
As loath unspotted flesh to burn:
See it gives back let him go.
Farewell Mortal keep thee so.

Satyr. Stay fair Nymph, fly not so fast,
We must try if yon be chaste:
Here Is a hand that quaks for fear,
Sure she will not prove so clear:

Clorin. Hold her finger to the flame:
That will yield her praise or shame.

Satire. To her doom she dares not stand,
But pluckes away her tender hand:
And the Taper darting sends,
His hot beams at her fingers ends.
O thou art foul within, and have;
A mind if nothing else unchaste.

Alexis. Is not that Cloe? it is my love; it is she:
Cloe, fair Cloe.

Cloe. My Alexis. Alexis: He.

Cloe. Let me embrace thee.

Clorin. Take her hence, Least her sight disturb his sense.

Alexis. Take not her: take my life first.

Clorin. See his wound again is burst,
Keep her near here in the wood.
Til I have stopped these streams of blood.
Soon again he ease shall find,
If I can but still his mind:
This curtain thus I do display,
To keep the pierceing Air away.

Enter old shepherd, and Priest. Priest. Sure they are lost for ever, it is in
vain,
To find them out, with trouble and much pain:
That have a Ripe desire, and forward will,
To fly the company of all, but ill:
What shall be counsaild: Now shall we retire?
Or constant follow still, that first desire,
We had to find them?

Old. Stay a little while:
For if the mornings mist do not beguile,
My sight with shadows: sure I see a swain
One of this jolly troops come back again.

Enter Thenot. Priest. Do thou not blush young shepherd to be known,
Thus without care, leaving thy flocks alone:
And followinge what desire and present blood,
Shapes out before thy burning sense, for good,
Having forgot what tongue hereafter may
Tell to the world thy faleing off, and say
Thou art regardlesse both of good and shame,
Spurning at virtue, and a verteous name:
And like a glorious desperate man, that buies,
A poison of much price, by which he dies
Do thou lay out for lust, whose only gain,
Is foul disease, with present age and pain:
And then a Grave: these be the fruits that grow,
In such hot veins that only beat to know,
Where they may take most ease and grow ambtious,
Through their own wanton fire, and pride de^itious.

Thenot. Right holy Sir I have not known this night,
What the smooth face of Mirth was: or the sight,
Of any looseness, music, joy and ease,
Have been to me, as bitter drugges to please
A Stomach lost with weakness, not a game
That I am skild at throghly, nor a dame,
Went her tongue smoother then the feet of Time,
Her beauy ever living like the Rhyme,
Our blessed Tyterus did singe of yore,
No, were she more entising then the store
Of fruitful Summr, when the laden tree,
Bids the faint Traveler be bold and free
Twere but to me like Thunder against the bay,
Whose lightning may enclose, but never stay
Upon his charmed branches, such am I,
Against the catchiug flames of woman's eye.

Priest. Then wherefore have thou wandered.

Thenot. It Was a vow,
that drew me out last night, which I have now,
Strictly performed, and homewards go to give
fresh pasture to my sheep, that they may live.

Priest. It Is good to hear ye Sheeph ard if the heart,
In this well sounding Music bear his part;
Where have you left the rest,
I have not seen,
Since yesternight, we met upon this green,
To fould our flocks up, any of that train
Yet have I walked these woods round and hauelaine
All this long night under an aged tree^
Yet neither wandering Shepherd did I see,
Or Shepherdess, or drew into mine ear,
The sound of living thing unless it were,
The Nightingale, among the thick leaued spring
That fits alone, in sorrow and does sing:
Whole nights away in mourning, or the Owl,
Or our great Enemy that still does howl.
Against the Moons cold beams.

Priest. Go and beware,
Of after falling.

Thenot. Father it is my care. Exit Theon^t.

Enter Da^hnis. Old. Here comes another straggler, sure I see,
A shame in this young Shepherd Daphinis,

Daphnis. He,

Priest. Where have left the rest, that should have been
Long before this, grazing upon the green:
Their yet imprisond flocks,

Daph. Thou holy man.
Give me a little breathing till I can,
Be able to unfold what I have seen,
Such horror that the like has never been,
Known to the ear of Shepherd: oh my heart,
L^bours a double motion to impart,
So heavy tidings you all know the Bower,
Where the chaste Clorin, lives by whose great power,
Sick men and cattle hane been often cured,
There lovely Amoret, that was assured,
To lusty Perrigot: bleedes out her life:
Forced by some iron hand and fatal knife,
And by her young Allex^s.
Enter Amarillis running from her s^llen sheepeheard. If there be
Ever a Neighbour-brooke or hollow tree,
Receive my body, close me up from lust,
That follows at my heels, be ever just,
Thou God of sheepheards: Pan for her dear sake,
That loves the Rivers brinks, and still does shake,
In cold remenbrance of thy quick pursuit:
Let me be made a reed, and ever mute,
Nod to the waters fall, whilst every blast,
Singes through my slender leaves that I was chaste:

Priest. This is a night of wonder, Amarill,
Be Comforted, the holy gods are still,
Reuengers of these wrongs.

Amar. Thou blessed man,
Honored upon these plains and loved of Pan:
Hear me, and save from endless infamy,
My yet vnblasted flower Virginity
By all the Garlands that have croun'd that head,
By thy chaste office, and the marriage bed,
That still is blessed by thee: by all the rights
Due to our God: and by those virgin lights,
That burn before his Altar: let me not,
Fall from my former state to gain the blot
That never shall be purged.
I am not now,
That wanton Amarillis: here I vow,
To Heaven, and thee grave father, if I may,
Escape this unhappy Night, to know the day,
A virgin, never after to endure
The tongues, or company of men vnpure.
I hear him, come, save me.

Priest Retire a while,
Behind this bushk, till we have known that vile
Aboser of young maidens.
Enter Sullen. Stay thy pace,
Most loved Amarillis: let the chase,
grow calm and milder, fly me not so fast,
I fear the pointed Brambles have vnlac't
Thy golden Buskins, turn again and see:
Thy Shepherd follow, that is strong and free,
Able to give thee all cont^nt and case,
I am not bashful virgin, I can please:
At first encounter hugg thee in mine arm,
And give thee many kisses, soft and warm,
As those the Sun prints on thy smiling cheek,
Of Plummes or mellow peaches I am sleeke,
And smooth as Neptune when stearne Eolus,
Lo^ks up his surley winds and nimbly thus,
Can show my Active youth why do thou fly.
Remmber Amarillis it was I,
That killed Alexis for thy sake, and set,
An everlasting hate twixt Amoret,
And her beloved Perigot it was I,
That drowned her in the well, where she must lie,
Till time shall leave to be, then turn again:
Tur^e with thy open arms and clipp the swayne
That has performd all this, turn turn I say:
I must not be deluded,

Priest. Monster stay,
Thou that art like a canker to the state,
Thou live and brethest in, eating with debate,
Through every honest bosom, forcing still,
The veins of any men, may serve thy will.
Thou that have offered with a sinful hand,
To seize upon this virgin that does stand,
yet trembling here.

Sullen. Good holiness declare,
What had the danger been if being bare,
I had imbracd her, tell me by your Art:
What coming wonders wood that fight impart.

Priest. Lust, and branded soul,

Sullen. Yet tell me more,
Has not our Mother Nature for her store,
And great increase, said it is good and just,
And willd that every living creature must,
Beget his like.

Priest. Ye are better read then I,
I must confess in Blood and Letchery:
Now to the Bower and bring this beast along,
Where he may suffer Penance for his wrong,

Enter Perigot with his hand bloody, Per. Here will I wash it in the mornings
dew,
Which she on every little grass does strewe,
In silver dropps against the Suns appear:
It Is holy water and will make me clear.
My hand will not be cleansed, my wronged love,
If thy chaste spirit in the Air yet move,
Look mildly down on him that yet does stand,
All ^ull of guilt thy blood upon his hand,
And though I struck thee undeservedly,
Let my revenge on her that Iniurd thee.
Make less a fault which I intended not,
And let these dew dropps wash away my spot,
It will not cle^nse, O to what sacred blood,
Shall I resort to wash away this blood:
Amidst these Trees the holy Clorin. dwells,
In a low Cabin, of cut boughs and heales,
All wounds, to her I will my self a dress,
And my rash^faultes repentantly confess:
Perhaps she will find a means by Art or prayer,
To make my hand with chaste blood stained, fair
That done not far hence underneath some tree,
I Will have a little Cabin built since she,
Whom I adorde is dead, there will I give,
My self to stricknesse and like Clorin live. exit.

The Curtayne is drawn, Clorin appears sitting in the Cabin, Amoret sitting
on the on side of her, Allexis and Cloe on the other, the Satyr standing by.
Glorin. Shepherd once more your bloold is stayed,
Take example by this maid,
Who is healde e^e you be pure,
so hard it is lewd lust to cure,
Take heed then how you turn your eye^
On these other lust fully,
And sheephear^esse take ^eedleast you,
Move his willing eye thereto,
Let no wring, nor pinch, nor smile
Of yours, his weaker sense beguyle,
Is your love yet true and chaste,
And for ever so to last.

Alexis. I have forgot all vain desires,
All looser thoughts, ill temp^ed fires,
True love I find a pleasant ^ume,
Whose moderat heat can nere consume.

Cloe. And I a new fire feel in me,
Whose base end is not quenched to be.

Clorin. Join your hands with modest touch,
And for ever keep you such.

Enter Perigot. Perigot. Yon is her cabin, thus far off i will stand,
And call her forth, for my unhallowed hand,
I dare not bring so near yo^ sacerd place,
Clorin come forth and do a timely grace,
To a poor swain,

Clorin What art thou that do call?
Clorin is ready to do good to all.
Come near.

Per^ I dare not. Clorin. Satyr, see
Who it is that calls on me.

Satyr There Is a hand some swain does stand,
Stretching out a bloody hand.

Per. Come Clorin bring thy holy waters clear,
To wash my hand.

Clorin. What w^nders have been here
To night stretch ^oorth thy hand young swain,
Wash and ^ubbe it whylst I rain
Holy water.

Per Still you power,
But my hand will never scour.

Clorin Satire^ bring him to the bower
We will try the soueragne power
Of other waters.

Satire Mo^tall su^e,
It Is the blood of maiden pure
That stains he so.

The Satire leads him to the Bower, where he spieth Amoret and kneeleth
down: she knows him, Perigot What e're thou be.
Be thou her spright, or some divinity,
That in her shape thinks good to walk this grove,
Pardon poor Per^got

Amor. I am thy love.
Thy Amoret. for evermore thy love:
Stick once more on my naked breast, I Will prove
As constant still, O can thou love me yet,
How soon could I my former griefs forget.

Perig. So over great with joy, that you live now
I am, that no desire of knowing how
does seize me; have thou still power to forgive,

Amor. Whilst thou have power to love, or I to live,
More welcome now then had thou never gone
A stray from me.

Per. And when thou love alone
And not ^, death or some lingering pain^
That Is worse, light on me.

Clorin. Now your stain
Perhaps will cleanse, thee once again
See the blood that erst did stay,
With the water drops away:
All the powers again are pleased,
And with this new knot are appeasd:
Join your hands, and rise together,
Pan be blessed that brought you hither.

Enter Priest and old Shepherd. Clorin. Go back again what ere thou art:
unless
Smooth maiden thoughts possess thee, do not press
This hallowed ground, go Satire take his hand,
And give him present trial.

Satire Mortal stand.
Till by fire, I have made known
Whether thou be such a one,
That may freely tread this place,
Hold thy hand up, never was,
More untainted flesh then this,
Fairest he is fall of bliss.

Clorin. Then boldly speak why do thou seek this place,

Priest. First honored virgin to behold thy face,
Where all good dwells, that is, next for to try
The truth of late report, was given to me:
Those sheepheards that have met with ^oule mischance,
Through much neglect, and more ill governance,
Whether the wounds they have may yet endure
The open air, or stay a longer cure,
And lastly what the doom may be, shall light
Upon those guilty wretches, through whose spite
All this confusion full. For to this place,
Thou holy maiden have I brought the race,
Of these offenders, who have freely told,
Both why, and by what means, they gave this bold
Attempt upon their live.

Clorin. Fume all the ground,
And sprinckle holy water, for unsound
And foul Infection ginnes to fill the Air
It gathers yet more strongly,
Of Censors filled with Franckensence and Mirr.
Together with cold Camphire, quickly stir.
The gentle Satire, for the place beginns
To sweat and labor, with the abhorred sins
Of those offenders, let them not come nigh,
For full of itching flame and leprosy,
Their very souls are, that the ground goes back,
And shrinks to feel the ^ullen weight of black
And so unheard of vennome, hye thee fast,
Thou holy man, and bannish from the chaste,
These manlike monsters, let them never more
Be known upon these dounes, but long before,
The next suns rising, put them from the sight,
And memory of every honest wight.
Be quick in expedition, lest the sores
Of these weak patients, break into new gores Exi^ Priest.

Per. My dear dear Amoret, how happy are,
Those blessed paires, in whom a little l^rr
Has bred an everlasting love, to strong
For time or steel, or envy to do wrong,
How do you feel your hurts, a less poor heart
How much I was abusd, give me the smart
For it is justly mine.

Amo. I do believe.
It is enough dear friend, leave off to grieve,
And let us once more in despite of ill,
Give hands, and hearts again

Per. with better will,
Th^n ere I went to find, in hottest day
Cool Christ all of the fountain, to allay
My eager thirst, may this band never break,
Hear us o heaven.

Amo. Be constant.

Per. Else Pan wreake
With double vengeance, my disloyalty.
Let me not dare to know the company
Of men, or any more behold those eyes.

Amo. Thus shheepheare with a kiss all envy dies.

Enter Priest. Priest Bright Maid, I have performed your will, the swain
In whom such heat, and black rebellions reign
Has undergone your sentence:
Only the maid I have reserved, whose face
shows much amendment, many a tear does fall
In sorrow of her fault, great fair recall
Your heavy doom, in hope of better days
Which I dare promise: once again, vpraise
her heavy Spirit, that near drowned lies
In self cons^ming care that never dies.

Clorin. I am content to pardon: call her in,
The air grows cool again, and does beginn
To purge it self, how bright the day does show
After this stormy cloud, go Satire go,
And with this taper boldly try her hand.
If she be pure and good, and firmly stand
to be so still: we have perfoormd a work
worthy the gods themselves Satire brings Amarillis in.

Satire Come forward Maiden, do not lurk
Nor hide your face with grief and shame,
Now or never get a name,
That may raise thee, and recure,
All thy li^e that was impure,
Hold your hand unto the flame,
If thou be a perfect dame:
Or have truly vowed to mend,
This pale fire will be thy friend.
See the Taper hurts her not,
Go thy ways let never spot,
Henceforth ceaze upon thy blood.
Thank the Gods and still be good.

Cl^rin. Young sheepheardesse now, ye are brought again
To virgin state, be so, and so remain
To thy last day, unless the faithful love
Of some good sheepeheard force thee to remove,
Then labor to be true to him, and live
As such a one, that ever strives to give
A blessed memory to after Time:
Be famous for your good, not for your crime.
Now holy man, I offer up again
These patients full of health, and free from pain
Keep them, from after ills, be ever near
Unto their actions: teach them how to clear,
The tedeous way they pass though, from suspect
Keep them from wrong in others, or neglect
Of duty in them selves, correct the blood,
With thrifty bitts and labor, let the flood,
Or the next neghbouring spring give remedy
To greedy thirst, and travail, not the tree
That hanges with wanton clusters, let not wine
^nlesse in sacrifice or rights divine,
Be ever known of shepherds, have a care,
Thou man of holy life, Now do not spare,
Their faults through much remissnes, not forget,
To cherish him, whose many pains and sweat,
Has given increase, and added to the downs.
Sort all your Shepherds from the lazy clownes:
That feed their heafers in the budded Broomes,
Teach the young maidens tricknes that ye grooms
May ever fear to tempt their blowing youth,
Banish all complement but single truth.
From every tongue, and every Shepherds heart,
Let them use persuading, but no Art:
Thus holy Priest, I wish to thee and these,
All the best goods and comforts that may please,

All. And all those blessings Heaven did ever give,
We pray upon this Bower may ever live.

Priest. Kneel every Shepherd, whilst with powerful hand,
I bless you after labors, and the Land.
You feed your flocks upon Great Pan defend you.
From misfortune and amend you,
Keep you from those dangers still,
That are followed by your will:
Give ye means to know at lenght,
All your Riches all your strenght.
Cannot keep your foot from falling,
To lewd lust, that still is calling,
At your cottage, till his power,
Bring again that golden hour:
Of peace and rest, to every soul.
May his care of you control,
All diseases, sores or pain,
That in after time may reign,
Either in your flocks or you,
Give ye all affections new.
New desires and tempers new,
That ye may be ever true.
Now rise and go, and as ye pass away,
Sing to the God of sheep, that happy lay:
That honest D^rus taught ye, Dorus he,
That was the soul and God of melody.
Song.
the all sing. All ye Woods, and Trees, and Bowers,
All ye virtues, and ye powers:
That inhabit in the lakes,
In the pleasant springs or brakes.
Move your feet,
to our sound:
Whilst we greet,
all this ground.
With his honor and his name.
That defendes our flocks from blame.
He is great, and he is just,
He is ever good and must:
Thus be honnerd, Daffadillyes,
Roses, Pinckes, and loved Lillyes.
Let us fling,
Whilst we sing,
Ever holy,
Ever holy.
Ever honerd, ever young,
Thus great Pan is ever sung. Exeunt.

Satyr. Thou deuinest, fairest, brightest,
Thou most powerful maid, and whitest.
Thou most virtuous, and most blessed,
Eyes of Stars and Golden Tressed,
Like Apollo, tell me sweetest,
What new service now is meetest.
For thee Satyr shall I stray,
In the middle Air and stay,
Thy Sailing Rack or nimbly take,
Hold by the Moon, and gently make.
Suite to the pale Queen of the night,
For a Beam to give thee light,
Shall I diue into the Sea,
And bring the corrall making way,
Through the rising waves that fall,
In snowy fleeces, dearest shall,
I catch the wanton fawnes, or flies,
Whose wouen wings the Summer dies,
For many colors get thee fruit,
Or steal from Heaven old Orpheus Lute
All these I venture for and more,
To do her service, all these Woods adore

Clorin. No other Service Satyr but thy watch,
About these Thicks least harmless people catch,
Mischief or sad mischance.

Satyr. Holy virgin, I will dance,
Round about these woods as quick,
As the breaking light, and prick,
Down the lawnes, and down the vales,
Faster then the Windmill sails.
So I take my leave and pray,
All the comforts of the day:
Such as Phoebus heat does send,
On the Earth may still be friend,
Thee and this Arbor.

Clorin. And to thee,
All thy masters love be free. exeunt.

The Pastoral of the faithful Shepherdess.

FINIS.

