A Panoplie of Epistles, Or, a looking Glass for the unlearned. Containing a
perfect plattforme of inditing letters of all sorts, to persons of al estates
and degrees, as well our superiors, as also our equals and inferiors: used
of the best and the eloquentest Rhetoricians that have lived in all ages, and
have been famous in that faculty.

Gathered and translated out of Latin into English, by Abraham Flemming.

Armat spina rosas, mella tegunt apes. Imprinted at London, for Ralph Newberie,
dwelling in Fletestrete a little above the great Conduite. Anno a Umgineo partu
1576.

A Catalogue of such Authors, as have written in this Panoplie of epistles:
with the number of the page where they are mentioned.
A.
ANacharsis Scythieus, 203. Anaximenes Milesius. 205 Archytas Tarentinus. 207
Antigonus Macedonicus* 209 Alexander Macedo. 216 Aristoteles Stagirites* 217
Apollonius Tyanaeus. 219 Agesilaus Lacedaemonius 222. Arcesilaus Prytannaeus.
208
C.
Chilo Lacedaemonius. 199 Cleobulus Lindius. 201 Cato Vticensis. 220 Cyrus
Persicus. 233 Chr. Hegendorphinus. 381 Chr. Longolius. 403 Caius Plinius
Nouocomensis. 241 Conradus Celtis. 391
D.
Darius Persicus. 213 Diogenes Cynicus. 293 Dionysius Antiochenus. 301 D.
Erasmus Roterodamus. 337.
E.
Epimenides Cretensis. 204 Epicurus Atheniensis 229 Epistoliographus Anonymus.
232
G.
Georgius Macropedius. 359 Gualterus Haddonus. 413
H.
Heraclitus Ephesius. 214 Hippocrates Cous. 265
I.
Isocrates Atheniensis. 154 Joan. Rauisius Textor. 349 Joan. Ludouicus viues.
397
L.
Lucianus Dialogographus. 229 Libanius Sophista. 305 Lucius Anneus Seneca* 307
M.
Marcus Tullius Cicero. 1. 2. 3 etc. Menecrates Syracusanus. 231 Marcus Brutus.
^61
N.
Nucilli Laconi^a* 237
P.
Pisistratus Atheniensis. 198 Pittacus Mitylenaeus 200 Periander Corinthus. 201
Pherecydes Syrius 204 Pythagoras Samius. 211 Plato Atheniensis. 212
Philostratus Tyanaeus. 232 Philippus Macedo. 215 Peregrinus Anonymus. 217
Panaetius Rhodius. 218 Phalaris Agrigentinus. 296 Paulus Manutius. 314
R.
Rogerus Aschamus. 428
S.
Solon Salaminius. 191 Socrates Atheniensi^* ^18 Synesius Pentapoli tanus* 301
T.
Thales Milesius. 19^ Thrasibulus Atheniensis. 201
Z.
Zeno Citicus. 210
In Abrahami Flemingi Londin. epistolarum Panoplian, Th. Sp. Ebor. Octastichon.
Quisquis in vmbrosis Musarum militat oris,
Huc veniat, capiat spicula, scuta manu.
Sieve velit gladiis duro certare duello,
Eminus aut hastis, hic via tuta satis.
Na^ liberiste nouus scribe^tib. arma ministrat,
In quo est and laeuis, ferreus atque stylus:
Utilis ergo tibi si miscellanea lexis
Haec fuerit, dicas, docte Fleminge
Vale.
TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, sir William Cordell knight, Master of the Queens
Majesty's Rolls etc. health, wealth, and happiness everlasting.
PAssing of late (right worshipful) thorough many a piece of land, pleasant
in view and profitable* in use, it was my happy chance to have entrance into a
goodly Gardene plott, which as it was large and of an exceeding great compass,
so was ^t beautified with flowers of all sorts, both delightsome to the eye;
in consider^tion of their variable colors: and comfortable to the nose, in
respect of their excellent sweetness. And no m^uaile though this Garden
plott were so goodly and so great: for, as in number they were (in manner)
infinite, which had recourse thereunto* so the The names of those cunning
Gardeners, which did set and sow these flowers, are contained in a Catalogue
in the beginning of this book not un ceslarie to b^ vnderstoo^*
multitude of cunning and skillful Gardeners, (whose most luckie hands ^owed
the singular feeds, of which these fine flowers took root in the ground,
sprou^g and spread with leaves and blossoms of glorious hew) was innumerable.
After I had set my foot within the fen^es of this rich and coastly Garden,
(passing for pleasantness, and excelling for largeness, all the Gardens that
are to be seen in this our age, albeit the heads of people were never so
in^entiue and curious, and their hands at no t^me so artificial and (...)*) I
saw a footepathe before me, not very plain to perceive, because it was not
much used and trodden, yet not so ouergrowne with green grass, but that it
might easily enough be seen: then pausing a space, as being in doubt to go
forward, considering the greatness of the Garden, the manifold corners, the
crooked turnings, and the compassing arbours of the same, least by presuming to
far* I should loose my self, as it were in a Labyrinthe: and museing thus in
mind, as burdened with uncertainty, what were most auaylable for me to
attempt, a soudeine cogitation concerning the present use and benefit of this
pleasant plott, overcame me as it were with inchantmentes, insomuch that I,
feeling in me self no ability to withstand so forceable an assault, as one
amassed, leasurly began to foot it forward: anon, haueing gone a little ground,
mine eyes were fead with most delectable appearaunces, and my nostrells with
most comfortable savors, so that there began to kindle in me a certain
affection of joy and gladness, and therewithal sprang, to the increase of my
courage, a Hope makes men har ^ie and ventu^ous.
hope of good happ after to ensue: whereupon I waxed venturous, and like a
confident fellow amended my pase, persuading my self, that in so heavenly a
paradise there was no danger, and always as I did proceed, so new and fresh
delights, were plentifully offered. Then, having called home my wandering
wits, I weighed the worthiness of the soil, which lay open and manifest in
sight, and falling into an un measurable love and liking of the same, for my
further solace I walked too and fro, taking a view of the goodly work which
was there to be seen, and marking the great choice of flowers, as well for
their kinds, as also their colors: whiles I was thus occupied, a soudeine
desire bred in me, to take a trial of those delights (though not of all, yet
at least, of some, that my labor and my longing might not be frustrate) which
were before and round about me on every side: in this desire there was such
efficacy and force, that I was not able to resist the woorking of the same:
whereupon (for I perceived the nature of it, and saw wherewith it was to be
satisfied,) I buckled my self to a new kind of buisinesse. For, Pleasant
obiectes can not but comfo^ and delight the sense^*
whereas before, the sense of seeing was delighted, and the sense of smelling
comforted, now the sense of feeling begins to put in execution his office:
and thus pleasure upon pleasure most plentifully is reaped. For, that whereon
at first I fixed mine eye, and the sweetness whereof pierced into my nose,
the same I am now bold to touch, to handle, to gather, and to bear away.
Among many and sundry sorts of flowers therefore, (the very woorst of all
being of great virtue and value) such as in my fancy, bare the brauest hew
and gallantest gloss, I gathered with a certain greediness, esteeming highly
of the opportunity of the time, which was then presently ministered, and
fearing least another should take my labor out of my hand: which caused me
with so much the more speed (though have, as the old proverb says, makes
waste) to finish that which I had begun. And (...) (right worshipful) these
few flowers, which I have picked and chosen from among many, (yea, myllians I
may say, and not amiss) according to my homely handling (for where knowledge
has but a certain infancy, and where experience is very young, what Art ca^ be
showed, what cunning can be declared?) I have tied up together in a Garland,
with course thread, for want of fine silk, placing each flower in such order,
as my skill gave me leave: and the same grossly bound up together, with their
natural stalks and leaves, even as they were hastily gathered out of
outlandish gardens, (for, the most part of these flowers, and if I said in
manner al, I were not to be accused of an vntru^h, grew in foreign
countries: as in A particular rehearsal of a few goodly countries, wherein
these flowers grew and prospered
Mac^donia, in Athens, in Miletum, in Thessal^a, in Tarentum, in Sic^lie, in
Venice, in Padua in Rome, in (...), in Louane, and diverse other fruitful
soiles within the compass of heaven: from far were they fet, and therefore
the more deintie.) I (...) to your person, confessing, that in consideration of
the gatherers unskillfulness, it is nothing agreeable to your singular
worthiness: but yet in respect of the excellency of the thing it self (for
being examined and weighed with aduisement, it deserves highly to be had in
estimation) being simply considered, it is most worthy of acceptance*
Wherefore, if it shall please you (...) a favorable countenance, to receive my
po^re present, which I acknowledge to be rusticall, but yet not deserving
refusal: (for in former ages of our ancients, the Gods them selves, and the
Goddesses also most gracious,

Pliny in pro log. lib. 1. Statius lib. 1. Syluar. and diverse other.
Of milk, of meal* and crop of country ground*
Of pears, of plummes, of ^uts and other fruit,
Of purpledgrapes on vines that did abound,
Of o^en cakes, when simple folk made suit,
Of little things right well they did rep^te:
And frankince^se of clownes required not,
But well in worth took what was to be got.)
I shall see sufficient occasion of ioyfulnesse min^stred to my heart: and my
hands shall be the more ready and quick, to gather such another, and in hope of
like luck in courteous acceptance, to be circumspect and advised in seeing it
bestowed. Thus having ben ouertedious* I commit your worship to the protection
of that God, whose feate is heaven* and whose footstool is the earth,
beseeching him of his gracious goodness, to crown you and yours with all manner
of blisfull benefits.

Your worships at commandment and service. Abraham Flemming.

To the learned and unlearned Reader.
Lo, learned Reader, whose mind is beautified with the amiable iuelles of
knowledge, and judgment, to thee I present this Panoplie of Epistles, to read
for thy recreation, and peruse at thy pleasure: for I am taught by experience
of my self, that the tediousness of studio, is to be assuaged with some
intermingling of delight. To the unlearned I do likewise offer it, as
sufficient furniture to arm and enable them against ignorance, the adversary
and sworn enemy of understanding: so that, from the communicating of this
necessary labor, a double benefit does spring: namely, pleasure and profit:
pleasure to the learned, whom if I had not made partakers of the same, I had
showed my self imurious: and profit to the unlearned* to whom if I had
denied the fruit of this my travel, they might well think and take me to be
hateful and envious* Being careful therefore of the one, and not negligent
of the other, I am well content, that the commodity of my labor, (which the
learned lead by integrity and uprightness of judgment, can but allow* and
the unlearned, by cause on the use thereof, d^pendeth the increase of their
knowledge, must needs commend: for that which is honest and also pleasant, who
is so mad as to mislike: and that thing from whence profit proceeds, who is
so witless as to contemn?) should be common. Persuading my self therefore
indifferen^ly of both, I will touch in brevity, the benefits that issue from
this book. As it is not for a naked and unarmed soldier* to encounter his
enemy being harnessed at all points, and to the proof provided, except his
intent be, wilfully to incur danger of violence: so it is not for any m^n,
to tie the use of his pen, to the vanities of his own imagination, which
commonly be preposterous and careless in keeping order; unless his meaning
be* of set purpose, to re^pe reprehension for his security and negligence* He
therefore that is to play the part of a warrior, ought with his force and
valliauntnesse, to join substantial furniture, that the service of his
natural abilities, and the use of his isntrumental powers, may concur and
go together, making him the more venturous to withstand his enemies assault,
and fuller of force also to give him the discomfiture. So he in like manner,
(that I may rather show my self a Me^curialist, then a Martialist: for I have
not to deal with war, nor yet with warlike weapons, otherwise then by way of
application.) that loves orderly to indite, and plausibly to occupy his
pen, in devising and disposing as well both meet matter, as also fit words,
in any kind of letter, (for of letters Exhortatorie, Accusatorie, Interces^o
rye, Commendatorie, Excu^atorie, Congratulatorie, Responsorie, Consolatorie,
Criminatorie, Nunciatorie, Lamentatorie, Mandatorie, Laudatorie, Conuictorie,
Obiurgatorie Interrogatori, Dehortatorie, etc. read Li^ Sophiit^, De
epistolarum characteribus.
there be sundry sorts) must make means and provision, for him self in this
case, that those wantes and imperfections of Art and cunning may be supplied.
To such a one I give counsel to pass and repasse, to view and reuiew, to take
down and put on, to exercise and use, such weapons as he shall find in this
our Panoplie or house of furniture, and he shall feel him self in shor^
space, fenced and strengthened to the purpose, against ignorance that ougly
monster of many heads, an enemy to order, and a friend to confusion. For,
there shall be no kind of letter, but in framing the same, thou shall (though
the gifts of nature, wherewith thou art endued, be but weak and slender) have
knowledge, cunning, judgment, and experience sufficient: be the person to who^
thou writest never so princely, never so learned, never so worthy, never so
noble, never so friendly, never so froward, never so gentle, never so angry,
never so virtuous, never so wicked, never so prudent, never so witless, never
so heavy, never so joyful: finally, be his qualities of this kind or that
kind, what so ever. So that, as the Physician, to heal many and sundry
maladies, wherewith his weak patients are infected, uses many and sundry
sorts of medicines: in like manner, to write formally to persons diverse in
degree, thou haste here ready to serve thy turn, many presidents and examples,
not broched in the seller of mine own brain, but drawn out of the most pure
and clear founteines of the finest and eloquentest Rhetoricians, that have
lived and flourished in all ages, even from the very first, that won fame by
that noble faculty, to the last whose names for the same cause, shall never
wear out of memory. What should I say more: The variety of method in this
Panoplie of Epistles.
will thou write gravely, will thou write wisely, will thou write sweetly,
will thou write smoothly, will thou write harshly, will thou write darkly, will thou write gladly, will thou write sadly, will thou write largely, will thou
write briefly, will thou write lovingly, will thou write angerly? will thou
complain, will thou accuse, will thou rebuke, will thou commend, will thou
threaten, will thou pardon, will thou displease, will thou reconcile, will thou
command, will thou entreat? what so ever thou art disposed to do by letter,
either to thy friend, or to thine enemy, thou have this Panoplie to guide thy
head in devising, and thy pen in disposing. To conclude, many, and (in
manner) innumerable are the benefits which this book brings, which we wish
no less profitable to thee the Reader, then it was pleasant to me the
gatherer and translator. Fare you well.

Thine for thy benefit. Abraham Flemming.

THE EXTRACT OF certain selected Epistles, out of M. T. Cicero, the most
famous Rhetorician and eloquent Orator among the ancient Romans.
Cicero to Messinio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He signifies to his friend Messinius, that he is desirous to see him, and
exhorts him to mitigate and assuage the heaviness and bitterness of his
troublesome times, with the communicating of letters, and with the comfortable
remembrance of a good conscience.

MOst acceptable were your letters: which gave me to understand no less the^ I
presupposed, before you applied your pen to the practice of inditing: namely,
yt you were inflamed with a marvelous desire to see me: which singular
courtesse of yours I can not but well accept, yet so notwithstanding, that you
imagine the same scant counteruailable with the kindness, where with for your
sake I am affected. For so do I wish al things to chance unto me, as I profess
my self touched, or rather stinged with a desire to be in your presence. For,
at what time the number of honest men, good citizens, Honesty, ple santnesse,
and love* are the causes of kind nesse, and the special allurements, why we
covet to be to gether.
pleasant companions, and such indeed as lo^ed me, and made of me great
account, was not small: yet among so many, there was not one, with whom I would
(...) (...) spend my time, then with you, and very few with whom I wish to be
so willingly. As for this time wherein we now live, for so much as some of our
acquaintance are swallowed up with the sword, some scattered in variety of
soiles, and othersome have altered the former disposition of their will: one
days space, spent in your society, ministers to my mind larger
delightsomnesse, then all the time which I waste with many of them, among whom
necessity co^straineth me to make continuance. I would not have you conceive
this opinion, that solitariness, or a wandering life in a vast wilderness, or
an unfrequented abiding, is unto me more pleasant and comforta^le, (which I may
not use by any means) than the conference and communi^ation, which I have with
Of Caesar's acquaintance.
sundry Gentlemen, that have usual resort to my house, one or twain at the
uttermost excepted. Wherefore I refuse not to run to that refuge of succor,
which (in my judgment) you ought to embrace, namely intercourse of friendly
Epistles, and also an assurance of both our consciences. For I am the man, as
you may lightly conjecture, and without curious canuassing gather, that have at
no time, attempted any thing, more for my private commodity, then for the
furtherance of my friends, and profit of my citizens, at whose estate and
condition, if He means Pompeius.
he had not envied, and maliciously repined, toward whom your affection was
never inclined, (for I was your beloved) both he him self had been fortunate
and happy, and all other given to virtue and goodness. Such a man am I, as
do both wish and will, that the violence of none have force so far to
prevail, as henest ease and tranquillity power to over come, and when as I
perceived, that the self same Caesar's army.
army which I most mistrusted, was of greater ability, then the mutual
consent of such good Gentlemen, whom I (by mine own procurement) assembled,
then thought I thus in my mind, that it could not be much prejudicial and
hurtful to conclude Yea, though the condition we^e scant honest.
peace upon any condition whatsoever, so that safety might be obtained, and
danger avoided, then to encounter him upon confidence of sufficient force, to
whom in strength and fortitude I am inferior. But of these matters, and of
other circumstances, we shall talk shortly face to face without interruption.
There is nothing which sticks so fast in my cogitation, as the state of the
affairs in Caesar took one part, Scipio another, and ^uba the king.
Africa, the expectation whereof keep me in Rome, for now (as it should
seem) the matter lies a bleeding, and is brought into a very narrow point of
peril, and surely I think that in some respect it touches me, although how
much or how little, out of question I am ignorant: nevertheless, whatsoever
is reported unto me from thence, I know the counsels of my friends and
welwillers are in a readiness. For now the matt^r is grown toward such
hassarde, that, although in their two causes which are at de^aunce and dealing
of blows in battle, great difference consists, yet small odds is there in
their He supposes that both their victories will smell of cruelty.
victories, except I be far and wide deceived. But to discover a plain
truth, my mind, which in matters of difficulty and doubtfulnesse was not a
little infeebled, in fearful dangers, and terrible desperation is mightily
confirmed: and your last letters have affoorded to the same, further
establishment: which contained a testimony of your valiantness, in
suffering injuries with a courageous stomache: besides that, sithence your
singular humanity and gentleness, was to your preserme^t, and your letters
also a means for your advantage, I feel my self thereby somewhat assisted.
For I will write no untruth, I took you to be a man ^f a soft nature, and a
mild spirit, as we are all for the most part, that have lead our lives in a
free and a fortunate common wealth: Howbeit, as we inioyed When the common
wealth was glorious.
prosperity, and the flower of felicity with moderation* so now also, in
this adversity, and In that we are (...) to Caesar.
declining of fortunes favor from us, ought we to sustain all perplexities
with patience: to the intent that in most main mischiefs, we might ^nde this
good remedy, not only to contemn and despise, but also to desire and long
after death, which we ought not to fear although we (...) not (...) with
blessedness^, For he is of op^nion, that our my^des or souls are immortal:
which he pro^ i^ his book of old age so entitled.
(...)* i^ (...) ^ (...) of the senses, and leauet^ the (...) ^rustrate (...)
(...). This tranquillity, ease and ^ietnesse* (...) you ^hase and p^ssesse, if
you love me in de^de, if your friends^ip ^e fervent* and (...) kindness not
controulable* yea plant this* persuasion in your mind, That nothing (blame and
offense (...)* (...) you have never ^eene (...) unto, an^ (...) (...)* Can
chance in the life of any man wherein horror is harbored, or fear
intertain^d. I will come and visit you shortly, if I may see time convenient:
if any thing fall out in such sort, that an alteration of our counselles must
ensue, I will certify you without delay. See that you remain so desirous to
see me, that you remove not from the place where you be, sithence you are weak
and cras^e, before you ask mine aduisement by your letters, what my will is to
have you do in that behalf. I would that you should love me still, as you now
do no less, and as I wish that your health be carefully considered, so I
would not be well pleased, if in tranquillity and quietness your mind
should not be established.

Fare you well.
Cicero to P. Lentulo.
THE ARGUMENT.
This Epistle is altogether consolatorie or comfortable: for he mi^istreth
consolation to Lentulus by comparison of his own times and troubles, when he
being in banishment for a sea^on, recovered notwithstanding the benefit of his
country, and the possession of his dignity. The occasion why the Epistle is
so shor^, was, for that Pollio went to Lent^lus of set purpose, to make report
unto him of all things by word of mouth.

OF all things done here, Of the country Asinia.
Pollio (who was not only present, but also had the ordering and disposing of
them) shall sufficiently give you to understand. As for my self, the confidence
and hope which I conceive in your matters and bus^nesse, comfort me a midde
the maine seas of my sorrows and heaviness* because* I suspect it is like to
come to pass, that by the procurement of (...) (...) counse^s, men's
maliciousness shall be infeebled and weak^ned, as also by the benefit of that
happy day of restitution, not only the thoughts of Whose unfaithfulness we
have in great suspicion
traitors sha^ be prevented, ^ut the cogitations and purposes of your
adversaries shall quite be dissolved: Secondly, the remembr^unee of mine own
When he was forced to for^ake his ^ountrie.
troublesome times, offer unto me some consolation: a represe^tation o^ image
whero^ ^ ^ee in your present estate. For although your worship and countenance
in a matter of less importance be blemished, then my health, sa^etie, and life
ind^ungered: yet there is such a lively likeness and resemblance, that I hope
you will judge me pardonable, if I fear not those things, which your own self
have always supposed not to be feared at all. But spare not to show your
self the man, whom (from tender years) I took you to be. Believe me the,
how much the injurious dealing of peruersse people shall be increased, so much
the worthynesse and dignity of your person shall be enlarged. As for me, For
in time of necessity, true friendship is more effectual.
look what duty and service is requireable of a friend to a friend, on my
part shall be precisely perfourme^* I will not deceive your hope.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Ualerio.
THE ARGUMENT.
This Epistle is tempered with jesting and pleasantness. One thing therein is
serious, namely where he gives thanks to Lentulus, to whose government
Cilicia was committed: lastly, it contains certain duti^ of familiarity
toward the same Valerius.

FOr He is pleasantly disposed, calling him Lawier, not as though he were one
in deed, but as though he gave him the name for affec tions sake.
why should I not salute you by the name of a Lawyer? I know no cause to the
contrary: Especially sithence in these days and as the course of the world
now is, boldness may be used for wisdom, impudency taken for prudence. I
have thanked Lentulus by my letters in your name, and that with diligence. But
I would wish you to look for no more letters from us: but rather to take
pains to come and see us your friends, and there to make your aboade, where
you may grow in worship and estimation, rather then to continue where you are,
seeming solitary wise: albeit some which have been with you, report you to be
proud and hautie ^arted, because you vouchsafe not to answer your clients:
and partly spightfull in speech, because you answer unhappily. But now
Valerius, my desire is to be pleasant with you in person: wherefore, do what
you can to come unto us: and as for Apulia your native country, come not at
it: that we may be glad of your safe coming hither. For if you go into
Apulia, when you come there, you shall know Alluding to the baseness of his
petigre, as though he were marvelous destitute of alliance and acqu^intance.
as many of your friends and kinsfolke^, as did Whom neither man, woman, nor
child knew but his dog alone.
Ulysses, at the ending of his long peregrination and wearisome voyage.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Curio.
THE ARGUMENT.
This Epistle has four members, or portions. In the first Cicero being
accused of Curio for his seldom writing, excuses him self by the
commemoration of his duty. In the second, he discovers the grief of his
mind conceived through the absence of Curio, and his joy on the otherside, for
Curio his worship. In the third is contained an admonition to the deserving of
praise, and to the embracing of virtue. In the fourth, he commends to Curio
the estate of his old age, being fifty six years old when he wrote this
letter.

ALthough I am grieved, that for negligence sake you have me in suspicion: An
excuse with a testimony of his benevolence.
yet my duty to be accused of you, did not so much move me to be sorry, as
the self same to be required, did encourage me to be merry: especially,
sithence I am not guilty of that offense which is laid to my charge* And
assuredly, in that you acknowledge a desire of my letters, therein you declare
your self, not only an approved friend unto me, but also do testify the
sweetness of your love. There has none escaped the carrying of my letters,
whom I might understand to travel toward^s you: For w^o is less slothful,
and more He said not more diligent but more quick and speedy, to the intent
he might rather excuse the^ commend him self. Epi. ^. Lib. 5.
quick and speedy to write to his friend then I? As for you, I have heard
not passing twice, or thrice at the uttermost from you, and when you write, you
write very sparingly and shortly: wherefore if you give unjust judgment upon
me, why may not I also condemn you in the same offense: and if you seem loath
that I should so do, then is it your duty to be more courteous and upright
toward me. But concerning letters, let this suffice: for I mistrust not, but
that I shall serve you to your own contentation with often writing,
conditionally, that my labor therein employed, be rather regarded, then
refused, accepted then despised. The second part of the Epistle.
I am not a little grieved for your long absence from us, by the means whereof
I suffer this inconvenience, that I labor in the lack of your most sweet
and delightsome acquaintance: and yet I can not but rejoice, for that you have
obtained and won (as it were) the maisterie in all things, with great
worship and renoune, and that fortune assenteth to my desires in all your
affairs, suites and business. The third part or portion
So great is the expectation of your judgment and wisdom, that I dout not to
request and earnestly beseech you, to return to us in such sort confirmed in
mind and established, y^ the expectation which you in the minds of most men
have kindled, may accordingly be maintained and nourished: He commen death and
exhorts together, because exhortation should be rempered with co^ mendation.
Epi. 12. Li. 15.
And because no storms of forgetfulness, no ^empestes of unthankfulness,
shall be able to drenche the remembrance of your duetifull desartes toward
me: I pray you heartily, to repose this in your memory, that to what
prosperity and dignity fortune shall advance you, * The fourth part or
member.
you should never have had the ability to aspire there unto, but that in your
childhoode you did lay a listening ear to my faithful counselles, and showed
your self conformable and applyaunt to my most loving aduertisements.
Wherefore, such ought your duty to be toward us, and such your affection,
that mine For he wa^ four and fifty years old when he (...) this letter.
old age still increasing, and daily drouping, may be harbored in the haven
of your friendship, and ^nde comfort in the goodness of your youth.

Fare you well.
M. T. Cicero to Curio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He exhorts Curio to seek after praise, fearing, least whiles civil wars
did spring, he would decline from the service which he did owe to the common
wealth, and take part and confederacy with traitorous citizens.

YOu are not ignorant Curio, that of letters there are Three kind of Epistles
or letters.
sundry sorts, but of all other none so certain as that one, which moves us
to invent matters necessary, that thereby we might certify such as be
absent, of that which they ought to k^owe, either pertaining to us, or to them.

Such kind of letters it is needless to look for at my hands, sithence you
have as well writers, as reporters, of your domestical and private business.
As for my matters, I have nothing new whereof to give you intelligence. Beside
this, there are two other kind of letters, which exhibit unto me no small
delectation, the one is familiar and pleasant: the other is weighty and
earnest: of which twain whether it best behooves me to frame my style unto,
and apply my pen, I am altogether ignorant. Should I use dalliance in inditing;
and pleasantness in writing unto you? Now certainly I think him to be no
citizen who sets his mind upon toying Because of the civil wars and
contentions.
in these tumultuous times. Should I write somewhat unto you gravely, and
disclose some matter of weight? what thing can there be, whereof Cicero can
certify his Curio more seriously, then of cases concerning the common wealth?
and in this kind of letters is my cause conversant, and so conversant, that I
would not willingly communicate with you, those things which at this present
occupy my mind. For in so doing I should busy my brain, in matters more
hateful then healthful. Wherefore, because there remains unto me no
argument whereupon to write, I will use that little clause or petit sentence,
which of custom I am wont, and I will not be behind hand to encourage you to
the desire and love of renoune: for you have a sore adversary, and the hope
which is already had on your behalf, exceeds the bounds of all belief:
which hope and expectation, you may satisfy, and easily overcome by the means
of one thing, namely, if you be certainly resolved in this point, that earnest
labor must be sustained, and no pains avoided, in Mening the moral virtues
wherewith we win credit to our selves, and commodity to the state of our
country.
those things principally which purchase passing praise, both with Prince and
people, the glory and fame whereof you have singularly and thoroughly loved.
Much more would I write tending to this same purpose, but that I am persuaded,
that of your own accord you have stomach sufficient in this point, and have
your mind no less inflamed to deserve dignity, then I am ready to put it
into your memory: and this, whatsoever it be, little or much, that I have
touched in my letter, I have not done, to the intent to kindle your courage the
more in this case, but to the end I might send you an assurance of my love,
and a gage of my hearty goodwill.

Fare you well.
M. T. Cicero to Curio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He comfort Curio mourning for the death of his father, and promises that
he will be unto him in place of a second father.

I Have lost a special witness of my great love toward you, your father I
mean, a man of singular virtue and nobleness: who, by the benefit of his
own praises, and by the means of you his true and natural son, had
excelled the fortune of all men whatsoever, had it been his good luck to have
had life prolonged, till such time as he might have seen you, his valliant
son, after your return from the Over the which he had peremptoric
government, and judicial authority.
province, before he gave his last farewell to the world. But though he be
gone, yet I rest in hope, that our friendship is not frustrate of witness
sufficient. The Gods give you good of your patrimony and inheritance. I am
yours, and think that you are no less loved and thought upon, then you were
of your father natural, whiles he lived.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Curio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He rejoices for Curio his sake, both because he was not present at Rome,
where many things were committed to the preiudi^e and damage of the common
wealth, and because he is in such a place, where his well doing may win him
worship. For end, he counsels Curio to take charge of the common wealth.

How these matters of weight go, I dare not let you understand by letter,
although, in what place soever you abide, as I have already written unto you in
times past, you are subject to the self same danger of By translatition, for
hazard of life and goods, aphrase very usual.
ship^racke: yet it rejoices my heart that you are absent, either because you
see not these things which we see: or else, because your praise is placed in a
lofty and famous seat, namely in the open sight, as well of Citizens as of
others your fellows: the report whereof has sounded in our ears, not by tunes
of tongs doubtful and variable, but by one voice of all men most certain, and
perceiuable. Of one thing I am ignorant, whether I should rejoice or be afraid
for your sake, because the expectation and looking for your return is
marvelous: not that I am afraid for any doubt of your virtue, that it should
not be cou^teruailable with the opinion of men: but certainly, for that at your
coming, you shall not be able to remedy that which is amiss: all things are
so tossed, turmoyled, troubled, topsie turuey turned, and in a manner utterly
spoiled. But I wot not whether I may well commit these matters to writing.
Wherefore, look more largely otherwise to understand the rest. But as
touching your own person, whether you travel in hope or in despair of the
common wealth: Ciceroes accustomed clause to Curio. for whose nature he well
knew: over him was he careful, lest he should be da^nified.
Study, devise, provide those things, which in a worthy man and a good
citizen, ought never to be wanting, that labors with tooth and nail to
succor the afflicted state of the weal public: and, before it be quite
overwhelmed with the waves of lamentable times, and outrageous manners of
mischiefous men, to restore it to the former beauty, ancient liberty,
worship and dignity.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Curio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He commends highly Titus Annius Milo, laboring for the Consulship and to
the intent he might obtain that which he defireth, omitteth no one
circumstance nor other, which in a commendatorie letter may be required.

YOur coming to Italy The first words detect the desire of the Petitioner
was not then heard of, when I sent Sextus Villius, Miloes friend unto you
with these my letters: Howbeit, when there was an ynkling, that it would not be
long er you came, and that it was perfectly known, that you were iourneying
out of Where Curio was in office of the Quaestor.
Asia toward Rome: the weightinesse of the matter was such, that we thought
these letters could not come too soon to your hands, when we greatly wished,
and gladly willed, that they might be conveyed unto you with all speed
possible. An insinuation, or close entrance, to his petition.
If (friend Curio) my deserts toward you were such, as they are more
commended of you, then considered of me, I would, if I had any great petition
to make, try what I could obtain, if Mark his modesty.
shamefastness were not my hinderance. For, to a shamefast fellow, it is
grievous and troublesome, to crave some great thing of him, of whom he
thinks him self by duty Privy commending of his merits.
well to have deserved, least the thing which he craves, might seem to be In
requiring is duty, in defireing is desert.
required, rather then desired, and to be counted a recompense and not a
benefit. But because your merits toward me are manifest unto all men, and
in the strau^ genesse of my doleful days, appeared, not only in their
brightness, but also in their greatness: and seeing It is the property of a
gentle and courteous nature, to affoorde much unto him, to whom much is due: I
doubted not to crave that of you by letter, which of all things is to me the
greatest, and most necessary. Neither do I fear any inability in bearing
the burden of your innumerable benefits, sithence chiefly I am of this
confidence, From hope of making recompense.
that there is no favor nor good turn so great, which my mind cannot
conceive in taking, or in exchaunging of courtesy and making amends, adorn,
and beautify. I, my studies, al my labor, care, travel, diligence: for end,
all my mind have I founded, fastened, and fired upon Milo his Consulship,
wherein I have determined, not only to seek for the commodity of the office
in his behalf, but also as I ought, for the due praise of piety. And surely,
I think no man at any time has been so careful of his health and wealth, as
I have been of his renoune and honor: in the which I have been resolved, my
self and all mine to consist. I know that you, being but one man, can, if you
will, be to him such a furtheraunce and help, as over and beside the same we
need demand nothing. We have al these adiuments and helps: the love of good
men, obtained through his behavior in the protectourship of the people, for
our cause, as I hope you understand: the desire of the commons and multiude, by
reason of his Whereupon Milo spent three whole patrimonies or inheritances.
large gifts and presents, and the liberal disposition of his nature: the
favor and good will of the honorable youth of this city, and of diverse
Gentlemen, who have given him their consentes: finally, our suffragation, or
consenting voices, though less auailable, yet not disalowable, but justly For
the friendly usage which he has showed unto me.
deserved, and therefore peradventure worthy acceptance. A guide we must
needs have, and of a governor we can not be destitute, yea one certain
ruler, and high officer must be made, in these storms and blustering tempests
which I have discovered. From the person of Curio.
And if one man among al yt rest, may be desired and wished, to this room of
authority, undoubtedly, we should not pick out one, whom with you we might
account comparable. Wherefore, if you can conceive this opinion of me, that I
am not a man unmindful of my friend, that I am disposed to courtesy and
goodness, if there were none other cause of such conceit, then that I lay to
my helping hand so earnestly, for Milo his furtherance, finally, if you are of
this judgment, that such benefits as you have bestowed on me, are not
frustrate and cast away: then let me desire thus much of your gentleness, that
you would stand my friend in this matter whereof I am careful, that you would
employ your travel and pain for my commendation, or to tell a flat truth, in
manner, my life and preservation. As for T. Annius, thus much I promise in his
behalf, that no man in the world toward you shall show more humanity, more
gravity, more constancy, more benevolence and goodwill, if it would please
you to vouchsafe him your favor. And as for my self, my worthiness, honor,
dignity, and renown, shall by your means so much be enlarged, as I must
(perforce) acknowledge you to be the very same my benefactour, in the
procurement of my praise, that wast sometime the pawn and protector of When
you spared no pains in restoring me to my native country.
my life. But that I am assured, that it is not unknown to you, how seriously
and earnestly I labor in this petition of Milo, and that therein not only
great pains, but also some resistance and striving is required, I would have
written unto you more at length: And now I commit to your patronage the whole
matter and the cause, and mine own person I commend to your courteste. And take
this one clause for a conclusion, that if I may obtain at your hands the
sum of my supplication, Milo shall not be so much bound unto you for your
highness, as I will be your deep debtor for your goodness. For the safegarde of
mine own life was not to me so precious, and dear, wherein he showed him
self a principal favorer, as my thankfulness shall be pleasant and
delectable, in making just recompense, where unto I shall be drawn by your
only and alone friendship, as in hope I am persuaded.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Coelio Rufo.
THE ARGUMENT.
He commends Fabius for five things: namely, for his honesty, his learning,
his wit, his soberness, and his friendship.

I Am well acquainted with Marcus Fabius, a Honesty and learning are linked
together, to give us to note that unlearned honesty, or un ho nest learning
are not much commendable.
very honest man, and passing well learned: I use him familiarly, and I love
him Pleasantly spoken in the praise of Coelius, for the no table qualities of
his mind.
exceedingly, both for the worthynesse of his wit, and also for the excellency
of his learning, and besides these for the singularity of his soberness and
marvelous modesty: my request unto you, is, that you would so take charge of
his matter as if it were mine. I know you are no table patrones. These words
import some matter of efficacy.
He must be a manqueller that means to commit his life to your supportation,
and the canuassing of his cause to your defense. But in this man no excuse is
serviceable, for I will take none. You shall set all things aside, if you love
me indeed, sithence my friend Fabius is willing to use your advise and help. I
am in great expectation of the state of * things at Rome, and my desire to
understand of them is vehement and earnest: and first of all I would gladly
know how it fares with you: For we have heard no news now this long time,
because of the sharpness of the winter.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Appio Pulchro.
THE ARGUMENT.
Dolabella accused Appius, and at the self same time had married Ciceroes
daughter. Cicero goes about to prove that he was ignorant of that which his
friends had done in that case, and gathers many reasons to the same purpose.

WHen word was brought to us of the temeritie and rashness of them which
Somewhat a more mild speech then if he had said, ac cused you.
molested you, and sought your disquietnesse, although the hearing of such
news at the first put me beside all patience, and kindled my choler, because
nothing in the world could chance so much against my opinion and mind: yet
notwithstanding, so soon as I gathered my wits together, and felt my self
better appeased, the faults laid to your charge seemed unto me not so heinous
and hateful, but that they might be tolerable, because the hope which I had
in you and yours, was exceeding great: and many things came to my remembrance,
why I should think this your trouble an enlarging rather of your For in aduer
sitie does virtue and prowess most flourish.
honor, then a blemishe to your person. But one thing I was very much grieved
and displeased withal, that the triumph which most justly you did deserve, was
so wrongfully wrested from you, by the counsel and consent of a company your
spiteful enemies: which if you so esteem, as I have always thought it should
be set by, you shall show the example of a wise man: and to the grief and
hartburning of your adversaries shall most justly triumph as an excellent
conqueror in deed.

For I manifestly perceive thus much, that not your manhood and substance
only, but your wisdom and discretion also, are most necessary and expedient,
to make your enemies repent their unadvised and over rash dealing. As for me, I
protest before all the Gods, not to be wanting either in promise or in
performance, in any thing concerning your That there may come none to Rome, to
give evidence against you.
dignity, (for so had I rather say, then for you safety) in this province,
which sometime was in your government, and I will in your behalf, supply the
part of an advocate, by speaking: of a neighbor and friend by laboring: of a
man well thought of in all cities, by authority and countenance, and of a
magistrate or ruler, by my For then al my friendly of fices and duties shall seem
the more forceable, by reason of my noble name, and title imperial.
gravity and counsel. All that may be, command and look for at my hands:
my diligence in discharging the dutifulness of a friend, shall be answerable
to your expectation and thinking. Q. Seruilius delivered unto me from you a
very short letter, which not wtstanding seemed unto me too long by many lines:
for I thought injury done unto me, therein to be required, wherein my will
never wanted to do you pleasure. I would not the time had chanced, wherein you
should try, what account I make of you, how much I set by Pompeius, which one
od^e man among al other I most of all esteem, and how dearly I love Brutus:
although in our continual acquaintance, and daily familiarity, you perceived
somewhat, and as you shall hereafter understand and try further: But because
it is chanced, if any thing be ouerslipped and lightly escaped on my part,
let it seem to you an offense wilfully committed, and a reproach to mine own
person willingly procured, and so I will acknowledge it. Cicero his Embaslad
our. (...). Epistola. 4^
Pontinus, whose intertainme^t with you, was te^pered ^o singular truth and
en^tesie, of which your ^ountie to him ward I am a witness, shewe^th him
self marvelous mindful of you, and hides not his goodwill, which duty
demands, and al for your furtherance and commodity: who taking ship to
sail from That he might do what he could, to stay the coming of any to
Rome, to witness against you.
Ephesus to Laodicea, and understanding that his word and presence might make
much for the maintenance of your matter, returned to Rome, that by his means,
there might no evidence be given against you in the city. And surely, sithence
I see the helps and assistance which you are like to have, not only auailable,
but also innumerable, I can not doubt, but that this carfulness and courteous
regard in your behalf, is like to redound to your greater worship. If you
bring to pass that Censors, that is, officers for the reformation of manners be
made and ordained, and if your behavior and usage in the same office be such,
as it ought to be, and as you are of ability to perform: I see none other
likelyhoode, but that you shall in time be a great stay and safeguard, not to
your self only, but to all yours, whiles the world indureth. Of this have a
special care, and set to the uttermost of your might, that we prolong no time:
that when we have satisfied your mind here by our diligence, we may also give
a trial there to you of our benevolence. The things which you writ unto me,
touching the love and affection of all men, and al orders toward you, they He
uses the like words to Plancus. Epi. 1. Lib. 10.
move me not to any admiration, but yet to hear so well of you, fills me with
joy and delectation: and the self same things whereof you give me
intelligence in your letters, have my friends also written unto me, as
witnesses of your well doing. I am replenished therefore with seas of pleasure,
as well for that those things are exhibited and given unto you (with whom mine
acquaintance and familiarity is not only great, but also This he added, to the
end he might seem not to have loved him only for commodities sake.
sweet) which are due and requisite, and also for that our fantasies and
goodwils toward valiant and painful men continue as yet in the city, by a
universal consent almost, and there remain: which unto my self is a pension
always of my pains, and the reward of my sustained labors. I can not but
much marvel how it comes to pass, that that * young man, (whose life and
safety, I have defended Dolabella.
with exceeding and earnest labor, from two several judgments.) should so
rashly ouershoot himself, utterly to forget And one whom he knew to love you
exceedingly.
the good patron, preserver, and defender of al his possessions, goods,
estate, and condition, in taking upon him so careless and fruitelesse a
labor, to incur and run in hazard of your ill will and displeasure, you
being a man furnished with all manner of safegardes, and beautified with all
ornaments of decency: but he contrariwise (to tell my mind briefly) having
nothing: He made boaste that that accusation was maintained by Cicero, because
at the same time he married his daugh ter.
Whose fond talk and childishe communication, was reported unto me long since
in writing, by our familiar friend M. Coelius: and whereof also you your self
have sent me word by letter. As for me, I had rather cut off all old
acquaintance with him, who has purchased your anger, then to seek after new
friendship. Neither would I have you call the love and affection which I bear
you, into question, for thereof you ought not to stand in doubt, sithence the
same is not unknown to any in the Province, nor vntestified in the city of
Rome. Nevertheless, so far as I gather by the substance of your letters, a
certain kind of suspicion is signified, and a doubt also secretly mentioned:
in the disscussing whereof another time shall be more convenient, as well to
reason with you too and fro in this behalf, as also to purge and discharge my
self in this case. For, where and in what place have I been an hinderaunce to
any embassage, to the intent that it might not pass to Rome for the
augmentation and enlargement of your praise and honor? Or if I had hated you
with a professed spite, and a manifest envy, wherein could I show the fruits
of such: a mischief, less to your harm and annoiaunce? Or if the envy
wherein I boiled against you were secret and privy, wherein could I have show
ed my self a more open and sworn adversary? And if so be any discredit, and
want of honesty, had been equal or semblable to theirs, which sprinckle us
with these blottes of blame, yet undoubtedly, It is the point of folly to show
a will to hurt him, whom thou can not for thy heart by any means, annoy.
I would not have swarued so far wide from wisdom and discretion, either in
hidden hate to practice open quarelling, or to bewray the inclination and
pronenesse of my heart, to do him harm, whom to annoy is beyond my reach and
ability. I remember certain came to me, and said, that the costs and
expenses which were appointed for the ambassadors, were too large, and
greater then they ought, wherein I used, not so much the Very wittily spoken,
because he regar death friendship when he commands: and has an cie to the
law when he valueth.
liberty of commanding, as I did the equity of valuation, esteeming them as
narrowly as I might, to the tenure and meaning of that law, named Lex
Cornelia, in that respect providing. Wherein, that I made no delays, or long
tariance, the several accountes of the Cities are able to give in evidence,
which are of sufficient authority to prove, how much and how little, each
particular City allows, of their Ambassadors to be received. But with what
lies and false rumors have light headed men ouerburthened you? that the
expenses are not only inhaunced and racked, but also redemaunded and taken
away, by their factours that be already gone, and that to be the occasion, that
diverse others are restrained. I would expostulat and debate the matter with
you, but that as I have protested in my former letters, I had rather at this
time say somewhat in mine own purgation, then against you to commence any
accusation: which counsel in deed I like the botter. And therefore,
concerning you in that you have credit ^o such reports, I will say nothing:
but touching myself, why you ought not to have believed such rumors, I will say
something, which shall be little. For if so be you take me for the same man,
whom I thought you were persuaded me to be, I mean ^n honest man, well
worthy of that knowledge, learning, and exercises, whereunto from my
childehoode I have been addicted: if you take me for a man of a valiant heart,
and not of the weakest judgment and advise, in matters of greatest weight:
then ought you to deny that any From his own person.
unfaithfulness, fraud, or deceitfulness lies l^rking in our friendship: yea,
and that more is, you must in no wise grant that it sauoureth of any thing,
wherein is any balenesse, vileness, or simpleness. But if by the law of your
lust, you account me a crafty, close, and counterfect fellow, what is there
that can less touch so Noble a nature, then either to have the good will of
From the person of Ap pius.
a most honorable man in contempt: or to seek the empairing and stayning of
his estimation and renoune in the Province, whose praise has been proclaimed
and defended in the city: or to show a mind disposed to mischief against
him, who is not within the precinct of our power to indammage: or to choose
that thing to be a testimony of dishonest dealing, which to the discovering
of hatred is most manifest, and to the working of any wrong or inconvenience
lest forceable? From the sign of an un thankful mind.
More over, what cause was there, whereby my stomache should so swel against
you, that the malice of my mind should be immitigable, sithence I was
infourmed of my brother, that you were not mine adversary, no not at such
time as necessity required, you should not have been my friend? And when
either of us, were moved with desire to be reconciled, and to have our former
familiarity restored: what thing attempted you with me, when you were in
office of the Consulshippe, From his constancy.
whereunto you would have me give mine assent, or join mine assistance, but
it has had answerable success? What thing did you command me to do, when I
followed Going toward the province.
you from Puteolis, in ye accomplishment whereof, my diligence was not
counteruailable with your expectation? And if so be, that be the token and
mark whereby to know a crafty, and Forelike fellow, to turn all things to
his own advantage and commodity: From that which is profitable.
What was unto me more profitable, what more convenient for my benefit, then
the acquaintance and society of a man most noble and honorable, whose
substance, wealth, wisdom, children, Specially Pompeius, and Brutus.
kindred, and friends, may be to my person a singular ornament, and a
sovereign safegarde? To all which circumstances, I have had a due
consideration, in seeking to obtain your favor, not with fraud, deceit and
subtilty, but with wisdom, soberness, and honesty. From semblance of desires
and other circumstances
What should I say of those bonds and chains, wherewith I am tied fast, and as
it were fettered, to my great contentation, how great are they and of what
efficacy? Se^blaunce and likeness of affections, pleasantness and sweetness
of familiarity, delectation and ioyfulnesse of life, fellowship and
comunication, mutual sending of loving letters: All which are domestical,
and touch our private persons.

From the opinion of the people.
What should I say of that which is popular and commune in the minds of the
multitude? The notable reconciliation of us twain, and falling again into
familiarity: wherein offense cannot be committed through ignorance and want of
aduisement, without suspicion of unfaithfulness: our fellowship in the
honorable and reverend office of y^ He means the Augurship wherein they were
both Ge rents at one time.
priesthood, in which function of religion and ceremonies, it was not only
directly opposite and against the prescript of laws, instituted by our
ancestors, to violate, infringe, and untie the knottes of freendship: but it
was also prohibited and precisely forbidden, that none should be admitted to
that vocation, whose heart fostered envy, and grudged against any particular
person of the same order: all which to pretermit and ouerskip, because they
are not only manifold, but also vehement, who ever had any man in such
estimation and countenance? who (I say) might, or ought, more to have made of
any man, then I did of From the person of Cneius Pompeius.
C. Pompeius? For, if so be that merits preuail, if deserts are of any force,
then I am of this opinion, that by him my country, my children, my safety, my
honor, and my self was restored to my self. If pleasantness of
acquaintance, and sweetness of familiarity are of power: what friendship was
there at any time, more hearty and sincere, betwirt any two having borne the
office of Consulles in our city? if any significations and presidentes of love
and courtesy are forceable: what has he not given me in charge? In what has
not he taken trial of my credit? what has he not communicated with me, as
his trusty partener? Whom would he rather have then me, to stir in his
behalf in the Senate and counsel house, Specially at the war had against
king Mithridates.
when he himself was not present? with what things, has not he been
willing to adorn and advance me most largely? For end, with what facility,
and quietness of mind, did he forbear me, when I was in plea in the common
place, in the defense of Milo, and yet interrupting and withstanding your
proceedinges? what providence and fore wisdom did he use, that no one Because
it was suspected that Milo killed Clodius by the counsel of Cicero.
sparckle of envy breaking out from the flame of that time (you wot when)
should so much as once touch me, when he thought it not much to supporte
me with his counsel, to maintain me by his authority, and to protect me
with his weapon? In which days, undoubtedly, such was his gravity,
soberness, courage, and valiant heart, that he would not give credit to the
report of any Phrygian, of any Lycaoni^ was a piece of Ciceroes dominion.
Lycaonian, as you did in your Ambassadors, but set light by the informations
of those men which bare best and iolliest countenance, if their reports seemed
to savor of ill will and malice. And for so much as this man's son married
your daughter, besides which knitting o^ affinity, and coupling of kindred,
feing that C^. Pompeius bears you such hearty goodwill, and in you co^ceiueth
great delight, as I am not ignorant: how ought I to be affected toward you,
and with what flames of kindness ought my heart to be kindled? specially,
since he sent letters unto me, the contents whereof were of such quality,
that although I had been your sworn and professed foe, as I am your most
dear and faithful friend, yet must I needs have been appeased, and have
framed my will to the contentation of him, whose merits have my service at
com^aundement. But hereof thus far: for that runs peradventure, more at
large, which is already written, then was necessary and requisite. Now
understand you, what I have In the Province, which things do pertain to the
purgation of Appius, whom Dolabella accused.
attempted and also finished. Wherein we will labou^ still, more for your
aduauncemente, then for your detriment. For (as I hope) we shall hear that you
shall be Censor shortly: the office and authority of which magistrate, I can
none otherwise believe, will be better considered off on your behalf (as it
requires a most valiant mind, and singular counsel) more diligently, and
more circumspectly, then these matters which we have in hand touching your
person.

Fare you well.
Sulpicius to Cicero.
THE ARGUMENT.
When Caesar made war in Spain against Pompeius accomplices: Tullia, Ciceroes
daughter died in childbearth when she was divorced from Dolabella, whereupon
Sulpicius sends a consolatori^ Epistle, or a comfortable letter to Cicero*
gathering arguments and reasons as many as he may, to assuage his heuinesse.

AFter His beginning is orderly and incorrigible. For who so is not sorry for
the misery of his friend, is not to be counted a friend: and therefore his
consolation can be of no force.
the death of your daughter was reported unto me: I took it so grievously (as
in deed I ought) and was stoung with such sorrow of heart, that I thought in
her departure a common calamity to consist: and if I had been present with
you there, at her death, I doubt not but to have given you a testimony, and an
assured declaration of my sharp conceived sorrow. And although this kind of
comfort is rather miserable, then dele^able, sour and unsweet, then tempered
with pleasantness, because they that minister this preparatiue to you, are
your near friends and familiar companions, and so partakers of your pensifenes
in equal proportion, that without streams of tears they cannot discharge such
a duty, in so much as they had more need of others consolation, then
themselves, being sorrowful, to presume to comfort the perplexed: yet
notwithstanding, I have determined at this present, to write unto you briefly,
such things as offered them selves to my remembrance: not that I presuppose
you to be ignorant, what in this case should be accomplished: but because you
being now peradventure over whelmed with heaviness, are not so circumspect as
you have been accustomed. The original of his com fort is derived from the
state of the time.
Why should that your inward greese so consume and waste your person?
Consider, I pray you consider, in what order fortune has dealt with us: that
by her fumishnesse and terrible thunderings, we are spoiled and left utterly
naked of those things, which with men are in no less price and estimation then
children, our native country I mean, how think you? our honesty, our
dignity, and all the honors depending upon our provincial estate. This
mischief and inconvenience being precisely pondered, I am in doubt, whether a
more forceable thing can chance to engender pensifenes, and to move a man's
mind to lamentable mourning. And should not he, whose heart is (as it were)
hardened with these greater and more vehement casualties, judge all other
sufferable, and with less sorrow to be sustained? You will not be so unwise,
I think, to be wail Seeing many which are wounded and slain in war perish
and die in forrow and pain,
her condition, if you fall into this consideration (as of necessity you must,
and as I me self do, many and oftentimes) that they are in no ill case, in
these days specially replenished with tumults, vprores, insurrections, * whose
lot and luck it is to make an erchaunge of life accompanied with disquietnesse,
for a death delivered from all vexation, and fortified with perpetual peace,
rest, and tranquillity. What was there in Tullia your daughter, which might
greatly kindle in her a will and desire to have life lengthened, in this time
burdened with troubles? what hope? what confidence? what thing of port and
countenance? that she being contracted and married to some noble youngman,
might run the race of her age in his ple^ saunt partnership? You may, I
think, and it is lawful for you, in mine opinion, without suspicion of
prejudice, to choose and elect, out of the noble and honorable youth of Rome,
one young man of whom you do well like and allow, to make him Therefore it
should seem that Dolabella and she were divorced.
your son in law, and to his tuition and government to commit your small
children and orphans, your own self being in safety. Would you wish that she
might live, and fill the city by the benefit of procreation, not using the
company of man? Would you desire, I say, to have her bring forth sons and
daughters, whom she might behold in their flourishing years, and rejoice? who
might possess their inheritance divided unto them of their father, and
therewith live like gentlemen and gentlewomen? who might As by the laws it was
provided. In lib. de leg. it is manifest,
orderly arise to feats and offices of honor in the common wealth, and in
their friends affairs might use their liberality? What of all these things
is there, which was not taken away, before it was fully given? But it is a
miserable thing for a man to lose his children: y^ loss of them, no doubt, is
miserable, if to suffer open bondage were not much more wretched. Shall I tell
you, what put me in great comfort, when time was? undoubtedly I will, upon
condition, that the self same things might mitigate and weaken your heuinesse*
As I came out of Asia, and directed my sail from Aegina toward Megara, I
began to take a view of the countries round about me. Behind me was
Aegina, before me was Megara, on my right hand was Pyraeus, and on my left
Corinthus: An argument A Maiori ad Minus. For if so be that desolatio^ be the
end of populous cities, no marvel though death be the end of mortal men.
which cities were sometime famous and honorable, but now being battered and
sacked, lie ruinous and waste. Then thought I with me self: We silly
souls, take the matter too too heavily, when any of our acquaintance dies, or
is slain, whose life (peradventure) was but short: and here how many
multitudes of men have been murdered? how many towns destroyed, how many
fair buildinges overthrown. Will thou, Seruius, stay thee self, and imprint
this in thy memory: Hominem te esse natum? That by bearth thou art but a
mortal man? And believe me (friend Cicero) in thus thinking, I was sufficiently
confirmed. The same thing also, if you please, hang before you as it were a
loking glass: at one time, An argument derived from comparison.
so many noble men perished: Moreover, thus much was diminished from the state
of the empire: finally, al provinces and places of guard were shaken: and yet
in the loss of one woman's life, are you so disqu^eted? who if she had now
escaped her dismal day: yet, doubtless, she had not been excused, for
within a few years her life would have ended, From that which cannot
otherwise come to pass.
because Homo nata est, By bearth she was but a woman. Wherefore withdraw your
museing mind from these matters, and turn your study rather unto that, which
makes for the renown of your person: persuade your self that From the person
of Tul lia.
she lived as long as need required, and that her uttermost hour passed over
head: that her continuance was in the commonwealth: that she saw you, her
good father, in the office o^ the Praetorship: y^ she was wedded As to Piso,
C^assipedes and Dolabella.
to proper young gentlemen of good place and calling: that she enjoyed in a
manner, all the benefits that might be obtained: and that, when the weal
public fainted, her life also failed. What is there now remaining, whereof
either you, or she might meritoriously power out your complaints against the
injurious dealing of Fortune? But to draw to an end: I would not have you
forget that you are Cicero, and that you ^e the self same man, which was wont
to give pre^ptes unto others, and to a^ist them with your wholesome counsel: and
not to follow the example of Naughty Physi^ians, who profess, and vaunt, that
they have understanding and ability enoughe, to cure the diseases of their
patientes, but to heal their own maladies, and to salve up their own sores,
they want wit and cunning: but rather apply to your own person, y^ precepts
which you give unto others, and as you would rule other men's minds, so see y^
your own be governed. Nullus dolor est, quem non longinquitas temporis minuat,
atque molliat. The same words are to be found in the 28. epistle of the
seventh book.
There is no sorrow and anguishe so deadly, but continuance of time may
assuage the bitterness thereof, and consume the corsiue eating of the same. But
for you to awaite the coming of that time, in hope to use the advantage which
it affoordeth, From the opinion and con cei^e of man.
redoundeth to your discommendation: when as your wisdom and knowledge are
remedies auailable, to cut off the course of such an infecting canckar. And
admit, there were sense and perseueraunce in the dead ghostes, yet thus much
dare I affirm, that the love which she owes unto you, and the reuer^nce
which she has of her friends, would so restrain her will, and bridle her
desire, that she An argument drawn from the will of his dead daughter.
would utterly dissallow of this your doing, and in no wise consent, that you
should so bitterly lament her death. Deny not this to your daughter deceassed:
withstand not the wills of your friends, who are touched with a mutual
compassion and sufferaunce of your sorrow: and grant thus much to your
natural country* that in what thing soever your counsel and assistaunce are
needful, you be not wanting. For end, because we are fallen into this
fortune, that our service must not be slack in this matter, Because the heart
of every true gentleman, ought to be much more moved with the misery of the
common wealth, then with the death of his children.
I wish you, not to give occasion unto other th^s to think, that so much the
death of your daughter is lamented, as the troubles of the commonwealth, and
other men's (...) are bewailed. To write more touching this point, I begin to
blush, and am ashamed, least I should seem to distrust of your wisdom.
Wherefore one (...) more ^dded, I will end my letter. We have seen you
sometimes in flourishing fortune, commendablye dispo^ed, and thereby able to
purchase the price of praise and noblenes: Even so, bend the powers of your
spirit, and ^he force of your mind^, that in this blustering blast of
adversity, we may have some trial of your constancy: and let not the death
of your daughter, lay a heuier burd^n of grief upon you, then behooves:
least among all other An argument from the praise of Cicero.
virtues, which in you shine and glister, this one be dashed and blemished. As
for me self, when I understand that your mind is somewhat quieted, what is
done here with us, and in what state the Achaia.
province is, at this present, I will give you knowledge.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Sulpicio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He answers to the consolatorie letter of S. Sulpicius, saying that his
sorrow, after he had perused the epistle, was somewhat afsuaged, but yet
adding this, that he has more causes to be he^uie and sad* then any man
beside assaulted with the like calamity.

I Wish, friend Seruius, as you write, it had been your luck to be present
with me, in my most heavy and grievous chance. For what a propp and ^tay you
had been to me, both by comforting me, and also by like lamonting with me, I
am well in^ourmed: because I had no sooner perused the sum of your letter,
but I fealt me self some what re^ieded. For you did write those things,
which could staunche the streams of my tears: and to quench mine anguishe,
you did discover the passions of your own heart. Seruius your son, gave
evident demonstrations of all friendly service and courtesy, which might seem
pertinent and agreeable to this my unfortunate time, both that his good will
toward me, wherein he was not wanting, might be manifest: and also, that
you therein, for my sake, might participate much pleasure: whose courteous and
friendly duties, exhibited with such humanity, were (I must needs say)
pouldered with For in misery, what place is left for plea sauntnes.
pleasantness, but yet for all that never skarse acceptable. Your words and
phras^ of speech do revive my fainting heart, ouerburthened with heaviness:
your suffering of my sorrow for companies sake, does work the same effect:
and your authority and countenance gives me, against care, great
encouragement: For I suppose it a beastly part, not to abide the brunte of my
chance, in such sort, as you (a man of excellent wisdom and judgment)
think it to be sustained. But yet my sorrows sometimes rush upon me, with
such forceable and violent power, that I am beaten down and kept under, and
therefore skant able to make resistance: because I perceive those consolations
to forsake me quite, which, with others tossed in semblable tem pestes of
adversity, remain undiminished. For Quintus Fabius.
Maximus, who lost his son having borne the office of a Consul, and counted,
when he was alive* a man of great worcester thines, in matters of policy, and of
singular renown in feats of cheualrie. Besides him, Lucius A Emilius.
Paulus, who in seven days space lost two sons, and your Who des^e^ded of
the Sul picia^ family.
Gallus, and M. Cato, who also lost his son, a man of profound knowledge, and
incomparable virtue: they all lived in those days and times, wherein their
nobleness and authority which they aspired unto, in the commonwealth, quite
quenched their calamity, with preservative receiptes of comfort. As for me
(miserable man) after I had suffered shipwreck of all the Countenance Worship*
Honor, etc. Epistola. 5. lib. 4.
ornaments whereof you make a recapitulation or rehearsal, and saw me self
spoiled of that which was my maintenance, and amid all these miseries, having
but one only comfort, whereupon to stay as on the anchor of my succor, yet is
it my evil and accursed l^ck, to be robbed of the same too, and thus is
unfortunate Cicero deprived of al delight. And what has the loss of this my
last joy procured? A collection of such cause^ as made Cicero sorrowful,
declaring that he is not to be reprehended, for being grieved with that, which
of right and reason ought to be lamented,
Has it not hindered me from furthering the suites of my friends? Has it
not made, me forget mine attendaunce upon the weal public? Has it not
made me have no will nor stomache to plead in the common place? Has it not
made me, not only glad to absent me self from the court of causes, but also
full loath to ^eeholde the same? and what has it not done? I thought no less,
then at length I found true, that all the profits of my pains, all the
commodities of my labors and offices, were vanished: But, when I called
things to the touchstone of trial, and examined my luck with other men^ hard
chance: when I found that my fortune was common, as well with you, as diverse
other whom I know: and after I had tormented me self, with the continual
cogitations of my calamities, and began to conform and frame me to provoked
patience: then I espied an harborough wheether to flee for succor, and I saw
a convenient haven where to lie at an^hor: namely* your words and
communication set down in lively letter, the sweetness whereof chased away
all my cares, and drove all my sorrows into perpetual exile and banishment.
And yet, even now, so grieuou^ is this stroke, and so sore has this blow
bruised, that the wounds which I suffered long ago, and which have been
Because time assuageth ^euines. Epist. 5. libro quarti. By which allegorical
phrase of speech, he means his old sorrows, which were renewed before
they were quite for gotten.
healed up and covered over with skin, begin a ^resh to ware raw and
green: For I cannot, as I did then, flee from the (...) public, for succor,
to my private house, which entertained me in my heaviness: so now, run
from my priuat^ house, for comfort to the weal public, in my misery, that I
might refreshe my crac^te ribs in her bounty and goodness. Wher^ore* I am
absent both from the common place, and also from mine own house: because, that
neither the grief, which I feel for the common wealths sake, can be
comforted by y^ benefit of mine house: nor the sorrow which I sustain for my
house, can be cured by the assistaunce of the commonwealth: for which causes, I
desire y^ more earnestly to see you, and to have some conference with you.
Nothing can so mi^igate an^ assuage my heaviness, as the meeting of us, twoe
old acquainted friends, and interlacing of talk and communication. I was in
hope of your coming (for so it was told me) y^ you intended to be with me
shortly. I wish you here so) ma ny considerations, and principally for this
one, that we may del^berate before hand, between our selves, how this time
should be bestowed, which is wholly to be applied to y^ pl^asure and will of He
means Caes^r.
one particular person, in wisdom not obscure, and in liberalitle famous, and
as I percei^e and persuade my self, not unmindful of me, and very At such
time as his son took Caesar's part against Pompei.
friendly to you. Which being as it is, great deliberation is required, what
order we may best use, not that any thing should be done or attempted, ^ut that
in his grant and goodness we may be acquieted.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Marcello.
THE ARGUMENT.
He persuadeth Marcellus to abandon al counsel of exile and banishment, and to
return into his country: that Caesar is not against it: that his brother
desires it: that the common wealth looks for it: that the state of his own
household and family stands in great need of it.

ALthough I understand, such to be the counsel and aduisement which you have
used, that I dare not be so presumptu^us, as to pronounce it worthy
reprehe^sion: but I must needs seem to varrie and differ from the same,
because such is my judgment touching your wisdom, that I count not my counsel
in respect of yours, deserving prefermet: yet notwithstanding, the
auncientnesse of our friendship, and your great goodwill toward me, whereof I
have knowledge and experience from your childhoode, admonishes me to write
those things unto you, which (in mine opinion) for your safety were
profitable, and to your worthynesse in no point disagreeable. The beginning of
his persuasion is derived from the proof of Marcellus his usage in the office
of a good Citizen, wherein wanted no perfourmance. etc.
I remember very well, that you are the man, which behaved your self in the
office of your Consulship, no less honorably, then virtuously, long before
you saw the sparckles of these enormities and maine mischiefs kindling: and
this perceived I also, that as well the counsel taken for making civil wars,
and the host of Pomp^ius, and that kind of martial preparation, was of you
dissolved, and besides that in so little hope, that it was exceedingly doubted:
in which mind, I think, you remember I was in like manner. Wherefore you took
occasion not to be much present at the making of such matches: and I did what I
might to be always absent. For we did not fight with those weapons, where
which we might He uses the same words in Epi. 1. lib. 6.
have prevailed, namely, with counsel, authority, countenance, and the
goodness of our cause, which in us were of greater force: but with arms and
sides, wherein we were not the stronger: we were therefore overcome, or, if
dignity can not be conquered, yet notwithstanding much empaired, weakened,
and wounded. In which, your counsel and intent can not but be universally
commended, because that, together with the hope and expectation of ouercomming,
you did also bridle all desire of fighting, and did declare your self to be
both a wise man, and also a good Citizen: a wiseman in that you were unwilling
to intermedle when Civil contentions were a springing: and a good Citizen, in
that you were as loathe to prosecute such perilous matters to the uttermost. As
for those men, to whom this your counsel seemed unsavory, and therefore
unworthy the following, I see they are divided into two kinds: for either they
begin to renew battle, and these men have taken their way into To Iuba the
King.
Africa: or else (as we) have committed themselves to him, whose luck^ it is to
be conqueror. Your counsel is to neither of these In that thou will neither
renew war, nor return to Rome: but remain in exile.
twain inclined, but as a mean separated by it self, supposing the one to be
a signification, peradventure of a cowardly mind, and the other an argument of
a malapert companion. I confess, that your counsel and determination, is
judged of most men, (and if I said of all men, I should not speak amiss) to
proceed from singular wisdom, and from a mind established upon the
foundation of magnanimity, and y^ sure ground work of valiantnes: but this
your consideration and pur pose, (except I lean beside my cushing,) has in it
a certain measure and meaning, sithence I suppose, y^ to the obteining, and
repossessing of all your For the desperation of the which he did choose to be
in banishment.
renoune and substance, nothing, beside will, in you was wanting. For so I
understood, that nothing else offered doubts to the mind of him, Alluding to
Caesar.
whose power and preeminence is universal, but that he suspected such to be
your security, that you would think your restitution to be no benefit:
whereof what I judge, it booteth not to declare, sithence it is apparent, what I
my self have done, whom you may at this present, use for an example. But if you
are fully resolved, to live rather in perpetual absence, then to see that
which in no wise you would: From that which is necessary.
yet this ought to be fixed and settled in your cogitation, that in what plotte
of land so ever your body abide, you are not exempted from his dominion, but
subject to the power of him, to whom by flight you deny subjection and
allegiance: who of his singular clemency and goodness, though he should suffer
you, now destitute of country, and frustrate of possessions, to live as you
list in peace and quietness: So that his exile is neither honest nor safe.
yet ought you of duty, to make this your continual meditation, what a godly
thing it is for you to lead your life rather at Rome in your own house, then
to be abroad in Mitylene, or in Rhodes. But for so much as the power of him,
to whom we exhibit duty and reverence, is so far dilated and stretched, that
it contains the compass of the whole world: were not you better allow of
this election, to live at home wtin the limits of your own land, void of
peril and danger, then in foreign and strange places, to sustain vile
annoiance? As for mine own self, The words of a most courageous hearted man:
and better to be followed then to be spoken.
Though I should suffer terrible death, yet had I rather abide the smarte
thereof, within the walls of my native soil, then in places of great
distance, where I am not known. And of this opinion are From common: consent.
al they which love you and tender your worship, of who^ there is a multitude
innumerable, whose good hearts and well wishing you have wun by your excellent
virtues, and purchased by the glistering mirror of your Noblenes. We From that
which is profitable and commodious.
also your friends, have a regard to y^ condition of your family, and
domestical affairs, which we will in no case should so run to ruin and docay,
as to grow past remodie. For, although it can take no such injury, as may
alwai^ last, and never be cut off from co^tinua^ce: (because neither he who
has supremacy in the common wealth, nor the common wealth it self, would see
such a villainy committed*) yet I would not y^ your good^ and possessions
should lie open to the claws of the greedy spoilers: and who they be that I
term by y^ name, I am not so timorous and white liuerd, but I dare send you
word in writing, how^it, I think it needless^* For in that matter, I am
assured, you can not be ignorant. And in this behalf, the manifold cares of
one peculiar person, and his continual tears, ( Caius Marcellus, I mean, your
very good Brother) make intercession, next unto whom are we immediately, in
thought and in sorrow, but in the parts of suppliantes somewhat more slack
then ^e, because we can not have access unto you, since we our selves are
destitute of an advocate. So much favor can we find, as men vanquished may:
and as for counsel, advice, and labor otherwise, to do Marcellus pleasure,
we will not be w^nting. That set light by Marcellus his retu^ne.
The rest of yours admit us not into their company: as for us we are
provided at all assaies, in all cases whatsoever.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Marcello.
THE ARGUMENT.
This Epistle was also indicted and written* to the same end and purpose, that
Marcellus night be persuaded to return to his own^ Country.

TO admonish you, I dare not because of your notable wisdom: nor to encourage
you, because of your valiant stomache: and by no means to comfort you, because
you are not fearful. For if such be your sufferance and patience, in these
your perplexities, as by report I have received, I ought rather for your Which
in adversity appears more glorious.
virtue sake, to show my self joyful, the^ to serve you with solace, in your
case sad and sorrowful. But if these foul mischeefs, which have almost,
broken the neck of the Common wealth, so stinge you that you faincte: my witt^
is not so fruitful, nor my pen so speedy, to raise you up again with sweet
consolations, sithence to be mine own physician in semblable maladies, I have
none ability. (...) remains therefore, that I show and try my self the man
whom I am taken to be, and y^ my assistance be so present in althings, which
either you or yours shall desire, that both you and they may conceive this
opinion of me, that I am yours, not (...), for you, to do what I can, but to
presume somewhat further beyond the bounds of mine own service and power.
Note this artificial form of admonition, to the end he might au^yde all
offense on his own part.
Yet notwithstanding, be you in this point resolved, that that wherein I have
given you advertisement, or discovered mine own private judgment, had issue
from a hearty good will, whereof to show a signification. I was constrained
to use no longer silence: wishing that you would do as I do, namely, stick
steadfastly in this persuasion, that if there be any common wealth at all, you
ought of duty to be there resident (by the consent and voice of all men) a
real Prince in actual government, in necessity giving place unto time: But
if there be no common wealth, yet for all that, this to be a most meet and
conue^ent room to harbor the For where there is no common wealth, there is
exile and banishment.
banished. For if we follow liberty, and forsake servitude, what place is
there in all the world, not subject to the regiment and power of this Rome the
Lady and Empres^e of the world.
city? But if any other place whatsoever, like you for the benefit of
liberty, yet ponder thus much more, that no place for such a purpose is more
sweet and comfortable, then your private dwelling, and peculiar abiding. And
believe me ( Marcellus) This is added, to put Marcellus in hope of the re
covering of his former dignity and reputation.
he in whose dominion and possession, all things are lodged, is not gone so
far beyond all humanity, but that he favors and furthereth worthy wits:
and as for the nobility, and honor due to men for their merits, no man
thereof has more consideration: sithence to the uttermost of his ability, he
procures, and according to the state of the cause, labors, that such things
should be recompensed with great estimation. But I have let my pen run at
randon more then I was purposed. I draw backward therefore, to that one point
of consolation, that with yours, if in deed they be The. 11. Epistle of the.
4. book declares the meaning of this place.
yours, I will continue yours: if not, yet will I nevertheless, at al assaies
so stand your approved friend, that all duties incident and payable to our
vn^eigned love and ancient acquaintance, shall exquisitely and thoroughly be
discharged.

Fare you well.
Cicero to M. Marcello.
THE ARGUMENT.
He deals with him by order of persuasion to return into his own country,
and draws his reasons from sundry circumstances very artificially: which
reasons of his, are very forceable to make him yeald to the foresaid matter
in question.

ALthough I gave to Quinto Mucio, not many days ago, a letter written somewhat
at large, to be delivered to your own hands, wherein I discovered my
judgment, how you ought to be affected in your own case, and what for to do
were most convenient, in my thinking: yet, when Theophilus, your freeman, was
providing to take his journey unto you, and I sufficiently perceiving his
faithfulness, and benevolence toward you, would in no wise, let him pass
without any letter. Wherefore, I thinking it not impertinent to your present
estate, advertise you now as I have done heretofore, not to neglect your own
commodity, but to will and to do your best, in that commonwealth (howsoever it
be inclined) to be conversant, from the which you are now absent. You shall
(peradventure) see many things which gladly you would not, but yet not more
then you do daily hear. Furthermore, it is not for you to be moved with the
sense of the sight only, for so much as you hear the very same things with
your ears, which are seen with your eyes, These words are opened and made
plain, in the first Epistle. Li. 6. in a marginall note.
wherein greater force appears to consist. But peradventure, your fear and
suspicion creeps somewhat further, least you should say somewhat which you
mean not, or else do that which you can not like. In these restraintes lift
up your ears to my judgment. First, To yield to time, that is, Epistola. 50.
Lib. 21. ad At^cum.
Not to struggle with necessity, is always counted a point of wisdom.
Besides that, The matter is otherwise, as the case now stands. It is not
lawful, perhaps, to speak what you think: but lawful (no doubt) to be still
and silent: for all things are at the commandment of one, who follows the
counsel and advise, not of his friends, but of him self: which thing would
not come to pass much otherwise, if the raynes of the common wealth were
committed and given in charge unto Meaning Pompeius.
him, whose part we have taken. Think we, that he who in time of war and
battle, when he saw the peril of us all, lincked and laced to the danger of
him self, would not use the counsel of Scipio, D^mitius, and di uers other.
some men both prudent and politic: that he will in tryumphe and victory
take more upon him, then he has, in matters of small affiaunce, less
assura^nce, and greater uncertainty? and that he, who regarded not the
benefit of your advise, being leauened with singular wisdom, when you were
in the office and place of an honorable Consul: nor allowed the counsel of
your brother, bearing the office of the Consulship, by your authority: that he
will now, having al things in his subjection and possession, desire our
opinions? Omnia sunt misera in bellis ciuilibus: In civil commotions all
things are miserable: which to be true, our ancestors have, not seldom
times fealt: but By reason of Sylla and his accomplices.
this our present age also, has oftentimes tasted: and nothing is more
miserable, then the victory it self: which, although it fall to the lot of
the better, yet it makes them the more f^erce, and violent: that,
notwithstanding they be not so inclined by nature, yet to be such they are
constrained by necessity. He excuses Caesar.
For the Uictor or Conqueror, must do many things to the expectation and
contentment of them, by whose help he obtained the victory, yea against his
own will. Did not you as well as I, see what cruelty was like to ensue that
victory? and would you for all that, even then, be destitute of the company
of your country, least your eyes should (peradventure) behold those things,
which your will ^an in no wise be won unto? No, you will say: for I my self
would defend mine own interest, and keep my ^ignitie and worthiness
unblemished. But it is a special point of your virtue and puisaunce, to reckon
your own state among things of least estimation, and to be touched with a more
vehement care of the common wealths preservation. Finally, what is y^ end of
your determination and meaning? for as yet your deed is commended: and your In
that he li ued (...) (...) and safety.
state also, as the case stands, is not dispraised: your deed, because you
did follow the beginning of Battle necessarily, and yet did revoke your self
from continuing to the end, not unadvisedly: your state, because you possess
peace and quietness, and suffer no defection of your renoune, nor eclipse of
dignity. And now ought no place to savor more sweetly in your nose, then your
natural contrie: neither is it your part to empaire and cut short your love
toward it, because it is grown out of favor and is waxen deformed, but rather
to be touched with the greater compassion, and to pity her present
perplexities: besides that to gratify and recreate her, hedged in with
heaviness, and not to absent your self, because you would not see her in this
misery: for she is deprived of As Pompeius, Cato, Domitius, Scipio, Bibulus,
Lentulus, Appius, al which were Cosuls: except Cato, who was Praetor.
many Noble men, and excellent personages, so that the want of you also does
agrauate her grief, For end, if it was the point of a stout and manful mind,
not as suppliant to yield to the Conqueror, take heed, that it be not the
part of a proud and hautie heart to contemn and set light by his liberality:
and if it be the point of a wise man, to be lo^h to lack the liberty of his
land, surely it is the part of a flintie fellow and a hard head, not to be in
love with such a benefit^: and if you can not enjoy the common wealth, yet
think that it is double folly to neglect private profit. The sum of all,
is this: if the life which at this time you lead, likes you so well, that
you do so love it, as that you are loath to leave it, and that it is more
co^uen^ent and fit for you, then otherwise: Whereupon not to think, is the
point not of a wiseman.
yet let your cogitations and studies be conuersaunt herein, that it is less
s^fe and more dangerous. Great is the lawless laying on of the sword and
warlike weapon: but in foreigne places is more impudence to offend, and less
shamefastness and honesty to do violence. So dear and precious is your
safety and life unto me, that I am equally matched with your brother
Marcellus, or at least, to tell the truth, as near to him as may be. It is
your part to have regard of To think ^at all things are in the power of Caesar.
these tumultuous times, to cast an eye toward your own health, and finally
of your life and lands to have good consideration.

Fare you well.
Marcellus to Cicero.
THE ARGUMENT.
He signifies of his return into his country, being thoroughly moved with the
counsel and countenance of Cicero.

WEll may you think, that your Some may do more with us by cou^tena^ce and
authority then our brother or kinseman by lou^ and counsel.
countenance and authority prevailed much with me, as well in all matters, as
principally and chiefly in this. When as C. Marcellus my brother, whose love
and goodwil toward me, was exceeding great, did not only give me counsel, but
besought me with earnest letters: he could not win me to subscribe to his
desire, nor perceive me persuaded in that point, before that your letters had
made a gap and entrance unto me, the rather to use the soundness of your
counsel* Concerning his return granted of Caesar.
How the matter goes, and what has been done in my behalf, your letters
give sufficient knowledge. Your rejoicing for my sake, although I could not but
best allow thereof, because it springs from the clear fountain of a well
disposed mind: yet is it so much the more sweet, pleasant, and acceptable,
as I have grown to the understanding of this, that in my great want of well
willers, scarsitie of friends, and old acquaintance, who tender my person and
possessions, sincerely, you have showed your self most desireous of my
safegarde, and not squemish or deintie of your singular benevolence. As for
other things, I make such account of them, as I might well be without them, and
with a good will lack them, except the times and days were not as they are:
But this benefit of friendship, I hold in such value and estimation, that I am
full ly persuaded, No man is able to live either in sower adversity or in sweet
prosperity, if good men be coy of their counsel, and friends spa^ing of
their comfort: in the consideration where of my heart reioy^eth. And that you
may likewise understand, that you have been (...) to a man not unthankful, I
will do what I can to requite your courtesy.

Fare you well.
Sulpicius to Cicero.
THE ARGUMENT.
He declares certain circumstances touching Marcellus, who was slain of
Magius, and signifies his services of humanity toward the dead body
exhibited.

ALthough I am assured, that the news which I bring can not be very pleasant
in your hearing, nor delectable in your conceiving: yet notwithstanding,
because Chance and Nature have power and rule in good men, I thought it
requisite and necessary (howsoever the case stands) to give you
intelligence. Upon the tenth of the Calendes of June, when I had sailed from
Epidaurus, to Piraeus, there I found Marcellus In the Consulship.
our fellow in office, with whom I had communication and conference, and
bestowed all that day in his company. The next day following, when I was
departing and taking my leave of him, of intent and purpose to go from Athens
into Boeotia, and so to pass through the residue of my For Sulpicius was L.
President over Achaia.
jurisdiction: he, as I was in formed by his own mouth, was preparing passage
by ship above Malea toward Italy. The next day after, when I was determined
to journey from Athens, about ten of the clock at night, Posthumous, a familiar
friend to Marcellus, came unto me, and told me heavy tidings: namely, that M.
Marcellus our fellow in office, after supper time, was sore smit^e^ of P.
Magius Chilo, one of his acqaintance, with a dagger, and that he had two
wounds, the one in his stomach, the other in his head, hard by one of his
ears: and yet notwithstanding, that there was some hope of possibility to
live. And that Ad Atticum ^pist. 10. li. 13.
Magius also hereupon murdered him self: which tragical chances moved
Marcellus, being toward his end, to send unto me, that I might have
understanding what had happened, with request in like manner, that I would
procure him a Surgeon. I provided one, and without ^urther procra^ination and
delay, we went to Marcellus early in the morning, so soon as the day star
appeared. And being not far from Piraeus, Acidmus servant met me with certain
letters and writings, wherein was noted, that Marcellus a little before day, was
departed. Thus a noble and an honorble man was murdered by the hands of a
varlot and a villainous beast: It was his hard luck and curssed chance, whom
his enemies, for his worthynesse and virtues sake, greatly spared, to find a
friend, whose daggers dinte wrought his doleful death. Howbeit I stayed not
my self upon this certificate, but forward went I to his pauilion or tent, and
coming thither, I found two of his free me^, and also of his servant a fews.
The rest ran away for fear, as they said, Because it was death to those
servants in that they defended not their master and Lord.
because their Lord and Master was slain before his own tent. I was
constrained to lay him in mine own horse li^tire, wherein I my self came
ryding, and caused him to be carried back again into the city, where I
procured as much pomp and solemnity at his funeral, as I was able to make at
Athens. I could (by no means) obtain thus much of the Atheniens, that he
might be interred within the walls of the city: for to their denial they
added a reason, because the state of their religion was an At Rome also the
same was forbidden.
impediment in that case, and would grant no tolleration: and that it never
was permitted to any man, time out of mind. But yet thus much curtesi^ did they
show, y^ in what famous place of exercise soever we would, his interrement should
not be withstoode nor hindered, upon which permission we presumed, and chose
out y^ Where Plato sometime flourished.
Academie, where we burned y^ corpse to ashes, and after that found such
favor at the hands of the Atheniens, that they repined not at expenses, but
erected in the self same place, a tumbe or monument of Marble stone, in his
sempiternall remembrance. So discharged we all the duties which we might, to
him whom fellowship in office, and friendship in course of life, made dear
unto us, both whiles he was living, and also when he was dead.

Fare you well. Dated at Athens, the day before the Calends of June.
Cicero to his wife Terentia.
THE ARGUMENT.
He shows what was the cause of his troubles, and how he was disbutthened:
and says somewhat touching his navigations or voyage to Pompeius.

I This letter was written at what time L^tulus and Mar cellus were Consuls.
Am disburthened and eased of many cares and troubles, which made you a woeful
woman, as I understood, and I was very sorry for the same. And what was the
cause of my heaviness, I perceived the next day after that I departed from
you. At night I cast up much ch^ler, after the eiection whereof, I felt such a
refection, that one God or other seemed as a Physician, to have ministered some
wholesome and seasonable medicine to me their poor patient, to which God (as
you are accustomed) make some satisfaction, not superstitiously, but
religiously, I mean, to Apollo and Aesculapius. I hope we have a sound and a
swift He means the ship wherein he made his voyage to Po^^eius.
ship to sail in, and to make speedy passage, into which so soon as I was
entered, I took pen and ynke and indicted this letter: hereafter I purpose to
write many Epistles to our familiar friends, and old acquaintance: wherein I
will make often mention of you, wife Terentia, and of our daughter Tulliola, with
no less diligence, then kyndnesse commending you unto them, (I trust) for your
commodity. I would counsel you to be courageous and stout hearted, but that
I know your valiantness and magnanimity to be such, as no man's therewith may
be counted comparable. And yet such to be the state of many matters, I
mistrust not, that both you may continue where you are, now very commodiously:
and that I shall hereafter fight for the safety of the weal public and
others with me of the same fellowship, right puisauntly. It is my will and
desire, that you regard your own health: and if it like you, you may remove
your household to such towns as be furthest from those, where soldiers be
encamped. Arpinas ground will serve your turn very well, if victuals wax
dear and scant. Cicero has him most heartily commended unto you.

Fare well a thousand times. Dated the. 7. of the Ides of June.
Cicero to his wife Terentia, Tulliola his daughter, and Cicero his son.
THE ARGUMENT.
This letter is not only lamentably indicted, but also faintingly invented. The
argument and meaning thereof is manifold, and consists of variable
circumstaunces, because he makes answer to sundry points and articles
contained in the letters of his wife Terentia.

I Confess I may write more often then I do, although I * This was written,
when Piso, and Gabinius were Consuls.
spare my pen, and write in such s^rt as if I had little leisure: and what
reason moves me to send you letters so seldom, I suppose you can not be
ignorant: because that, as all times are unto me miserable, and still
replenished with recourse of fresh calamities: so when I address my style unto
you, or when I peruse the epistles sent from you unto me, I fall into such seas
of anguishe, that the very tears trickle down my cheeks: yea, in such sort
do I sighe and lament, that I can endure no longer, to suffer further torment.
I would I had been less longing after life, and more groaning after the gra^e:
then (undoubtedly) had we not seen such mischiefs, nor been subject to such
tempests of troubles. Howbeit, if ^ortune have reserved us to any hope and
confidence of future profit and commodity, hereafter to be gathered, then are
we so much the (...) deceived. But if these storms be continual, and so
unchangeable, that no calm is like to f^llow: then I would I might look you
in the face, (my life and my joy) and I would I might dye within the
comfortable claspings of your embracing arms: sithence, neither the Gods
eternal, whom you have worshipped with sincerity and perfect devotion, are
pi^rced with pity to consider our deserts: nor yet men, whose safety I never
refused to procure, are moved with consideration to recompense our merits. We
were at Brundisium with M. Lenius Flaccus, the space of xiij. days, a very
good man and a friendly, and such a one, as for my sake, put his own life,
lands, and goods, in desperate hazard: not fearing the penalty of a The
law of Clodius, which commanded that none should be so hardy and bold, as
to receive Cicero near their house, within the compass of four miles. etc.
most injurious law, in such servile sort, that it should be an impediment,
whereby to restrain him from exhibiting duties of humanity to his friend,
and courteous intertainment to such whom he favored. I would we were once
able to make him amends: we thank him daily, but that is no sufficient
acquittaunce. We passed from Brundisium the fifth of the Calendes of May, and
so took our voyage to Cyzicus by Macedonia. O miserable man, O tormented
traveler: what should I desire of you, poor woman, wasted in body, and
consumed in mind: to come and visit me? may I not desire so much? may I not
see you? then, alas, must I lack you? now sure so I think: Then must I do
as I may. If there be any hope of our return, do what you can to confirm and
to further it. But if there be none, as I suspect and fear, then are we
undone, and past hope of good speed. Howbeit, do what you can to come to me,
and then be sure of this, that if I have your company, I will not think my
self in despair and past recovery. But for our daughter Tulliola, what order
shall we take? I refer that to your discretion: for I can in that case give
no counsel. Nevertheless, how so ever the case stands, regard must be
had, that her misery be mitigated, her marriage not neglected, and her good
name and fame well maintained. And what shall Cicero my son do? I am content
that he lodge in my bosom, and be always present within the compass of mine
embracing body. More then I have already written, I can not comprehend:
heaviness hinders, sorrow will not suffer, care intercepteth, present
grief in no wise permits. How it fares with you, I wot not, whether you
possess something, or (whereof I am sore afraid) whether you are spoiled and
turned out of all things. I travel in confidence, that Piso, as you write,
will continue our friend and favorer. Touching such of our family, whom I
have made free and set at liberty, there remains no matter wherewith you
should be moved. As for those which abide with you, your promise was, that your
dealing should measure their deserving. Orpheus remains still in service,
and persisteth in his duty: the rest are not so officious and attendaunt. The
condition of the other servant is such, that if we be quite dispossessed,
they enjoy freedom and liberty, if they may obtain it If by the means and
procurement of Clodius they were not withstoode.
without contradiction or denial. And if we be not disherited, but keep our
own without diminution or empayring, that their service be at our
commandment, a very few excepted. Howbeit, these are to be thought things of
less weight, and tending to small purpose. Whereas you exhort me, to have a
good heart, and such a mind, as the foggie and moist mystes of miseries, may
not infect and putrify: and moreover minister hope and confidence of
restitution to my former worship and dignity, with recovering of my sore
shaken safety: I wish with all my heart, such to be the hope which you
exhibit, that in hoping, I may not, as one unhappy, hope amiss. Now, for my
self (miserable man) when shall I receive any letters from you? what messinger
shall convey them hither, and deliver them to my hand? I had looked for them at
Brundisium, but that the mariners would needs away, as loath to be hindered
by any tide or tempest. It remains (my Terentia) that you maintain your
self, as you are not unable. Honest has been our former life, and our days
already spent have flourished in prosperity: our offense has not put us to
this trouble and vexation, but our virtue is the cause of this our sharp
affliction. There is nothing amiss, An argument of a mind full of
perturbations and troublesome cogitations.
but that we lost not life and all, with the rest of the ornaments of our
renown. But if the lengthening of life, in consideration of our posterity and
offspring, be supposed more acceptable, then with the deprivation of honor, to
suffer deaths incontroulable assault, and so to putrify in the grave: then
are we not discontent, but yield very gladly, to abide other bitter bruntes
and shrewde skyrmishes of adversity: albeit in (...), they are importable and
not to be suffered. I sent Clodius Philetraeus back again, because his eyes
were diseased.

Sallustius with his dutifulness is a friend to hope. Cennius is a great
favorer of us, and such a one in deed, in whom I see such confidence of
hearty goodwill remaining, that I am persuaded he will never fail you, if he
may further you. Sia said he would see me, but he is gone from Brundisium. Be
careful of your own health, and let this thought be always resident in your
mind. An argument of his love to wards his wife Terentia.
That I suffer not such smarting torments in consideration of mine own
calamity: as I feel dead ly pangs in respect of your misery. Terentia, my
most faithful, trusty, and loving wife: Tulliola, my most dear and best
beloved daughter: Cicero, the surplusage of my hope, and pledge of all my joy:

Fare you well. The day before the Calends of May. From Brundisium.
Cicero to Caesar.
THE ARGUMENT.
He commends Apollonius, sometime servant to P. Crassus, to win him creadit
with Caesar, then encamped in Spain, and armed against the confederates of
Pompeius.

MY love and liking of This Crassus was slain of the Parthians, with his
father M. Crassus.
P. Crassus, a young man of exceeding nobleness, has been no less faithful
then fervent: in whom, whiles he was but in the flower of his age, I reposed
such hope as kindled my comfort: and began also to conceive of him as well as
heart could think, upon sundry circumstances which offered them selves to my
judgment. With this Crassus sometime was Apollonius in service, of whom,
whiles his master lived, I made great account, and might in no wise disallow
of his doings: for he was very circumspect and studious in his masters
business, and a man marvelous moete to serve his turn at al assayes: for y^
which cause Crassus loved him accordingly. And now, since y^ does of Crassus,
this man, by occasion, being moved to my remembrance, seems to me not
unworthy of favor, and to deserve y^ inheritance of a ^rend, because his
opinion was always occupied in this point, y^ to such whom he loved, he would
exhibit reverence: and duty without dissimulation, to such as him well liked.
This Appolonius coming over unto me at Cilicia, did affoorde me such service,
that in many things I might not miss the necessary use of his assisting
hand, nor be destitute of his wisdom, counsel and providence: and the self
same man, as I think, withdrew not his will or might from you, at such time
as it was welcome, aduenturing to compass as much as his ability could
permit, in the Alexandrine battle. Which service of his, ministering this hope
unto his heart, that your opinion concerning his person, and behavior, would
be no less commendable then ours* he determined with him self, to prepare
direct passage * unto you principally into Spain, to the attempting also of
which voyage, mine advise was not wanting, for his further encouragement. To
whom I would not have applied so plausible a style, in depainting out his
praise, but that I was persuaded, that with you it should loose none
authority: Howbeit, I praise him not, to this purpose, as though he had not
deseru^d commendation, sithence you can not be ignorant, that he was a
seruitour under you in time of war, when his merits were manifest: and one
at your commandment, as you know, if you call Crassus to For Crassus was
Ambassador to France at the appointment of Caesar.
memory. And if he were disposed to crave commendation, and were addicted to
hear the trumpe of men's tongues sound his praise, I perceive whole multitudes
applyaunt in that behalf. As for the testimony of mine own private
judgment, whereof he accounted, not slenderly, and which I am assured of, shall
prevail thoroughly, I have most willingly declared. I dare verify, that the
man is learned, and that he has desired and de lighted in the best exercises
of study, which good inclination has not sprung in him of late, but grown in
him of long con tinuance, ever since he was a boy. For he lodged in my house,
with Diodotus the Stoicall Philosopher, a man (in my judgment,) very profound,
and deeply experimented in matters of natural secrecy, and other points of
wisdom and gravity: with whom he did keep company, not for a fashion,
but of a will, to wax learned, and expert in that whereof he was ignorant:
and being now inflamed with the admiration of your martial exploites, and
other serious affairs, is very desireous, to reduce them in a Chronicle, and
to write them in the Greek tongue, as a monument of your im mortal memory. I
doubt not but he is able to comprehend as much as he pretends, and that he
can bring his enterprise, in that case, to perfection. He lacks no learning:
he lackes not experience: it is not long, since he was conversant in the like
kind of knowledge and practice: very earnest is he, to satisfy the eternity
of your puisance, and by his pen to decypher your praises in perpetual
records: Now have you a witness and testimonial of mine opinion touching
Appollonius: of whom, I trust, you will according to the singularity of your
discretion, conceive certain judgment: and thereafter give him a taste of your
courtesy: And yet again, I commend him unto you, whereof I made a former
denial, protesting, that in what respect soever it shall please you to be his
favorer and furtherer, I my self shall account it worthy double acceptance.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Caesar.
THE ARGUMENT.
He commends a young man named Praeciliu^, whose father was a very great
friend to Caesar.

I Am bound of humility, to commend unto you soly and alone, the son of Note
the causes from whence this commendation is derived.
your very friend, my familiar companion: the son (I say) of an excellent
man, and one to whom (for his modesty, and civil behavior) I bear special
affection, and can not but recompense him with the like proportion of goodwill,
as he shows and performs toward me. Besides that, by sundry instructions
of trial, and infallible experience, I understand, and therefore the more
boldly affirm, that his father was a singular friend unto me. This same is he*
which sometime derided me, and other whiles rebuked me, because I was not
conformable (being so honorably invited of your own person) to join with you,
as your adherent. Hom. Od. (...) 60.


(...)
Yet, though he sought to prove me,
His counsel could not move me.
For I heard our Nobles and Peers making this exclamation and saying: Hom. Od.
A. ^ and (...). 21. and (...). 209.


(...)
(...)
Be stout and strong, with valliant heart
In Martial field show what thou art,
That thy successors may thee praise,
As duskish clouds do darken days.
Yea, they stay not there, but go about to set me all in a light flame,
notwithstanding I was kindled before, and thus they talk unto me:

(...) (...). 241.

(...)
If die thou do, then die not like a clown:
But with thine end, join glory and renown:
Attempt some worthy act, and noble deed:
Thy fame then shall they sound that thee succeed.
But these persuasions are of small force to move me, as you may perceive:
wherefore, leaving the lofty and vaunting style of Homer, I will frame my
self to the perfourmaunce of Euripides his true and undoubted precepts.

(...)
I can not like that prudent man, This vearse cited by Cicero, is not to be
found in Euripides.

Which for him self no wisdom can.
Which verse of the Poet, that good old father Praecilius notably commends,
and says, that such a one does see, (...), behind and before, meaning that, as
he is not ignorant of things past, so of things present and to come, he is not
unskillful: and such a one says he:

(...) Il. 2. 57. and A. 27.

May counted be right excellent,
In universal government.
But to leave my digression, and to occupy my pen in that which I first
attempted: you shall show unto me, a principal point of courtesy, and
discover your benevolence abundantly toward me, if your humanity and gentle
inclination, which is s^ngular, may be exhibited to this youngman, of whom I
have made mention: and that it shall further please you, to perform the sum
of my suite, and by your means to advance him to the scope of my
commendation: which (I hope) you will no less accomplish, for the further
dignity of the race of the Praecillians: then I have been appliaunt to
instill this supplication into your remembrance, that they meritoriously may
reap the benefit of your gracious favor. Thus have I used a Because of the
interlaceing of greek Poem^s.
new and strange form of writing, and discrepant from my usual method of
inditing letters, to the intent that you might the better understand, how
these my words, have not discoursed upon a vulgar and common kind of
commendation.

Fare you well.
Lentulus to Cicero.
THE ARGUMENT.
He makes a commemoration of such feats as he had done: accuses the Rhodians
upon occasion: and adds a rehearsal of his desartes toward the common
wealth.

After that I had some company, and a little conferrence, with our friend
Brutus, and perceived apparently, that in his coming to Asia, there was more
delay then maturitie and speed: I addressed my return back again into Asia,
that I might gath^r up the gleanings of my labors, and send money to Rome, as
soon as possibly I might: In the mean season I came to knowledge of
Dolabelaes (...) in Lycia, being in number above a hundred ships, prepared for
the ready assista^nce of his armi^: pr^ided by (...) of purpose, that if he
were Cassinius being there resident as goue^ nou^.
(...) of the confi^nce (...) he reposed in Syria, he might presently (...)
shipping and passing with expedition into Itali^, might join him self with the
Anthonies, and fortify, with his aid; the rest of those tumultuous villains.
In the fear whereof I traveling with great thought, and in such great doubt,
as I am not disposed to express, set all mine own affairs and matters of
importance at cinque and si^e, and endeavored myself with the company of
fewer and lesser ships, to sail toward them: which presumption of mine ^ad
grown to perfection and full effect, and by my mean as ^ad quite ^eene
dispatched, if the Rhodians had not procured (...) ^inderaunce: (...),
notwithstanding their impediments, provided for my ^inderaunce, a great part of
them, though not the whole (...), was discomfited, and put to flight. At the
coming of us not only the souldi^rs, but also the captains, and presidentes
of the army, were moved with such amazing of mind, an^ ^stonishment of heart,
that having no stomache to enter conflict and skyr^, betook them to (...), for
their present remedy. As for their ships of burden, we took them, every
vessel: and now have I obtained The discom fiture of his adversaries and
enemies.
that, which did not only offer unto me occasion of doutfulnesse, but troubled
me also with much fear, so that the matter being brought to this stay,
Dolabe^la is not able to pass through into Italy with his (...), nor with his
partakers and (...), to make you more and harder work, wherein to (...)
o^upied. The Rhodians, how desperately they behave themsel^es, as well toward
us, as also toward the common w^lth, you may understand by ^y letters which I
sent abroad publicly and openly. And certainly, I was more pinching and
sparing in my ^riting concerning them, then I found the^ furious, and more like
(...), then ruled with aduisement. I would net have you moved with admiration,
for that I have written somewhat shortly. Wonderful is their outrage. As for
mine own private injuries, against them I made patience a preservative: their
evil disposed mind for the safety of our ^ide, their greed^nesse to For if I
might dispatche the ^ollection of all the money whi^he I am ^o send unto Rome,
my next request should be for a ^uccessour in my plate. Now, that which I
have given to Cassius, that which we have lost by the death of Tr^bonius, by
the light credit of Dolabella, and ^y the deceitful dealing of them, which:
kept not (...). ^ither performed promise unto me, nor yet to the common
wealth, it is my meaning to recover and obtain: which otherwise can not be
accompulished, except* I might have longer space granted of adiding: and that
my request man be subscribed unto, I desire you, that your (...) (...) may ^o a
further^ce. I (...) m^ self, so well to have deserved of the (...) (...), that
I ought not to look after the benefit and commodity of this Province, but to
be in as great expe^tation of recompense, as either Cassius or B^utus, not
only for the fellowship in When we gave Caesar his deaths wounds.
that fact, and (...) taking in that perilous enterprise, but also (...) our
good (...) (...) (...) (...) (...), and for the (...) of our (...) For, was
(...) the first that wrought the dissolution and breaking of Anth^ies laws?
was not I (...) first that (...) over Dolabellaes troop of horsemen to the
common wealth, and delivered the same to Cassius? was not I the first, that for
the safety of (...), had the advantage of choice, for the s^ppression of that
most mi^chiefous and detestable (...)? It (...) I, and (...) but I* that
succored Cassiu^ with soldiers, and joined Syria to the common wealth. For if
I had not maintained Cassius with so much money, and ministered ^uch present
helps and ^o speedy ^cours as I did h^ had never had the (...) is ^ (...) for
his heart, to set one ^oote forward into Syria^ And now also no less
inconveniences were like to grow to the weal public, by the means of
Dolabella, then there did (s^mtime) by y^ procureme^t of Anthony. Al which
sores I have (...) up with apt plasters, yea, even I have wrought their full
perfection, I, (I say) who wa^ both a co^panio^, and a familiar friend to
Dolabella, and a near kinsman to Anthony* by Because they labored to Caesar
in Len^ulus behalf, and obtained their suite.
whose mediation and * procurement, this province fell to my charge and
authority. But (...). Loving my native country with more tenderness, I was
at defiance with all my friends, and have denounced battle against mine
affinity. And although I perceive, the profits which hereby I have gotten to
be but small, in comparison: yet am I not in doubt or despair, neither in
lothsomnesse of labor, as ouerwearied and cloyed with such a busy charge, but
am as ready and as venturous as ever I was, not only in the love of liberty,
but also in tempests of dangers. Howbeit, if by the procurement of the Senate,
and of each other notable personage, we may attain some due and deserved
honor: our authority shall be enlarged with the rest, and our ability to
profit the common wealth shall be increased. I could not see your son, when I
came to Brutus, because he was removed and gone to keep his winter, with a
troop of horsemen. But that he is so affected toward the weal public, both
for your sake, and his own, and principally for mine, I have cause to rejoice:
for he is to me in stead of a brother, as your true son, and worthy of such a
father.

Fare you well. Dated the. iiij. of the Calends of June. At Perga.
Cicero to Lucceio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He desires Lucceius the Historiographer, to make a several volume of his
own exploits, martial feats, and deeds that he had done: which work might
seem of more worthiness.

PUrposing and attempting, at what time I was in your company, to confer
about the same matter whereof I write at this present, and perceiving my self
restrained and still drawn back with somewhat a rusticall kind of
shamefastness: I have now declared all, being absent, and therefore supported
with the more boldness: for letters do not blus^. I am inflamed with an
incredible desire, not (as I take it) deserving reprehension, to have our name
made famous by your pen, and with your works to win everlasting worthynesse.
Which thing, although you tell me often, that you intended to accomplish and
fulfill: yet I pray you dispense with my much haste, and suppose my speediness
in this point pardonable. For your order and style of writing, notwithstanding
it was always of me marvelous vehemently and earnestly desiered: yet has it
A commendation, for the getting of goodwill.
quite overcome mine opinion, and has set me in such a fire, y^ I covet and
crave with all celeritie and speed, our deeds and adventures to be registered
in your immortal monunients. For, not only the co^memoration and rehearsal of
succession, haleth me into a certain hope of perpetual renoune, but also y^
earnest desire wherewith I feel my self al kindled: y^ we may enjoy whiles we
be alive, to our full expectation, either the absolute authority and credit
of your testimony, or else the signification of your benevolence, or else the
sweetness and pleasantness of your flourishing invention and excellent wit.
Neither was I ignorant, at what time I was writing these circumstaunces, with
what heavy burdens (of such things, I mean, as I had taken in hand, and
prsuatly determined) I was pressed. But because I did see, and also
understand, that the History of the Of the war called bellum sociale: when
they which were in countenance, taking in despite that they were thrust out
of the city, took up weapon and armor.
Italian war, and the civil commotion, by you was almost finished, and that
your pen had painted many leaves of paper, in the description of those
tumultes and insurrections: and for that you your self, reported unto me, that
you would begin to declare such matters as remained: I would in no wise
hinder my solfe, but gave you warning of my will, that you might deliberate and
take aduisement, whether you thought it more convenient to join such cases and
discourses as concerned us, with the residue that by your industry is already
compassed: or (as many of the Greek writers have done, as for example,
Calisthene^s upon the Trojan battle, Tymeus of King Pyrrhus, Polybius of the
Numantine war, al which, have divided those foughten fields and fierce
conflictes, from the bodies of their continued Histories) separate that Mening
the coniuration of Catiline.
civil conspiracy. from those battles and incounters had with our foreign
enemies. It is not much auailable for our commendation: yet for the making of
the more haste, it is much material, to touch me and my doings (I mean,)
wherein I would have you to cut off al expectation of circumstaunces touching
place, and forthwith give onset to the very cause, and the time. And if your
mind be occupied in Of the civil co^motion on ly, and of no man but me alone,
by whom the rage of that sedition was both assuaged and suppressed.
one argument, and in one person, I perceive already, with what plenty of
matter, beauty of words, and sweetness of style, all things are like to be
accomplished. I am not ignorant, how greatly these my speeches smell of
shamelessness, first in laying upon your shoulders a burden of such weight
(for your private business may be a means of flat denial) and secondly, in
desiering you so to adorn and advance me, yt among al men I may become
famous. What if al yt I have done seem unto you, not meet to be so popularly
praised? yet remember, that He which once runs once out of the rayles of
shamefastness, may thoroughly continue impudent. Wherefore my request unto you,
is, that you would use a more vehemente and patheticall order in this discourse
of my deeds, then peradventure you will think upon: and in your description,
spare not to set light by the Which allow nothing disagreable unto truth.
limited laws of an History: And account not that favor, as a trifle to be
contemned, if it shall commend me unto you with the more vehemence, deem it not
I say ridiculous, sithence you have written thereof in a certain treatise very
sweetly and pleasantly, and declared y^ it wrought no less affection in you,
the^ pleasure sometime did in Hercules, of whom Xenophon makes relation in his
memorables: despise not that favor and grace: and as for our love, let it have
such liberty, that it may get more largely then truth judges worthy grant.
And if we may get you to take pains in this matter, it will prove (I am
absolutely persuaded) a work worthy of such a writer, wherein his ability is
made manifest, and a testimony left of his abundant knowledge. Concerning ye
beginning of y^ coniuration and tumult, until y^ time of our From exile or
banishment he means.
return, a small volume, as I think, will serve: wherein you may intermedle, both
with the ripping up of civil co^mutations and chaunges, either in the
explication of causes which gave original to novelties, or else in y^ remedies
of inconveniences: and also in reprehending such things, as you shall judge
prostable, and in matters whereof you have no misliking, allege sundry reasons
for their further authority and comprobation. Besides that, if (as your
accustomed order has been) you shall think it necessary and requisite, to
set things out amply and largely, then can you not do amiss, if you shall
describe He notes Pompeius and others, of who^ contrary to faith, honesty
and friendship he was betrayed, that he might gratify Clodius.
the false, faithless, malicious, and traiterous dealing of many against us.
Moreover, the sundry chances and chaunges, whereunto I have been subject,
will minister unto you much matter wherein to be conversant, and sufficient
argument wherein to be occupied, all be sprinkled and tempered with a certain
kind of pleasantness, and variety, which may be allurementes to the minds
of men, in reading to use deliberation, and delays of delight. For nothing is
more meet to recreate the Reader, then the varieties of times, and the
alterations of Fortune, which, although in consideration of experience they are
not to be desiered: yet, in respect of perusing and reading, they are to be
embraced. For in the quiet remembrance of sorrows escaped, consists much
pleasure: and to such as in their own person have sustained no trouble, but
taken a view of other men's chances without sorrow, the conceit of pity
breeds much delectation: For which of us, entering into the consideration of
captain Epaminondas, lying upon his deaths wound at Mantinea, is not touched
with a certain Compassion and pity for his death: delectation and pleasure for
his puisaunce. Ac^ilius Probus, Iustine, and Strabo, have all written of him
very nota bly.
compassion, tempered with sweetness? who then commanded the spear to be
plucked out of his flesh, when to a question by him propounded, this answer was
delivered, that his target remained safe, and was not in his enemies
possession: that even in the anguishe of his mortal wound, he ended the course
of his years, with no less contentation, then commendation: and as his death
was of him most willingly embraced, so were his merits perpetually praised.
Whose desire in reding Themistocles flight is not kindled, and in scanning his
return not lightened? For the very order it self of Chronicles, and Histories,
have in them some force to continue a register of my doings, both in peace and
war. But of an excellent man oftentimes, the manifold and variable chances
move much admiration, expectation, pleasure, sorrow, hope, fear, etc.: and if
all things be concluded with a notable end, then is the mind replenished with
pleasure of most sweet and delectable reading, which benefit shall redound
much more answerable unto my desire, if hereof due regard be taken, that you
make a several volume, separated from your other writings, wherein is
comprehended, a perpetual History of many things, if (I say) you divide this
from that, as it were a play, interlude, or repensentation of our chances and
adventures. The reason why he terms it by the name of Play or Interlude.
For it contains sundry acts, practices, shows, and gestures, as well of
our counselles and attemptes, as of our troublesome times, and days very
combersome. I do not make flattery, and smoth phrase of speech, the instrument
whereby to creep into your favor, sithence my meaning is manifest in this,
that my will depends chiefly upon the aduancment proceeding from your
labors, and the obteining of your report by pen and paper, to make me famous.
For you are not the man, that is ignorant of his own estate, no more
suspecting such to be his adversaries as have him not in admiration, then
thinking those parasites and clawebackes, which crown him with commendation.

Neither am I wide from wit, and void of judgment, or rather so mad and
fantastical, to desire his assistaunce for my preferment, to the purchasing
of perpetual honor, who, whiles he is so occupied, wins not to him self,
by the nobleness of his learning, everlasting renoune. For that great
Alexander was not carried away with a blind affection, when he would have none
paint out the portraiture of his body, but Apelles, and none to make his image
in metal, save Licippus: but reason and judgment bred that conceit in his
mind, because he thought, that they being most excellent and incomparable
artificers, should not only in the discovery of their skill make him glorious,
but them selves also passing famous. And those forenamed workmen of singular
worthiness, made such persons, by their pictures and sculptures most lively
proportioned, so far from being strange, that they were well known to such as
never saw them: which thing, although they had not by cunning compassed: yet
should their nobleness have been no whit the more darkened. Neither is the
renoune of that Spartane or Lacedaemonian Agesilaus, of less port and
account, for that he suffered not the lineaments of his body to be drawn in
colors, nor the form and measure of his members to be made in metal: then
the fame and name of those, that were most desierous both ways to be popular.
For that small pamphlet of Xenophon, penned in the praise of the same king, is
of such sufficiency, that it surpasses all the pictures shadowed with the
painters pencill, and all images of the caruer or grauer smothed and fined with
his chosen instruments. And surely this shall seem to me a thing of great
excellency, both to the delectation of my mind, and also to the remembrance
of my dignity, if I may be described by your pen, then portraied by their
skill, or set out in the volumes of any other whatsoever: not only, for that you
should in setting me out, give a note of your rare wit and profound knowledge:
as Timaeus did, in the behalf of Timoleon: and Herodotus for the advancement
of Themistocles: but because you by your authority and countenance, being a
man of great acceptance, and in causes of weight very well known to the
common wealth, may procure me the more renoune: that I do not only hear that
sound of puisance and dexterity, that blast I say of honor and high worship,
which Alexander when he entered into Sigeum, did say that Homer ascribed to
Achilles: but that I may possess and enjoy that pension of praise, which has
issue, not only from the testimony of a man of It is not enough to do notable
feats, but an excellent writer is requisite also to record the^.
great knowledge, learning, and gravity, but also of honor, nobleness, and
authority. For Hector, whom the Poet Naeuius introduces in his poesies, has
a plausible sentence, rejoicing above measure, not only in that he was praised:
but he adds this clause as a necessary supplement, because he was praised of
a man deserving praise. And if so be that, luck lay a block in the way, that
my request is in hassarde of hinderance (sithence it is no reason nor
conscience, that you should disapoint me in any thing wherein I desire your
furtherance) I shall be constrained peradventure, to attempt that which many
very scornfully and disdainfully do repr^hend: namely, I will write of my
self, and sound the trumpet of mine own merits: yet in such sort, that I
vary not from the president and example of many noble and honorable
personages. But to be conversant in this kind of style and method, is (as you
know) The eauses which put him back from writing in his commendation.
a vice: and therefore such as be the registrers and writers of their own
acts, adventures, and counsels, must of necessity so temper their pen, that
they break not out of the banckes of modesty, nor show themselnes, in their
doing, shameless and impudent: a parcialitie therefore in this point is to be
followed, which honest natures in no wise do neglect: who when they see in them
selves occasion of deserved praise, are so far from amplifying their own
merits, that they use a sparing method: and when they perceive on the other
side, just cause of reprehension, are so far from seeking their own blame
and rebuke, that they drown all in the seas of silence. Moreover, it comes
to pass, that when men write their own doings, the smaller credit do they
win, the less belief, the le^le opinion of desert, small authority, and as
little admiration: in so much that many make this objection by way of
reprehension, and say, that more modesty remains in the minds of the cr^ers
at common games of actiuitie, who after they have set crowns of triumph upon
the heads of the conquerours, and proclaimed their names with a loud voice in
the hearing of a solemn assembly, and when they of duty ought semblably to be
crowned, before y^ breaking ^p of t^ose pla^es and departing of the people, to
the intent that they s^uld not seem to challenge victory by their own
private voices, another comes forth and takes upon hin^ the execution of
that office* These syrts and sands we wish to avoid, and avoid, to our
abiliti^, if you will stand satisfactorie to my request, which y^ you would
accomplish to my ^tter (...), we desire and beseech ^ou most earn^stly* And,
l^ast peradventure, you should muse in your mind, why we are so i^portune at
this present to crave y^ of you in such earnest order and multitude of words,
which you have oftentimes promised to fulfill, (I mean y^ registring of our
^nmultuous times and dangerous chances, wc circumstaunces not impertinent to
that purpose:) I pray you be contented with this answer, that the hot desire
of making haste, whereof I made mention in the front of my letter, sets me
on a fire, Note his un reasonable arrogancy and proud disposition of mind but
follow it not.
because we are in love with nothing in the world so much, as that the people
of all lands and regions, might, by the immortal monuments of your learned
books, attain to the knowledge of us, by the commemoration of our deeds,
whiles we are yet alive, and that we may taste the sweetness and joy o^ that
our little glory, and young springing honor, before we be dead. Concerning
these matters, I would wish you to write unto me, if it be not too painful
and troublesome unto you, what you are determined to do. For if you will take
it in hand, and mind no less the^ you have oftentimes said, then will I
gather abbridgements of all such things, as in that case be necessary: But if
you use procrastination, and drive me off with delays till another time. I
will confer with you face to face, and let pen and paper lie a sleep. In
the mean while, finishe that which you have begun: so shall you love us.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Lucceio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He signifies how auailable the comfortable letter of Lucceiu^ was* to assuage
the sorrow and anguishe which tormented him, for the afflicted state of the
common wealth.

ALthough the consolation of your letter, could not but be acceptable unto me,
for therein is disclosed your great benevolence and goodwill, lincked with the
like prudence and wisdom: yet there was a further commoditi^ then that,
which likewise I obtained: Namely, the knowledge o^ your magnanimity and
courage, in the contempt of things transitory, and your armed mind against
variable Fortune: which commendation, I judge to belong to wisdom
principally, Not to stay vponany other foundation, neither by external
casualties to fall into dubitation either to live in fe^icitie, or in misery.
In the considerat^on whereof I was earnestly conu^rsant, ( Note for our example
how many words he brings to gether to beautify his Me^aphore or translation.
for it had taken deep root and sure ground in my remembrance) yet not
withstanding, the violence of tempes^ous storms did so shake it, and the
clustering toget^er of (...) did so batter and beat it, that it was much
impaired, and in manner (...). Now I see and feel their present ass^staunce,
as well in your former l^tters, as in this your last E^istle, which I perceive
to have wrought effectually. Wherefore, these words are often to be repea^ed,
and not only to be told with a naked signification, but also to be v^er ed
with a sad declaration, that nothing was more welcome to me, then your letter
of comfort. To the ingendering of which passion and inward motion, as well those
circumstaunces, which with no less pleasantness of style, then with plenty
of arguments, you have gathered, are auailable: as also the valliantnesse,
constancte, and soberness of your person, then which nothing can be more
beh^ment and patheticall. Which not to endeavor to follow, is a fault, in my
indgement, most foul: and a filthy offense. Wherefore, in this one respect,
suppose me more valliaunt, then your self the master of courage: because you
seem unto me to have some hope and confidence, that these things will decline
from worsse to better: For these hurly burlies with ^age of weapons, and those
other liklyhoodes: besides that, the reasons in that discourse by you
collected, forbad me utterly to despair of the common wealth. Wherefore, in
that you are valliauntly minded, there is the less wonder, for so much as you
live in expectation: and yet to conceive any sparckle of hope, it is a thing
whereat we may maru^ll. For what is there that is not so shaken, that it
seems to run to ruin, and utterly to come to naught? Mark and behold en
this side, that side, and round about, the members of the common wealth, which
none knows so well as you, ne understands with such perfection: and believe
me, you shall not find so much as one that is not maimed, bruised, (...), and
much infeebled: which I would prosecute with my pen, and amply describe, if I
had a more certain view of them then you have, or were able to make a
commemoration and rehearsal of them without horror and heaviness: although as
you admonish me, and give me comfortable counsel, all anguishe is to be
rejected. Therefore will we dispose our selves to suffer with out sorrow, our
He means (as it may be thought) the death of his daughter Tul hola.
domestical and private misfortunes, and the preposterous chances of the
common wealth, with more magnanimity and constancy of mind, then you your
self shall be able, although you give me precepts in this respect to imitate.
For the consolation where upon you stay your self, is (as your letter does
signify) a shadow of some hope: as for us, we mean to be steadfast,
courageous, and established, yea in very desperation, when hope is
harbourlesse where unto you, not withstanding, draw us by your admonitions, and
by your precepts endeavor to persuade us. For you rip up the most pleasant and
delectable remembrance of our Because we have always thought well of the common
wealth, which remembrance of well doing is not unpleasant.
conscience, and of such things as we (you being the ring leader and principal
author) attempted and performed. For we did no less undoubtedly, in the
behalf of our country, then of duty was demaundable, and might boldly be
required: howbeit for all that, more I may say to you, then any man's mind is
urged to accomplish. You shall pardon me speaking any thing in mine own
advancement. For with the cogitation and consideration of what things, you
would disburthen us of heaviness, by the remembrance and thinking upon the
same seriously, we feel our selves emptied of much pensiveness. Wherefore, not
to neglect your admonitions, or to account your precepts conte^ptible, I will
withdraw me self from al molestations and perplexities, so far forth as mine
ability shall give me leave: and I will frame my mind, and address my study
unto Mening the study of Philosophy, where unto he applied him self most,
after the common wealth was so misera bly afflicted.
those things, where with prosperity is beautified, and adversity mitigated:
and with you shall my continuance be so long, as both our age and our health
will permit. And although we be hindered from coming together, to enjoy bodily
presence, and real company, yet not withstanding, the conjunction of our
minds, and knitting of both our hearts together, shall be of such efficacy and
force, that we will reap such benefit, each of us by and through the self
same studies, that we shall persuade our selves to be so familiar, as if we were
never a sunder.

Fare you well.
Lucceius to Cicero.
THE ARGUMENT.
He demands the occasion of Cicero his so long absence from the city: and
gives him counsel to withdraw his mind from sorrow.

If you are in health, it is well: I am in health, according to my custom, and
yet somewhat worsse for all that, then I have been wont. I sought about
oftentimes to the intent I might see you, and was moved with no small
admiration, that you were not at Rome, after your departing from me: which
offers unto me, at this instant, no less occasion of musing. I know not of
certainty, what thing should restrain and keep you from Mening tho citic of
Rome
hence. If solitariness and living alone be your delectation, when you write,
and continue to be none otherwise occupied then you hane been accustomed: I am
glad, and I do not mislike of your meaning: for then this nothing can be more
pleasant, not only in these times both miserable and lamentable, but also at
other seasons of quietness and tranquillity: especially, either to your over
wearied heart, which bra^eth after intermission and rest from busy and great
matters* or your learned and prudent mind, which freely delivers some thing,
at all times, which unto other appeare^h delectable, and makes your own
person honorable. But on the contrary part, if you lie grouing in gricfe, and
lament with tears as a prisoner to pensiveness, which fashion you used when
you were here abiding: I am sorry, because you are grieved, and I can not
rejoice except you were merry. Yet I cannot but accuse your effeminacie and
womanlike disposition, if you give us leave frankly to utter what we think.
Will not you; having so eleare and sharp a sight in the contemplation of
things hid and secret, view and behold that which is sensible and manifest?
will you know this, that you consume and waste your self with continual
complaints, and all to no purpose* will you not understand that your sorrows
are doubled, which your wisdom requires to have somewhat assuaged? And if by
persuading we prevail not, but see our labor lost, we be take us to praying,
and use ways of intreatance, beseeching you, that if you will do any thing in
the world for our sake, shake off this yoke of anguishe, cast away sorrow, and
return, either to live with us among all your acquaintance, Either live among
us, as you were wont or at least live merrily alone.
in our common conversation: or else in solitariness to your private
contentation. My desire is not to dull you, if I can not delight you: but I
would gladly drive you from your purpose, least therein you continue: for so
much as these two contrary effects torment me mightily: in the one of which, I
wish, that of you my will be regarded, or else in the other that you be not
offended.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Lucceio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He answers to Lucceius demasiding the cause of his absence from Rome, and
she weth sundry reasons why he is so grieved, and why he is loath to lead his
life in the city.

ALl your love is a^arant and manifest unto me by your last letters which you
sent me, and never a part or parcel thereof left vnoiscouered: which as unto me
it is not strange and unknown, so it is sweet and acceptable, I should say
pleasant and delectable, but that I may never recover that word again,
sithence I have lost it for ever; Not so much for the loss of the common
wealth, as either for the slaughter and death of his friends, or else for their
absence in foreign places, for some became hard har ted that they might not
return into their country which was quite spoiled of liberty.
not for that one occasion which you have in suspicion, and conjecture, and
wherein, (though your words be mylde, gentle, friendly, and favorable,) yet in
deed you accuse me sharply: but rather, because those remedies which ought to
heal my launced flesh, and to draw a skin over my wound, are to be counted
no remedies. For what shall I say? should I flee for, succor to my friends?
how many be there of them? we have had of them, almost in every corner: but
now some are dead, othersome are fled, and so hardened, I know not by what
means, that they care not for their conntrie. Feign would I lead my life with
you, it is the thing which I chiefly desire: old acquaintance, unfeigned love,
hearty goodwill, semblable behavior, and equality in studies will have it so.
What thing is wanting in our friendship? may we live together? I know no cause
certainly that should be the impediment: But undoubtedly hitherto we have been
in sunder, though we were neighbors in Tusculano, and Puteolano. For what
should I say? can we be together in the city? where, for so much as place of
plea is common, fellowship is not required: But this our age, I wot not by what
e^ill chance, is fallen into such stormy and tempestuous times, that when w^
ought most of all to have ^ourished, even the, a^as, to be alive, we were
thoroughly ^amed. For (...) ^uge might re^ine to me, after I (...) stripped naked
of all mine ornaments The death of his daughter moves him to write in this
complaining order.
and pleasures both private and (...)* only y^ letter^ and epistles which
passed daily too and fro my hands: for what else (alas) (...) I do? And yet
they, wherein I thought my comfort to have consisted, I cannot tell how (...)
after what sort* (...) now to shut me out of the castle of consolation, and as
it were bitterly Because as they hate filthy things and indecent: so they
esteem servitude most vil^.
vpp^aide me, because I continue in that life; in the which there is nothing
else to be hoped for, but a pitilesse prolonging of a time most miserable. And
you marvel not a little, as you say, in that I absent me self from that
city, wherein mine own house does not delight me, wherein I have the state
of thief times in great detestation, persons and places in contempt, court and
counsel in no countenance: finally, what do I not abhore? Wherefore, my use of
letters is such, wherein I impart every portion of time, not that they are a
perpetual plaster unto me to salve up mine incurable sores, but that by them
I obtain a little forgetfulness of my sorrows. And if it had been ours
gracious fortune, to have brought that to effect, where of neither you nor I
did so much as once think, by reason of the daily terrors and fears wherewith
we were molested: After the Pharsalian co^ flict. For by and by after returned
Cicero into Italy.
we had been always together, and never in sunder, neither should I have had
oc^asion to be offended at your prosperity: nor yet you to be so disquieted
at my heaviness. Which thing (mutual society and (...) I mean) let us, to
the uttermost of our ability, en^euour to attain. For what is there, then
that, more (...) for us, more meet, and c^nuenient. It shall not be long
therefore er^ I see you.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Titio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He comfort his friend* taking the death of his children gricuously.

ALthough I among all men am most unmeet to minister consolation unto you, The
com^unicating and partakinge of sorrow, is a co^ solation. For both of them
were touched with the common wealths miseries, and Titius also be sides had
cause of private sor row.
for that the grief which I conceived by your heuinesse was so great, that I
me self stood* in (...) of a comforter: yet not withstanding, for so much as
my sorrow^ was not so near the b^nckes of bitter lamen^ation and mourning, as
yours: I thought it a point of faithful friendship, and a taken of singular
(...), not to keep silence over long in this your anguish, but to send you s^
succor, and sma^ consolation, which n^ght ease you a little of the burden of
your care, if it did not altogether ^ealt ^ou o^ your grie^e. The consolation,
which I give you is (...) (...) mon, and so common is it, that, me thinks we
ough^ to hau^ it always in our vtterau^ce, and never to let it ^ip out of our
memories, It is extreme folly not to be ruled by an universal law.
That we be not unmindful of our mortal condition, that we are bredd and
borne under the rule of that law, which has appointed the lives of all men to
the sufferance of fortunes wou^ding weapons^ and that w^ ought no^ to kick up
the heel, as repining to live in that state, whereunto by birth we were
ordained* neither to take those chances, which can be prevented by no policy,
nor counsel, too heuily: Because many as well as he have lost their children.
but by calling the miffortunes of many other men to our remembrance, learn
and understand, that whatsoever falls upon us* is not new and strange, but
has happened oftentimes before. Howbeit, neither these, nor thos^ co^solations
whatsoever, wherewith wiseme^ hold themselue^ well contented, and which are not
only committed to memory, but written also in books the longer to continue,
ought not to seem so preualent and effectual, as the veri^ Which is most
lamenta ble, in so much that a wise man can find no pleasure in hi^ life.
state it self of our city, and the great unquietness of these accursed
days* insomuch that I must needs pronounce them most happy and fortunate,
which never begat children, and them less wretched (...) mis^rable, which have
lost them in these times of tumults and ^roubles: the^ if they had lost the in
the flourishing estate of a good common wealth, or when th^re had As though
there had be^ no common (...) we^lth ^t (...) time.
been any common wealth at all. And if your affection be forceable* or if the
(...) * thin^ing of your matters make you to mour^e * (...) ^ ^uppose that al
your sor^ow ca^no^ with such ^cilitie be (...) bu^ that (...) sparkles will
remain. But if that thin^ mo^e yo^, which i^ an argument of natural love that
you (...) the miseries of them which have made an exchange of life with death: to
make no word^ o^ that which I have oftentimes nead, and not (...) (...), what
har^e can there be in death? which if it (...) not se^selesse* might much
rather be (...) (...) then (...)* (...) like wise so e^eemed* and though it
lack sens^ (...) thought a^ ^nimie to life, yet ought not y^ to be accompt^d
^iserie; which is not fealt, suffered, nor perceived: and thus much more*
without waue^ing* dare I ^ffirme and approve, so ^eat t^ be the (...) which
(...), and (...) to f^ll ^ppon the co^monwe^lth, that whosoever from them is
(...), y^ man in mine opinion, is never a whit (...). F^, what place is left
now for ^enestie? where lo^geth goodnes^* who intertayneth virtue* in what
haven lie honest exercises at anchor? where are ^ood arts and sciences
ha^boured? nay* is not lib^rtie dispossessed, and safety spo^led of her
inheritance* I have not (of truth I swear) heard of any youth, or child,
dying this year most perilous and satal, which s^emeth not to me in high
favor with the eternal gods, in that they were set free from the fetters of
these afflictions, and let loose out of y^ prison of this unlucky lif^.
Wherefore if this cogitation may be utterly rooted out of your mind, For so much
as theyare not utterly deprived of this light and life, but that they have
escaped the miseriesof these dangerous days.
that they who^ you have entirely loved, sustain annoyaunce: then you shall
perceive, the greatest part of your heaviness diminished, and your heart
more flexible to be recomforted. For that simple care been induced, i^ I had
perceived that those things which you sustained, were so far from being of
you dissalowed, that they were well liked off and approved. But when I
considered, what your meaning was, then I supposed, that you saw very wisely
what you were able to compass. Now y^ state of all things is otherwise, your
judgment is at liberty, you are appointed to the office of a Consul, in your
best and brauest age, in the pearl and flower of your eloquence, A reason of
the necessi^ic of the time.
and at such a time, as the common wealth labors in extreme skarsitie of
such men as you are. Now therefore (I beseech you by the Gods immortal) apply
your whoale study, care, and endeavor, in the attempting and accomplishin^ of
that thing, which may pu^chase to your name singular dignity, and also
incomparable glory: and surely there is no more but one course of well
governing the common wealth, which leads the direct path to honor and
nobleness, at this time specially, the weal pu^lique having been so sore
assaulted, afflicted, shaken, battered, beaten and bruised, by the space of so
many years. Thus much I was urged of mere goodwill to signify unto you by my
letters, not that I would seem to make you insufficient of counsel, and
therefore to stand in need of my precepts and admonitions, but to give a
testimonial of my harti^ goodwil toward you, wherwt I am inflamed. Out of
those books wherein precepts are given for the attainment of renown.
For I know this, that out of what springs I have drawn my water, out o^ y^
self same also, have you largely tasted. Wherefore to use a measure, thus much
I thought requisite to let you under stand, y^ I might rather declare unto you
the certainty of my benevolence, then make a vain show of my wisdom and
experience. In the mean season, whatsoever depends upon your worthiness
and honor, I will have a regard thereunto with no less singularity and
precisenes, then with carefulnes and discretion.

Fare you well.
Plancus to Cicero.
THE AROVMENT.
He thanketh Cicero, for his good exhor^ation tending to the desire of true
renown: and promises that he will be wholly in the power of the common wealth.

MOst acceptable was the letter that you sent me, which, as I understand, you
indicted upon certain conference had with Furnius. As for mine own person, I
bring an excuse o^ the time past, that I heard nothing of your journey, and as
little of your return, before I was certified by your own letter. For I
persuade me self in this wise, that I can pretermit no manner of ^uetie,
though it be with the least, but the same will redou^d to my great blame and
sore discredit. Wherefore to defend and maintain ^amiliaritie between us,
among many specialties, I find some of great efficatie, as the acquaintance
which you have had with my ancestors, y^ affection which you exhibited unto
me in my childhood* and the love which you have toward me* both professed and
confirmed. Wherefore (my Cicero) so far forth as my years and your age shall
suffer, be certainly persuaded, that you are he only, and none besides you, in
reuerencing of who^, I have determined to use no less sincerity and
obedience, then a son should afford to his father. Al your counsels, as they
are seasoned with precise wisdom and excellent judgment (both which in you do
flourish) so are they tempered with fidelity, truth, and faithfulness, I judge
of your mind as I judge of mine own, and by mincowne I measure yours.
which I measure and examine, as it were by weight, by mine own conscience.
Wherefore, if I should think otherwise (undoubtedly) your adm^nition might
co^troule me: or if I did call it in dubitation, your warning would enforce me
to follow y^ which seemed s^mply best in your opinion. What is there now that
can pull men wrong way? whatsoever commendable ornaments, and things garnished
with goodness, are reside^t in me, either bestowed through fortunes benefit, or
obtained by mine own labor and diligence, although you for affe^ions sake,
^steeme them of greater value, yet not wtstanding, in ye judgment of my most
enemy, they are set at such a high price of praise, that nothing seems
desirable, save the jewel Which peradventure I had not, though I did many
notable things, when Cae sar was in room of r^giment.
of honest report. Be resolved in mind, and in thought thus established, that
what I can encounter by power, foresee by counsel, procure by authority, al
and every portion thereof shall be referred to the profit of the commonwealth.
Your meaning is manifest unto me, and as for your admonitions, they shall be the
rule of my doings* neither will I at any time so far ouershoote me self,
that any thing of me attempted, shall deserve reprehension. I am in expectation
of all things, as desirous to know what is done in Where D. Brutus ^as L.
president.
Gallia province, as also to understand the state of By the new Consul^, who
entered into of fice in the K^. of January.
such matters as have been in hand this month of January in the City. In
the mean season, very great is my care which I suffer, where I do remain,
least these countries and people, among the faults of others, should suppose
our harms their occasion. To be brief, if my success be such, as I deserve:
then certainly, I will satisfy the minds, both of you, whom I wish specially
to content, and of all good men, least I make their affiaunce frustrate. Regard
your health, and love me as I love you.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Planco.
THE ARGUMENT.
In this Epistle he pricketh Plancus forward with the spurs of praise, not
only to take upon him* the charge of the common wealth, but also the defense
and preservation of the same.

I Received two several letters from you, tendinge to one effect, which was a
manifest argument of your diligence. For I perceived, that you were touched
with a certain desire, to have your letters, which I long looked for,
delivered to my hands. Out of which, after I had perused them, I reaped double
commodity and vauntage, very hard for me in conference to decide by
judgment: whether I should think your love toward my person, or your true
heart to the body of the common wealth, of greater account and estimation. The
love and affection of our country, in my judgment, is the greatest without
exception, but yet not withstanding, the knitting together of our wills
conteyneth more It is true: but yet not more love. for our country in that
respect is preferred be fore our parents and our children, ergo much more
before our friends.
sweetness: wherefore the commemoration of that benevolence, and reverence,
which you exhi^ited unto me as unto a father, even from your young years, and
the rehearsal of such things as served to a semblable purpose, increased in
my heart incredible delectation. Again, the declaring of your mind and study
to the commonwealths advantage, which you have already conceived, and
hereafter mean also to see continued, appeared unto me passing pleasant. And
so much the greater was this delight, how much the nearer it approached to the
above recited circumstances. Wherefore, my Plancus, I do not only exhort but
also beseech you, as I have done in that my letter, whereunto you sent me an
answer, that with all your heart, will, and des^re, with all your body,
strength and courage, you regard the estate of the weal public.

There is nothing in the world, whereby your commoditi^ may be more enlarged,
your glory amplif^ed, and praise published. Neither is any thing of such
excellency in the world universal, or of equal worthiness, then for a man to
behave himself in such order, as that he may deserve well of the common
wealth. For, such is your singular courtesy, and such is your wisdom, that I
am not restrained to utter unto you with liberty of speech, whatsoever I
think necessary. Fortune has so favored and furthered you, that the
passage to very great things, has been opened wide to you. And though the
attainement of such countenance, Be^se it seems that by the favor of Caesar
you obtained that which you have gotten.
without the assistaunce of virtue, were impossible: yet notwithstanding, what
soever you have aspired unto, y^ same is referred, for the most part, to the
goodness of Fortune, and ascribed to the state of time. What benefit soever the
commonwealth receives through you, in these troublesome seasons, and hard
world, it shall whoalie and solie redounde to your own dignity, and be
reputed proper to your own person. The hatred of al Citizens, (those villans
only, of whom you wott, excepted) is incredible against Anthony. In you is
great con^idence reposed, and on your army no small expectation depends. Now
take heed in any case, for the honor of all the Gods, that you loos^ no time
for Which you are like to win by taking upon you to de fend the common wealth
in danger.
your own ad^auncement and renown. I counsel you as a son, I favor you as
me self, and I exhort you, in our countries behalf, as a very friend.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Planco.
THE ARGUMENT.
He commends Plancus for his readiness and willing heart in succo^ring the
common wealth: and incourageth him to hope for most ample and honorable
rewards from the Senate for his labor: wherein he promises to take diligent
pains himself, and exhorts him, that as he has begone notably, so he
would proc^ede and continue manfully.

ALthough I understand by y^ mouth of Furnius, what your will was concerning
the common wealth, and what was your counsel: yet notwithstanding, after I had
viewed and examined your letters, the matter lay more open and manifest to my
judgment, so that I was thoroughly instructed in your meaning. Wherefore,
although the whoale state of the common wealth stands or falls in one
conflicte or battle, which, as I supposed, was Not only decreed upon, but
concluded and finished. Liu. lib. 28.
decided upon, when you were reading this letter: yet notwithstanding, the
very report of your will and toward mind, was so blased abroad, that thereby
you achieved great commendation. If we had had a For both the Consuls were
gone out to fight with Anthony, and therefore were absent from the City.
Consul at Rome, it should have been declared and testified to your special
praise and worthiness, by the assent of the Senate, how approueable your
enterprises were, and how acceptable your preparation. The time of which thing
is not only not paste, but is scarcely come, in mine opinion. For end, That
seems unto me to be true and not counterfect honor, which is bestowed and
employed upon noble men, not for hope of preferment hereafter, but for present
merits and deserts past. Wherefore, let there be any common wealth at all,
wherein honor may have power and ability to flourish, and trust me, it
shall be your lot and luck, to be advanced to the best, the chiefest, and the
greatest. And, That honor (to say truth) may of right be reputed honor,
which is not a For Plancus had but given a signification of his will: to the
intent, that if he had been advanced to honor, or received any in^igne of
worthiue^se, it might seem^ unto him an allurement or provocation to show prof^
of his prowes, rather then a reward for any not able deed by him performed.
temporal reward for further encouragement, but a perpetual recompense of
virtue and honesty* Wherefore (my Plancus) lay too all the might you can make,
to purchas^ praise, and to win worship: support your native country: be an
assistant to your fellow in o^fice: and refuse not to consent to ye incredible
conspiracy of al nations: in so doing, you shall both know and try that I am
a furtherer of your counsels, a ^auourer of your dignity, an assured friend
in all assayes, and a most faithful companion. For unto those causes wherewith
we are lincked in love one to another, as well in respect of courtesies, as in
consideration For we have known one another of a long continuance. Epist. 22
lib. 10.
of auncientnesses, the tender affection wherewith we are inflamed, is
coupled: and that is it, my Plancus, which has wrought this effect in me,
that I make more account of your life, then I do of mine own.

Fare you well. The 4. of the Calends of April.
Cicero to Trebonio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He is sorry, for that he was not accessarie and partener of the conspiracy
against Caesar's majesty: because Anthony suruiuing, does what he can to
work the mischief and detriment of the common wealth: finally, he declares
with what a desire of recovering hi^ liberty he is touched.

HOw desirous, and how feign would I, that you had bidden me as a guest, to
those delicates and iunckets in the Ides of March: Anthony had not the^ been
left alive. Epist. 12. lib. 10.
we would have had no fragments or broken scraps left. But now it is fallen out
unluckily, and we have sore a do about those relics, that the good which
you did in the behalf of the common wealth, has in it some occasion of
complaint. Because that from you, being so worthy a man, the benefit did
proceed that Meaning Anthony, to whom it was a benefit to live.
this great contagion and pestilence to the weal public, remains still
undestroyed: in so much that otherwhiles, I feel me self so disquieted, and
of patience dispossessed, that (a thing skarsely beseeming my person, and not
altogether tolerable) I am somewhat angry with you. For you have left a
greater burden of business for me (being but one) to bear, then to all the
re^t, me self only excepted. For so soon as the Senate might assemble, and
sit in consultation, after that When he went to Brundisiu^, to bring with
him the Macedonian power, to the City.
villainous departing of Anthony, I returned to mi^e old accustomed
determination, which you and your father also, an earnest and industrious
Citizen, always talked off, and heartily loved. For at what time, the Tribunes
of the people, had procured a convocation of the Senate, the 13. of the Kalends
of January, and caused another matter to be called in question, I embraced the
common wealth, and claspt it whoalie in my boosome, yea I behaved me self
courageously: and as for the Senate, whom I perceived in manner fainting and
weary, I revoked them to their ancient virtue, and former custom: howbeit,
not so much with the force of my wit, as with the valliauntnesse of my heart
and stoutnesse of mind. This day, my endeavor, my painefulnes, and my bui^e
styrring too and fro, has ministered to the common wealth, the first fruits of
hope concerning the recovery of liberty. Neither have I omitted any time,
after, either in being mindful of the weal public, or in laboring and
doing what I might for the benef^te of the same. All which premises touching
the affairs of the City, and other matters besides whatsoever, I would let
you understand by mine own letters, but that I am in opinion, that you are
otherwise certified and informed: although my For he could never be quiet by
the means of Anthony.
business be so weighty and importune, that I can obtain but little leisure:
nevertheless you can not but come to the knowledge of all things, by reason of
the recourse of other men's letters: that which you hear of me, shall be but
little, a few matters I mean to communicate unto you, which shall be comprised in
a short summarie. We have a valliaunte Senate, as for those which have been
insigned with the office of the C^nsulship, some of them are timorous and
fearful, othersome malicious and evil minded. We are greatly indamaged by y^
^osse of Who died: ^eade the 9. Philippie.
Seruius: L. Caesar is in a very good opinion: But, because Anthony is his
uncle on the mothers side, he is not ouersharpe and earnest, to give sentence
against him. Our Consuls are men of great gravity and excellency: D. Brutus
behaueth himself honorably: Caesar, Being but ninetene years of age. Vel
leius in his 2. lib. and Tacit, lib. 13.
the proper youth, is s^ngularly disposed: in whom I see good grounds of
comfortable hope, for that which remains: thus much be you well assured off,
and thoroughly certi^ed, that if he with all celeritie and speedy preparation,
Of his own private counsel, and proper expe^ces. Philippic. 3.
had not taken up, enrolled, and must^d an army of tried soldiers, being
such in deed as were not to be instructed in the feats and conueyaunces of
battle: and if two legions of Anthonies hoaste, had not left him, and
assembled themselves, to the others authority, whereby terror and fear were
as bridles to restrain him in his rigorous usage: In his return from
Brundisiu^, epi. 25. lib. 12. and Philippic. 3.
he would have let nothing escape him, though never so mischie^ous, though
never so cruel, bloody, and savage. These matters, notwithstanding you were
infourmed of them before, as I think no less, I was not unwilling to make
more manifest, and to lay wider open to your understanding. Other things there
be, whereof I will write unto you more largely, when I have obt^ined more
leisure.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Terentia his wife, Tulliola his daughter, and Cicero his son.
THE ARGV^ENT.
He excuses the brevity of his writing, commends the duetifulnes of Piso
his son in law toward him, bewaileth the state of Terentia, and wills her
to regard her own health.

Think This letter was made when Piso and Gabinius were Consuls.
not that I write longer letters to one or other, except they write largely
unto me, whereupon I must needs lengthen my lines, and use words more
liberally. Again, I have nothing whereof I should write: and if I had, yet, as
this present time and occasion chances, nothing is done of me with more
hardness. As for writing unto thee, Terentia, and to our daughter Tulliola,
Alas, I cannot do it without abundaunce of tears. For I see that you are most
miserable women, and my will always was to behold yo^ happy and for^unate:
which thing I was bound, of duty, to see accomplished, and had brought it to
perfection, if we had not been so timorous and fainthearted. The merits and
deserts of Piso my son in law, challenge singular love in my behalf, to
whom I cannot choose but show much kindness, whom I have advertised, as I
might, in your ^halfe by my letter, and heartily thanked, as in deed I ought*
You have good affiaunce* as I understand, in the new Tribunes of the people
lately created: that will be for your further confirmation, if Pompeius his will
be inclined according ly: But as for Crassus, I fear him notwithstanding. I
see that al things are done of youwith courage and kindness neither do I
greatly marvel: howbeit I am to lament your chau^c^ and overthwart luck,
which in deed is such, that my calamities seem nothing so many in comparison
of your great miseries. For P. Valerius a man full of courtesy, and appliaunt
to do his friend a pleasure, wrote unto me, that which I could not read
without unmeasurable weepinge* For that is the mening of these words, a Vestae
ad Tabula^ Valeria^: by the judgment of a lear ned man now liueing* whose
authority is grounded upon certain monumentes to be seen yet, in Italy.
how you were led from court to court, from magistrate to magistrate, from
officer to officer, from law to law. Alas, my life, alas my joy and only
delight, that thou should suffer such vexation, that we (I say) my sweet
wife Terentia, from whom, al were wont as from a fountain, to fette their aid
and succor, should be thus imprisoned inperplexities of ne^sifenes, and
swallowed up in surgeinge seas of sorrow.

Concerning that which you write of our house, that is to say, of our plain
plot lying in the city: Thus much I say by way of resolution, that then I
shall think me self restoared* when that is recovered. But (^las) these
things are not in our own hands. It greeueth me also, that whatsoever costs
and charges are required, thou must ^e are a portion thereof, although thou
be brought to extreme misery, and feel lack and loss, procured by
spightfull spoilers. And if so be, that the matter may be finished and
dispatched, all things shall fall into our possession. But if the self same
fortune forment us still without immutation, which at this instant^ does
afflict us, will you be so unwise, as to castaway the remayner of that which
you have; considering your present adversity? I pray thee heartily, my life,
let them that may best, stand to expenses, if they be so pleased: and have a
consideration of pour Yet did Terentia live above a hundred years as Plinic
reports. 7. lib. cap. 48.
own health, which is much infeebled, if you love me your Cicero. For you are
both day and night before mine eyes, and continually represented to my
cogitation. I see thou refusest no kind of labor, but offerest thee self to
the susteyning of all whatsoever. I see nothing lacking in thee. Wherefore, to
the intent that we may obtain that, wheruppon your hope is fixed, and your
pains also employed, neglect not your own health. I know not unto whom I
should write, except to them only, who visit me with their letters: or else,
to such as you name in your Epistles, when occasion is ministered. Further then
I am, I mean not to travel, because where I am, does not discontent you: h^
w^eit my desire is* that you write often, speci^lly* if in that whereof we
hope, any a^suraunce be graun^

Farewell my joys, farewell. Dated at Thessalonica, the third of the Nones of
October.
Caecina to Cicero.
THE ARGUMENT.
First he entreats of his book, which ^ee made upon Caesar: and after
men^ion thereof sufficiently made, he desires Cicero to be a mediatou^ unto
Caesar, that he may obtain leave and liberty to return.

IN that This book was written in the praise of Caesar, as the other (whereof
he confesses himself to have felt the smarte) was written to his contume
lie and reproach.
my book was somewhat long before it came to your hands, ascribe it, (I pay
you) to our timorousness and fear: and be moved also with compassion of the
time present. Your son (as I heard) was not in quiet mind^, (and good
reason why) if it had been published and made common abroad: for so much as it
is not so precisely pondered, nor so advisedly regarded, with what disposition
of mind it was written and compiled: as how it is taken and received, least
that thing be a cause of my further annoyaunce: who as yet feel the smart and
punishment of my former invention and phrase of inditing: wherein I have such
luck and destiny, as no man besides. For whereas a fault in writing is
dashed out with a race of the pen, and penalty of foolishnes is an evil
report: mine offense and error is rewarded with banishment, and exile is my
correction: the sum of whose trespass is this, because I being armed, gave
language to mine adversary, much missliked. There is never a one of us, in
mine opinion, but would wish the victory to chance to his own side: yea,
and that more is, when they were sacrificing to the Gods, and busy in holy
ceremo^ies, would even then power out their p^titions, that Caesar, with all
possible speed, might take y^ overthrow. And whosoever did not meditate and
think upon this, happy is he, and in all points most fortunate. If Meaning
Caelar.
he know this, and therein be persuaded, why should he take stomache and
(...) against him, that wrote a thing against his will, seeing that he has
vouchsafed to pardon and forgive all such as made supplication to the Gods, and
exhibited unto them much ve^eration, against the ^ife and ^afegard of his
person. But to make return thither, where I begone: this was the occas^on of
my conceived fear. I wrote of you (by my credit and honesty) sparingly, and
timorously, not as taking courage and heart at grass, but as renouncing and
forsaking me self. What man is ignorant that this method and order of
inditing or writing, should be free and liberal, vehement and patheticall,
lofty and hystoricall? That is supposed a loose kind of writing, to talk of
any man irreverently, for therein is lewdness discovered: and that is tangled,
when a man speaks all to his own^ praise and popularitie, for then will
follow suspicio^ of arrogancy. That is the free and ^iberall kind of
writing, to sound another man's commendation, from the which to withdraw and
diminishe never so ^itle, it is to be imputed to inf^rmitie and weakene^e: or
else, to be ascribed to envy and maliciousness. And ^ cannot tell, whether
my labor will seem acceptable unto you, and approuable in your judgment.
For that which I was not able to comprehend and perform, I thought good,
first not to touch, secondly to be parciall of my pen, and to do that I did,
not over largely. Howbeit In that part of his book wherein he does commend
Cicero.
I stayed up my self as well as I might: many things I impaired: many things
I omitted: and many things were not so much as once mentioned. As therefore it
is seen in the climing steps and staves of long ladders, if some be taken
away, some cut off and broken, other some left loose and vnfastened, it is made
an instrument of falling down, rather then of going up: even so, a desire of
writing, encountered with many misfortunes, and as it were torn to tatters
with a thousand tempests of troubles, what thing can it affoorde, either in
hearing delectable, or in judgment probable? When I came to the noble name of
Caesar, all my joints quaked, and I trembled sore for fear, not for any
terror of punishment, Because he was doubtful how Caesar would take his
doings, well or ill.
but for the uncertainty of his opinion: for I am not so well acquainted with
him, that I should know his whole disposition. In what wavering is my mind,
suppose you, in what a maze of mistrust is my conscience, when it reasons
with it self in this form and order? This will Caesar allow: This word
offers cause of suspicion: what if I change it? But I dout in so doing I
shall set down a worsse. Go to then, do I praise any? is that an offense?
admit it be so taken, what if he will not allow the commendation. Or, he
writes to me with weapon in hand: Or, he writethe like a warrior fiercely
to his onimie.
He detesteth the style and order of writing of his enemy, armed to resist his
power: what then will he do to him that is vanquished, overcome, and as yet
not restored? My fearfulness also I feel augmented, when I fall in
consideration of you, who in your Orator use circumspection and cautions for
your private supportance by Brutus, and seek a fellow for your excusation.
Which thing, for so much as the patron and defender of al m^ in all cases,
vouchsa^eth to do: what ought I, your ancient client, to think in such a case
of my self? In this repro^h (...) of (...), and this torment of blind
suspicion, (...) many things are written to the conjecture of a contrary
sens^, and not after the interpretation of his judgment, albeit he follow an
oblique and crooked opinion, how hard a matter it is for the writer to frame
him self to a contentation, we are not ignorant, and you also, whom
excellency of wit has both armed and abled, have notable e^perieuce. Howbeit,
I said thus much to my son, tha^ be might read over the book* unto you,
and so bring it away again, or else deliver it to your self upon this
condition, that you made promise to add thereunto your corrections, that is,
if you would translate this and that, and make it all otherwise. As touching
our voyage into Asia* although we felt the burden of necessity pr^ssing down
our shoulders, yet have we done according to your commandment. And now,
whereunto should I exhort you for my sake? you see the time is come, wherein
somewhat must be decreed and concluded upon in our behalf. There remains
nothing, my Cicero, why you should labor in expectation of my son: he is
but a springall, his vehement affection wherein he now trauelleth, his young
years wherein he is entered, and the fear wherewith he is molested, are such
hindera^ces unto his mind, that he can not excogitate and devise all things to
the uttermost. So that the weight of the whole matter, must needs rest upon
your own neck: all my affiaunce is fixed on you. Such is your wisdom,
prudence, and experience, that you know of a certainty, with what things
Caesar is pacified contented, and pleased. So that from your providence all
things must proceed, and have their issue, and by your discretien they must be
accomplished: for otherwise there remains no remedy. Much may you do with
his own person so great is his favor: and very much can you obtain of his
friends, so good is your credit: and to thi^ ^ne thing shall you join
performance, if you could be thus persuaded, that in request rests duty,
(although it ^e a great matter and of much weight) and that the case, wherein
your aid is craved, is your own: except, peradventure, I put you to this
pain, either by too much foolishness in this my For such as be in misery may
scarce use such boldness.
misery, or else by too much shamelessness in our Because old acquaintance
presumes very fa^e.
ancient friendship. But the custom of your life is such, that it excuses
both my supposed presumption^. For, s^thence your use has always been, to
set light by your labor in your friends behalf and furtheraunce: now they
are, not in hope only that you will do the like, but charge you also with a
commandment. Concerning the book which my son shall give you, my request
unto you, is, that it may not be published: or that you would so correct it,
that I thereby be not indaungered.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Thoranio.
THE ARGUMENT.
To comfort Thoranius, he gathers arguments from circumstaunces past, and
sets him self down for a president or pattern to be followed.

ALthough, at the writing of this letter, the end of this most miserable
battle seemed to approach, or that somewhat therein was done and already
dispatched: yet notwithstanding, I called to my remembrance, that only you
among the rest, in so huge an hoaste, gave me your assent, and I again with
you was not at disagreement: and that we twain alone did beho^de and see, what
mischief and inconvenience was in that war, in the which, peace being
excluded and di^possessed of place, the victory it self would prove most
bitter and cruel: which, if you had been conquered, had wrought your utter
destruction, or if you had triumphed, had brought you Because of the malape^
arrogancy of Pompeius his accomplices.
in slaueishe subjection. Wherefore I, whom men, both of courage and wisdom,
reported to be When I preferred most wrongful peace, before most rightful
war.
timorous and fearful, Domitus I mean and Lentulus, (I was so indeed:
fearing least those things should chance* which afterward came to pass)
am nothing so affected, but rather courageous, and ready furnished against all
manner of misfortunes. When any thing appeared unto me in possibility of
prevention and auoydance, then it grieved me at the heart, if it were
neglected. But now, that all things are turned vpside down, sithence
counsel could not prevail, one refuge yet remains, that is, patiently to
suffer what so ever luck allotteth: principally for this cause, sithence of
all things whatsoever, death i^ the conclusion: and of this I am fully
persuaded in conscience, that so long as I might, I tendered the dignity of
the common wealth, and when that suffered shipwreck, my will wanted not to
provide for the safety of the same. Thus much have I written, not to give
evidence of my self: but that you, who in mind, heart, will, consent, and
judgment, are al one with me, should none otherwise conceive. For it is the
most sovereign comfort in the world, that a man call to memory his upright
and just conscience, notwithstanding the success of things be not answerable.
And I would to God, that time might once chance, wherein we might see and
enjoy one or other state of a weal public, and that we twain might meet
and confer of our di^ers distresses, which even then we sustained, when we
were thought faintharted, because we did prognosticate and foretell that the
self same things which are come to pass, should chance in tract of time. As
for you, and yours whatsoever, I assure you of this, that there is nothing
whereof you should stand in fear, otherwise then chances to the whole body
of the common wealth. And as for me, so think of me, and so take me, that to
the uttermost of my might, I am your present friend, both for the safety of
your self, and your children, withal my heart.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Domitio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He desiereth Domitius lamenting the death of his ^riendes, to have
consideration of his own estate, sithence the common wealth is not unsatisfied.

MY will was not withdrawn from writing unto you, after your coming into
Italy, because I received no letters from you, but because I my self being
destitute of al things, had nothing left whereof to make you promise^ neither
was I able in such lack of counsel to deal with you by way of persuasion,
nor yet to minister unto you (...) of comfort, in so great and manifold e
miseries. Although these things are never a whit the better, but so much the
worsse that they are mere desperate: yet had I rather that my letters should
stand void and waste, then not to write at all. If I did understand that you
took upon you a greater charge in the behalf of the common wealth, then you
are able to compass and perform: yet notwithstanding, I would counsel you by
all the circumstances that I might, to that condition of living which should be
offered and allotted. As though the battle fought at Pharsalia were his whole
port and countenance by the will of fortune
But seeing you make that the scope and end of your good determination, and
valliaunt attempt, which Fortune her self has appointed to be the limittes
and bounds of all our labors and enterprises: I request you, I desire you, I
pray you, and heartily beseech you for our old familiarities sake, and
ancient acquaintance, and for the great good will which I bear you, and you
likewise me in equal proportion and measure of faithful friendship, that you
will not neglect the sa^egarde o^ your own^ life, which we wish to be prolonged
for our comfort, the joy of your parents, your wife, and all yours whosoever,
to whom you are at this present, and always have been, best beloved: let your
mind be touched with due consideration toward your own health, and the
health of all such as depend upon you, taking you for their supporter, and
principal proppe of their preservation. Use the benefit of those things, at
this instant, which you have learned in times past, and wherein you have, from
your young years, been trained and instructed, by men of singular knowledge,
learning, wisdom and judgment: which also you have imprinted in the tables of
your remembrance, and engraven in the plates of your deep understanding. For
end, satisfy the desires of those your special ^riends, whom entier love has
lincked, and many ^old testimonies of courtesies have knit close unto you, For
we can not chose but be grieved: nevertheless we can overcome our grief by
valliantnes^e.
if not with a willing and toward, yet with a courageous heart, and a stout
stomach. As for my self, I wot not what I may do, or rather I perceive that I
can not (...) much: nenerthelesse, thus far will I (...) in promise, that
whatsoever I (...) (...) (...), and convenient, both for your safety, and also
for your dignity, shall be labored in, with as much carfulness and diligence on
my behalf, as ever you employed in the furtherance of my matters. Of this my
will, leaning wholly upon you, I have made report to your mother, a notable
Gentlewoman (no dout) and such a one as loves you exceedingly. If you write
unto me touching any thing* I will therein bestow mine endeavor: as I shall know
it best agreeable to your desire: and though you write but little: yet
notwithstanding, whatsoever in mine opinion shall be necessary and expedient
for you, my travel therein shall not be neglected, nor my diligence denied.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Cassio.
THE ARGUMENT.
In this Epistle he inueyeth against Anthony, and his confederates.

YOur friend Anthony, kindles coals offurious outrage continually, and
makes no intermission. First he has caused this title to be written in the
standing image which he has set in y^ Oratorie pulpit. PARENTI OPTIME MERITO.
To the best deserving father of his country: so that you are not only judged
manquellers, but also murderers of your affinity: what say I, that you are so
judged? nay rather that we are so termed: For that mad beast avouches, that
I was the Prince and ringleader of that your noble and commendable deed.
Brutus and Cassius did not communicate their counsel in kill li^g Caesar, with
Cicero. Plutarch.
I would to God my fortune had been so happy: then had not he been so
combersome unto us. But it was your deed, full of manhood and prowess: in
which, for so much as it is past, I would I were able to give you any
counsel. But. I can not devise, what I may do for myself. For, what other
remedy does remain, but that force fight against force* and violence struggle
with violence? Thi^ is the purpose and meaning of them all, in general: not to
stay, till they have procured the slaughter of Caesar. Wherefore* he being
brought into a solemn assembly and convent by A Tribune of the people, who wa^
after wards slain of Octauian.
Canutius, before the sixte day of the Nones of October, departed away very
cowardly and filthily: howbeit ^e uttered those things, concerning the
defenders and preseruers of their country, which should have been applied to
traitors and rebels of the common wealth. And touching me, he spoke not very
doubtfully, when he said, that whatsoever you had attempted, or Canutus put in
practice, issued altogether from my counsel and procurement. Now by this
little crop, judge you of the whole lump, and how they are intended in other
cases, suppose you by this cir^umsta^ce, in y^ they spoiled and robbed your
embasador of his purueyance. What, think you, is their meaning, when they
venture so far? and spare not to set a broche such an enterprise? To be
carried to a sworn enemy: O extreme misery. We could not abide to have a
Lord rule over us, and we are in subjection to a fellow servant. Howbeit, hope
rests in your Of tentimes testified, but specially against the Pa^ thians.
puisaunce and nobleness, even now, whereof I travel in affection, rather then
in confidence. But where be your soldiers? As touching that which remains, I
would have you confer with your own conscience, and not to seek so much
after the knowledge of our sayings.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Trebatio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He seems to commend Trebatius, a^ a wise man, whiles he did avoid the
inconveniences of war. But in deed he notes him for a timorous coward.
Somewhat he writes of Octauius, and of Trebatius his riches, and hautinesse,
pleasantly

IN the conclusion of the tragedy, called THE TROYAN HORSE, you know this
sentence is usurped, Sero sapiunt, Wise with had I wist. But you, old suersbee
Because your desire is to meddle with war in no case, wherein you show your
self a wisema^.
are not wise too late. First I have to signify unto you, that I received your
letters, which sauoured somewhat of madness, and also of folly. Furthermore,
in that you show not your self very desierous to see Britannie, I reprove not
your wisdom. And now me thinks, you are at ease in your Inn, and therefore
you pass not how little you be combred. To be circumspect and wise in all
respects, is a well whetted weapon. I^ I used to suppe often abroad, I would
never be out of the company o^ Cne. Octauius, your familiar (...), unto whom,
when he has bidden me as a guest to take part of his cheer, I have cast out
this language, He notes the baseness of the man.
I pray, Sir, who are you? but (by my faith and honesty) to speak in good
sadness. The man is very pleasant and honest. I would you had brought him
away with you. Let me be fully certified what you do, and whether it be your
determination to come to Itali^ this Winter, or no. Balbus infourm^d me of a
certainty, that you were like to prove very rich and wealthy. But whither his
meaning was after the Roman manner, or after the Stoicall sort Or, that may
use and enjoy the ple sures and profits of heaven and (...).
(who hold opinion that he is well monied and full of substance, that enjoys
the benefits of heaven and earth) hereafter I shall have trial. Such as come
hither, from the place where you abide, accuse you of pride and hautinesse,
because you will not vouchsafe to make them answer that crave your counsel.
Nevertheless, you have occasion to be glad. For it is commonly known among
all men, that there is not a more cunning and skillful lawyer then you in
Samarobrina.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Cornificio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He excuses him self for seldom writing* commends the p^dence, wisdom,
gravity, and soberness of Cornificius: accuses the present state of the
common wealth, with a purgation in Caesar's behalf.

TO that which was the last point and conclusion in your Epistle, I answer
first, and make it the beginning of my letter. For I have marked and observed,
that you great Rhetoricians and famous Orators, usurp the same order
otherwhiles. You require my letters, which I never failed to send, whensoever I
was informed of any that made passage that way. In that I gather by the scope
of your letters, that you will not attempt, nor determine upon any thing of a
certainty, before you had understanding, how far forth that fellow (I wot
not what he is) Caerilius Bassus would presume: my hope and confidence inclined
that way, by reason of your policy which put me in comfort, and the gravity
of your style in writing, which discharged me of despair. My earnest request
unto you, is, that you would write as often as may be, to the intent that I may
be resolved what you do, and what other do, and also what you are purposed
hereafter to take in hand. And, although I was sorry at my heart for your
departing from me: yet notwithstanding I restored my self with consolation at
the same instant, both because I thought thus in my mind: He shall go where he
shall be at peace, quietness, rest and tranquillity, and shall be delivered
from matters of great importance, which desire present attendaunce: albeit the
contrary chanced, in both respects. For there, where you be, war and tumult^
(...) (...) here where I am, peace began to flourish, but such a kind of
peace, wherein if you had been conversant, many things would not have been to your
liking, and yet the self same wherewith Caesar him self, is not well pleased.
But such be the ends of civil wars and commotions, that those things only,
which the conqueror would, are not accomplished: but that their desi^rs also,
by whose help the victory was obtained, must be satisfied. I am so confirmed
in mind, and, as it were, so hardened, that I was well contented to be a
beholder of Plancus But sa whom Caesar restored.
Plancus, and a hearer of Laberius and Publius their poesies in Caesar's shows
and pageants. Know you thus much, that I stand in need of nothing so much, as
I do of one with whom I may have familiar communication, and learned laughter:
and you shall be the man, if you come quickly, which that you do, I think for
me profitable, and for your self not incommodious.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Culleolo.
THE ARGUMENT.
He gives thanks in his own and Pompeius name, for the great c^tesie showed
to (...), and commends him upon occasion.

Whatsoever you have done in L. Lucceius his behalf, I would have you well
assured, is done to the com^oditie and furtheraunce of a well disposed person,
and such a one whom insolence can not make unthankful: yea, that which you
have done I my self account worthy acceptance and recourse of duty: besides
that, Pompeius, so often as he sets eye on me, (which is not seldom) gives
you singular thanks. Thus much more also I add, whereof, I am certain you will
conceive principal pleasure, that by your benignity and friendly usage toward
Lucceius, I felt my self very joyfully affected. Now to that which remains,
although I mistrust not, but you will continue in the self same your
accustomed liberality, at this time for your own constan^ie, as heretofore
for my sake: yet notwithstanding, mine earnest request unto you, is, that what
so ever you have showed in the beginning, and have also endeavored to proceed,
you would employ your will and labor, that to the end if may be augme^ted,
increased, and enlarged. Which if you do, both Luc ceius and Pompeius shall
well accept your courtesse, and you shall leave with them a principal pledge of
your merits, thus much I avouch and do able. Touching the common wealth, of
these matters, and our meaning, I wrote unto you diligently, a few days
agone, and those letters delivered I to your servants.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Ampio Balbo.
THE ARGUMENT.
He signifies in writing, with what ^re he is touched, toward the safety of
Ampius being in exile and banishment: whom he^ comfort, and commands to
rest in hope.

COncerning It is peradue^ ture the same A. Bal. to who^ he writes in the 3.
Epi. li. 1. and 13. Epi. li. 6.
the care which I conceive for your preservation and safeguard, the letters of
diverse of your friends have given you information: whom I have satisfied to
the uttermost, as I am well assured. Neither do I give ground unto them, as
though there were imperfections in my frendshippe, albeit their benevolence
toward you be singular, that therefore they are more desierous of your
safety and welfare then I. But they must, of necessity, give place unto me,
as one more able to do you a pleasure, at this present then they. Which thing
I have not neglected to do in your behalf, neither will I fail to be your
furtherer, and I have done so already, in a matter of great importance,
having a regard to lay the foundation and groundworke of your safety and
life. See that you be of good courage, and of a valliaunt spirit, making due
account of my help and assistance in all things whatsoever. The day before the
Nones of Iulie.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Torquato.
THE ARGUMENT.
He comfort Torquatus, who stacke to Pompeius his side, in this, because he
was not at Rome: and minist^eth unto him some hope of return.

Although He comfort him by the common condition of all men.
such be the present troubls and turmoyles, that nothing is left in just
square, but every man repents him of his state and condition: and that there
is none which had not rather be any where else, then where he now is resident
and abiding: yet doubt not I, but that to a good and an honest man, it would be
most wretched and lamentable to be in Rome, at this present* For, though in
what place soever a man remain, the sorrow and grief is al one which
springs from the ruin and overthrow of things Touching a man's own self,
and his native contry.
private and public: yet do the eyes, in beholding desolate disorder and
confusson, kindle the more anguishe, which see and view those things, that
others hear by report, in so much that they can not, for their lives, but
suffer the bloody butcherie of miserable cogitations. Wherefore, although you
sustain the sting of man^ a vehement desire, as it is needful: yet would I
have you to exonerate and unload your mind of that sorrow, wherewith I
hear* you are most consumed, that is, because you are absent from the city of
Rome. For although you are touched with an earnest affection to see your
friends and your goods: yet, those things, which so ardently you require,
continue in their own state: neither could they wax better if you were
present, neither in peril to be worsse, now that you are absent. You ought
not, when your mind is occupied in the (...) of you^ private matters, to crave
^ome several and singular condition of countenance, or refuse to take part of
that fortune which is common to many. And as for your own person* my
Torquatus, such ought your thoughts and cogitations to be, that desperation
engender no impediment, nor timorousness^ any hinderance to your consultations
and purposes. For neither he, which showed him self against you more unjust and
injurious, then your dignity deserved, has given you any great signs and
tokens of a spirit not appeased: neither is he fully resolved touching your
safety, of whom safety by petition is desired. And for so much as, The
event, success, and end of war, is uncertain: the victory on the *From the
person of Caesar.
one side, so far as I see, can not be to your prejudice and annoyance,
because it inclines not to the destruction of any: and From the person of
(...).
as for the victory on the other ^de, I am certainly persuaded, you your self
have not mistrusted nor ^eared. It remains, that one thing among all the
rest, much molest and vex you, which I count a kind of consolation, and that
is the hassar^e o^ the whole common wealth, against which ^oule mischief and
inconuenie^ce, although many learned men make many words, I fear me no
soue^eine ^emedie can be found, save that only and alone, which is so great, as
there i^ in men's minds fortitude and courage, and in their hands valliantnesse
and strength. For i^ so be that, To think well, and do no worsse, be mean^
sufficient to attain a blessed life, then is it a false and wrong full speech
(in mine opinion and fantas^e) to say, that such a man is miserable, whom
conscience for his wise (...) and vertuou^ purposes, st^dfastly suppor^.

Neither did we (a^ I think) being led with the rewards o^ victory, leave
our count^ey in tynie^ paste, our children, kindred, and all that we were
worth: But A good man does nothing upon hope, but follows his duty.
a certain duty o^ (...), p^etie, reverence, and love, due and payable to
the weal p^blique, and not imp^rtinent to o^r dignity and (...): whose minds
were not so robbed of reason, and subject to madness, when we did as we did,
but the e^ent of the victory was manifest unto us.

Wherefore, if that be come to pass, whithe we counte^ likely for to chance,
at the very entrance into our cause: we ^ught not to be faintharted now and
fall into diffidence, as though some thing which we thought impossible to be
done had ^appened. Let us therefore be of that persuasion and judgment, which
reason prescribes, and truth deciphereth that Whatsoever we attempt in the
course of our life, blame may be avoided: which if we do want, we may suffer
all mutations and chaunges, incident to this mortality, with patience and
moderation. This talk of mine is uttered to this end, that we may fix our
hearts upon this firm foundation of comfort, that Virtue is of sufficient
ability to bear up her self, when all things else run to ruin, perish,
and come to naught. But if there be any state wher^in is community, you shall
not want it, Torquatus, whatsoever it be. As I was penning this letter unto
you, I remembered how you were wont to accuse my In Pompeius his cause.
desperate dealing, or rather my wavering and mistrusting mind, whom you
undertook to harten with your countenance, and with your a^thoritie to
encourage. At which time undoubtedly, I did not so much mislike our cause, as
I disal^wed ^ur ^ounsell. For I perceived that we were wise too late, in mak^g
resistance against that power, When we* made an (...) to Caesar of Gallia ^or
the space of five whole years.
which we long before had confirmed. And then I added moreover, that in
def^nce of ^pen right, and supp^ssing ofwrong, we took us to the spear, the
shield, and the sword, a^ for our counsels and authoriti^s they lay still
untouched. (...) did I prophes^e vp^n those things which came to pass, when I
said they wo^lde chance in time: But I did ^eare, least that should come to
pass, wherein was much likelyhoode, and which I saw very hu^tfull and
dangerous, if it grew to perfection: speci^lly, if I might Of Caesar^
victory.
promise that, with certainty to fall out herea^ter, which has some assured
success, if in that behal^e promise might be made. For in those things did we
most excel and prevail, which in open field are not broached, nor used: as
for war and weapons, we were far inferior in force, and also much weaker.
But let your mind be of the same disposition, I beseech* you, and take unto
you the like courageous stomache, as you thought it behooved me to testif^e in
time of necessity. These things have I written to that end and purpose,
because your friend Philargyrus reported unto me your whole estate, not
omitting any circumstaunce, with a most faithful and honest heart, as I
supposed, when I was inquisitiue to know your condition: adding moreover, that
you are wont sometimes, to be in subjection to vehement passions, and to show
your self racked with wonder^ull carfulness: which you ought not to do,
nor yet so much as once to mistrust and dout, for that your M^ning that in time
to come, he was in likelihood to come to great dignity and promotio^
harvest is in hope hereafter, in one common wealth or other: Or else, if the
state of the weal public be so sore assaulted, that it sustain, not only
ruin temporal, but also utter suppression: yet despair not you, either of
your state present, or o^ that which is to come: for your miseries shall not
surmount the miseries of the rest, but even as they are afflicted: so shall you
be molested. As for this time of perilous tumulte, wherein we live, the
inconveniences whereof consume the courage of us all, as it were a running
cancker, and keeps our minds in wavering suspension, you must su^fer without
heart grief, at least, with grief not drowned in extremity, but seasoned
with moderation and indifferency: because your conversation and course of
life, is in that Athens Epi. ^lib. 6.
city, where Lady Reason was not only borne and begotten, but also fed and
fostered: and a measurable trade of life, in like manner, maintained. Besides
that, you have Governor of Achaia. Epi. 4. lib. 4. and. Epi. 6. lib. 6.
Ser. S^lpicius for your comforter, whom you have always tendered with equal
proportion of kyndnesse, a^ your own self, whose good will is in a
readiness, and whose wisdom never unprepared, to instill sweet drops of
consolation, into your heart wounded with anguishe: whose authority if we had
not disanulled, nor reie^d his For he gave us counsel in no wise to intermedle
with civil war. Epi. 4. lib. 4.
aduisement, we had been rather in power of the gracious scepter, then under
force of the ravening sword: in the dominion of For in time of peace, the
Romans commonly did wear gounes
a long gownd^ magistrate, then in subi^ction to the vi^ory of an harn^ssed
warrior. But these things have been told with more tediousness, then
peradventure (...) r^quired. I have no friend in all the world, t^ whom I
owe more service and duty of courtesy, then unto your person: And as for
those Gentlemen, to whose goodness I am no less in debt, then you do
vnders^ande, the mischiefous chance of this bloody war, has devoured them
all, and by that means am I quite dispossessed. As for my present estate,
Namely, in no authority or estimation.
what I am, and of what account at this time. I am not ignorant. But For so
much as there is no man ^o ^ourged with calamities, that may not attempt
somewhat in his own ^ehalf, and take trial to the uttermost; i^ hi^ mind be
in^lined and proane to nothing else but unto that which he^ has in hand: I
would have you make full reckoning of al my counsel, of all my labor, of all my
love, and what so ever else is incident to honesty and faythfulnesse, not to
be yours only, but your children^ also, at Or, to be owing as due debt* and
demaundable: because he has made pro mise* to Torquatus to do something for
^im and hi^.
commandment and service.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Metello.
THE ARGUMENT.
He being in exill^ and banishment* craves the good will help and assistance
of Me^ellus, bearing at the same t^me the office of the honorable Con^ship.

THE letters o^ my brother (...), and of T^ Pom^ ponius my very friend, (...)
unto me such* great ^boundant hope, and plentiful confid^nce, that no less^
ay^ concerning me now in erile, then assistance in your P. Lentulus who was
earnest with the Senate for Ciceroqs restitution.
fellow officer seemed to consist. Wherefore putting off all procrastination
and delays, I sent my letters unto you, whereby, as my hard fortune and
unhappy luck required, I have both acknowledged the duty of one not
unthankful, and have, in consideration of the residue of the time, presumed to
crave your friendly furtheraunce. After this, not only the letters of my good
and loving favorers, but the report of diverse passingers, whose journey lay
through these quarters, signified unto me, your constant mind and
unchangeable affection. Which thing wrought in me such a conceit, and bred
such an imagination in my heart, that I durst not be so bold, as to molest
and trouble you with my needelesse Epistles. And now Quinctus my brother, sent
me the sum of that Oration tempered with Because Me^llus was his adversary
before.
much myldnesse, and marvelous clemency, which you in my behalf made in the
audience of the Senate with great solemnity, and he exemplified, that I might
not be ignorant: in perufing whereof, I felt such inward motions, and passions
of spirit, that I could not, but of mere compulsion, write somewhat to so good
a Gentleman: and I desire you earnestly, and beseech you humbly, so far
forth as your will may suffer, that you would rather tender my life and the
safety of your frientes, then withstand and resist me, to please the arrogant
cruelty of Meaning such as did aid Clodiu^: for in the: 4. book Ad Atticum,
and the 3. Epistle, this Metellus is called the bro there of Publius Clodius,
who was enemy to Ci^ro
person. You have vanquished and quite suppressed the rage of your own anger
and conceived hatred, for the benefit of the weal public: and will you be
drawn by other men's maliciousness, to bend and fortify your power, to the
annoyance of the common wealth? Now, if, of your clemency and goodness, you
will vouchsafe me your supportation and assistance, I protest unfeignedly, and
promise religiously, that I will be wholly in your jurisdiction and at
commandment. But if it be not permitted nor thought lawful, that either a The
Consul P. Lentulus, most willing to see to Cicero his safety.
magistrate rescue me, the Senate succo^r me, or the people (...) (...), (...)
of that (...) which has over come me and the common wealth^ I wish you to be
circumspect and well advised* least when you would so he that might have been
preserved, shall be sequ^stred from that commodity.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Antonio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He charge Anthony with dissoluteness in duty: casts in his dish the
ingratitude of his nature, and commends unto him a certain Gentleman named
Atticus.

ALthough my determination was, It is marvel that he would write to such a
governor whose usage in the province where he ruled wa^ saultie and blame
worthy: as Dio, Obsequens, in Epitome Liuiana report.
not only to use an intermission of writing, but also to stay my pen utterly
from in^iting letters unto your highness, (commendatorie Epistles excepted:)
not because I knew of certainty, that they were of force and virtue
sufficient with your person: but least I should offer suspicion to them, at
whose request I I refused not to write, somewhat to be derogated from our
familia^tie, and (...) wonted acquaintance to be diminished. Howbeit, when T.
Pomponius, one that is not ignorant of mine affection toward you, and of my
dutifulness perfectly insirueted, bearing you hearty goodwil, and not envying
us, prepared his journey to the place of your abiding, I thought it necessary
to write somewhat, He signifies that he wrote against his will.
specially, for that I perceived Pomponius would not otherwise be answered. If
the courtesy which I exact of you, were beyond all credit, and the recourse of
benefits which I demand did exceed, yet ought no man to wonder as though I
were importune, nor fall into admiration as though I were impudent. For what is
there which tendet^, either For store and plenty of mat ter, this place is to
be confer ted with that which is set down Epi. 8. lib. 5.
to your profit, For store and plenty of mat ter, this place is to be confer
ted with that which is set down Epi. 8. lib. 5.
to your honor, and For store and plenty of mat ter, this place is to be
confer ted with that which is set down Epi. 8. lib. 5.
to your rendune, that has not had issue from the liberal and frank
disposition of my nature? all which things notwithstanding, have procured me
so small advantage, that you are the man which have made me no recompense:
your self are an approuable witness. Contrariwise, that from you toward me
something has proceeded, I have, by the reports of many, indeed rec^ed: for
that I have had trial and experience, I dare not seem so presumptious, as
boldly to affirm, least (peradventure) I should vpbraide you with that Of an
unthankful fellow, or a beast v^worthy of any benefit.
discourteous term, which you are wont, as the voice goes, to dse in my
discredit without desert. But touching those things which are reported unto
me, I had rather you should understand them at the mouth of Pomponius, to whom
they were troublesome in semblable measure and proportion: then attain the
knowledge of the^ by the means of my letters. Concerning mine own mind, with
what singular courtesy, and especial duty, it has been toward you inclined:
as well the honorable Senate, as also the people of Rome can give suff^ient
testimony: and as for your own person, you may consider with your self thus
much* that with me you have bin in great credit, and acceptance: for which my
humanity and gentleness, how deep a debtor you are unto me, I refuse not the
judgment of other men, to take true trial. Whatsoever I have attempted in
times past, to do you good, and for your benefit also accomplished, I was drawn
and allured there unto through the liberal disposition of my will, and afterward
by my constancy, and vn^ariablenesse: But as for those matters which The
judgment which proceeded against Anthony, M. Coelius being his accu^er: in
the which judgment, Cicero defended Anthony.
remain, they desire, believe me, my furthera^ce the more earnestly, greater
gravity, and no little labor. Which I am content to sustain and take upon me
to the uttermost of my power; if I may p^rceiue that my travel is not
fruitless, nor my good will frustrate: But if ingratitude be the pension of my
benevolence, and security the recompense of my courtesy, I will not wade so
far in folly, that you for my gentleness account me no better then mad and
lunatike, what I mean, and what manner of matter I make (...) of so (...), you
may understand of Pomponius: whom I do so comm^nd unto your highness, that,
although I mistrust not your goodness to his furthera^ce by all means (...),
yet not withstanding, I presume upon you with one petition, y^ if there remain
in your mind any mark or token, of my love toward your person, you would
express y^ same in Pomponius behalf: then which you ^n do nothing unto me more
acceptable.

Fare you well.
Bithynicus to Cicero.
THE ARGUMENT.
He makes a secret way and entrance to his petition and request, by calling
to remembrance the mutual love which was between him and Cicero: the some of
his request is, that he would put his friendship in practice to defend him
whiles he is absent, for so much as there is no doubt, but what so ever he
does, is in hop^ to be considered and recompensed.

IF the causes of our friendship were not manifold, and grounded upon justice,
and conscience, I would make a rehearsal of the first beginnings, and (as I may
say) the seeds or blossoms of the same, from our progenitors and parents.
Which thing they ought to attempt, in my thinking, that have had an eye to the
acquaintance and familiarity of their fathers, but have not sealed the same
with the signets of their own courtebus behavior, and liberal disposition,
in friendly du^ulnesse. Wherefore, I will hold my self satisfied with our
private friendship, and therein show that I am well contented: upon hope and
affiance whereof, I presume to be your petitioner, and the sum of my request
is this, that in mine absence, it would please you to be my present tutor and
de^ender, in all cases, states, suites, and controversies depending upon
necessity, if you are of opinion, that no part or portion of your welwilling
and well doing to me, should lie The latin word is applied to such as have
the fall ling sickness, who are said (whiles they are in their agony and pas
sion) to be nei there alive nor dead.
fainting between life and death, that is, neither forgotten nor unremembered.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Bithynico.
THE ARGUMENT.
He declares with what a fervent desire of leading his life with Bithy nico,
he is inflamed and kindled: and professes that he loves him as dearly as
one friend can love another, with all sincerity and perfectness.

I Desire This letter was sent to Q. Pompei us B^thy nicus of whom Tul lie
makes mencio^ in his book of notable and famous orators he was named
Bithynicus, of Bithynia a place which he subdued, after the report of Festus
for many considerations, that yet at the length the common wealth might be
restored to tranquillity, and set free from all tumultes and cruel
insurrections: yea for this I wish to s^e that gracious time, trust my words,
that I may be the more earnest to challenge interest in your promise, which in
your letters unto me directed, is e^ppessed. For the contents and argument of
your Epistle, is, that if things might grow to that issue, you would lead
your life in my company. Most acceptable unto me, is the honest inclination
of your will, and your doings differ not from the kind of acquaintance, nor
yet seem to be at disagreement with your fathers judgment and opinion (who
was a man of great countenance and reputation) concerning me. For let this be
the groundworke and absolute building of your hope, that in greatness of Which
you have received of Caesar's friends and assistants.
benefits, they, which at times prevailed, or may yet bear away the best, are
nearer unto you then I: but in friendship, goodwill, and mutual love, no man
my match or equal. Wherefore, as well the memory of our acquaintance and
society, in you remaining, to me is most acceptable: and the towardness of
your will to enlarge and establish the same, very approuable.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Pompeio.
THE ARGUMENT.
In this Epistle is contained an expostulation or reasoning* why Pom peius did
not so much as vo^chsafe to send him a gratulatorie letter, that is, an
Epistle of thanks, sithence the weightines^e of such a matter as the beating
down of Catilines conspiracy, deserved some duty.

IF you and your army be in health, it is well. The pleasure which I, together
with all y^ rest, did reap The war^e against Mithridates being finished.
in reading your letters, that you sent openly to be known, was incredible,
and exceeding all belief. For therein you declared so great hope of ease and
quietness, as I promised to all men, upon confidence of your private person,
the only procurement of my bold presumption. But thus much understand you:
your old adversaries, now your new friends, are not only vehemently
astonished with your epistle, but being quite spoiled of the great affiance
whereunto they trusted, are utterly discomforted. Concerning that letter, which
was directed and sent unto me, although therein but a bare argument and a naked
signification of your will toward me was comprehended: yet notwithstanding,
that it was pleasant and delectable unto me, I would not have you ignorant.
For every man does, of custom, rejoice in nothing so much, as in the certain
and assured knowledge of his friendly service, and dutiful points of
courtesy. So my conscience, in that respect, ministers unto me plentiful
delectation.

Which benefits, He does quip Pompeius as unmindful of a benefit received.
if they be not an one time or other, satisfied with semblable recourse of
service, and mutual humanity, I am well contented, that further tokens of
friendly usage, in me lie still at quiet. Of this one thing I doubt not, but
that, if For Cicero made an Oration pro Lege Manilia, concerning the putting of
him in charge with the Mithridaticall war.
those things which I have attempted, to do you good, had purchased but
indifferent courtesy on your part the common wealth would soon set us in
atonement, and establish mutual good will between us both. But least it
should not be manifest unto you, what I desire to be done in your letters I
will write openly and plainly, as, both my nature moves, and our friendship
craves. Such things have I compassed, and brought to perfection, as deserve,
(partly for our familiarities sake, and partly for the common wealths cause)
some courteous and thankful point of duty, in writing to be testified: which I
imagine to have been of you pretermitted, through a certain fear to offend,
least you might be thought to do contrary to the mind of As Crassus or
Caesar, who thought that the conspirers were not to be killed.
one man or other. But be you hereof well persuaded, that whatsoever we have
done for the safety and preservation of the weal public, the same, by the
judgment of the world universal is allowed, and by common testimony
approved: which, at your coming Namely, to the famous city of Rome.
hither, you shall understand, in such order to have been wrought, not only
with much wisdom, but also with great courage and stoutnesse of stomach, that
with you, a much greater friend the^ was For Scipio Africanus, and (...) were
(...) friends.
Africanus: I, not much inferior to For Scipio Africanus, and (...) were (...)
friends.
Lelius, shall gladly be knit and united, as well in affairs touching the
common wealth, as also in faithful love and sound friendship.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Furfano.
THE ARGUMENT.
This Epistle is not brought into so notable an abridgement, as it ser ueth for
a perfect pattern or example of commendation.

SO great was mine acquaintance and familiarity with A. Caecina, that between
two friends, greater could not be established. From the auncientnesse of
friendship.
For we used the company of his father very much, a man of singular
nobleness, and special valliauntnesse. And I have so loved Caecina.
him from his childhoode, From the causes of friend ship.
both for the great hope of honesty which in his nature appeared, and his
excellent eloquence: and also for that he has been conversant with me a great
portion of his time, as well in exercises of friendly behavior, as also From
semblance of desires and studies.
in desires, studies, and dispositions common to us both, that I would not wish
to lead my life with any man From mutu all good will.
more familiarly and lovingly. How necessary it is therefore, that I see to
his safety, and have a regards to the protection and defense of his credit,
in what things so ever, to the uttermost of mine ability, you may, by the sum
of this letter, be resolved. It remains, that From the cause of commendation.
when I have attained the knowledge of this by many circumstances, how your
mind is affected, touching the estate of good men and virtuously disposed, and
also what your meaning and intent is, concerning the calamities of the common
wealth, that I request nothing at your hands, but that through the
commendation of my letters, your will may lean and incline as much to Caecina
(which of your own accord without admonition or constraint you are appliaunt
to do) for his furthera^ce, as I am assured how much you make of me your friend
at commandment. Then this I esteem nothing more precious, on your part to be
performed.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Lepido.
THE ARGUMENT.
He rebukes Lepidus with much myldness^, because he being adorned and
advanced to great honor by the consent of the Senate, neglected the duty of
giving thanks for the same. Moreover he exhorts him, not to meddle nor make
with concluding peace between good citizens and mischiefous Antonie.

AS the singular benevolence, and perfect love, which I bear you, kindled a
great care in me for your honorable advancement, and noble titles of
dignity: so I am offended at your dissoluteness, in that you have not, for
such worthy benefits, showed your self thankful to so courteous a Senate:
sithence, from that order sprang your preeminence. I am right glad, and can not
but rejoice, that you are de^erous to procute peace between the citizens:
which peace if you separate from servitude, and so bring to pass that it smell
not of bondage, and slavish subjection, the commonwealth shall reap profit,
and your renoune shall increase by your travel. But if this peace be like to
restore a Marcus Antonius, who in the war at Mutina, was dispossessed.
desperate and merciless villane to the possession of a mighty dominion: then
understand you* that all men are of this opinion and mind, to prefer death
before such a servitude. Wherefore your doings shall be leuened with more
wisdom, in my judgment, if you intermedle not with such a mischiefous
Against this peace he is maru^llous earnest in his Philippicis.
peace making, which neither the Senate allows, nor the people well like off,
nor any honest man does commend. But these things shall be discovered unto you
by other men's report* or else my letters shall certify you of the same. In the
mean space, according to the measure of your knowledge, and proportion of your
policy, attempt nothing, but that which can not be amended. See to it, and

Fare you well.
Cicero to Torquato.
THE ARGUMENT.
His mind and will was to comfort Torquatus, but because he wants matter to
kindle consolation, he layth that the medicine against sorrow and heaui^esse,
ought to be a good and guiltlesle conscience.

IN my former letters I have been somewhat large, not so much for necessity,
as for benevolence: this provoked me, that did not move me: Neither stood your
In suffering aduersiti with manhood.
virtue in need of our encouragement and supportance: Neither was mine estate
and condition such, that I should offer service of comfort and consolation to
another, being succourlesse my self, and therefore must I use so much the more
shortness at this present. For whether I needed not use many words then or no,
I see no more cause why I should be long now: or whether I thought it
necessary then, to let my lines ru^ne in number and length: yet that which I
write now is sufficient, specially, seeing I have no news whereof to let you
understand. For although one report or other sounded in our ears continually,
touching Which are don in Spain
those things which I suppose are not from you co^cealed and kept in secret:
yet that is the sum, that is the end, scope, and mark of all, which I
perceive with my mind as manifestly, as we see the^ with our eyes externally.
Neither do I see further in any circumstaunce then you, I am well assured. For
although, no man can guess and conjecture, what end In the foughten field at
Pharsalia.
the skirmish, or rather the conflict, is like to have: yet notwithstanding, I
see both the end of the battle, and, (if that be in doubt, yet this is most
certain, for so much as one of the twain must prevail of necessity) N^melie
bloody and cru ell. Epi. ^. and. 14 lib. 6.
what manner of victory this or that is like to prove: which when I view and
see, I perceive such to be the state thereof, that no mischief is in likelihood
to happen hereafter, if that may chance before, which is suspected and feared.
For so to live, as life seems loathsome, is a torment most miserable: and to
be discharged from fear by death, no wise man will term wretchedness: no not
in him which is happy and fortunate. But in that Athens, which can blase
abroad w^the more beauty of worcester des and braveness of speech, the worthiness
of your person, then I can paincte out with the flowers of mine Elloquence.
city is your abiding, wherein the very walls may seem able enough to utter
these things, nay many more, and of greater excellency. Thus much I warrant
you of, my life for youres (though slender he the comfort which proceeds from
other men's miseries) that you are no whit now in the greater dan ger, then any
of them which went their way from war, or tarried still by it, some resisting,
and some again fearing him which overcame. But this consolation is of no such
efficacy, as that which I hope is of you usurped, and of me not unfrequented.
For I will not vex and molest my mind, so long as I li^e, in any respect,
since I know my self free from ^ffence: and if I die, my care can not be
great, in so much as I shall be deprived of all sense and feeling. But he
carries He takes upon him wast and needele^ labor.
Owls to Athens, which (...) his pen, in such points as to you are
familiar. You, yours, and what so ever else touches you, are looked unto of me
with daily diligence, and with special carfulness: neither will thy Cicero
show him self dissolute, whiles life indureth.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Oppio.
THE ARGUMENT.
Being prepared to make a voyage into Graecia, he commits the charge and
tuition of his whole estate to Oppius, prefixing an enumeration or rehearsal
of such benefits as he had received.

DOubting much in mind, as our friend Whom he had certified oftentimes by
letter of his determined voyage.
Atticus does know, of my whole purpose and preparation of this voyage,
because many things offered them selves to my memory, whereby I was drawn
into variety of opinions, as uncertain what to attempt: your counsel seemed
unto me a great supportation, to disburthen my mind of such a (...), and your
judgment most necessary to confirm my wavering will. For your advise by
letter given, was most manifest, wherein appeared, what you thought in this
case: and Atticus also, made report unto me of your words touching the same. I
have always thought and accounted you, to be a man endued with exceeding He
that gives connsell must be wise and true.
great wisdom, in ministering counsel, and adorned with that inestimable Iuell
of faythfulnesse in giving advise: whereof I have had principal experience,
when I had recourse to your prudence, at such time as civil co^motions began
to sparkle and kindle, as earnest to be instructed, what you supposed most
profitable for me to take in hand, whether I were best to go to Pompeius, or
tarry still in Italy. Your counsel in this case, was, that I should use such
providence, and deliberation in dealing, that my dignity, whereof I ought to
have a special consideration, might not be empaired, blemished, and stained.
Whereupon I understood your meaning, and have, not only your faith and honesty
in admiration, but your religious and upright dealing in gining counsel, in
singular reverence: because, when you perceived the will of your Caius Caesar,
whom he followed in the civil war.
most entier and best beloved friend leaning another way, yet did you not so
much regard his meaning, as you made account of my profit. Mine affection has
inclined unto you, long before this time present: and I am not ignorant of your
kindness toward me, always testified by apparaunt tekens, both in mine
absence when I was in horrible ieopardie: and also toward mine, as I do well
remember, whom you defended, su^oured, and maintained. Furthermore, after my
return, and repairing home, how familiarly you lead your life in my company,
and what I have both thought concerning your goodness, and blased abroad
touching your worship, all men, that mark and consider well of these matters,
are able with their voices of agreement, to confirm our witness. You thought
me your constant and faithful friend* although I ^ took part with Pompeius, and
you stacke to Caesar's side.
Your judgment was grounded upon great gravity and singular assurance, which
you gave in comme^dation of my faithfulness, and advancement of my
constancy, yea it seemed, that the persuasions wherewith you were moved, to
^rie my credit, were of special certainty, sithence after the death and
overthrow of Caesar, you doubted not to commit your self wholly into our
friendship. Which opinion of yours, or rather judgment, if I do not establishe
with all benevolence, courtesy, and dutifulness, I will think my self no man,
but a monster: As for you, friend Oppius, continue your kindness, and let your
love be enlarged, (although I write these words, rather for Read the 17. Epi.
of the 12. lib.
a fashion, then that I presume to give you instructions) and take the tuition
of all things that belong unto me: which least you should not incompasse with
knowledge, I have committed them to the credit of Atticus. And to conclude
with mine own self, look for letters of more length, and fuller of lines,
when I have obtained a little leisure. Be careful of your health, then which
you can do nothing unto me, your friend, more acceptable.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Matio.
THE ARGUMENT.
Matius made his complaint against Cicero, who charged and accused him to be an
adversary to liberty. Cicero labors in his own purgation, and that any
such thing was of him committed, makes flat denial.

IAm Cicero calls the self same Matius, a most learned man, in his. 1^ Epi.
7. lib.
not yet sufficiently resolved, whether our Trebatius, a man full of courtesy,
and one that loves us both exceedingly, ministered unto me more molestation and
trouble, then delectation and pleasure. For, when I came to my manor at
Tusculanum, somewhat late in the evening, the next day immediately following,
early in the morning, his body being scar^e in perfect health and soundness,
he repaired unto me: whom after I had rebuked, because he spared not his
sickly body, he uttered these words, that there was nothing in all the world
whereof he was more des^erous, then to view my countenance, and to enjoy my
company. Hereupon communication arose, and I demanded of him, what news?
then did he recite unto me your complaint in order: whereunto before I make
answer in the purgation of mine own person, it shall not be a miss, nor
impertinent to our present purpose, to make a preamble of certain necessary
circumstaunces. So far forth as I am of ability, to call things past to
remembrance, there is no friend more near unto me, then you, in consideration
of An argument drawn from antiquity or auncientnesse.
auncientnesse. But in auncientnesse there is somewhat common with the
multitude, which from love is exempted. I bare you good will, on the self
same day wherein I first knew you, and that your good An ^rgume^t from mutual
good will.
will with a certain recourse of kindness unto me confyrmed, was not weak,
is manifest to my judgment. Moreover, your departing from us, which was so
much the more grievous and less tolerable, as it was tied to diuturnitie and
continuance, our Because they hunted after honors wherein there is emu lation and
hartgrudge.
ambitious disposition, y^ dissimilitude of our life, and our manners wherein
was no likeness, would in no wise permit and suffer, that our wills and hearts
should be lincked with lasting conversation, and accustomed company.
Nevertheless, I understood the inclination of your nature, and perceived where
unto your mind was addicted touching my person, many years before the civil
tumults and vproares were a flote, when Caesar was resident and abiding in
France. For, that An argument from benefits and good deeds
which unto me in your opinion was marvelous profitable, and to Caesar's
highness not incommodious, you did your inde^our to accomplish, that he might
love me, that he might have me in some reputation, that he, I say, might
account me among the number of his favorers. Many things I pretermit, and
swallow up, as it were, in streams of silence, which were uttered by voice,
and written with pen too and fro as An argument from familaritie.
familiar as might be wished. For things of greater weight followed. Again, in
the beginning of the civil war, when you directed your journey toward
Brundisiu^, intending to go to Caesar, you disdained not to come and visit me
Some ferme place or manor of his own, whether Matius courteously came to see
him.
in Formiano. To call in question first of al, how highly ought I to esteem of
this point of courtesy, being e^hibited in those perilous times, and dangerous
days. Besides that, think you that I can so lightly forget your counsel, your
conference, and your gentleness, the sweetness whereof I have tasted, and reaped
the advantage of your singular benefits? at the putting in pro^e and practice
of which premises, Trebatius, as I remember, was present. I have imprinted the
sum of your letters in my memory, which you sent unto me, when I met Caesar,
In Some large common, belike, so named
Agro* as I think, Trebulano.

Shortly after insued by succession of time, that season of the year, wherein I
addressed my self to pass a voyage to Pompeius, unto which enterprise I was
either by shame compelled, or by the right of duty enforced, or else by the
state of my fortune constrained. What courteous point of a friendly Gentleman,
what will to my weal whiles I was absent, or love toward mine which were
with you present, was at any time wanting or to seek, when it should be used.
Furthermore, I and al mine have rested in this judgment An argument from
constancy and vnuariablenesse.
concerning you, that unto me you are a faithful friend, and to them, in no
respect, a foe. I came to Brundisium: think you that I am so obliuious,
blockishe, and forgetful, as not to remember, in what celeritie and post haste
you came riding from Tarento to see me, so soon as you heard of mine arrival?
what fashion of sitting by at the same time you used, what communication you
ministered, and how you established my heart harrowed with heaviness, in the
fear of afflictions and miseries, the smart whereof, one with another,
indifferently suffered? After many alterations of times, it came to pass yet
at the length, that as luck had allotted, our meeting was at Rome: what wanted
in our fri^ndshippe that ought to be required? In matters of great moment, and
affairs of wonderful weight, I ran to your counsel as to a sanctuary of
succ^ur, that by your advise I might be instructed, in what order to use and
behave my self toward the majesty of Caesar. As for all other points of
friendly duetifulnesse, what man has inioyed them in such ample privilege, (
Caesar besides me excepted) in that you vouched safe to come often to my
manor, and refused not to spend many hours, in protracting and lengthening
communication tempered with all pleasantness, that might be possible? Beyond
the things above mentioned, you were the cause efficient, if you have not
forgotten, (for by your means I was urged) that I wrote these (...),
philosophical discourses. After The civil hurly bur^ie and battle finished
and e^ded.
the return of Caesar's majesty, of what thing were you more careful, then
that I might grow and increase to ripeness of familiarity with Caesar's
highness? which as you attempted lovingly, so you performed it luckily. To
what purpose pertains this prolonged preamble, wher^in I ^nt to have used
brevity? because I am in no small admiration, that you, to whom all these
things ought to be known, should be so credulous and light of belief, as to
be persuaded of me, as of an offender in those points, which are at defiance
and battle bidding with our friendship. For, besides all the circumstaunces
whereof I have made a repetition, being very evident, plain, and apparaunt, I
have sundry other particularities, and special things, manifold in deed,
but yet not so manifest, which I am not able in words to comprehend, nor to
d^liuer to your capacity by mine utterance. Whatsoever is in you, or belonging
to you, is so far from m^ing* any (...), that in them I plant my chiefest
pleasure. But princip^lly and above al other ornaments and possessions of
inestimable value, both the singular faithfulness where with your friendship
is sealed, your counsel, gravity, (...), vnuariablenesse, and noble nature
also ^ight with pleasantness, humanity and gentleness, your ^eete letters
leuened with love, delight me exceedingly. Wherefore I will now pluck off this
plaster, lay the wound wide open, and return to your complaints. His answer
of purgation to the intented complaint of Matius.
First I answer this: I gave no credit, neither was I brought to believe that
you yealded your consenting voice to the law whereof you w^te: Beside that, if I
had believed so much, I would have considered, that you would never have so
done, without some necessary cause and just provocation. He turns a
discommoditie to comme^ ^tion.
Such is your dignity, such is your renoune, that whatsoever you attempt and
go about, it is noted, marked, and observed: On the other side, the
maliciousness of men is so ripe and cankared, that some things be far worsse
reported, the^ they were by you practiced. These things if you refuse to hear
and to ponder, I am to seek what ^o say in mine own defense. For certainly, if
any thing so^nde in mine ears effensiuely spoken in the dispraise of your
person, I am no less earnest to maintain your quarrel, against your enemies:
then you have been wont to protect me, from the injurious dealing of mine
adversaries. But to (...) further of d^fence I say this, that it is divided
into two sorts: For some things there be Epi. 10. li. 10
which of custom I shake off with a manifest negation, as for example, in this
suffrage or voice of consent: other some which I will confess and uphold, to
be done of you, with no less religion and godliness, then with humanity and
gentleness, as in ^uerseeing games, pageants and exercises. But you can not be
ignorant, whom I know to be very learned, * if Caesar were in possession of
principality and ruled as king, that your behavior and usage may be discour
s^d upon, two sundry ways after a double order: either that your
faythfulnesse deserves commendation, and your courtes^e admiration, for so
much as the love which you showed to your ^riente, was not only manifest in
the time of his life, but apparent also after his death: or else after this
sort, Which peradventure Ci cero him self delighted in.
that that liberty of a man's natural country, which diverse do embrace, is to
be preferred before the life of his friend. Concerning these points, I would you
had the per^ of my disputations. As for these two circumstaunces, which are, as
it were, the two ^aine proppes of your praise, who (...) more willingly, or
more often then I, has given aduott^ements touching your person, both that you
were So he does write to A^ticus. He was al ways thought to be author of
qui^tnesse.
an earnest procurer that civil war should not be taken in hand, and also a
diligent labourer, for the inoderation of the victory? wherein I (...) no man
which a^ented not to me. Wherefore I thanks my ^amiliar friend Trebatius
heartily, by whose means occasion of inditing this Wherein con sisteth my pn^
gation.
Epistle was offered, whereunto, if you do not give credit, you shall judge me
void of all friendly behavior, and des^itute of all humanit^e: then which
nothing can be more grieuo^s unto my nature, nor more (...) to your manners.

Fare you well.
Matius to Cicero.
THE ARGUMENT.
The excusation of Ma^us both for him self and also against his man accuso^.

GReat He testisieth his good will toward Cicero.
* was the pleasure which did redound to me, by reading of your letters:
because I understand that you have conceived the same opinion concerning me,
which I hoped and wished: whereof, although I did not labor in doubt, and
travel in uncertainty: yet notwithstanding, because I had it in great price
and estimation, I did what I could, that it might be in^olable and continual.
As for me, in conscience I am well assured, that nothing is of me committed,
which might offend or stir any man to stomache: and much less did I believe,
that you, being one, whom nature has bea^tified, with manifold and precious
ornaments, and Art also polish^d with goodly perfections, could upon temeritie
and rashness, ^e persuaded to think amiss of me, specially, ^ithence you are
the man toward whom my good will has not only leaned, but lasted, not only
inclined, but continued. And for so much as I perceive the case stands as I
would, I will answer to such criminal causes, as you in my behalf, resisted of
your singular goodness: and as it was meet, for the acquaintance wherein we
are lincked and yoaked. For I am not ignorant what they have burdened me
withal, since the death of Caesar. They An objection.
count it a thing worthy of reproach, that I take the death of a very friendly
Gentleman so grievously, that I am greatly disquieted and out of patience, that
he whom I loved is spoiled of his life. For say they: A man's country is to be
preferred before friendship: as though victory were already theirs, and that
Caesar's death had been advantage to the common wealth. But I will not deal
frau^ulently nor deceitfully. I am not ashamed to confess mine unskillfulness,
and to acknowledge that I have not * The confutation.
yet clymed up to this step of wisdom. For I did not follow Caesar in the
civil dissension and tumulte: yet nevertheless, although I was offended at the
Civil war he means.
enterprise, I was loath to forsake my friend: neither did I at any time so
allow such kinds of insurrections, or so well like of the cause of commotion
and bloody battle, but that my desire ^ath been earnest, and my labor ready,
He was the author that civil war was not taken in hand but stayed.
to suppress them in their infanci^, and utterly to extinguish and quench them
whiles they were in kindling. Wherefore, in the victory, and triumph of a
Gentleman, whom I liked and loved, the sweetness of honor did not allure me,
the greedines of money did not ensnare me, neither was I be witched with
bravery of promotion: which pensions and rewards, other that were not so
deeply, as I was, in his highness favor, excessiuely, and weout al regard of
moderation abused. Furthermore my goods, possessions, and maintenance of mine
house, was diminished and impaired, by the force of Of which law, read the
third book o^ commentaries of civil wars.
a Law which Caesar enacted, ratified, and proclaimed: by the benefit whereof,
the greatest number of them that rejoice in the over throw and death of
Caesar, have made their continuance in the City. After that the Citizens were
vanquished and overcome, to the intent that they might taste the sweetness of
He was t^ author that moderation of the victory was not neglected.
parcialitie, and not be dealt withal rigorously, I joined my mind and my
might together, as precisely for their supportation, as for safeguard of mine
own life. These circumstances considered, I may thus conclude: Is it possible
that I, whose will was to have all live, and none go to wrack, should not be
much moved in heart, and pinched with perturbations, for his death, of whom
that incomparable and most gracious deed was obtained? s^thence these men did
not only swel with the poison of envy against him, but also sought his
destruction and overthrow. Punishment therefore is thy pension (say they)
sithe^ce thou wast so saucie, as to find fault with our doings. O unspeakable
arrogancy: O pride incomparable, the like report whereof never pierced into the
ears of any people: Adescriptio^ of them that slew Caesar, and of himself,
comprehended* in this clause.
that some in practicing foul offenses, should be so vainglorious, and other
again contrariwise, may not be suffered to show themselves grieved, but must
be pinched therefore, and extreemely molested. Those things wherein they would
have me restrained, are not denied to the^ that live in a servile condition,
they may be fearful they may be joyful, they may be grieved, they may be
comfor ted, they may hope, they may despair, and all with liberty of will, as
not having their minds in any man's subjection: all which privileges of a
courteous nature, those same authors and captains of liberty, as they term
themselves, do what they can to wrest and wring from us by the torments of
terror. But lost is their labor, and their toil to none effect: the fear
of no danger shall at any time so possess my heart, that there upon should
ensue a diminution and empairing to duetiful courtesy: neither will I yeald so
far to the invasions of fear, as to revolt and start back from my professed
humanity. For, honest death I never thought to be avoided, but often and
earnestly So are the words set down in three ancient copies: and not to be
sustained, as in some books it is imprinted.
to be desired. But why should they spue against me their spiteful stomaches if
I wish but this, yt they might repent themselves of their deed? For I desire
yt the death of Caesar may disburse unto al, a bait of bitterness, But I ought
of duty, sithence the part of a Citizen so requires, wish well to the common
estate, and to be touched with regard for the safe tie of the same: which
thing, for so much as my former trade of life, and my hope which remains,
are sufficient confirmations that I earnestly ^esire, it is not for me to crave
liberty of speech, and with words to overcome the matter.

Wherefore, I beseech you most heartily, to prefer the thing it self, before
bare talk, and to make more account of the very purpose, then of report by
tongue: and credit me, there can be no fellowship between me, and them that
be of corrupt conversation and stained manners. Should I (to touch such
things as I have adventured in my lusty youth, Somewhat it to be graun ted to
the degree of years.
when I might swerve with sufferaunce, offend and yet be pard^ned, do amiss
and be counted excusable) should I, I say, recant now in mine aged years, should
I make a mutation or change of that which is past, and as it were begin a new
web? I will not do so: neither will I commit any thing, which might seem
scrupulous and offensive: the grievous chance only, of a man whom I loved
exceedingly, of a man (I say) in superiority and highest place of honor, does
move me to mourning: And if so be, that I had been otherwise affected, I would
not have ^loode in contradiction and denial of that, which I have done: least
I should be judged a naughty and lewd fellow in offending, and a timorous and
vain varlot in dissembling. An objection against him.
But those plays, pageants, and shows of victory, which Caesar procured to
be made and published, fell into my charge, and ordering. His confuta^ion.
What then, that pertained to the office of a private per s^n, and not to the
state of the weal public: which duesie notwithstanding, I was bound to see
performed, as well for a memorial of our perfect friendship, as also for the
exhibiting of deserved honor unto him after he was intumbed: and finally to so
passing a Understanding Caesar.
young Gentleman, in whom especial hope was reposed, what could I else do,
then conform and fashion my will, to the satisfying of his requests?
Moreover, I repaired oftentimes to the house of Consul Anthony, for sa^utation
and courteous greeting sake: unto whom, such as (...) me to be an adversary
to my country natural, had ^ten recourse, (I will not say, but seldom:)
either to ask that which was another man's right, or else to pray upon that
which was none of their own. But what arrogancy is this? An argument from the
less to the greater: By Caesar's permission, I used their com panie whom^ he
counted hi^ enemies: you will not ^uffer me to love where I list.
Caesar gave me leave to deal with whom I would, yea although he bare them
little love and affection, yet notwithstanding, he did not restrain me from
using their company: and why then should they that have taken away my freende,
iarringe, and snarring at me like dogs, labor with tooth and na^le, to enclose
me within certain limits, to the intent that my love might not have liberty
to lodge where it likes? But I am sufficiently warranted, that the modesty of
my life, shall be of great force, to suppress their false rumors, and also, that
they which are at defiance with me, for my constancy toward Caesar, will
find in the end, that it is more auailable for them, to provide such friends as
are like me, namely, officious in the utter most point of ^urtesie, requirable:
then like them selves, inconstant, vain, lightheaded and variable. As for me,
if I may enjoy the fullness of my desires, the residue of my life will I *
Which wa^ a free City. Ep. 7. Lib. 4.
lead in Rhodes, where I may possess peace and quietness. But if I be
intercepted with some finister chance, I will so be resident in Rome, as I may
wish and will, to be free from annoyance. To our trusty friend Trebatius, I
give great thanks, in that he has not concealed from us your kindenes, but
revealed the faithfulness of your love unto us in seemly manner: and for that
also, by his procurement it is brought about, that to him, whom I always loved
from my very heart, I see just cause of further dutifulness and reverence to be
performed.

Fare you well
Cicero to Allieno.
THE ARGVM^NT.
This Epistle is petitorie, for he craves courtesy of Allienns, de^iring him
to receive Democritus Sicyonius into ^is favor and protection.

DEmocritus Sicyonius is not only my friendly interteiner, but also (a thing
seldom and strange among many, the Graecians specially,) a man full of
familiarite and courteous acquaintance. For there is in him singular honesty,
excellent virtue, passing liberality toward strangers, and plenti^ of
reverend behavior: Moreover, he prefers me, before all other, in duties of
humanity, gentleness, amity, and kindness. This Allienus, as it should seem
was lord Praesident of Sicilia, as may be coniectured by the circumstances of
the. 79. Ep. lib. 13. whom Oppius in his book treating of war^ in Afri ca,
calls some time by the name of Prae^or, and sometime by the ^ame of Pro^onsul.
You shall understand that he has principal rule not only over his own
people, but that the whole Province of Achaia also, is in his jurisdiction. I
am bold to make an entrance for this Gentleman to your honor, that he might
know you, and that you with him might be acquainted. I am assured, that when
you understand of his person and usage thoroughly, you will of your own accord,
without suggestion of others, (such is the goodness of your nature) judge him a
man worthy of your favor, friendship, and entertainment. My petition and
request therefore unto you, is, that this letter being read and considered, it
would please you to receive him in to your protection, and make promise unto me
in his behalf, to do what may be done, for my sake. To conclude, if you once
perfectly know (as I hope it is like none otherwise to come to pass,) that
his worthiness deserves your courtesy: I beseech you to make much of him,
to love and like him, and to reckon him in the number of your friends. Thus if
you do, you shall gratify me highly, and do him an exceeding great pseasure.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Planco.
THE ARGUMENT.
He writes of the determination of the Senate, not disagre^ing from own
sentence, that the dignity of Planeus might be augmented, and his honor
enlarged. Finally, he adds an exhortation of valiantness, willing Plancus
to persevere in resistance against Anthony, till such time as all the sparkles
of his fury in battle be extinguished, and utterly quenched.

I Had no sooner gotten opportunity to enlarge your honor, but I pretermitted
nothing, which might make for your advancement, either in consideration of the
recompense of virtue, or in respect of the worship that might be ministered by
words. This to be no untruth, you may understand, by the determination of the
Senate: For so was it enacted, and by authority confirmed, as I in writing
gave information, and in words uttered mine own sentence: which the full
court, and a^emblie of Senators, were so far from dissalowinge, that
thereunto with earnest desire and large graunts, they condescended. And
although I perceived by your letters which you sent me, that the judgment of
good men, was to your greater delectation, then Which by the decree of the
Senate were granted.
the ensigns and ornaments of renown in your expectation: yet, I thought that
it was our duties to ponder and weighe, how deeply the common wealth is
grown in your debte, for your meritorious and well deserving behavior, albeit
you required nothing in the way of reward. Proceed you still as you have
begone, and let your Bring that battle to an end, which the Consuls have, for
the most part, discomfited.
last assaults be answerable to your first attempts. For he that shall give
Anthony the overthrow, and fell his force flat under foot, shall in like
manner bring that battle to an end. Wherefore Ilias. 4,
Homere named not A^ax nor Achilles (...) that is to say a conqueror of
cities: but assigned that title to venturous Ulysses.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Planco.
THE ARGUMENT.
He commends Plancus for his assistaunce and speedy succor in the behalf
of the common wealth employed: gives him counsel, to pursue Anthony to
Mutina, and by all means (...) to procure ^is destruction.

O Joyful report, and most acceptable rumor, which was scatered abroad two
days before At Mutina, when (...) was put to flight.
the victory was obtained, concerning your assistaunce, your fortifications,
your earnestness, your expedition, your speediness, and the courage of your
soldiers. So that now, our enemies being vanquished and utterly put to flight,
al hope in you is harbored, all confidence and assurance in your dealing
reposed. For it is noysed abroad, that the most notable and principal
ringleaders, of those rebellious robbers, and traiterous varlots, have forsaken
the foughten field, and being unable, any longer to encounter, have taken
flight from Mutina. Therefore it is no less commodious to dig up the roots,
then to cut off the small sprigs: and as commendable to pearce to the bone, as
to pare the skin: and as great puisaunce and prowess, to take trial of the
uttermost hazard, as of the foremost adventure: and as much praise due to
constancy, to wound him to the death, as to draw out a weapon. I looked for
your letters, and the letters of many more besides: I was in hope also that
Lepidus would remember, In present danger: which compels good and true
hearted citizens, to fight in the defense of their countr^e.
in these tumultes and storms of the weal public, to join his power with
your strength, whereby he might satisfy the expectation of the common wealth.
Labor to the uttermost (friend Plancus) and think no kind of travel too
tedious, that not so much as one little sparckle of that outrageous, cruel, and
most mischiefous war remain unquenched. Which thing if your wisdom and
manhood may compass, you shall bestow upon the common wealth, a heavenly
benefit, and you shall purchase to your own person, everlasting renown. The
third of the Ides of May.

Fare you well.
Plancus to Cicero.
THE ARGVM^NT.
This Epistle makes mention of the preparation which he made to overthrow
A^honie.

I Thought that it was not impertinent to your person, nor to the common
estate, by these letters which I have written, to understand such things, as
in process of time have chanced. * My di^igence, and circumspect dealing,
has Epi. 20. lib. 10.
(as I hope) been to my self a commodity, and to the weal public an
advantage. For I ceased not to send poastes to Lepidus daily, that, all
contention cancelled and cut in sunder, Epist. 2. 18. and 21. lib. 10.
and* a reco^ciliation of both our wills obtained, his help joined to mine,
and mine aid lincked unto his, he with me, and I with him, might defend the
common wealth, from the inuas^on of adversaries: and that he should not so
much think upon one Because in the conflict at Mutina, Anthoni^ was
discomfi^ed.
vile rascal, and contemptible outcaste, as on his private reputation, his
children, affinity, friends, and natural country. Wherein, if he
condescended to do so, as he was desired, he might turn my service to his
own advantage, in all things whatsoever. My request, was not void in this
case: for by Laterensis our messinger passing between us too and fro, I
prevailed in my purpose: insomuch that the matter growing to this perfection,
he gave me his faith, truth, and honesty, that he would pursue and resist
Anthony in battle, if he could not keep him out of his province: besides
this, he besought me to come and join the aid of both our armies together,
whereof he was so much y^ more des^rous and earnest, for that Anthony was
reported to have a great power of horsemen, and Lepidus had no such troop in a
redines prepared. For not many days age, although small and slender were his
whole number: yet notwithstanding, ten^e of the best and chiefest of his
horsemen, came over unto me: of which things I being not ignorant, made no
prolo^ging nor lingering excuses, but thought forth with, that Lepidus in y^
Whiles he thought well of the common wealth and his country.
commendable course of his good and well disposed counsels, was greatly to be
furthered and assisted. What profit did depend upon my setting forward, I
perceived presently: either because I might pursue and vanquish his troop of
horsemen with mine: or else, because by the presence of mine host, I might
correct and draw to obedience, y^ part of Lepidus his army, which is Or,
which is corrupted with bribes and rewarde^ to assiste Anthony.
skarse sound, and revolted from the common wealth. Wherefore, a bridge being
made over Pliny compares Isara to Rhodanus, lib. 3. cap. 4.
Isara that great flood, which is near the borders of the Allobroges, in one
days space, thorough my procurement, I and my soldiers passed over to the
other side, the fourth of the Ides of May. Now, when I was infourmed, that L.
Anthony, was sent before, with the aid of certain horsemen and footmen, and
so came to Forum Iulij: I sent my brother strengthened with the power of four
thousand horsemen, the first day before the Ides of May to meet him: I my
self accompanied with There is me^ cion made of five logions, Epist. 8. lib.
to of four. Epist. 13. lib. 11.
four swfte and speedy legions, and the horsemen which I have remaining,
intend to take upon us the tracing thorough tedious iourneyes, and forthwith
to follow after, if our fortune be but so so, indifferent (I mean) in the
behalf of the weal public: then shall we both beat down the boldness
of those desperate conspiratours, and find an end also of carfulness.
Moreover, if that pestilent spoiler, having premonishme^ts and forewarnings of
our coming, shall begin to retire and draw back into Italy, it shall be *
Brutus Decimus Brutus, praesident of Gallia Cisalpina, now called Lumbardie.
his charge to meet him, whom I know to flourishe in wisdom, counsel, and
policy: and to want neither courage, puisaunce, nor valliauntnesse. Howbeit,
if that chance come to pass, I will send my brother with horsemen well
^rouided, to follow after, and to defend Italy from violence. See that you
neglecte not your health, and as I love you, so love me again.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Ligario.
THE ARGUMENT.
^ee writes that he is in hope of Ligarius safety: to the obteyninge whereof
he promises all the help that he can procure: in the mean space he
exhorts Ligarius, to take his froward fortune and untoward luck with
moderation and patience.

ALthough it behooved me, in this This is the same Ligarius in whose behalf
Cicero made his oration, bearing title, pro Q. Ligario.
your time of trouble, to write somewhat unto you* according to the quality of
our acquaintance, either by way of consolation, that you might not be
comfortless: or by way of assistaunce, that you might not be succourlesse.
Yet, hitherto, I have not accomplished that point of courteous duty: because
I perceived that words and sentences could not prevail, against your
pensifenesse, which was unappeasable, nor diminish any part of the same, it was
so indurable. In process of time, when hope began to bear blossoms
abundantly, that the day was approaching, wherein we should have the presence of
your person, in health and prosperity: I could no longer bridle the secret
motions of my mind, but needs must declare unto you my determination, and
discover the whole sum of my counsel. I will therefore write that unto you,
whereof I have a sealed warrant, namely, that the anger and displeasure of
Caefar against you, will hereafter be assuaged. For, to tell the plain truth,
both the matter it self, the day, the opinion of people, and (as I gather by
sundry apparaunces) the inclination of his own proper nature, allure him to
gentleness and clemency: which to be as I say, not only the estate of other,
ministers me occasion to presuppose, but the reports of his nearest friends,
and Gentlemen he means of Caesar's nearest acquaintance,
such in deed as with him are most familiar, persuade me that you are toward
the attainement of Grace with his highness. Unto whom, since the time that
Concerning Pompeius co^plices, vanquished in Africa.
news came first out of Africa, I together with your brethren, intermitted no
opportunity, to put in practice the parts of Suppliaunts: whose virtue,
integrity, uprightness, love and constancy toward you being incomparable
and singular, besides that, their carfulness for your safety, being planted
upon perpetuity and continuance, were so forceable and pithie, that there is
no kind of thing, which Caesar's highness, Without the mediation, or
intreataunce^ of any person.
of his own accord, will not grant and give of his free bounty: and if our
petition be somewhat later obtained, then we would, the cause thereof, is to
be ascribed to his great and earnest affairs, of whom all things are required
with submission, which have made harder access to his highness, so that we
might not at will, use his gracious goodness. And besides his busy matters,
Africa has incensed and kindled Because they had renewed war.
his anger, insomuch that he seems, of purpose, to work their
disquietnesse, whom he perceives thoroughly bent, to frame his continual
vexation. But we understand, that he in a storm, is somewhat calm: against
madness, marches with mildness: and is pight with patience against
inconvenience. Wherefore, give credit to my words, and repose this report in y^
cosket of your memory, that you shall not remain long in these troubles,
sithence they are like to have their limitation. When When I have showed that
which I mislike not. Epist. 10. lib. 5.
I have declared that which is hidden in my thought, it rests behind, that,
of the towardness of my will to do you pleasure, my deeds rather then my
words, give a testimony. And if I could accomplish so much, as I might
challeng of duty in that commonwealth, wherein my merits (as you hold
opinion) are not only manifest but also manifold, you should be soon delivered
from these disco^modities and dangers. For the self same cause has been a
canckar to my Dignity, renown, worship and estate.
wealth and estate, which has been a plague to your health and safety.
Nevertheless, what courtesy so^ ever, the image and representation of mine
ancient dignity, what duetifulnes soever, favor may afford, and friendship
comprehend, my labor, my counsel, my desire, my furtheraunce, and my
faithfulness, shall be at the commandment of your good brethren in every
respect. See that your heart be courageous, as becomes a man: let it be now,
as it has been always in times past, first for the causes which in writing I
have mentioned: secondly, because you have been so well affected toward the
weal public, as, that you may, not only at this instante, hope When you
understand that there is hope of safety.
prosperously to flourish: but also, though you were drowned and utterly
overwhelmed, with the waves of adversity, yet thorough ye comfort of
conscience, knowing that your meaning has been virtuous, and your doings
commendable, to wear out al tempests whatsoever, with a manfull courage.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Trebiano.
THE ARGUMENT.
He is very glad of Trebianus his return into his country, by suite at
length obtained: he exhorts him to blot things past out of the book of his
remembrance, and to prefer the recovering of his dignity, before the loss
of his private goods and substance.

IN time past, I did only favor Cicero his son in law. Epi. 16. lib. 2. and
13. lib. 8.
Dolabella, being bound un to him in no respect of duty, for there was no
cause of necessity to exhibit such service: but he owes unto me duty and
reverence, for that I was unto him, a present refuge and defense, in his great
Whereof mention is made, Epi. 10. lib. 3.
dangers. Now, through y^ recourse of a late singular benefit, issuing from
his humanity and gentleness, I am so streigtly tied to his courtesy, because
y^ before, in the matter it self, and at this instant also, he has satisfied
me so plentifully, touching your safety, that I know none, to whom I am deeper
in debt, for such bounteous deserts. For which thing, I rejoice in your behalf
exceedingly, y^ I had rather you should show your self glad in heart, then
Because the suite concerning your safe tie, was obtained by the means of my
son in law, made to Caesar's highness.
to give thanks unto me for your good luck: the one of which I desire in no
respect, the other you may well do, without doubt of uncertainty. Concerning
that which remains, when by your virtue and worthiness, free passage is made
for you, to return to your friends and acquaintance: your wisdom must so
moderate and rule you, and the valiiantnes of your nature must be so effectual,
that you ought to forget that, which you have lost, and think with your self
what you have recovered. You shall lead your life in joy among your
acquaintance: you shall be in the company of us your favorers: more dignity
by many degrees have you achieved, then all y^ private wealth can
counteruaile, whereof you are dispossessed: which notwith standing would afford
you the greater pleasure and delight if there were any state of a commonwealth.
Puteolanus, of who^ somewhat is spoken in the Epistles Ad Atticum oftentimes.
Vestorius, our familiar friend, wrote unto me, that you gave me infinite
thanks: this report unto me is marvelous acceptable: and I give you good
leave to use it, both in the presence of other persons, and in the hearing of
Siro also, your friend and my welwiller. For those things that we do, our
meaning is to have them thoroughly approved and allowed, of such men as are
endued with most wisdom, and grounded upon the soundest judgment. My desire
is to see you as soon as might be.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Trebiano.
THE ARGUMENT.
This epistle contains an excus^ of his not writing: it contains also a
consolation: finally, it contains a promise of good luck and fortunate
success, with a brief memorandum of his own duetifulnesse.

LOng since would I have directed my letters unto you, if mine invention could
have ministered any matter, wherein my pen might have been occupied. For in In
adversity when fortune is not favorable.
such a time as this is, the courtesy of Epi. 13. lib. 6.
friends craves the benefit, either of comforting, or else of promissing. I
did not comfort you, because mine ears were full of many rumors, concerning
your puissaunce, and your prudence, which arm you sufficiently against y^
injuries of these troublesome seasons: and because the conscience and secret
knowledge of your own studies and attemp^s replenished your heart with perfect
consolation. Which thing if you do (as I hear) the The profit of good and ho
nest desires, is chiefly-obteined in calamity.
revenues of your virtues will be inualuable: wherein I am assured, your exercise
consists: and to that rule and direction to level all your doings, I exhort
you earnestly. Furthermore, unto you, a man absolutely furnished with the
knowledge By dealing in matters, noting examples, and searching the kno ledge
of antiquities, we wax learned.
of many matters and examples, and in all manner of antiquities thoroughly
instructed, I* not utterly ignorant and unskillful, though in desire,
peradventure somewhat less occupied, yet in things themselves and in their
trial, somewhat more conversant then I would, make this comfortable promise,
that these bitter bruntes, and injurious deeds which you suffer, shall not
long continue. For, even his own person, who is of ability and power to
prevail most, seems unto me, daily more inclined to equity, and to the
Which is, that one man should assiste, help and love another.
nature of things in their succession: and such is the kind of your cause,
that, together with the commonwealth, which cannot lie in ruin perpetually,
and vnrepaired, it must of necessity, as it were raeuiue, quicken again, and
recover the former per^ections: Moreover, something is made more mild, gentle
and liberal, than we, through fear, suspected. All which premises, for so
much as they depend often upon the alterations of seasons, and chaunges of
times: we will mark every moment, not pretermitting any opportunity, whereby
you may be (by our means) succored, and assisted. Wherefore, that other kind
of letters, which I have spoken of before, shall be (as I hope) more easy and
ready, to do me service continually, that I may be bold to make promise un
to you of that, which in deeds rather, then in words, may be performed. I
would have you to be in this belief, that you have more friends and
favorers, then are in subjection to this your present chance, or ever have
been in times past, so far as I am able to understand: unto, Meaning that his
frie^dship should surmount all others.
not so much as one of them all, purpose I to give place. See that you have a
manly and valiant heart, which in you is not wanting: As for such things as are
in the dominion of Fortune, they shall be governed by observations of seasons, We
will aid and support you so far forth a^ man's counsel is able. For all
things that chance cannot be avoided.
and provided by the assistance of our counsels.

Cicero to Trebiano.
THE ARGUMENT.
He promises whatso^uer he can do to the vttermoste of his power, that
Trebianus may be set clear^ from danger: and shows him some hope, of better
fortune hereafter.

HOw I esteem of you at this instant, how I have accounted of your person in
times past, and how much you have et by my freendship, I my self am a witness
sufficient. For your counsel, or rather your chance, to remain longer in
civil wars, was always unto me Because I have evermore well a^counted of
your person.
a great gree^e: and this your unfortunate luck, for that the restitution of
your renoune, is delayed and put off longer, then by equity seems
tolerable, or then I in heart have earnestly desired, the care thereof pearceth
into my mind, no less violently, then my chau^ces were ^graffed in yours,
when I was in the like extremity. Wherefore, Postumulenus and Sextius, Atticus
also our familiar friend, and next unto him Theudas your free^an, have
understood my meaning, manifestly: yea to al and every of them, I have
affirmed severally, and oftentimes protested religiously, that I am kindled
with a certain kindenes, both toward you and ^our children, in any thing
whatsoever, to satifie your ^illes with my service. Whereof, I would have you
certify such as tender your person, that they in like manner may be assured,
that all my The like course of words are to be found Ep* 14. lib. 6
duty, diligence, counsel, ability, faithfulness, substance, and else
whatsoever, is always ready, and at hand for their benefit and furtherance.
If I can compass so much by mine own authority, or by the favor and good
countenance of other my well willers, as of duty I might, in that common
wealth, wherein my merits and deserts are not unsealed nor vntestfied: then
should you in short space, be the same man, which in times past you have been,
namely in highest degree of (...), and prince also of your honorable order. But
in so much as, each (...) ^s were at one time, and for Because we followed Po^
peius.
one cause subject to semblable luck: I do both promise you those things which
in writing I have above mentioned, remaining unto me as mine own, by use and
possession: and those things also which I seem otherwise besides to retain,
as fragments and portions of mine ancient dignity. For Caesar himself, as I
conjecture and gather by many circumstances, has not against us conceived
displeasure, as his adversaries: and al those Gentlemen who with his person are
most familiar, being, For I had no such foresight, whereby I might make means
in time to use the benefit of their help, if in time to come, I should stand
in need.
by a certain chance, bound unto me, through the great duties of courtesy,
which of old I exhibited, to their contentation, favor me greatly and use me
very reverently. Wherefore, if I can do any thing touching your estate, that
is, in the behalf of your safety, wherein al things else do cousist, as I grow
in hope day by day, through sundry reports which I hear: I will take a
proof of mine ow^e power: and what mine ability can comprehend, I will boldly
put in adventure. It shall not need to stuff my letter with particularities:
take this for a general conclusion: All my study, all my benevolence, all the
means that I can make, is as your own, to gratify you, and at your pleasure,
to do you service. But I am very desirous, and I take it to be a thing much
touching my person, that all your friends understand mine intent and purpose,
which by your letters, as a most convenient and fit instrument, may be
accomplished, namely, that The like clause is used in the 11. Epi. of the
first book, where he writes to Vatinius.
what soever is said and thought to be Ciceroes, the same also is due to
Trebianus, freely and at will to use. Thus much have I signified, to the end
that they might be well assured, nothing to be wrapped in such difficulties,
but the same, being for your sake attempted, shall appear unto you most
pleasant and comfortable.

Fare you well.
Uatinius to Cicero.
THE ARGUMENT.
Vatinius being sent into Illyricum, at the commandment of ^aesar Dictator,
commends his dignity and honour^ble estate, to his friend Cicero, that he
might defend the same from the slanderous impeachementes of ^alicious and
spiteful persons.

IF you are in health, it is well: I am in health. If you keep your accustomed
order, in prosequuting ^he part of a patron^, P. Vatimus your client comes
unto you, as standing in need of your present defense, and desirous to
committee the handling of his cause unto your wisdom: you will not (I think)
reiecte him in honor, whom you received in danger. As for me, unto whom should
I make access, unto who^ should I appeal, but unto him? He makes a gappe to
his good will, by ripping up to remembrance, a been fite, receiued^* of which
been fite: Valerius, Max. lib. 4. Cap. 2.
through whose tuitio^ I have learned the attainement of victory? What, should
I fear I wax faint, y^ he which for the tendering of my safety, passed not
a point for the conspiracy of such as were of most power and puisance, will not
now, in the maintenance of mine honor, beat down the spiteful speeches of vile
abiects, and tread under feet, their envious slanders? Wherefore, if, as you
were wont, you love me: then take upon you the whole charge of mine estate,
and think with your self, that this burden, what soever it be, must needs
be laid upon your shoulders, least my renoune run against rocks, and so
suffer shipwreck. You are not ignorant, that my fortune (I can not tell by
what means) does hardly escape the baytes of backebiters, my behavior has
not deserved, any such doggishe dealing: but makes it any great matter,
sithence it comes to pass, I know not by what destenie? If there be any,
that peradventure, will be quarelling at our dignity, to blemishe and empaire
it, I beseech you to continue your accustomed courtesy, and liberal nature,
in defending me whiles I am absent. The letters which I sent unto the Senate,
concerning In Dalmatia.
our affairs, I have exemplified, and hereunder set down, point by point,
that you might not be vncertified. It is reported to me, that your clearke or
Secretary, has plaide the fugitive or runnagate, and is among the Vardeies:
Touching who^, I had from you no special precept: Nevertheless, I have out
commandment before hand, that inquisition should be made after him both by
Land and Sea: and undoubtedly, I will find him out, that you may be at quiet,
except he has taken flight into The name Dalmatia is derived of the ^itie
Daimnium, as Strabo ^ith. Lib. 7.
Dalmatia, from whence (notwithstanding he lurk for a season) we intend to hunt
him out, at one time or another. It shall be your part to love us still.

Fare you well. Dated, the. 5. of the Ides of Iulie: from Narona where I am
encamped.
Cicero to Uatinio.
THE ARGUMENT.
^e gives signification of his good will, as well toward the wife of
Vatinius, as also toward Vatinius his own person: Moreover, he requesteth
him, in no wise to fail, but to send home again his runnagate servant
Dionysius.

THat my duties of courtesy are well accepted of you, I do not w^nder. For of
al men alive, I have known you most thankful: The letter of Vatinius wh^r
unto this is an ans^, was lost: as it is cu^dent to p^oue.
which report I never ceased to blase abroad, for the increase of your
commendation. For you have not only given a testmonie of your good disposition
in that case, unto me by motions of mind, and utterance of words, but your
deeds also, have in most ample and large manner confirmed the very same.
Wherefore, you shall have knowledge and experience, that in all your affairs
whatsoever, my desire is semblable unto yours, and my will al one in every
respect. Whereas you commend unto me, Pompeia your wife and partener, a woman
of great noblenes and excellency: I had communication with ^ur friend Suca,
immediately upon the perusing of your Epistle, whom I willed, to say thus much
unto her, in my name: that, in what thing soever, she stood in need of my
service, it would please her to send me certificate, and it should be done,
with singular care and special regard, to the satisfaction of her own
desire: I will therefore do no less then I have said, and I will confer with
her personally, if the matter depend upon necessity. Howbeit, thus much I
would have you infourme her by writing, y^ there is nothing, be it little* or be
it great, which may seem unto me, either too hard to accomplish, or too ba^e
and vile for a man of any calling and countenance to attempt. All things,
which I shall do, touching your business, shall unto me, be both easy and
honest. Concerning my servant Dionysius, that runnagate, let not your labor be
lacking, if I am in your love and favor: what promise soever you make unto
him, I me self will see it perfourmet. If he be intractable, stu^burne, and
naughtily disposed, (as he is) you shall lead him in triumph as a It appears
by this that Dionisius was in the hands and power of Vatinius.
captive and prisoner. The GODS send a plague of confusion, among the
Dalmatians, by whose means you are much molested: But, according to the
tenure of your writing, they shall be taken shortly, and by them shall your
prowess be made famous: for they have always been counted Martial and
Warlike.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Seruilio Jsaurico.
THE ARGUMENT.
He signifies, how delectable a thing it was to him, to understand the course
of Seruilius his Navigations, or travail by Sea: whom he also desires to
certify and send him word in writing, of the state of the Province, which
he had in government, together with the trade of his doings, and affairs:
finally, he promises his service in all things, whatsoever requireable.

MErueilous pleasant and joyful were your letters unto me: whereby I
understood the course of your nauigations and voyages: for This Seruilius was
Ciceroes fellow, in the office of the Augurshippe.
you set down a testimonial of your remembrance concerning our ancient
society and fellowship: then which, nothing in the world could minister unto
me more delectation. It remains, that my joy shall be the more augmented, if
you apply your pen to write unto me familiarly of the state of the common
wealth, that is to say, the condition of your Province, and also of the trade
of your dealing, as your ordinances, and other affairs: whereof, although I am
infourmed, by the reports of many, to your high honor, and renoune: yet
notwithstanding, I would very willingly, by your letters, as more welcome
messingers, be certified. I will not write unto you oftentimes, what I think
toucheing the weal public in general, because the intercourse of such
letters are dangerous: But what is done here shall be revealed unto you by mine
Epistles, which shall not be your sealdome visitoures. I am in hope that In
the Augu^ship Philip. 2. and Dio. lib. 4.
Caesar (our fellow officer) his care hereafter, and regard presently, will so
provide, that we may recover some one state of a common wealth: at whose
counselles that you be present, it seems to no small purpose: But, if in
your judgment, it appear more profitable, that is to say, more honorable, to
be President and Governor in Asia, and to have the tuition of that part of
the weal public, which is in an ill case, and to be redressed: then the
self same thing, which makes best for the profit of your person, and is
most auayleable for your commendation, ought of me also to be desired.
Touching your dignity, and what so ever else belonging to the same, I will
take upon me the whole charge, and therein show my love and diligence: and
to Who being surnamed, Isauricus, of Isauru^, in Pamphilia, left the same name
to his son as a por tion of his inheritance.
your Father I will have a principal respect, as he is a right noble
Gentleman, y^eloing unto him my help, with all humility and reverence: unto
the perfourmaunce whereof, as to the requital of due debt, I owe the
vttermoste of my power, both for the auncientnesse of our acquaintance, and
for your singular benefits: besides that also, for his own honor and renoune.

Fare you well.
Trebonius to Cicero.
THE ARGVM^NT.
He declares how joyful and glad he is, for the good and laudable disposition
of Cicero the younger (meaning the Son) toward virtue: he sends ce^taine
verses, which he wrote in the d^praise and rep^oche of an evil Citizen to
Cicero the elder (supposeing the Father) desiring him to (...) and place them,
among his own discourses, written upon the destruction and overthrow of
Caesar.

IF ^ou be in health, it is well. I came to Athens the (...). of the Calendes
of June, and there (...) was my chance (a thing answerable to my desire) to see
your son, a young man addicted to y^ best kind of studi^, and of a passing
good report of modesty: which thing, what pleasure it ministered unto me, you
may well understand, albeit I keep silence. For you are not ignorant, how much
I do account of your person, and how greatly, in (respect of the love
wherewith we are lin^ked, not grounded upon ancient nesse only, but also upon
faithfulness, a most firm and unshaken foundation,) I rejoice for your sake,
both for this so As a son ne of so virtuous an inclination which is a jew el
of exceeding great joy e.
singular and precious a treasure, as likewise for all other small commodities
redounding to your advantage. I would not have you suppose (my friend Cicero)
that I f^ll your ears with these rumors touching your son: but it is a
common voice abroad how he is disposed. There is nothing in the world
universal, of them, which are in Athens more bel^ued, then is this your, and
also our young Gentleman Cicero, (for what thing can there be within the
compass of heaven, betwixt us twain, several and not commune?) there is, I
say none more desirous, to attain, y^ knowledge of those arts and sciences,
which you have in highest estimation, I mean, those that be of most
excellency and perfection.

Wherefore, I am glad with al my heart on your behalf, I speak unfeignedly, and
no less joyful for our own sake, to tell the truth with simplieitie:
because ^ee whom of necessity we ought to love, howesoeuer his nature were
inclined, is of so virtuous disposition, and commendable behavior, that me
must of force, judge him worthy of our love and kindness, continually. This
your Son, and young Gentleman Cicero, when among other communication betwixt
him and me interchanged, he had said that he would see Asia, I did not only
desire him, but also earnes^ly bes^ught him to accomplish that his purpose, at
such time principally as the state of the Province fell into mine* authority
and government: unto whom (doubt you not) such service shall be exhibited, on ou^
parts, as, both (...) ^th, and courtesy challenget^* Moreo^r, we will have a
(...) reg^d, namely, that That famous Philosopher in the peripateticall
profession: Ep. 21. lib. 10. and lib ^. and. 3. of Offices.
C^tippus, keep^ him (...) (...) lea^t peradventure, you might imagine, that he
intermitteth and ceasseth* from those notable exercises of learning whiles he
makes his abode in Asia, whereunto you incited him by your fatheuly precoptes
and ^hortations, whiles he continued in Athens: for we will not be slack to
encourage him by our counsels who is already, as I see, furnished to the
purpose, and as it were with Look in Flauius V^getius, for the better
understanding of Plenus gradus militum.
a full step marching forward, that he may daily proceed further and
further, both in the instructing of himself, to be the more skilful, and also
in practicing himself, to be the more cunning. Of your estate and affairs in
the common wealth, I did know nothing, at the inditing and insealing of these
letters: Certain reports I heard of hurly burlies abroad, wherein I have so
little delight, that I wish with all my heart, they were but mere fables and
va^e forgeries, to the intent that the time may once come, wherein liberty,
and quietness may be recovered and enjoyed: of which benefit I have
hitherto, been deprived.

Nevertheless having obtained a little leisure and opportutunitie, Or, whiles
we were in the Ship, and had not so many matters wheraboutes to be occupied.
through the means of our navigations, I have performed a present, to the
renoune of your person, aunswerable to mine own mind, and manner: in the
conclusion and end whereof, I have set down a word, which you, to our high
honor, have freely uttered: and I have also, not denied mine assent to you,
but subscribed accordingly. In the invention and conueyance of which verses,
if I shall seem, in your judgment, somewhat liberal in language: the
vileness of the person, against whom we inueihe, shall dispense with our
doings in that case, and make them tolerable. You shall in like manner,
pardon our anger, which is justly kindeled against such as he is, being both
evil men, and no good Citizens. For end, why should it be more lawful for The
written and deviser of Satyrs.
Lucilius, then for us, to arrogate and take unto himself, that liberty in
writing^ sithence those whom he harmed, he equally hated: and yet for all that,
had not more notable adversaries, upon whom he might violently rush with
woundin^ words. It shall be your part, according to the sum of your promise,
to interlace my devises among your treatises, for I travel not in dubitation
hereof, but that, if you write any thing at all, touching the For this
Trebonius was one of them that mur thered Caesar.
death and overthrow of Caesar, you will bestow some portion, and the self
same not the least both of the matter, (you know my meaning) and also of your
good will, upon me your petitioner. Fare you well: and account my mother and all
my friends, as persons unto you commended.

Dated the. viij. of the Kalendes of June* From Athens.
Cicero to T. Fabio.
THE ARGUMENT
He uses seven sundry circumstances, to comfort Fabius, being in exile and
banishment.

ALthough I, who am desirous to be From the sorrow of himself: for it is a
kind of consolation, when we signify our selves, to be touched with mu tual
sorrow.
your comforter, have more need my self to be succored: because nothing has
this long time, seemed unto me more grievous and insufferable, th^n your
private damage and discommoditie: yet notwit^nding, I do not only exhort
you, but also for the love wh^ ^ith we are lincked, require and beseech you,
to be of good courage, that your behavior may be corresponde^t to manhood and
valiantness: and that, moreover, you would call into consideration, what is
the From the condition of all men.
common condition of all men, and From the state of the times.
the quality of y^ troublesome times, wherein we are borne by destinies
appointment. Your virtue has attributed and given more unto you, then your
From the comparing of ^ood things.
fortune has derogated and taken from you: because you have achieved those
things, which many have wanted: and have likewise lost that, whereof diverse
noble and honorable men are deprived. To conclude, such seems to be the From
the fear of commune calamity.
success of laws, statutes, judgments, determinations, and seasons, that he
may think himself very well sped and excused, whose luck was no worse, then
with so light and small a punishment, to depart out of the common wealth. From
hope of restitution.
As for you, that want not wealth, that are not destitute of children, that
have us, and besides us, diverse gentlemen more, knit close unto you in a
covenant of especial kindness, and benevolence: besides that, sithence you
alone, among so many, suffer the penalty of judgment Because it was unjust.
worthy reprehension, and which, as From the opinion of men.
all hold opinion with one assent, though somewhat uncertain, that through
the power of Caesar.
one, you are pardoned: in consideration of all these circumstances, you ought
to esteem your burden, so much the more easy and light, and to let the
grief, by the injury of undeserved exile engendered, mildely of you be
sustained.

As for my heart, both toward your self, and also toward your children, it
shall be none otherwise aff^cted, then will in you, and duty in me, do require.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Rutilio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He desires Rutilius, that in the division of lands, he would not meddle with
the possessions of Albinus.

FOr so much as, both by mine own knowledge I am instructed, how highly I
esteem of your person, and again on the other side, have had experience and
trial of your good will toward me oftentimes professed, I was nothing
scrupulous or doubtful, to crave y^ at your hands by the way of petition,
which, by necessity to crave I was constrained. What great account I make of
P. Who at such time as he was Tribune of the people, brought Cicero home again
out of banishment.
Sextius, mine own conscience is witness sufficient: and, in what reverence I
am bound of duty to have him, both you understand, and no man can be
ignorant. This Sextius, after he had been certainly infourmed, by the
reports of many, that I was deeply in your favor and friendship, requested
me, to write unto you, as earnestly and effectually, as was possible, touching
the inheritances and possessions of C. Albinus the Senator: of the body of
whose daughter This is apparent in the Oration made for Sextius.
L Sextius an excellent youngman, and the son of P. Sextius, descended. Thus
much have I written, to the intent you may understand, that I ought, not only
for P. Sextius sake, to bestow my labor, but that it belongs to Sextius in
like manner, for the behoof of Albinus, to employ his diligent travel. C.
Albinus received of A. M. Laberius certain Manours and houldes, by Acording to
the tenure of Caesar's Law concerning valuation: lib. 3. comment. de bello
civilly.
valuation and apprisement: which land Laberius had bought before o^ Caesar,
being (sometime) the interest and goods of Plotius, If I say, it makes not
for the weal public, to have them divided: I might seem rather to bear the
office of an admonisher, then to play the part of a petitioner. Nevertheless,
sithence it is Caesar's will and pleasure, that the ordinances and constitutions
of Sylla touching buying and selling, should be When as Cae sar
notwithstanding, hated ^uche as were of the sect of Sylla.
rati^ied, confirmed, and established, to the end that they might be i^dged his
by more law, and he therein to have the better title: If those lands shall be
divided, and those possessions parted, which Caesar himself has soulde, what
authority, I pray you, can there be in his bargains of sale, and what
assurance? But the course of this cause, you, according to the worthiness of
your wisdom, shall call in consideration. I beseech you in this behalf so
earnestly, and so heartily, as it is not possible for me to ask any thing in
the world, with a greater desire, for a matter of more equity, or in more
feruentnes of spirit, that toward Albinus, it would please you to vfe
parcialitie, and at no hand to meddle or make with the lands, which are fallen
into his own age, from the right of Laberius. You shall make me, not only a
man passing joyful and merry, but you shall, in like manner, increase mine
honor and renoune, if P. Sextius, by my mediation, may satisfy the mind of
him whom I love exceedingly, for so much as I am his debtor, in many points
of dutifullnesse: which to perform and accomplish, I beseech you with
instance. You cannot bestow upon me a more acceptable benefit, and therefore in
fulfilling my request, you shall do me a passing pleasure.

Fareyou well.
Cicero to Ualerio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He desires Valerius, that he would not suffer Curtius his ground to be
divided: which he goes about to persuad^ by sundry reasons.

I Am nothing disquieted, nay rather I am delighted, that the Signifying
somewhat above bare friendship.
entier kindness which ^th us twain together, is known among very many.
Howbeit, I am not, unto you, any impediment or hinderaunce (as you may well
conceive and think) whereby the matter which you have taken upon you, at the
appointment of Caesar and his good pleasure, might not so be order^d, as to
your credit and diligence is most agreeable. For, sithence many clients
resort unto me, with their sundry suites, as desirous of fortunate success,
because they are in a certain persuasion, and undoubted assurance, of your
good will toward me, as much as may be, inclined: I am so circumspecte and
advised notwithstanding, that to your office, through ambition, and over much
meddling, I be not an impediment. Ever since He claims courtesy by pleading
of modesty.
I was a child, and knew what acquaintance meant, I and Q. Curtius, have been
united in very great familiarity: at whose misery, as at the calamity also
of Syllaes time full of tumult, I, am sorry, and lament: and yet nevertheless,
when as grant was made by a general consent, that such as had suffered
semblable inconveniences, all that they were worth being utterly lost and
spoiled, should return and enjoy the liberty of their country, I withdrewe
not my will from the rest, for the furtherance of their safety. This C. Curtius
has a certain possession, or piece of land, lying in Volaterrano, whereto he
conveyed the remnant of al his substance, as it were from the danger of
devouring ship wrack. At this instant it has pleased Caesar, to admit him
among the order of Senators: which place and office of dignity, he can
hardly and scantly maintain, For none might be a Senator, unless his
possessions were worth. D. C. C. C. thousands. Suetonius in Augusto. None
might be a Gentleman of arms unless he were worth. CCCC thousands. None might
be L. Chamberlain or high counselor, unless his ability were a. C.
thousands, not only whiles the common wealth was standing, but in the times
of the Emperors: as Pliny reports in an Epistle.
this possession of his being not reserved and restored. And surely, it is a
thing, tha^ which none can be more grievous, that he whose honor is higher
advanced, should of substance and wealth sustain greater damage: neither is
it convenient, that he should be dispossess of that land, which is divided at
Caesar's commandment, who is made a Noble Senator by Caesar's beneficence. But
touching the equity and vprightnes of the thing I have small stomach, to use
more words in writing, lest I should seem to account more of the circumstances
of the cause, then to esteem of your favor and love. Wherefore I beseech you
most earnestly, that you would suppose the suite of C. Curtius, as pertinent
to mine own person: in so much that, what soever you do for my sake, by way of
request, concerning the present cause of C. Curtius, persuade your self that
you do it for Cicero: and let your opinion be occupied in this point, that what
he, by your benefit, obteineth, the very same likewise Cicero receives: Thus
much to put in proof, and also to perform, I beseech you once again, and
that with earnestness.

Fare you well,
Cicero to P. Sulpicio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He makes a declaration of his duty: commends M. Bollanus: desires
Sulpicius to be a mean, whereby Dionysius his servant might be apprehended.

ALthough my recourse be not so often, in these days specially, to the Senate:
yet notwith standing, when I Think, that this P. Sulpicius, and P. Vatinius,
unto whom certain Epistles in the 6. book are written, had the rule and charge
of Illyricum, by ^e commaun dement of Caesar.
your letter was of me read and perused: I did think that I might in no
respect be a hinderer of your honor and renoune, but that thereby our
ancient freendshippe should be ecclipsed, and a great portion of courteous
duties, passing to and fro between us, utterly banished. Wherefore, in your
absence I failed not to be your furtherer, neither did I show my self
dissolute or negligent in ordering a solemn supplication for your behoof: and
as for regard to your wealth, substance, reputation, and dignity, therein I
will show my self at no time wanting.

To the intent therefore, that your acquaintance may not be ignorant, with what
a loueing affection I am careful over your person, it is my will and desire,
that by letters from you they be shortly certified: to the end, that, if in any
thing you stand in need of mine assistance, they may not be in suspension to
infourme me of the same. Touching M. Bollanus, a man of no less honesty,
then valiantness, a man (I say) furnished with all things, and one whom I
have loved, as a friend, of long continuance: I send you singular
comme^dations. You shall do me a special benefit, and such a pleasure as a
greater cannot be performed, if you do your endeavor, that he may understand,
this my commendation unto you in his behalf commenced, to have been to him, a
principal help and advantage: of whose good demeanor you shall so well like,
that you will take him to be (as he is) a virtuous Gentleman, and a courteous.
I make you this assurance by faithful promise, that through the fruit of his
friendship, and use of acquaintance, you shall reap exceeding delectation,
and sweetness above measure. Furthermore, I beseech you instantly, as you
tender our kindness and familiarity, and for the loves sake which unto me
you have perpetually professed, that in this point, you would spare no pains,
but labor to the vttermoste. Of him is mencio^ made, Ep. 9. lib. 15. to the
same effect.
Dionysius my servant, to whom I committed the charge of my books, accounts
and money, after he had by stealthe conveyed away many, of those things, whereof
I put him in credit, and suspecting that his offense was such, as deserved
due punishment, he took his heels, and by flight sought for refuge. He is
lurking in one corner, or other, of your Province. M. Bollanus my familiar
friend, and diverse other a great many, saw him in I find nothing thereof
written, save that it was a river in Dalmatia, now called Narenta. Ptol. lib.
2. cap 17. but it should seem, in this place, to be the name of some country.
Narona: to whom, after certain conference, when he had coined this excuse,
that he was, by me, manumised and set at liberty, they gave credit to his
report, and let him escape. If you will vouchsafe for my sake, to bestow some
labor, that he may be apprehended, and sent back again to me his master,
what a benefit I shall receive by your pains therein employed, I am not able,
by vtteraunce, to testify. The matter it self is but momentanie and light,
but the grief of my mind is vehement and great. Bollanus will instruct you in
what place he abides, and, what is to be done in this case, if you will use
his advise. If it be my luck to recover the fugitive fellow, I will think me
self, to have received an exceeding great pleasure.

Fare you well:
Cicero to Philippo.
THE ARGUMENT.
He commends Oppius and Egnatius to Philippe the Proconsul, the one being
present, and the other being absent.

ALthough This L. Philippus was, (as I suppose) bro there to Lu. Phi lippus
father in Law to Au gustus. L. F. ^* N.
the reverence and certainty of our old acquaintance, drives all
doubtfulnesse into banishment, that I cannot choose, but think my commendation
to be ingraffed in your remembrance: yet notwithstanding, I am constrained of
courtesy, to commend, and recommend the same, L. Oppius my familiar friend
being present: and the affairs of L. Egnatius, in his absence, to your
patronage and defense. So great and so sure is the freendshippe, which
knitteth our hearts together, and so firm is the foundation of our
familiarity. that I can not but labor, as earnestly in his business, that it
might be furthered, as I would travel in mine own matters, to have the^
maintained. Wherefore, I shall persuade mee^ self to be a partaker of a
principal benefit, if through your procurement, it may come to pass, that he
may understand, such to be your favorable and courteous usage unto my person,
as I have always thought and esteemed. Than this pleasure, I cannot receive a
greater, at your hands: wherefore, to see to the perfourmance of the same, I
desire you most earnestly.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Seruilio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He commends Andron, the son of Arthemon, of Laodicea.

WHiles I was resident in my Province of Cilicia, whereunto (as you know) three
jurisdictions of It appears that Laodicea, at that time, belonged to the
government of Asia: and not to Cilicia. for Asia was in the administration and
rule of Seruilius. Ep. 68. lib. 13.
Asia were assigned, I used the company of no man so familiarly, as of Andron,
the son of Arthemon the Laodicean: with him I took up my lodging when I was
in that city, and I had in his house very courteous intertainment: besides
that, he was a man (in my thinking) marvelous fit for my fashion of life, and
such a one as I delighted much to be conversant withal. From who^ after I had
departed, I began to feel more kindness kindling in my heart, to the
co^^^rmation of further freendship: because in many circumstances, I had
experience of his acceptable service, and was thoroughly instructed by trial
taken, that he was not unmindful of me being absent. In consideration of
which premises, I was right glad when I saw him at Rome. For you are not
ignorant, sithence your bounty has extended and stretched it self, to a
great number in this Province, how many Gentlemen there be found of a
thankful nature, and of manners not to be mis^iked.

These things have I written, of purpose, to let you understand, that I have a
necessary cause offered me, to employ this present labor, and that you might so
judge of him, as of one worthy of your courtesy, and deserving gentle
entertainment. I shall therefore be much beholding to your goodness, if you
express and make manifest unto him, as it were by evidence or witness, how
you love me, and in what credit I am with you, and how you esteem of my
person: that is to say, if you receive him to favor, vouches^fe to be his
patron and defender, finally, if it shall please you, in all cases and
quarelles, ( So far forth to be his mainteiner, as your own honesty and the
worthiness of your own person will suffer. Ep. 22. lib. 1^. and 31. and 32.
lib. 13.
your honor kept unblemished, and provided also that you be not thereby
molested) to be his furtherer. This shall make marueilously for my commodity,
and to the satisfaction of my request shall be most effectual: which that you
would do, I beseech you heartily.

Fare you well.
Cicero to P. Silio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He gives Silius thanks for the honor exhibited to Nero: whom he commends
highly in all kind of circumstances.

MY friend As I coniceture, this was T^. Claudius Nero, from whom Augustus lead
away L^uia great with child.
Nero has given you infinite thanks, yea such thanks, as are both marvelous
and incredible: reporting unto me (in your high commendation) that there was
no degree of honor which was possible to be bestowed, but you exhibited the
same unto him, for his special advancement. The profit and advantage, which
you are like hereafter to obtain, is As who should say: is great.
neither small nor indifferent. For, then that young Gentleman, nothing is more
worthy acceptance: and (out of question) I must needs acknowledge, ye you
have done me a principal pleasure: for there is not one among all the
Nobility, whom I have in more estimation. Wherefore, if it shall please you to
accomplish those affairs, which he is desirous should fall in your charge and
disposing, together with my labor and industry: I shall think my self so
gratified, as if you had ^oen me the greatest good turn in the world. And
first, touching Pausanias Alabandensis, supporte his estate, maintain his
condition, til Meaning, above named Nero.
Nero his coming: For I know thus much, that And also Pausanias Alaba^densis.
he is wonderful earnest, in And also Pausanias Alaba^densis.
his behalf: and therefore is my request also the more vehement. Moreover,
touching the Citizens of N^a* a city in Lydia.
Nisaea^s, of whom Ne^o makes special account, defending and protecting them
most diligently, so take the charge over them, that of their estate you show
your self most careful: t^ the intent, the whole city may understand, that
the supportation and countenance of Nero, is to them a singular sa^garde. I
have commended Strabo Seruilius unto you oftentimes: and do the same again at
this instant, with more feruentnesse, because it has pleased Nero to take upon
him the maintenance of Straaboes cause defended by Nero.
his matter. Thus much by way of petiti^n, I crave at your hands: that you
would deal in his cause, and not leave him that is innocent and blameless, to
the gain of any one unlike to your own person. This shall be unto me, a point
of duty most acceptable: and I shall have occasion, in like manner, to
think, that your usage is leauened with gentleness. The full scope of this
Epistle, is, that you would adorn Nero to the uttermost of your power (as you
have determined and done already) with all ensigns of honor. The Province where
you are, has a goodly great In the which Ne^oes virtues may be ^eene.
Theater, and of beholders no small multitude, not as this our province, it
has I say many viewers of a young Gentleman right nobly disposed, endued with
wisdom, and such a one as is not greedy of glory, nor covetous of
commendation. Wherefore, if he shall be furthered by your favor, as he is at
this present, I has in times past, he shall be able to confirm and establishe
those exceeding great retinues which he received of his ancestors, and shall
bind them with the abundance of his benefits. If you shall assist him in this
order, your labor shall be marueil^us well Upon Nero, who will deserve your great
courtefie.
bestowed, and you shall impart to me, in semblable manner, a singular benefit.

Fare you well.
Cicero to C. Paeduce^ino.
THE ARGUMENT
This Epistle contains a commendation of M. Fabius.

I Love I think him to be the very same whom (in the second book of his
familiar Epistes) he commends to Coelius.
M. Fabius entirely, with whom mine acquaintance is, not only very great, but
also ancient. I demand not of you, what your determinations be, touching his
controuer sies: (you shall save, as your credit and dignity requires, your
statute and ordinance) but my petition unto you, is, that he have easy
access to your person: that he may obtein those things, which are not
repugnant to equity, your will in no point withstanding: and that he may see
just cause, and take evident proof of my freendshippe, how appliable it is to
procure his profit, especially through you, with whom my words are not
unlikely to prevail. Not to fail in this case, I beseech you most earnestly.

Fare you well.
Cicero to C. Munatio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He commends L. Regulus, his free man, whose name was L. Luci^ neius, upon
certain circumstances, seeming unto him not unnecessary, to be repeated.

L Lucineius Trypho is the free man of L. Regulus my most familiar friend, and
best acquainted: the considerati^n of whose calamity causes me to show me
self more officious toward him, and to exhibit larger duties of humanity,
to do^ him pleasure. For, my beneuelence does neither ebb nor flow, but
continues at a stay unvariable, and therefore as my good will has been in
times past, so is it at this present: Howbeit, Trypho is such a one as I love
by him self, severally. For the service which he showed, to do me good, in
those our stormy times, was singular and excee ding great, in those days (I
say) of ours laden, as it were, with dangers, when I had a perfect perseverance
in discerning the bounte^us inclination of people, or (at least) skill
sufficient, in perceiving From such as used preten ces playing the
counterfectes.
their faithfulness. We do so commend him to your protection, as men defying
ingratitude, and sworn enemies to forgetfulness, ought (being bound of
duty) to commend them, that have well deserved. You shall seal your
friendship unto me with a principal pleasure, if he may understand (because
for my saftie he has thrust himself as it were upon He has put himself into
many dangerous ^duentutes.
sharp pikes, and for my sake has passed many a voyage by sea, in the could
time of winter) that some part of his service has been to your advantage:
which, the goodwill that I bear toward you, requires.

Dolabella to Cicero.
THE ARGUMENT.
Dolabella, Cicero his son in law, persuadeth his father, either to take
part with Caesar, or else to convey him self from war, into some city where
he may live in peace.

If you have your health, I rejoice, I am well, and so is our Tullia, as for
Whom Plime reports to have lived a hundred years and eight.
Terentia, she was not all after the best: but I am certain, she is now
receuered, and wareth str^ng again: to be short, all things with you are in
such good case, that they cannot be better. Although there be no cause, why
you should have me in suspicion at any time, that I seek to persuade you, as
more regarding the part of Caesar, then having respect to your safety and
good estate, to join your self in confederacy, either with him and us, or
else, for your own preservation, to seek after ease and tranquillity: yet
notwithstanding at this present, especially, sithence the For Pom peius had
lost Italy and Spain as hereafter in this present epistle, is mentioned.
victory is so far from being pessessed, that it is in small likelyhoode to
be achieved, I can conceive none other opinion, but this, that I am drawn by
duty, to deal with you, touching your estate and affairs, by order of
persuasion, because I cannot in this poinct use taciturnitie and silence,
saueing the zeal and affection which in me, toward you, For affiniti^ sake,
because Dolabella ma ried Cicero his daughter.
is naturally required, harmless and undiminished. As for you (my Cicero)
accept my words in such sort, and have such liking of my counsel, that
whether you allow it, or whether you disanull it, as well my meaning, as also
my writing, may seem in your judgment, to have had issue from a gentle heart,
courteously disposed, and to your goodness most bounden and obedient. You are
not unadvised, that C. Pompeius, notwithstanding his By which circumstances he
obtained that surname of^ Mag nus, to be called* Po^p^ie the great.
name of nobleness, his title of dignity, his renown in feats of arms,
hispuisance in martial exploites, his power by the means of the protection of
kings and countries, is in danger: and that this which fortune denies not to
any one of inferior degree, cannot fall to his lot to obtain, namely to
prepare flight, saueing his honor and honesty, (...) that he is driven out
of Italy, now that he has the repu^ out of Spain, his tried army, and
proved soldiers In Spain.
taken, and he himself At Dyrrachium.
compassed round about on all sides, and so environed, that he cannot escape:
the like luck whereof, whether any Emperor of ours tasted at any time, I am
ignorant. Wherefore, what he, or your self, may hepe for hereafter, consider
and wey w^l in your own mind, according to the worthinesie of your wisdom,
for so shall you, with great facility, take such counsel, and use such
aduisement, as to your own person will prove in sine, most profitable. Thus
much more I desire of you, that, if he have escaped his danger, and keep
himself close in the Navy, that he be not bewrayed, to be From that which is
profitable.
careful of your own affairs, not to neglecte your own estate, which ought
most of all to move you, and now at length, toward your self, rather then to
any other, to use more friendship. You have done service sufficient already,
From that which is honest. The like to this, is in Virgil. To Priam and thy
coun^rie:
Thou Have showed sufficient duty.

as well in consideration of duty, as als^ in respect of acquaintance. Both
parties are satisfied, and that common wealth, which you have always liked and
loved, allows your doing, and is not disco^tented. It remains, that where
the weal public is at this present, there we also abide and be resident,
rather then, whiles we buisily hunt after an estate old and aunciente, we
have none at all, but be quite dispossessed. In consideration of which
premises, I wish you (my best beloved Cicero) that if peradventure Pompeius
being expelled also out of Pompeius was assaulted and set upon at Dyrrhachium
a city in Sicilie, now (as some suppose) called Durazo.
these places, flee of force and constraint, to other regions, to take your way
to Athens, or else to some other city, as it shall please you, for the
enioyinge of quietness: which thing if you shall do, not rejecting my
counsel tending to your commodity, I would have you certify me by your
letters, that I, if by any means it is possible, may hasten to see you well
settled. Whatsoever, perteyning to your dignity and worthiness, remains to
be obtained of the Emperor, it is as easy as heart can conceive, (such is
the clemency and gentleness of Caesar) to get it, for your furtheraunce:
besides that, my request in your (...) unto him, humbly made, shall prevail
and win no (...) authority. It belongs to you, as a badge of your bounty,
to procure that the self same messenger, whom I sent unto you with my
letters, may return, bringing back again from you, to me, a convenient
aunsweare.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Dolabella.
THE ARGUMENT.
He writes to Dolabella, in his high advancement and commendation, because
he ouerthrewe a pillar that was erected, and set up in open place of
assembly, to Caesar as it were to a God. Read the^ 4 book ad Atticum, and
Lactantius lib. 1. Cap. 15.

Although I grudge not, ne repine (my He was no longer son in law to Cicero*
for he and Tullia were diuor ced. Lib. 11. Epist. ad Articu^.
Dolabella) at your glorious renown, but reap thereby great joy, and pleasure
unspeakable: yet I cannot, but acknowledge and confess, that by the popular
report and opinion, I am accounted and thought a partener of your praise. I
seek conference with no man, and yet I have daily communication, not with a
few (for there are very good men, a great multitude, who for the regard of
their health, and maintenance of their own safety, have recourse to Meaning
Bae iae, a town in Campania, full of pleasant commodities, Epist. 12. lib. 9.
where, it should seem he was: or else in Cumano or Tusculano.
these quarters: besides them, there resort hither many of mine acquaintance,
out of diverse towns incorporate, not* of any great distance) but they all,
one with another, Because you ouer^hrew the pillar and the altar which was
erected to Caesar, of purpose to make him a God.
aduauncing you with praises above hills and mountains, yea to the very
heaven, give great thanks unto me, immediately thereupp^n. For they say, that
they are grounded upon such assurance, and are in such certainty of
knowledge, that you, by showing your self attentive to my precepts, and to my
counsels being obedient, practice the part and duty of an excellent citizen,
and frame your self to such commendable usage, as thereby you are proved a For
Dolabel la and Antonie were fellow Consuls.
singular Consul. To whom, although I can make a most true answer, that in
your deeds, you follow your own advise and judgment, as not needing any
other man's counsel: yet notwithstanding, I do not assent thereunto manifestly,
least I should seem to diminish your commendation, if all the praise were
ascribed to the benefit of my judgment: neither yet will I seem utterly to
make denial: for, in deed, I am more vaineglorious then I need. Howbeit, y^
is not repugnant to your renown, which made much for the honor of Homer, in
Iliad. lib. 1. who being ^ king, ^ad the (...) o^ the (...) in who^e (...) we^e
any king^s.
Agamemnon y^ king of kings, and prince without (...), to have a sage Nestor
for his wi^e ^unsellour: as for ^ee, I think my name not a little nobled, ^n y^
you being but a young man, and bearing the worthy of^ce of a Consul, enjoy the
flower, and ^s I may say, y^ pearl of praises, that you (I say) being, as it
were H^ (...) hi^ ^is (...). ^pi* 17. lib 8. and 7. and ^. lib ^.
my pupil and scholar, wear the goodly garland of commendation* L* Caesar
vn^, when I ca^e to him in his sickness to Ad Attic^m Epi. 17. li. 1^.
Naples, although every part of his body, both limme and joint were disseased:
yet notwithstanding, before salutation or gr^ting finished, these words unto me
he uttered. O my friend Cicero, how rejoice I in thy behalf, for that
Dolabella has thee in such estimation: and if I were in as great countenance
with my M. Antonius, Dolabella his fellow Con^ul, whose mother s^ued asterward
L. Cae^ar her bro there, when he was a proscript or outlawe.
sisters son, our safety had not been now to recover, but long ago
restoared. Touching your Dolabella, I see just cause to be joyful, and
likewise to be thanckefull: whom next and immediately after you, we may well
and deservedly call by the name of a Consul. After continuance of
communication, he spoke very much of your notable deed and famous enterprise,
affirming, that nothing was done at any time before, tendinge more to the
renown, the honor, and the Appi lib. 4 de bello civilly.
safeguard of the common wealth: And this report of L. Caesar, in your high
commendation, is common in the mouth of all men: yea, it is the conspiring
voice of the people, to the increase of your praise. But I pray you, give me
leave to succeed you, though Because it sprang not from me, as from the
natur^ll stock, and* therefore I am to crave and not to chale^g.
not as a right, yet as a counterfect or b^stardlike hire, in the inheritance
of honor: and suffer me to enter, as it were into possession, of some part or
portion of your praises: howbeit my Dolabella (for whatsoever I have before
spoken, proceeds of pleasure and jesting) I am much more willing, all my
commendations and titles of dignity (if I have, at least, any in owneage) to
run wholly into y^ rivers of your r^nowne, then to draw any one drop of your
dignity, for the enlargement of mine own reputation and honor. For my love
and affection toward you, has been hot and fervent, as you might well
perceive: yea, so much y^ more is my kindness kindled, through y^
consideration of these your famous feats, that in love nothing is possible to
be more ardent or fiery, no not in the highest degree: and good reason why:
Because, Nothing in the world universal, believe me, then virtue is more
beautiful, more precious, more lovely, or amiable. I have always borne
goodwill (as you know) to M. Brutus, for the singularity of his wisdom, the
sweetness of his behavior, his incomparable honesty, and his surpassing
constancy: Yet notwithstanding, in the On the v^rie same day that he and his
companions slew Caesar: Epi. 28. Lib. 10.
Ides of March, so much was added to the love which I bare him, that I
wondered, how it might be possible, that love to increase, which seemed so to
abound and duerflowe. What man would think, that the love which I both
professed, and performed toward you, could in any one point ^ee augmented?
Yet it has so proved, that never until now I seenied to The latin copy has
Amare, and Diligere, the first exceeds the last. Epist. 1. ad M. Bru^um.
Clodius says, he, Valde me diligit, favors me great ly.
love you: in times past, but t^ favor you* Wherefore, what remains wherein I
should give you exhortation? (...) have a regard of your renown, and not to be
negligent of your glorse? Should I sot before your eyes, as it were a spec^ or
looking glass, men of great nobleness and passing (...), as they are
accu^omed to do, that use such an order of imitation? I have none more
honorable then your own person: be an example to your self of prowe^e, and
wrestle with your self in worthiness: Nay, shall I tell you what? It is now
high time for you to degenerate, and to b^ unlike your self, since your
adventures have been so manfull, and your deeds so famous: which being as it
is, exhortation is not necessary to be used, but rejoicing is requisite, and
may not be refus^d. For, that has chanced unto you, which has fortuned to
none besides, at least to a very few in my thinking, that For the people are
better pleased with clemency and gentleness* the^ with (...) and sharpnes. Ad
Atticum lib. 10. Epi. 4.
great rigor and sharp revenge in punishment, should be not only not
enuyed, but also highly praised, and m^st acceptable with men of virtuous
disposition: yea, with every commoner, and person of inferioritie. If this lot
had fallen into your lap, by a certain luck, I would have rejoiced at your
good fortune and felicity: but the valliauntnesse of your heart, the
worthiness of your wisdom, and the efficacy of your counsel, are the causes
of this your prosperous chance. For I have read over your Oration. then which
nothing in my judgment, is polished with more prudence: your order was so
seemly, both in clyming as it were by degrees, or footinge forward to the very
cause, and reuolting from the cause to y^ person of your self, that the That
every man thought you might lawfully take reuengement, upon all those which
erected and raised up a pillar or column to the deifying of Cael^r.
very event of the thing, gave you leave and liberty to punish: none to the
contrary withstanding. In consideration of which your deed, y^ City is
delivered from danger, and set free from fear: neither was the commodity,
which you procured, being exceeding great, temporal and momentanie, but
perpetual and everlasting, yea, such as shall succeed you, shall take it as an
example for imitation, endenouring to do the like: So that now, by this your
famous feate, thus much you are to understand, that the common wealth leans
and stays it self upon your shoulders: and not the maintenance only, but
the adua^ncement also of such persons, the As if he said That which re maineth
is looked for, of you to be per fourmed.
beginning of whose liberty did proceed from you, is re^erred unto you, and
upon you depends. But touching these matters, we will have conference
shortly more at large, as I hope: and as for you (my Dolabella) because you
are a preserver of the weal publiqu^ and our def^nder, I counsel you to see to
your own safeti^, carefully and diligently.

Fare you well.
Cicero to Papirio Paeto.
THE ARGUMENT.
He answe^reth to two Epistl^s of Paetus, to the first* in this order, that he
is of right, touched with a certain de^ite of his well^are, the force of whose
love toward himself, he has tasted, and the pleasantness of whose wit
he has highly esteemed: to the second ^e answeareth in this sort, that it
makes no matter, whether h^e be at Rome or at Naples: sithence at Rome, all
things are under one man's government: wherefore, he says that he continues
in this opinion, to buy a house to inhabit in at Naples.

I Will frame an aunsweare, ^o your two several letters: one of the which I
received two days past, at the hands of The names of two servants the last of
whi che was a carrier of letters.
Zethus: the other was delivered me by Meaning his carefulnes whereunto he
has relation.
Phileros. By the former letter I understood, that my carefulnes for your
welfare, was very acceptable: De diuina li. 1. de sini. lib, 5 the same order
of speech had pacuuiu^, and Africanus the lesser used: Festus and Scneca Lib.
19. Epist.
whereof I am glad you have attained the certain knowledge: but believe me,
my letters cannot make you such substanciall assurance, of my desire touching
your safety, as it is Rome which he prefers before Athens: For every man
does rat^er co^me^d his own natu ral country, the^ a foreign^ and strange
region.
in deed, and trial has testified. For, although I see my self, of many had
in reuer^ce, (as I cannot otherwise report) and exceedingly beloved: Yet among
them all, there is not, so much as on^, in who^ I reap such delight and
pleasure. For, in so much as your kind heart toward me is greatly inclined,
(which you have not, this long time changed nor discontinued, but even at this
instant, constantly put in practice) it is a thing not lightly to be regarded,
and whether I may say chiefly to be esteemed, I am uncertain, but
doubtless, I may say common to you and many more a great number: howbeit, in
that your merits are such, as they win goodwill, and be, as it were, baits
to benevolence, besides that, your usage having in it such sweetness, and all
kind of delight somnesse, these properties are your own, by title of due
possession. To these your manners most seemly for a man, your talk replenished
with pleasant meriments, not answerable to the trade of the Atheniens, but
agreeing to the custom of the ancient Romanies, yea, correspondent to that
which sprang up in the very b^some of the Rome which he prefers before
Athens: For every man does rat^er co^me^d his own natu ral country, the^ a
foreign^ and strange region.
City: as for me, (think you, as you list and like) I am meruelously
delighted with merry conceits, uttered with a pleasant grace, chiefly with
them that breed in our own country, (among the Romans, I mean) and
specially, when I perceive them to have a smack and smell of ancient Latium, at
such time as outlandish language was brought into this city, which sauoureth
at this present, so much of A part of Gal lia, where the people did wear long
mantels.
Gallia Bra^chata and He speaks those words, because Caesar had made many
that came from Gallia tra^salpina, free denizens in Rome.
Transalpina, that of our old merimentes, there is no appera^ce remaining.
Wherefore, at what time I have a sight of you, me thinks (to tell the truth
without gloase of lying) I see the Gentlemen full of merry conceits: To Laelius
in the 1. de o^ si. he asscribeth a pleasant coun (...): and in lib. de cla^is.
Ora he commends him for his tr^mme eloquent tongue. I merua^le he forgot
Caesar brother to Catulu^, who exceeded al other in vtte^ng d^light some
^eastes with a convenient grace. Lib. 1. de o^fi. and lib. 2. de Ora.
Gracchies, the Lucilies, the Crassies also, and the Laelies: and all the
ancient Romans in that thing famous and memorable. I would I were dead, if
besides you, I know one left, in whom I may acknowledge the image of our
aunciente and domestical pleasantness to continue, and remain. To these
sweet and delectable i^astes in communication, (...) so great l^e is lincked,
and all for my commodity, mer^aile you that I was so sore discouraged, upon
the conceit of your health, which I would not have to be in hazard: As
touching your purgation or excuse, which you used in your other letter, that
did not dissuade me from purchasing a new house at Naples, wherein to inhabit,
but that you did rather co^sell me to make mine aboade still in the city: I
^ooke your meaning aunswearable to your words. Howbeit, thus much I perceived
then, and by this letter I understand no l^sse, your opin^o^ to have tended to
this mark, that I might lawfully (of which mind I meeselfe was) not give over
all mine affairs in the city utterly, but a great part of them for my private
quietness. You allege unto me in this behalf, Catulus for an example, and
those times full of troubles: but wherein am I and Catulus to be likened and
compared? It was no pleasure unto me, no, not when I was unjustly condemned to
exile, to discontinue long from the safeguard of a common wealth: For we satt
at y^ stern, and had the weal public in ^ur rule and government: but now
we have no place allowed us, no not scarsely next We are contemp^ible per son^,
and thought vnworthi^ of any place, though never so vile and obs^ure.
the pump, or the sinckhole. Think you, that the acts and ordinances of the
Senate would be the fewer, if I were at Naples? When I am resident at Rome, the
Judges are assembled by my means, the court and counsel, thorough my
procurement, gather together, the decr^s* of the Senate are ^ntred into
writi^g, in the house of your * welwiller, and my familiar friend: and surely,
when it comes into his memory, I am admitted to the Epi. 25. lib. 9. some
think that these words are spoken ironically.
penning of mine opinion: and I heard say, that there was a report brought to
Armenia and Syria, that the decree of y^ Senate (as it was said) was not
disagreeable to my judgment, long before the matter was menc^oned. I would not
have you think that I am disposed to jest: For, let this not be unknown to
you, that I have had delivered to my hands, letters from kings of far
countries, wherein they give me great thanks, in that I call them by such a
As, by the name of kings.
royal name, and ascribe unto them, in the vtteraunce of my sentence so (...)
^tles ^eing guoran^ ^ no^ only whither they ^ucre so called, but also not
knowing in the world, whether they mounted to the same, by the (...) of their
birth. What the is there to be say^ further? So long as he shall remain He
speaks of Caes^, w^o^ the Senate had created censor, or magistrate for the
reformation of ab^ ses in ^our, for the term of three years. Diod. lib. 43.
our president and governor, for the reformation of manners: so long as he
shall occupy the name of a magistrate, I will be ruled by your adui^eme^t: but
when his office is resigned, and he from hen^e departed. I w^ll acquaint my
self with your cheer, though it be but simple: If I shall be provided of an
house, for ten days space, I will disbursse for every day, after y^ rate
appointed, by the laws made for expenses. But if I shall find none to do me
service, nor to my contentation, then have I determined to take up my lodging,
in your mansion. For I am certain, that I can not please you better, the^ to
reap the advantage of such an occasion. Touching Sullane house, I was in
desperate dout of it, as in my last letters unto you directed, I let you
understand, howbeit I have not quite forsaken it. I would have you, according
as you write, to have carpenters about you. and to view it where it is
decayed, and stands in need of repayring. For if the walls be not ruinous,
nor the roof rotten, of the rest I shall like well enough.

Fare you well.
Thus far out of the familiar Epistles of M. T. Cicero.
THE EXTRACT OF Epistles, out of Isocrates, the excellent Rhetorician among the
Atheniens.
Isocrates to Philippo.
THE ARGUMENT.
Isocrates purposing to ^nde to Philippe an Oration, touching the
reconciliation of the Graecians, and the assaulting of the Barbarians, penned
this Epis^le, being as it were, a s^mmarie of the whole O^ation, and a means
to mou^his majesty to the reading and perusing of the same: in so much that it
appears to be nothing else, but a preamble or entrance into that Oration,
which is entitled, Oration Philippica: The Oration to king Philip.

IF I were in the pearl of my youth, and had in my bones marrowe: in my limbs
and joints strength, and in the rest of the parts of my body, desired ability,
I would not make writing, the instrument to speak unto your This epistle was
written to Philip king of Macedonia fa there to the great Alexander, the noble
conqueror: in the beginning whereof Isocrates goes a bout, by way of excuse
to purchase favor: and by comparison to move attentiveness.
majesty. But for so much as, I am entered into my wrinkled and withered age,
which with mine accustomed exercise is at disagreement (for I am much hindered,
by reason of my years, and yet as the case now stands, the matter may be
dealt in, conneniently:) I will attempt to d^clare to your highness, after
what order things may be brought to pass^, and, as I mean, established. I am
not to learn, what difference there is in persuading by lively voy^e, and by
giving advise in letters, the messengers of the mind: not only, for that there
is more facility and easiness obtained, when matters called in question, ^all
in conference of persons present, then there is, when hand writing and Epistles
pass too and fro in absence and distance: or because all people are more
applyable, to count that which the tongue r^porteth, deserving more credit and
that which the pen decyphereth, worthy of less belief: listening to those, as
to things of certainty, but attending to these, as to shadows of
immagination: but most of all, and principally, for that in conuentes and
meetings, and intermingling of communication, if any word, clause, or sentence,
escape in speech, not (peradventure) ap^ly understood, or, not so redily
believed, the person in presence, with little labor, may cure both the
inconveniences. But if so be that in writing, any such scrup^ous and doubtful
circumstaunce appear, there is no man (the li^ely interpretation of the writer
wanting: or the authors apology to seek, by occasion of his abse^ce) that man
minister a medicine to heal up the malady. (...), for so much as y^ judgment
of y^ whole matter, is in your majesty's po^r, I am (...) upon hope and
a^iau^ce, that our (...) s^al (...) (...) ^om being ^itlesse, that it is like
to wi^ singular credit, and to pre^aile much with your highness: not
mistrusting, but that your grace (cutting off all impediments to the contrary)
will ^ake a view of the cause, and w^y the same, not superficially, but with
due consideration. A point of rhetor^que, call led Occupatio with some what a
liberal admonition under a counterfeit show of praise and commendation.
Some the^e were, who having recour^e and mutual ^alke with your p^isance, did
what they could to di^uade and withdraw me from m^ne honest purpose, saying,
that you had f^atterers and mealmouthed merchants in high estimation: but that
such as told you truth with simpliciti^, and gave you precepts pou^dered with
pr^dence (then which, nothing more necessary for a prince) ^ere in (...),
disdain, hate, and detestation: whose words and ^aine speeches, if I had taken
for For things of certeintie and undoubted truth.
Oracles, I had altogether stayed my pen, neithe^ had I presumed to write my
mind in paper. But no man's talk shall be of such authority, as to per suade
me that it is possible, any man to e^cell others, in renoune purchased by
famous feats of arms, or in y^ praise and worthiness of wisdom, excep^ to
other he show him self a scholar, a hearer, a benefactour: and soprouide, of
him self, (by all means as he may) that Iuels and ornaments, wherewith the wit
is beauti^ied, and the mind gloriously enriched, be not to seek, when they
should be possessed. In consideration of which premises, I was incited, and
(as it were) spurred forward, to write to your princely puisaunce. And for so
much as, my taulke tends to matters of such moment and weight, yen to such
things indeed, as it becomes no man living, more then your majesty to hear
and consider: I thought to labor to your nobleness, by way of exhortation
seasoned with earnestness, that your highness would vouch safe to giu^ the
Which he made to the king: therein declaring what ought to be the exercises of
a king: and whereunto his ^udie should be addicted.
Oration (which of purpose I have written) attenti^e ^earing. I am not
surprised with the incantations and sorceries of vain (...) neither* am I
ignorant, that your grace has given diligent (...), to the like Or^tions, even
till such time as your atention i^gendred todiousnesse. Furthermore, (...)* is
and veryer pedient. that such as desire to vaun^ their wits, and blase abroad^
their skill* sho^lde* procure (as is not unknown to a^) to them selu^ (...)
assemblies, and (...) (...) with (...) (...) of ^ples, among (...) they might
find ma^y (...) at their eloquence* and to make a world^ wonder, at their
sugared, v^teraunce: And who so is willing to bring any thing to per^ection,
necessity cra^eth, that with him, on whose power and abiliti^ the (...) of
matters by (...) ^pressed and made manifest (...), conference be not (...). If
(most noble sovereign) I were to give counsel to any citi^ and incorporation,
I would frame my self to i^terlace comm^nication and talk with the
magistrates, the governors, the princes of the people, and the seniours of the
^itie: But having a matter of more w^ight in my hands, namely, advice and
judgment touching the ^intenance of the safeti^, and the supportation of the
good estate of the Graeci^s in general, to whom ought I more justly appeal,
then For the king is the ground work and fou^ dation of the weal public upon
him the people stay as upon the prop of their (...), such a one therefore
should want no ho^lesome counsel.
to him, who in nobility surmounteth, in puisance surpasses, in authorititie
excels all the inhabitaunts of the Grecian kingdom? It is not to
hosurmised, nor imagined, that the mention of these matters is unseasonable,
and out of opportunity: For, whiles the Lacedaemonians be in possession of
principality, it were a thing too painful and combersome to your highness,
to take of us (your people) the safegarde and tuition, and to resist their
power as a f^e and aduersatie. As for their estate at this time present, such
it is, that they think them selves in no ill case, if they might enjoy their
own d^minion. As for our own city, it shall she we it self marvelous
applyable to fortify your force, by the adjoining and putting too of their
power, if it shall please your highness, to make the Graecians, partakers of the
fruits of your goodness. What better occasion then this presently offered,
can be ministered to your majesty? The figure Occupatio yet again usurped,
whereby he end^uoureth to challenge to him self authority.
Marvel not (most renouned king) that I have attempted a thing of such
difficulty, weight, and importance, being neither Orator, neither Emperor,
nor yet potentate: marvel not I say, that I am so presumptuous, as to take
upon me, two things of such exceeding gr^atnesse, as they may seem
incomparable: namely, talk uttered by me, that ^endeth to the state of
Graecia: and counsel offered, to you as a prince both puisant and politic:
For, as I never had to deal in the common wealth: (^ro^ the which, what causes
constrained me to be abstinent, it were a bus^e and laborious thing to
declare:) so no man will make denial, I suppose, that I am destitute of
knowledge and instruction, which contains things of baser countenance, and
that labors to the attainment of matters of more importance. Wherefore, it
shall not seem to savor any whit of absurdity, that* my sight be somewhat
sharper in discerning what is co^odions for the weal public, then they that,
there, are in superiority, having the common wealth in government, as
presidents over the people. It shall not be long, ere we give a testimony,
whether we be of any worthynesse and reputation: whereof our Oration hereafter,
shall procu^e due experience.

Isocrates to Philippo.
THE ARGUMENT.
This Epistle is tripartite, or consisting of three portions. First he
dehorteth Philip from making war rashly, whereof Cicero also, in this order
writes: In the field to use temeri^ie, all upon the head to handle the weapon,
and to enter conflict or ski^mish with the enim^e* it is no point of huma^itie,
but the property of a sauag^ beast: But when time and necessity requires,
then on with armor, and fight for life, preferring death, before serui^ude and
misery. Secondly, he gives him advise, to make war against the king of the
Persians. Lastly, he counsels him not to refuse the friendship of the
Atheniens, and to be bountiful to the Graecians in general.

OF truth (right renouned Roy) A way to win favor by the figure Oc cupatio:
and to attentiveness by using comparison.
I am not to be taught, the humor of al men to be so infected with philauty
and self love, that vain praysers are accepted and had in estimation, when
wise counselers and recounters of honesty and virtue, are rejected, put by, as
people of no price, and counted contemptible: especially if any man,
voluntarily and of his own accord, take upon him the office of giving
pr^cepts to to amend things amiss, not being thereunto won by others
requests, nor yet warranted by commandment.

As for mine own person, if I had not heretofore, even in those points which
were pertinent to your high estate, of a right good meaning and purpose, put
you in remembrance: I would not at this instant, have bewrayed my secret
meaning, in open and apparent speech, concerning those things, which are to
your highness allotted. But, forasmuch as it is my determination, of
conscience to be careful in affairs touchi^g your person, being a puisant
prince, both for the affection of love, wherewith in my countries cause, I am
inflamed, and also for the duties sake, where with all, for the benefit of the
Graecians, I acknowledge my self to be burdened: I would suspect in heart,
that I had committ^d a heinous and filthy offense, to offer then to your
majesty, in matters not so necessary and urgent, the use of my counsel: and
now in cases of great importance, and which require, for their weightinesse,
no small circumspection, not once to mutter, nay rather to be still and silent.
A sente^tious dehortation from *rashness in fighting in battle by com parison,
by dilemma an argument not to be avoided by division, and from examples.
Then was the gem of your glory only, in hassard to be blemished: Now, the
sa^tie of your life is in fear to be indaungered: wherein you seemed to all
those that heard terms of contumely thundered against your grace, very secure
and negligent. For, what man is there, but knows that in perilous attemptes,
and desperate adventures, you are carried away with more temeritie, then, by
the ensigns of your royalty, is sufferable? and that you are stoung with more
love, to hear your self for valiantness aduau^ced, then touched with
tenderness, to see y^ whole body of the land politiquely preserved. It is
altogether a^ discommendable and infamous, for a man being inuir^ned with his
enemies, though he fight valiauntly, yet with the rest of his fellow soldiers
to be in equality: as it is to throw him self in dungeons of dangers, and to
plunge in pittes of perils, when necessity offreth no such constraint, which
being avoided and overcome, he has done nothing, where by he should be renouned:
and yet loo^ng his life, immediately follows shipwreck of all things that he
is worth, and an utter overthrow of his whole estate. It is not (out of doubt)
always to be counted worthiness in a warrior, to be hackt and hewn in the
field with the edged weapons: But then is praise the pension of puisance,
when, for For as the nature of circumstances be, such are the acts and deed^
depending on the same: and many times the circumstaunce alters the action.
etc.
the defense of his natural country, the safety of his parents, and the
weal of his children, he pusheth upon the sharp pikes, as not terrified with
the sight of any bloody adventure. But when the above named, shall receive
annoyaunce, when they shall be damnified, by such a kind of death, and when
the successes of adventures in times passed, shall be blemished, stained, and
ingloriously defaced: such a death is so far from being commended, that it is
utterly condemned, so far from being embraced, that it is to be abandoned, as
an enemy to honor, and a procurer of shame and infamy. Good it were and
convenient, in mine opinion, that you follow the same order in battle and
warfare, which cities use and exercise: For, all and every of them, when they
send their armies and bands of harnessed soldiers, to any place, so prudent
and provident, that having a regard first to the weal public, and the
Senate, they Consultations at home, are as necessary, as skirmishes abroad
with the aduer sarie.
leave them at such stay, and set them in such convenient order, as they may
consult and deliberate without interruption, upon such matters as tend to
their estate: where upon, this comes to pass, that, if any wound be inferred
with force of foreigne weapon, yet does not the strength of them all decay,
neither is their power generally suppressed: but they are of ability to suffer
many slaughters, and of sufficiency to recover their riches, as not subject to
perpetual impouerishment. Which thing (most mighty Prince) you ought to have
in contemplation, and perfect view: persuading your self in judgment, that to
For that being lost, what commodity, what delect^tion can redound to any man?
life and safety, nothing, though most pr^cious, is comparable: besides that,
this ought to be a principal part of your meditation, namely, the well using
and commendable ordering of obtained victories. Do you not see, in what great
carfulness of their kings good estate, the Lacedaemonians labor? insomuch
that the best citizens, and the chiefest among them, in worship and
countenance, disdain not to stand in their defense, nay rather conform their
hearts and hands to have them supported: to whom greater shame does redounde,
and controulments of discommendation enforce fouler blemishes of infamy, in It
is high honor therefore, in the (...) behalf, to exhibit duty and
service, and ^pecially in time of t^multuous battle.
not protecting the life of their Prince, and preserving him from deadly
danger, then in casting down their targets, as f^aughted with fearfulness.
You are not ignorant, what fortuned to Xerxes, busying him self to oppress
the Graecians with ^eruitude, and what chanced to Cyrus, endeavoring to
challenge possession of the Persian dominion. For the one of them, being
vanquished in so many conflictes, discomfited in so many skyrmishes, and sorely
assaulted, afflicted, and dismayed with so many slaughters and bloudsheds, that
it p^sseth y^ memory of any man, to rip up a semblable example: nevertheless,
in so much as his Life preser^ed, all other losses may in ^ime be ^ecouered and
supplied.
life escaped shipwreck, his kingdom was not only, to his own contentation
restored* but the same also ^as left to his sons by succession, as theirs by
interest of inheritance to be possessed: Yea, he so fortified Asia, that it is
no less to be feared, then in former times it has been accustomed. As for
Cyrus, after all the kings armies were overthrown, when all things fell to the
lot of his jurisdiction: through his temeritie it came to pass so
preposterously, y^ The inconveniences of temerous and unadvised dealing.
of so large a kingdom, he not only sustain the deprivation: but brought al
his soldiers into utter hassarde and extreme inconveniences. I could make a
recapitulation of an infinite number, who, when they were governors of lands,
and captains general over huge hoasts, because they them selves suffered an
untimely discomfiture, and perished contrary to ^xpectation, they drew after
them innumerable multitudes into destruction. The conclusion of his former
discourse: and a transition to the second part of his epistle, co^ cerning the
moving of war against the Persian people.
These examples ought you to consider, and as presidentes not unmeet for a
prince, prudently to ponder, that the praises of valiaun^nesse and
magnanimity, which is yoaked with temeritie, and inordinate ambition, should
not be hunted after of your majesty, sithence they are annoyances to true
nobility: neither would I wish you, in so manifold mischiefs of mighty
monarchies, to intrude your self into other dangers of battle and murder to
the darkening of your dignity royal: neither encounter with them, that either
are not unwilling, to sustain the loss of a life, overwhelmed with
wretchedness: or in hope to obtain larger wages and salarie, cast them selves
very rashly and securely into millians of mischiefs, and dangers in manner
inextricable: neither show your self desirous of that renoune, wherein there
appears to be some Because the praise proper to a prince ought not to be
popular: but peculiar, as his estate is se uerall.
community with many Barbarians and Graecians, but be you studious and
inquisitiue after that glory which may garnish your majesty in such sort, as
you may seem a myrrour in this our age, and a prince admitting no mate:
neither set your affection upon such virtues, as to contemptible persons, and
people of base degree, are not denied: but after those singular ornaments labor
with an insatiable appetite, and an unquenchable thyrst, whereof no man of a
lewd and vicious disposition, is a communicant or partaker: neither let your
battle be ingloryous, exempted from nobleness, and entangled with
difficulties, when they may be honorable, magnificent, valiant, and
accompanied with pleasure, niether let your attempts be such, as through your
occasion, your dearest friends, and those the^ whom none can be more near,
should be For that tends to your own dishonor.
damnified, and dashed out of courage: your enemies on the contrary,
harboring in hope and confidence: of which thing you cannot, no not at this
instant, be excused, sithence therein you have offended. But as for these
barbarous and foreign people, with whom you are now at defiance, it shall be
sufficient so long to be conqueror, as your own kingdom, Necessary points
incident to a king or governor: these documents and instructions are not set
down with such eloquence, as th^i s^uour of wisdom.
by your policy and discretion, is safely and soundly established. And
touching him, whose title is so stately, as to be called Rex Magnus, The great
King, it remains, y^ his exterminion out of the empire ^e procured, and that
of principality he be dipossessed: y^ by these means, as by ready instruments,
both your own renoune may be amplified, and that to the Graecians it may be
apparent, against whom battle is to be denounced. I wish most earnestly,
that I had written thus much to your highness, before your expedition: that
either, if you had been conformable to my counselles, you had not been so
greatly indaungered: or if you had not been applyable to my precepts, I might
not seem to persuade you unto those things, which none do now disalow, having
seen the event and success of the same: but ye end it self, might give a
testimony, ye mine admonitions and aduertisements, concerning these matters,
were, in respect of verity, not to be disanulled, and in consideration of
upright duty and scruice, not to be controuled. Now, The transiti on to the
third part of his Epistle, touching the Atheniens.
for so much as the nature of this discourse is such, as it offers
plentiful occasions wherein to continue talk: I will not wade further in this
case, because I am of opinion, that as well your own person, as also the
chiefest and faythfullest of your favorers, will add to that which I have
already alleged, many more circumstaunces. Furthermore, I fear least in
delivering mine opinion in this point, I have showed my self over curious.
For, whiles I proceed by little and little, and as it were go forewarde foot
by foot, I have not remembered the thing present in my hands, but neglecting
the brevity of an Epistle, have followed the course and order ^f an Oration.
Wherein, Or, althoug^ I have forgotten to limit my lines, because the argu meant
wherein my style is co^ uersant, is of importance. etc.
although I have not been circumspect, yet is it my duty, not to pretermit
and pass over with silence, such necessary things as tend to the estate of
our city, and require due vtteraunce: But I must do mine endeavor, to
persuade you all that I may, to the knitting of familiarity with the same, and
to the gracious bene^ite of friendship. For, I think, there are not a few,
who report and blase abroad in the ears of people, not those mere odious
tales which ring in our hearing, to the defamation of your royalty, but
letters, tales, and fables, cast in the moulde of their own immagination: unto
whose For nothing is more perni cious to a prince, then to give ear to
Parasites, slau^derers, clawebacks, and such like noisome monsters.
infecting tongs, O king, be not attentive, for it is not convenient. And why?
Because it is a flat absurdity, and a thing directly against reason, that you,
nipping your people with sharp reprehensions, because they lend listening
ear, to the lewd language of detestable slaunderers: should have them in
high reputation and favor, who profess that faculty, and use it for a common
exercise. And you know, that they can persuade our people which way they list,
much more fit then is it for you, to rule the same at your plea sure. For, if
so be they, who toward the common wealth have not been meritorious or
bountiful, attain by words alone, to what so ever thing they wish and will:
How then can it be but requisite and convenient, that your majesty, in whose
power it rests, with lively deeds, to assiste us exceedingly, not to obtain
at our hands, what so ever pleases your highness? As for those kind of men,
that refer all things to the Atheniens, I see them opposite and set against,
the bitter accusers of our city: and them in like manner, that affirm the
Atheniens in no kind of thing, either great or small to be culpable. But be
it far from me to utter any such speech. For, sithence some are of this
opinion, that The saying of a Pagane not unworthy of the mouth of a christian:
these words of Isocrates ag^ with the doctrine evangelical.
not the Gods them selves, notwithstanding their state of perfection, are
free from all offense, I would be asham^d to be so vain glorious, and
swollen with ostentation, as to challenge a ^aultlesse life, saying, that at no
time our deed^s have so swerued, that they might be amended: Howbeit, thus much
I am to affirm, y^ your majesty shall find no city, more requisite for the
Graecians,

L. ij. or for your affairs more con^enient: which benefit is of you most
diligently to be considered. For it shall not procure to your highness,
exceeding great commodities, not only if with your Grace, it enter society:
but also, if it do but seem unto you favorable, and you again unto it
appear friendly and courteous. For, to turn ye sum of my talk to them whom
your highness has in present obedience, if they shall have none other to ^lee
unto for refuge, thus much I dare pro mise, that to your majesty they shall
continue dutiful: and as for the Barbarians, you shall with more facility and
speediness, compel them to loyalty. What may be thought now of y^ The beneuo
lence and good w^l of people, is a cause that the prince pro spereth the bet
ter.
beneuo^e^ce, which is of such quality, as we have above mentioned? is it not
to be desired, is it not to be sought after, and that with earnes^nesse,
sithence by the efficaci^ and virtue of the same, your Grace shall be of power
sufficient, not only to protect your possessed Empire from foreign invasion,
but also to enlarge your dominion: yea, and that without hassard and detriment?
Now, out of question, I can not but have those princes dealings in admiration,
that hire strange soldiers for salarie in battle to do them service, y^
maintain them with great and large wages, they them selves not being ignorant,
that many, by giving credit to such false varlots, have been betrayed, and
very few (doutlesse) from loss of life preserved: not endeavoring, rather, to
win to them selves the good wills, and procure, for their own advantage, the
assistance of so mighty and victorious a city, as has saved many places from
ruin and decay, yea, the whole land of Graecia, from the spoil of
desolation. An incitatio^ to further noblen^e, drawn from the co^memoration of
his p^aises: a point of a rhetorici^n worthy imi tation.
O prince, ponder this in your cogitation, let it be weyed precisely in your
thought, that many praise your prudence, many extol your wisdom, because you
dealt in such order with the people of Thessalie, as seemed not repugnant to
equity, and for them most expedient: which manner of men, are not of so
tractable a nature, are not of so mild a disposition, but hedstrong,
sedicious, given to moving of mutinies and rebellions. Eue^ so (most mighty
Monarch) judge of us, sithence you know well enough, y^ as y^ region of the
Thessalians, so the power of the Atheniens, is from you not so many degrees
distant: which, by your bountifulness, you can not do amiss to reconcile,
sithence Favor of people, far bet ter then conquestes and triumphs.
It is a point of more nobleness, puisaunce, and valiantness, to obtain and
win the favor of incorporate cities, then to scale castle walls, towers,
bulwarks, and fortifications. For as this does not only purchase hatred and
envy, every thing for the most part, that is done, being ascribed to the
violent soldiers: Even so, on the contrary part, if you could use the means
to win the hearts of the people, and to get men's good wills, what is he,
that shall not wonder at your wisdom? Concerning mine assertio^s and reasons,
in the behalf of our city, right requires that you continue worthy of
credit. The figur^ occupatio, whereby he go eth about to his words to add
authority.
For it is too too manifest and apparent, that it is so far from my custom,
to play the flatterer with my citizens, that there is no one man besides me, to
be found, of whom they are more often reprehended: yea, it is w^l known,
that the multitude have me in no es^imation (I mean, those that be clawbacks
and mealemouthed merchants, making account of their painted sheath:) but some
of them know not what I am, othersome hate me as ill as they hate you.

Nevertheless, this envy incident to us both, has in it a certain
difference: for they repine at you, because of your power, your riches, your
wealth, and your pr^ncely port: at me they grudge, because I profess my self,
to be indu^d with more wisdom then they: and more are there that delight ^n
their company, then that tak^ pleasure in my familiarity. I would it were as
easy for me, as it is for you, to remove the opinion of the multitude, so
unadvisedly concei^ed. A thing very usual with ^so crates, still to be putting
in the princes mind, the thing which is in present hand ling.
Now the matter rests in your highness, you may ^ee thereunto, if you will:
As for me, partly in consideration of mine age, and partly in respect of other
causes, mine own estate must be carefully regarded. To conclude, I see not to
what purpose it were, to make more words in this matter: howbeit, I will add
this overplus, that between your kingdom and your felicity: the prosperity
of the Graecians, and their (...) there may be some communion and intercourse,
nothing to the contrary withstanding.

Isocrates to Philippo.
THE ARGUMENT.
He begins this Epistle following, with an Argument drawn Ab vtili:
according to h^s usual order. Then he counseleth King Philippe, that he
setting a^ide all other matters what so ever, should make war, as soon as
may be, against the king of the Pe^sians. The conueyaunce of his matter shall
appear plain and manifest enough, if one part with anther be advisedly
conferred.

ALthough I have had sufficient conference, as I am persuaded, with Of this
name there were five in number, as is to be read in Authors, 1. A Sydo^ia^ Po
et, 2. a Tyrian Philosopher: 3. a (...) philosopher, 4 an (...), 5. an
Hieropo^itane sophister: the sixth a Macedonian, and the son of ^olaus, and
this is he of whom he spea ^eth in this place.
Antipater, as well touching the profits of our city, as conterning the
commodities of your person: yet willing was I not withstanding, to write unto
your high nesse, what, after the conclusion of peace, were not amiss to be
done: to write (I say) unto your majesty, matters not much dissenting from
th^se that I have mentioned in mine Oration: howbeit, much briefer. For, mine
advise, at that time, consisted in this point, that all controu^rsies of our
cltie, of the Lacedemon^ans, of the Thebanes, and of y^ Argiues being
cancelled, the Graecians might be reconciled and set at concord. For, I was in
opinion, that if you could obtain so much of the chiefest and most principal
cities, the residue would in like manner give assent, and, at no hand, stand
in contradiction. At that time, things were in another estate: but now are they
in such (...), that to use reasons of pers^asion, it is not n^cessarie. For, in
con^deration of the con^ or battle attempted, al are compelled to return to
their right mind, to remember them selves, and of those things duly to
consider, which I supposed requisite, both to be said and also to be done, of
your highness: that war, I mean ( Two infectiue diseases in the minds of ^en.
madness being removed, and Two infectiue diseases in the minds of ^en.
co^tousnesse cut ^ff, where with the minds of men are in^ected) should be
made in Asia. Furthermore, many there be, that demand this question, whether
I gave yo^ counsel to bend the force of arms against the Barbarians: or
whether I, after you had so determined and purposed, allowed your intent? As
^or me, who hitherto have had no conference with your majesty, touching that
matter, I say, that I know nothing of a certainty: yet neuerthel^sse, that to
your ^ounsels I denied not my consent, where in you used, long since, much
deliberation. Which answer after they had received, they assaulted me with a
request, namely, that I would give you advise, not to change your meaning, but
in your determination to persist. For, A persuasible ar gument used for his
purpose, consisting in commendation of Philippes doings.
more renouned deeds, more famous and noble acts, or tending more to the
profit of the Graecians, could never be adventured: neither might better
opportunity, to put things in practice, at any time be ministered If therefore I
were endued with that ripeness of wit, and ability of vtteraunce, wherein
when He shows with what an earnest desire he is touched, ^or the furtherance
of his cause, in calling his former years in question, and pleading his
present inability.
I was young, I flourished, and if I were not by reason of mine old age so
distressed of strength and Rhetorical ornaments, which beautify and pounce
the style of an Or^tor: I would not make letters the instrument of my meaning
to your highness, but I would in presence of your puisance, with such
patheticall speeches as I might, move your majesty, to take upon you this
enterprise with valia^tnesse. Now, in consideration of the premises, I deal
with you by way of The weapon of aged persons.
exhortation, as I am able, cou^seling you, not to neglect such opportunity,
nor to revolt from it, before you see it accomplished. Moreover, to boil in
the miserable desire of any thing besides, is contrary to honesty and honor:
for the most p^rte, are at such de^aunce with A vice and a virtue.
extremities, that A vice and a virtue.
mediocritie is the tr^asure which they count commendable* nevertheless, to
seek to the attainement of renoune, to clime up to the castle of glory, none
ought at any time to give over with ^ediousnesse* none ought to a^iure with
lothsomnesse: especially, if they be called to places of (...), and advanced
above others, to stately preeminence, Note the or der of Isocrates how he
takes occasion always to stir the spirit of the prince.
which Royal condition, and Imperial dignity, is allotted to your majesty.
Again, let this be your meditation, that your noble name, and flourishing
fame, cannot be empaired, but that it shall be quall to your martial exployts,
when those Barbarians (provided, that they, who are conformable to your
majesty, and to your graces regiment not rebellious, be not among the number)
be enforced by compulsorie means, to yealde service to the Graecians: and when
you have constrained that king, who is now named The great king: mening the
king of Persia.
(...) the mighty Monarche, to put those things in practice, which are
limited unto him by your royal commandment. The present estate being as it
is, your majesty may with more facility and ease, consummate and perform
these matters, then you attained that power and nobleness, which by the
assistaunce of your ancient kingdom, you recovered. Now there remains
nothing over and besides this, but that among ye Gods, as one of their number,
you be ascribed. This one thing, I am to think a benefit of mine age: because
I have lived till such time, as to see such things as my mind was occupied
about, in my young years, both in mine Oration called Panegyrica, and in that
also which I sent to your majesty, entitled Philippica, which I wrote with
mine own hand, partly put already in execution, and for that I rest in hope
also, they shall hereafter be accomplished and performed.

Isocrates to Philippo.
THE ARGUMENT.
He commends highly and notably his scholar and* friend D^odotus, together
with his son: giving privy prec^pts to Philippe, to get him wise counselers,
and not to mis^ike the liberal language of his well willers, in admonishing him
of things tending to his profit.

Although among us it be a perilous attempt, to pro^e the conueying of letters
into Macedo^a; not only now that we are at warte with you, but also in the
time of pear: yet not withstanding, have determined and (...), to direct an
Epistle to your highness, concerning Hi^ scholar, or disciple, in whose
behalf this Epistle right comme^dato^ie was penned.
Diodotus. For, I think reason requires, that I account of my familiar
friends, whose deserts to us ward clame ^course of duty, as of persons not
contempti^ie, but worthi^ ^stimation: and touching him, in whose behalf I
deal by writing, I cannot give too great a testimony of courtesy, in
consideration of his A thing that requires equal h^easure o^ courtesi^.
benevolence to us extended, and the integrity of his behavior plainly
signified: I was very willing to commend him to your majesty: unto whom,
after that access was granted by others mediation, unto your highness, thus
much remained unto me to accomplish, namely, in his cause to give some
testimonial, that the knowledge which your grace has of him, and he likewise
of your highness, may be, by my means, confirmed, ratified and established.
For, insomuch as many and diverse sorts of men, among whom the greatest part
be of good countenance, honorable and renowned, Or, have not refused to keep
me compani^.
have framed themselves to my conversation: oth^rsome also flourished in
el^quence, wisdom, poli^ie, and deeds of arms: and some again in modesty
of life were singular, and for decency in manners very much commended, being
otherwise, altogether unapt for other uses, and in other exercises inexpert and
ignorant: yet this Diodotus my scholar.
one odd man, of whom present mention is made, such is the dexterity and
readiness of his wit, such are his rare ornaments, whereby nature and Art
have beautified him, that in all the premises, and above cited cyrcumstaunces,
he is most cunning, most perfect, and in no one point unfurnished. Which
things, I durst not presume to auouche A confirmation drawn from an
i^fallible reason.
but that I am so far from being deceived in the man, that, what he is within
and without in affections of mind, and outward actions, I am most ab solutely
instructed: and that I also thought, your majesty has atteined the
understanding of this report, as well by (...) of your familiar meetinges, as
also by the information of them to whom he is well known and acquainted. Of
whom, there is not so much as one, except he be inflamed with extreme envy,
and marvelous maliciously minded, but will r^port him to be a man of singular
In eloquence and counsel Diodotus cou^ ted excellent.
eloquence, and in wise counsel to none inferior: besides that, in justice
incomparable in modesty matchless, to avarice or covetousness a bitter
adversary, and in all the trade of his life, a pleasant companion, and
courtecus in behavior. Moreover, that he has vtt^raunce at will, vtteraunce
I say, replenished with decency, abhorring whatsoever is unseemly: yea such
is his liberty of speech, as of right it* may be reputed, a manifest ar gument
of his benevolence, toward his friends and favorers: That relative pronown
has re^pecte to liberty of speech his pro per antecede^t, in the clause going
before.
which, being in deed, not discommendable, such as among men be of
principality and honorable estate, as have their minds so affected, as the
majesty and countenance of their empire requires, highly reverence, as a
thing passing commodious and profitable. As for those whose natures are not
correspondent, to the greatness of their power and dominion, they, I say, as a
morssell of too hard digestion, cry, away with it, for it is cumbersome: as
though thereby, they were compelled to put something in execution, which to
their own wills is repugnaunt, not understanding, when deliberation is had
concerning profit, those that in speech dare stand in contradiction, to
afford unto them exceeding great ability to compass what they will. For, it
is convenient and necessary, The little good that parasites, ^atterers,
cl^wbackes, and ^uch a^ speak pla^ sible things, do in common wealths.
that such as study, devise, meditate, and occupy their brains, to speak
all things to please, and nothing to offend, cannot by any means establishe,
the dominions of kings, which draw after them great and manifold dangers, and
such in deed as dep^d upon necessity, and cannot be auoid^d: but that they
are altogether insufficient, to confirm the liberty of commonwealthes, which
doubtless, are in somewhat more safety. It is a thing Tellers of plain
truth, without dissimulation, are to be had in estimation.
well beseeming such, as for the commodity and ad^auntage of their hearers,
smoulther not the inward thoughts of their minds, with secret silence, but
utter freely, whatsoever they think convenient, to be so esteemed off, as of
men not unable, of many things to procure the preservation, which oth^rwise
seemed very nigh ruin and desolation. In conside^ation of which foresaid
premises, An admonition for princes, governors magistrates, and such as bear
off^ce of countenance in common wealths.
it ought of right to be provided, y^ princes, governors, and such as are
planted in seats of authority, should more esteem the words of them that
tell the truth with simplicity: then the smoth speeches of them, that speak
all things to currie favor, and yet indeed, say nothing that deserves
favor. Nevertheless, of custom it comes to pass, that some, and of them
not a few, make more account of such as fawn on them with flattery, then of
those that affirm the Which was the cause that Diodotus was so vexed and
molested.
manifest verity: Which was a great occasion, that certain of the nobles and
peers of Asia disquieted Diodotus: toward the commodity of whom, although
he was touched with a careful consideration, as appeared, not only by
ministering wholesome counsels, but also in deeds of arms, and putting
himself out to daungero^s adventures: yet notwithstanding, in so much as he
admonished them of their duties, some what largely in language, An unmeet
recompense for such hono rabble and ^ingular service as well of mind as of bo
die.
he was dispossessed of such honors as in his country sometimes he enjoyed,
and besides that he fell from the hope of passing great rewards, wherwithal he
was attainted. Thus were the plausible speeches of fantastical parasites of
more efficacy, then the merits and good deeds of so notable a man, were of
authority. For these causes m^cioned, albeit he were from time to time
determined, to have access unto you, yet, I wott not with what manner of
Timorousness a shrewd hinde^er of (...).
^iorousnesse and fear he was hindered: not because he supposed them that were
placed in highest degree of dignity, to be al alike am^ge themselves: but, for
the having taken trial and experience of others crooked conditions, he dur^t
not intertaine the a^aunce and hope, which of us to hi^ was off^ed: So that in
this case, Diodotus co^ pared to a paf singer upon the fea. The course of the
comparison is not unworthy the no^ing, for imita^on* o^ (...).
he may be compared to some y^ sail^ upon the swelling seas, who being
disc^mfited with the storm^ and tempests thereof, never enter ship to the
same end again with quiet minds: albeit they know and see, y^ sailing*
oftentimes has prosperous success, and happy fortune. But, because he is
commended to your majesty I think it a meritori^ deed, and I am of opinion,
it will redo^nd to his commodity. The occasion of which my thinking* is
principally inge^dred by your Virtues that ought to be resident in every
princes mind.
clemency, your humanity* and your mildness, which is not here at home wtin
the walls of your own dominion, but in foreign jurisdictions and barbarous
countries, to your singular renown by ye clanging tr^mp of swift report,
proclaimed. Moreover, I am of this judgment concerning you, that you are not
to learn, how nothing within the eompasse of the heavens, procures more
pleasance, obteineth more profit, then Honest and faithful friends are an
inualua ble jewel, and a most precious trea^ure.
the purchasing of such friends, as be honest and faithful, by ways of well
doing, I mean benefits: and of such men to be careful, to deserve none
otherwise then well, in whose behalf, for courtesy to them exhibited, many,
yea innumerable, will show themselves thankful. For, such as be furnished
with the armor of virtue, such as glister and appear glorious with the leames
of learning, acknowledge no less praise and reverence, to them that honor and
highly esteem such, as in virtue and learning be famous, then they would, if
they themselves were partakers of these excellent benefits. But such to be
the disposition of Diodotus, I dare warrant, as by his own industry and
private means, he will win your majesty's favor in such sort, that you
must needs vouchsafe him courtesy. With Namely by the commemoration of your
clem^cie your gentleness, your af^abilitie, and other virtuous ornaments.
semblable persuasions I assaulted his son, to have access to you, that ^y
submitting himself as a scholar to your discipline, he might thereby reap
advantage, and of his sustained labor recover an acquitall. Which advise when
I had given, and he with attentive ear had received, he confessed forthwith,
that of your friendship, there was not in all the world, then he, a man more
desirous: howbeit, to his words thus much more he a^nexed, for further
discovery of his secret mind, y^ he was there unto drawn with semblable
affection, as he has been to Exercises of acturitie, where an the winner
received a crown o^ a ga^land: these g^mos were ^alled Gymni ca certamina, and
in ancient ^ime very much freque^^ed.
open games and spectacles, rewarded with crowns and garlands. For (said he)
I was in love with the adununcemente of victory, but to offer the trial of my
self, in those exercises required, I wanted courage: and why? Because I
perceived the unworthiness of mine ability, far inferior to the fame and
renown, issuing from those solemn coronations. In like manner, he wished most
heartily, by your mediation to mount to honor: but he suspected, something in
himself to harbor, whereby he should be hindered. For his * want of
experience is to him an impediment, and The first make men unmeet for places
of honor, the second d^i ueth them into an amas^ment.
ye glorious show of your stately authority, a sore discouragement. To which
imperfections his body may be joined, being not so finely proportioned, as it
should escape reprehension, which in many respects, as he supposes, will be
letts to his furtheraunce. Howbeit, whatsoever to him shall seem auailable, to
do that, let him have leave and liberty. So that, whether he address him to
come to you, or whether he lead his life in this soil, being addicted to
quietness and abhorring the contrary, A summarie of the whole petition made
to king Phillippe by Isocrates, in the behalf of Diodotus and his son.
let him find such favor at your graces hands, that as well all necessari^s
whatsoever, by your procuremente, may be supplied for his maintenance, as also
that both he and his father, may be so provided for, as they may lead their
life free from annoyaunce and fear of danger. For thus ought you to think,
that we commend him to you, as a Which requires a care full regard, a
prouide^t eye, and whatsoeelse is necessary.
thing delivered to your keeping by us in this our old age* (which is to be had
in high honor, and reverence) committed I say to you by our authority (if at
least wise it carry any show of countenance) of good will, yea of the same
goodwil, which to you, through the whole course of my years, I have professed,
and to your weal also, put in practice and executed. I would not wish you to
be moved with admiration, either at the largeness that I use in this letter,
or for that I have uttered some what therein, sauouring of curiosity or
ancient experience. For, setting all other things aside, I bent the whole
force of my will and wit to this end, that it might be apparent and not
vntestified, A conclusion testifying the disposition of his heart to his friend
whom he loves.
the commodities of my friends to kindle in me exceeding carfulness, whom
I love and tender with as much duty as is possible.

Isocrates to Alexandro.
THE ARGUMENT.
He rejoices that Alexander loves learning, whom under a color of
commendation he exhorts, by keeping company with virtuous men, and using the
familia^itie of such as be endued with knowledge, to seek after ^loquence,
finesse of speech, and policy in governing the commonwealth, rather then the
entangled disputations of Logique, and quarelling questions of the Sophistical
Science: not without a privy rebuking (as I suppose) of Aristotle's profession.

WHen I sent letters to King Philip of Macedonia your puissant predecessor.
your father (right noble king) I thought my self to attempt a thing repugnant
to reason, if I seemed not to be mindful of your highness, and to
acknowledge some courtesy by salutation, considering that you en^oy the self
same title of renown, the self same majesty of a Monarche, the self same
seat of royalty, and al things else to principality apperteyning: yea, I
thought my doings to savor of no sparckle of duty, if I wrote not somewhat
to your puisa^ce, whereby people might conceive an opinion, (those I mean to
whom I am unknown) that For if wisdom should want in old men, in what age
were it to be lound?
^ld age has not deprived me of wisdom, and so deluded my judgment, that I
am utterly drowued in dotage: but that they might thus rather think, that the
wit which remains in me at this hour, being not consumed and wasted, as the
strength of my body, by sunory casualties, and multitude of years (specially)
infeebled, is not unworthy of that ability, of y^ order, of Of Rheto^ique or
the orato^e profession.
that faculty, and of that conueyaunce in writing, wherein, when I was young
and not subject to these present infirmities, I flourished. The renown of your
majesty, striketh-into * An allusion to the good inclination of Alexander: who
was but young when this Epistle was writ (...).
mine ears: For in whose mouth is not this report, that to ye Atheniens, you
are marvelous favorable, and exceeding friendly, beesides that, very well
disposed to the attainement of wisdom: wherein, undoubtedly, you give a
testimony, not of vnaduisement, but of an approueable judgment. I must needs
confess, that for this cause, commendation is the merit of your majesty,
because the voice goes, y^ Whereon the praise of a Prince principally does
depend.
you have in countenance and estimation, such of our citizens, not as want ye
ornaments of virtue, not as lack learning, not as be boyd and desritute of
wisdom, no^ as be of a corrupt inclination, and as it were fettered and fast
bound with a detestable desire to practice deeds ^ending to ^hischiefe: but
such, of whom you have good liking, hearing their prudent discourses, and
learned reasons without satietic, lothsomnesse, tediousness: The commendation
of his worthy qualities continued.
in keeping of whose company, and using whose conversation, you are so far
from being indaungered, or running into any kind of annoyance, that you are
much benefited, and from many injuries defended. For the acquaintance of Men of
approved life and honest conuer sation.
such men is to be desired, their familiariti^ is to be sought after with
sedulitie and earnestness, especially of such as have the name and credit of
wise men in^eede. Among all kind of sciences, and professio^s of knowledge,
you have such an emulation and envy to Logique, which techeth men to make
fa^sitie (...), and verity salsitie, by sophistical conclusions.
exercises Dialectical^ as y^ you improve the^ as toys, yet not to be utterly
disalowed, (for so of your highness it is reported:) but so to think of them,
as of things in private meetings of friends and familiar compamo^s, very
requisite and auailable. Nevertheless, to princes, governors, rulers of
people, and persons placed in high seat of authority, not so necessary and
profitable. For, thus stood your opini^n, that i^ is a thing neither
expedient, nor yet decent, that such as pass others in worthiness and
preeminence, should use with their citizens A thing prop per to ia^gling
sophisters and questionistes in their quarrelling exercises and Logique schole
points.
quarelling questions, or give to the rest liberti^ of ouerthwarting in
language and unseemly contraciction. So that (as the rumor runs) this
manner of profession is no Howell in your Alphabet, is no flower in your
Garden, is not regarded of your person: but that eloquence, finenesse of phrase
in vtteraunce of talk and communication, is the thing which you account
excellent, which with us is usual, both in the affairs be^oging to our daily
conversation, and at such times also as we deliberate in matters touching y^
common wealth. Through the attainement of which Eloquence and Philosophy. the
one consisting in sweet and orderly vtteraunce: the other in wise and prudent
precepts.
singular Sciences, you have aspired to that perfection of ability, that you
most prudently instruct them, that to your grace are obedient, even presently,
what shall happen hereafter, and skilfully inf^urme them, what every one, of
duty, is bound to put in practice: yea, that ripen^sie of judgment you have
attained, whereby of things concerning honestic, and instice, you can give
approved sentence: and of their opposites or co^traries deliver a good opinion.
Furthermore, of this commodity you are made a possessioner, that By wisdom
and knowledge.
thereby you can measure the penalties and punishments of offenders, according
to the proportion of their crimes, not running into Of too little, or to much.
either extremity, but keeping an equality. The self same also is your
direction, in recompencing such as do well, with rewards not undeserved. Your
wisdom therefore, and your passing eloquence, are worthy to be pouldered
with perpetual praise, in consideration that you (a prince and king) acquaint
your self in such kind of studies, and in them spend your time, being (no
doubt) commendably bestowed. For A conclusion kindling further incoragement in
the mind of Alexander drawn from hope and boune esperaunce.
by this your endeavor, you minister hope to your father, and afford
plentiful affiaunce to your friends, that in process of time, as your years
increase, and you continue in these virtuous exercises, it will come to pass,
that in wisdom you shall so far outrunne all the rest, how far your
father is beyond all other that are alive, none excepted.

Isocrates to the offspring of Jason.
THE ARGUMENT.
First of all he prefixeth the reason that moved him not to go into
Thessalia. Then, by a prolonged insinuation he persuadeth him, to be of this
opinion, that civil benevolence is better then tyrannical government.

ONe of our Ambassadors made report unto me, that you drew him a side from
his company, and demanded of him severally, being separated from the rest,
whether it were possible to win me by persuasion, to leave the place of my
present aboade, and to take on me a foreign voyage, to the intent, we might
enjoy one another familiarity? My will is good touching this matter, for
Iasons sake and Polyazes cause Or, both which have vouch^afed me friendly
entertainme^t, and courteous usage.
both which have exhibited unto me singular significations of courtesy: and I
know that if it might be compassed, that we meet and confer, it is like to
prove a general commodity. But I have many hindrances, among which this is a
chief and principal, A necessary cause whereby old men are to be holden
ex^used.
the weakness of my nature, that cannot endure the labors of painful
iourneying: beesides that, it is not seemly, that I being so aged and stricken
in years, should lead the rest of my life in a strange and outlandish
country. Again, many, hearing of that voyage, nay, all would have me in
contempt, and that deservedly, because in my drowping days I attempt tedious
traveling, having framed the former course of my life in tranquillity and
quiet nesse^sithence it is convenient, yea, although I had lived long in some
for reign land, yet now to draw homeward to my nat^ue soil, considering
that death stands at the door, and my next lodging must be y^ grave. Further
more (for to what intent should I lie) I stand in fear of mine own city, I
mistrust it much, seeing the leagues and co^federacies made with it, so sone
violated, so soudeinly cracked in sunder. And surely, if in your affairs the
like chance appear, how, which way, by what means, may I escape
reprehension, may I avoid punishment, (considering y^ it is a thing not so
easily brought about* how, I say, should I shun shame and infamy, some
thinking that for mine own cities sake, I neglect your safety, or for your
cause am careless of my country? And seeing that the commodity is not
common, how I might gratify both, I do not understand. The reasons therefore,
for y^ which I may not do that which I would, are many. Howbeit, I think it
indecent, that I writing of mine own matters, should, in yours, show me
self negligent: but what has been discoursed upon too and fro, in place
where I am, I will imparte the knowledge of them unto you in writing, as I feel
me self able. I would not have you conceive this sinister opinion, that more
The first I abhor, the last I do esteem.
for oste^tation and vaineglories sake, I have penned this epistle, then for
The first I abhor, the last I do esteem.
consideration of your courtesy and gentleness: For I am not so madd a man, as
to be ignorant, that I, in this my deerepite and drowping age, cannot indite
and frame my style in writing after a better form and order, then in former
times, when that which I did publish and make manifest, was very plausible, and
thought praise worthy: But if I pronounce y^ which is nothing so good, it is
like, y^ the light of my renown, shall not suffer a partile eclipse, but it
shall be in manner, wholly darkened. Further more if I should seem serious, in
doing service to the aduaunceme^t of mine own wit, among al other matters, I
would not have those this argument: whereupon to make an apt discourse, it is
merueilous easy: but I would have been inqui^itiue after things more
commendable, and opening Or, a larger field, wherein I may have scope to
deliner my meaning in words
a freer passage to mine utterance. But, to this day, have I not so well liked
of these things, sithence there be other matters which the rather I regard,
whereof a multitude are ignorant: neither in consideration of that, have I at
this present, taken upon me this labor. But when I understand, that you are
burdened with busy affairs, and such things as be intricate and fraught
wish difficulties, what my judgment concerning them, is, A will not be deintic
to make declaration. An entrance to his purpose
I think, that ability to give counsel is agreeable to mine age, and that I
want not wisdom for such a purpose. For Experience makes old men passing
cunning.
experience, and the use of many things, have made old men cunning and exp^rt:
yea, it works in them such perfection, that they abo^ al other have
perseverance and knowledge, what is profitable, what is inconvenient. As for
discoursing upon present ^ccasions, sweetly, smothly, finely, eloquently,
cunningly and artificially, it is a work and labor of our old age Because
such things are more agreeable to younger years and riper wits.
not to be cracted. Wherefore, this my service shall seem sufficient, if I
discover mine opinion, and lay my meaning naked to the view of others
judgment. I would not you should merucile, if I fall in mention of some
circumstance or other, where withal heretofore, ^y hearing you are acquainted:
For, peradventure, I shall be constrained, Cum nihil dici possit quod non sit
dictum prius: Sythence nothing can be spoken, but that which heretofore has
been vt^ered.
to entertain some of them into the manor of my memory, which must needs be
uttered: othersome, for that I know them serviceable to my purpose, I may not
pretermit: For I should show my self inbrawnd with foolishnes, when I see
others usurping that which of me has been uttered, yet I me self to be so
precise, as to abst^ine from such words and sentences, as in times pas^, both
by tongue and also by pen I have delivered. Thus much have I placed in the
front by way of a preamble, because y^ coming first and being most manifest,
is one them y^ are least abstruse and secret. For I use of custom to say (...)
says the Greek text: Quidnam oratione, says the Latin interpretation: which
we have Englished, Utteraunce.
to the folowers of our philosophy and discipline, al other things whatsoever,
this to be considered, what, by * utterance, and the members of the same, is to
be compassed: Which when we have found, and diligently, or rather thoroughly
dispatched, I tell them again, y^ sensible reasons, and ornaments must be used,
which to the argument or whole cause is a beautifying, and a mean to attain
y^ end whereunto our attempts were leuelled. This, concerning oratorie
exercises, is our persuasion: the self same is the groundworke of al things
else, and of your deliberation, it is the prop, maine post and pillar. For
nothing can be wi^sely wrought, except, first of all you make this your
meditation, and ^ singularity of skill thus consider Premeditations not to be
neglected.
what manner* Or what kind of men.
of people ye will prove your selves to be hereafter, how you will frame the
course of your life, and conversation, and to what manner of auth^ritie your
(...) shall be directed^in choice of honor, which to like and love, either that,
which* y^ citizens offer of voluntary motion, or y^ which is gotten perforce,
wroung from them contrary to their wills, and pray upon with tallans of
extortion^ These things prudently pondered and marked, al manner of actions
whatsoever, daily and hourly incident, are semblably to be considered: and you
must do y^ uttermost of your indeuonr* that al your atte^pts may be referred to
the self same, which was laid before you in the beginning. If you sha^ th^s
limit your selves, having an eye to this platform, and acquainting your wits
with Which inge^ der actions or de^des correspondent to their kind.
wise consultations, your purposes shall have straight aim, as it were at a
white, to the ready reaping of your comoditie, and the more able shall you be
to enjoy it. But if* you lay not such a ^aft foundation, putting in practice
whatsoever chances, it must needs follow, y^ as your wits wander, The
inconvenience of temeritie.
so of many things y^ you might other wise have, you shall be fru strate. A
privy objection.
One or other peraduentnre of them y^ have lived inordinatly, will go about to
quarrel and find fault with my reasons, buisily beseeging me with commands, to
deliver unto them Or, some substantial reason, in the confirmation of mine
assertion.
some sentence of certuintie, touching this proponed controversy. I may not
therefore (...) my iud^ment in the whole matter. A resolution or answer to the
former ob iection: co^teining a comparison of a private man and a tyrant: of
whom Xenophon sub tit. Simonidis, and Hieronis, largely discourses.
The life of pri^ate men (in ^ine opini^) is more secure, more quiet, and
better, then the life of tyrants: and I suppose those honors more pleasant
and acceptable, which unto princes, by valiant hearted people are exhibited:
then such dignities as the torments of terror, extort and wring f^o^ such as
with servitude are oppressed. And although I am not ignorant, that there will be
many to stand against me in contradiction, and among al other, such as be of
your familiar acquain tance, principally: yet nevertheless, concerning this
matter, I must somewhat give a taste of my judgment: for I think that even
these, through your persuasions are suggested, and meruailously provoked, not
only to have tyranny retained, but to see the same established. This do they
so much the rather, for that they take not a full vewe, of the whole nat^e
thereof, but being entangled in blind (...), throw ^selues into rivers, nay,
main seas of errors* They have respect to his Which outward circumstances
breed error.
authority, they conside^ his commodities, they are touched with consideration
of his (...) delights, (...) the obteyning and enjoying of all which, they hope
themselves to be in possibility* But (alas) they (...) (...) The troubled
state of tyrannical po were d^scribed.
wh^le worlds of troubles, their manifold ^eares, their (...) or like
bloudsheads, finally, the infinite annoyances that attend vp^ princes* and on
such as be in princes favor* these mischefe^ they mark no^ these perils are
unperceived. That falls on them, which happens Note the course of this
comparison.
to such as attempt mos^ (...) of^* ^ (...) notorious* who altho^gh they be
ig^raunt what ^wdnes lucketh* and what he ynousnesse is harbored in the (...)
they go about, yet neu^rthelesse, they are ^o far from despair of well
speeding that their food is co^nfidence to reap such profit and advantage,
as therein consists, al perils escaped, and al dangers that are wont to be
joined to such pernicious enterprises, avoided: pa^pering their minds with this
imagination, that they be as far from all annoyaunce, as heaven is from hell,
and as nigh neighbors to al manner of commodities, as the flesh to the skin.
If therefore, any be of this belief and opinion, I give them leave to use their
Or, to enjoy their happiness and blessed condition in their own blockishne^
beatitude and felicity in their folishnesse. I should be ashamed, if I taking
upon me the charge of a Couns^llour, should not (...), neglect others profi^e,
and (...) own^ advantage: and rather (setting al a^ ha^ard, both mine own
(...), and all thinge^ els^ whatsoever, as utterly (...)) give them suc^ (...),
a^ should tend wholly (...) their (...). Then would I wish you, s^ to listen
and learn my (...), as that you may give evidence, you are fully re^olued, Or,
my meaning to be none otherwise then I profess with tongue.
my heart and my tongue to be at agreement.

^ocrates to Timoth^o.
^ THE ARGUMENT.
He highly aduaun^eth the (...) of a certain tyrant: and gives him counsel,
under the pre^ence of praise, to be gentle and courteous to (...) is citizens.
Lastly, he tempts Timoth^us with a petition* namely to be a^ (...) and
succoure^ to one (...).

WHat tried friendship has knitt ^s twain in one, you have (I think)
received by the report of many. First of all, I An exhortation to cleme^ c^e,
under the color of com mendation.
cannot but (...) for your sake, in that your usage, in this possession of
princip^litie, is far bett^r then your fathers was, and your ^oings tempered
with m^re (...): Secondly, because you are in^amed with a greater (...) ^o
purchase honest and honorable renown, then to gather ^gether in huge heaps,
abundaunce of riches, and mo^e like mountains: In which your doings, no
slender signification of virtue appears: but rather a most manifest test
^oniall of your well disposed nature, and right commendable disposition.
Wherefore, if, as your b^ginninges are, (now in the mouths of all men, and in
all places, to your high praise proclaimed:) so be your proceedings, it is not
like that you shall want Witnesses of your (...), by whom your fame may be
blown abroad, to your eternal renown.
instruments, for the advancement of your wisdom, or tongues to er^oll with
triumphant trumps, this your most noble enterprise* I suppose also, that those
things which are noysed abroad, concerning your father, will be of very great
force and efficacy, to prove your pruden^e, and to show also, wherein, above
others, you are to challenge excellency. For it is a custom among many used,
not so much to commend and make honorable Children not following the vicious
qualities of their fathers more to be com^e^ded, then such whose good
behauiours are correspondent to their parents example.
the children, that are descended of p^iseworthie pa^ents: as to have them in
reverence, whose fathers being tyrannical, savage, blood thirsty, and
merciless, yet their sons degenerating from kind, and endued with qualities
in all respects clean^ contrary. For, what soever is in the nature of men,
not answear^ble to expectation, that in all points is much more gracious, and
acceptable, then those things which of custom are looked for, and by ordinary
course come to pass. These premises, therefore, curiously canuassed, narrowly
^fted, and straightly examined, this ought to be your chiefest meditation, in
this (I say) must your mind be ea^nestly conue^saunt, P^inces minds in what
points they ought to be occupied: for though the epistle be special: yet the
pre ^epts are general.
by what means, through whose help, by the virtue of whose (...), you may both
redress the calamities of the (...), pr^cure the (...) of the people, work
means how they might lead their lives in more pleasantness and security,
then they have in times past to their great disqui^tnes. For these duties of
clemency, these practices of humanity and gentleness, are the ornaments of
good governors, and the precious pearls wherewith all princes are beautifie^.
Which inualuable Jewels, many having in contempt, applied all their power and
ability to this only end, namely, to attain the full measure of their
pleasures and c^ncupiscences, with liberty excessi^e, and more then e^pedient:
Citizens, in the mean season, of great worship and wisdom, being defaced,
utterly undone, and spoiled. Such Caterpillars in Common wealths, ar^
ignorant, that It is to the praise of a prudent prince, yea that it makes
much for the estimation of wisemen, advanced to these high and stately thrones
of nobleness, by Which injury the law of nature graffed in our minds in our
(...) forbids.
others sorrows not to seek their own delight, by others miseries not to
purchase their private pleasure, nor to the detriment of others, to procure
their own profit: but rather by their carefulne^se and diligent industry, to
augment and increase their peoples felicity, to be in^linable to clemency,
conquered with compassion, not rigorous in reuengment, not pitiles^e in
punishment, nor of his own safety to seem careless and negligent: but with
the Scepter of mercy, and sword of justice in such order to govern his king
dome, that none dare b^obould, by treacherous (...)* to bring their good estate
in hazard* and to be no less circumspecte, that his own life be strongly
d^fended. Yea, therein to be so diligent, as i^ all the world conspired to
work hi^ overthrow and destruction. For by this means it shall come to pass,
that they shall be exempted from peril, and ^lourish in fame, among all the rest
of the Graecians: Then these singular benefits, and incomparable commodities, it
is Because they a^e the very best and most sovereign, without comparison.
too too hard to attain greater or better. As I was thus occupied with my
pen in writing, I soudenly remembered, that in all things you have exceeding
prosperous s^ccesse. For you have abundance of wealth, plenty of riches, which
cannot be gotten without extreme tyranny: He enjoyed all prosperity by
inheritance.
these you have by inheritance, your father with much violence, and through
flaming fyers of envy obtained them, you have them now in possession: the For
therein stands most commendanon^ otherwise, it turns to shame when wealth
is abused.
good and orderly using of the which, is in your hands, it becomes you to have
^ singular regard how they be bestowed, not vainly, but necessarily, not
vnad^isedly, but di^creetly, not to your reprehension, but to your comm^ation.
Touching this matter, therefore, these are my precepts te^ding to your profit.
Thus, then, stands the case: if you esteem of money, if you make account of
great power, if you have such transitory things in reputation, then Because,
a^ the shadow does follow the substance: to daunger^ accompany (...) chesse.
you must needs love dangers also, without y^ which those things cannot be
recovered, nor attained: so that you must, elsewhere crave counsel, and of
others seek assistance. But if you ^aue sufficient, nay, if you have
abundance, if you love virtue, if you love an honest and honorable report, if
you be incensed with the desire of y^ A thing specially to be obtained.
peoples favor and benevolence, th^n imprint mine admonitions in y^ tables of
your memory, i^brace my counsels, let my precepts be y^ rule of your actions,
strive to be equal to those y^ govern cities under their authority most
excellently: contend I say, not only Do your endeavor, not to be equal with
them only, but to excel and pass them also.
for equality, but also for superiority. For this I have heard concerning
Cleomenes, whose Dominion lay in Methym^a* that in at his enterprises he
discharged the duty of ^ good and prudent governor, was also so far from
putting any to death, from driving any into exile* from From bringing any into
that case, that they are not only 10. be dispossessed of all that they were
worth, but their lives also to be in (...) (...) (...)
making any pros^ript or outlaw, from procuring unto any one such miserable
nience that his citizens live in singular security, in ease and quietness, a^
will and in wealth: that he calls home again such as were thrust into
ba^ishment, intertaineth them into the embracing bosom of their country
natural, that were de priued of that passing ioyfulnesse: that of all their
possessions, whereof they were spoiled and robbed, he makes merciful
restitutione ^ud that they might easily* recover interest in their own, he
makes large paiments, to such as bought the goods of the banished, to give
over their purchased title to the former and lawful owners: and, not being
here withal satisficed, he furnishes al y^ citizens with armor, and sees
the^ provided to the purpose, for his present assistaunce, nothing (...) the
mischefous insurrections, and rebellious attempts of such as favor As not con
tent with an uniformity in government.
change, and buisie themselves to bring in alteration. And if any dare be so
bold to set abroach such an enterprise, he thinks much more auailable, that
his own life in consideration of his humanity, gentleness, benignity, and
mercifulnes to his citi^ens plentifully: testified, should suffer shipwreck:
then exe^nting cruelty upon them, and taking Ab effectu, because it thirsts
after the loss of life,
bloody reuengment, to furuiue and outliue ye residue. Touching this matter,
much more (peradventure) I might have mentioned, and more artificially with you
have reasoned, but that I perceived me self stayed with an impediment, namely
lack of loysure to lengthen my letter, in y^ (...) ting whereof, I was forced
to use great has^. But another time shall serve to minister counsel unto you,
for your Which is the end of ho nest counsel.
prosite and commodity, if mine old age be not mine hinderance: For the
present time, we wit^take occasion, to discourse upon things perteyning to
your private person, Autro^ntor, the bearer and deliverer of this letter unto
you, is a man with whom I have much familiarity: For, I have been
conuersaunt in the self san^e Or, studies tending in knowl^dge, or, o^e and
the self same science and profession.
exercises, wherein he has been occupied, and I have oftentimes and the use
of his Art and knowledges (...), I have been in hand with him, and (...) that
not s^eldome, to address his journey unto you, and that he has so done, I
was y^ author and procurer. In (...) (...) which premises, I would y^ you
entertain him honorabl^, (...) in such order, as to either of us is expedient
and profitable: and toward whom, Or, how favorable soever you do show your
self for his avail and prosite.
what duties of humanity so ever you exhibit, what courtesies so ever you
show him for his furtheraunce, persuade your self, that some part or portion
of the same tends to my benefit. I would not you should wonder at my so blunt
and bold ^nditing considering* that I never craved any thing of Clearchus,
For, in manner all, that sail from you to us, report you to be like such among
us, as be of most excellency? so that concerning Like it is that he means
Clearchus the Lacedaemonian Duke: for of that name there were two other,
Clearchus Solensis, and Cl^archus Ponticus: as Suidas says.
Clearchus, thus much must be signified, that at what time he was conversant
with us, by all men's confession that ever had conference with him, of all our
disciples or scholars, he was of most liberality, of most mildness, and of
most gentleness. But after that he had aspired to principality, and had
caught government within his claws, his mind was so altered, his conditions
so changed, and what not in him so alienated, that every one, to whom in times
past, he was not known, had him in high admiration: in consideration of which
causes, my former acquaintance with him, is turned into strangeness. To come
again to you, whom I love and like, my desire is, and that with earnestness,
to accept us familiarly: and so sone as you can, give us some assurance, that
your wonted courtesy toward us conceived, remains still vnchaungable. For
you shall to This Autocrator was one of his deer^st acquaintance, and his very
friend.
Autocrator, be a favorer and a furtherer: you shall likewise, procure a
letter to be sent unto us, whereby our ancient friendship, and acceptable
service tending to gentle intertainement, may be renewed. Fare you well: and if
it be your pleasure, to use our labor, in any thing to your person pertaining,
send us word by writing.

Isocrates to the Magistrates of the Mitylenaeans.
THE ARGUMENT
^ Agenor the Musician by name, his kinsemens master, beseeching them to
disburthen him of the heavy yoke of banishment, and to restore him again to
the sweetness of domestical liberty.

THe sons of Aphareus my kinsemen, whom Not Agenor the king of Phaenicia:
Vit g^l li 1. Aen. nor Agenor the son of Antenor: Homer lib. 11. Iliad. but a
third of that name, by profession a Musician.
Agenor the Musician taught to play on melodious and tuneable instruments,
besought me with instance, to be earnest with you by letter: that, sithence it
has pleased you to call home again a great number out of exile, you would
vouchsafe also, on him, his father, and brethren, be stow the same benefit of
restitution. To whose demand, or rather request, when I made this answer,
that I should not only show my self foolish and insipient, but also saucie and
impudent, in laboring for the grant of so great a grace, to magistrates with
who^ never before I had conference, nor yet acquaintance: they Or, were more
earnest and instant with me, to grant their re quest, that their friends might
also be gratified.
assaulted me with more serious supplications, not holding me (say what I could
to avoid their intreatance) excusable. Now when they were frustrate of all
confidence, and ready to be (as it were) devoured in despair, it was manifest
to all men, and marvelous apparent, that their minds were exceedingly molested,
and took their repulse very impatiently. Now, when I perceived, their
perturbatours were more vehement, then was convenient, at length yealding to
their request, I made them promise, to write this Epistle, and to see it sent
unto you also, for their further co^tentation. And thus much I had to say,
concerning the offense of foolishness and importunacie. I can not but think,
that your deeds are not discommendable, ne yet unprofitable, in that you have
In that you are grown in to favor with your people, and have obtained their
good will: then which, a governor has not a better thing to desire.
entered reconciliatio^ with your citizens: in that you do your endeavor, y^ the
number of such as be banished, may be diminished: that you lay to the uttermost
of your labor, y^ society in the commonwealth may be increased: finally, for
that, in this sedition, you set before you the state of our city, as a
president or pattern for you to follow. Among all other things praise worthy,
this one deed is principally to be extolled, that together with the
restitution of their country, you also see surrendered, all such possessions and
substance to those whom you have called out of comfortless exile, as were
taken from the^ by force and violence: In which your usage, you make plain
declaration, that you did not procure their expulsion out of the city, as
incensed with the desire of others men's wealth and riches, but as fearing some
danger imminent and hanging over the weal public. But, although you had not
ben resolved in any of the above cited circumstances, neither yet had received
into the liberty of their country, any person proscript and banished: yet
notwithstanding, I would think it much for your commodity, if, to them, of
whom I write at this present, you show your selves so beneficial, as to
bouchsafe them restitution to their country. For, sithence none is ignorant,
that in the knowledge and Art of Music, From the au thoritie and commendatio^
of their own country.
your city is incomparable, and that among you, are bred and borne, men
marvelous cunning and expert in that profession: it were an offense tending to
dishonestie and dishonor, y^ he to whom, not so much as one in this our age
can be found equal, in skill of so famous a science, should lose the liberty
of such a noble city. And for so much as it is usual among all other Graecians,
to make free denizens of their common wealth, such as excel in any alowable
Art, albeit they be foreiners and altogether strangers: As who said, it were a
shame that you should so offend.
will you, whose name for this cause, among so many nations is nobled, be so
inflexible and void of courtesy, as to suffer a citizen of your own, a
citizen (I say) in a most necessary science so singularly practiced, to live
among aliants? I can not but marvel at those cities, as at a worlds wonder,
that, to such as be winners in Bodily exercises: as running, leaping, iumping,
wrestling. etc, used in former ages.
Gymnicall games, assign larger rewards, than to them, that by their
compassing wits, and incessant labors, have found out something, to the life
of man most profitable, and to the maintenance of his estate very expedient:
not considering in the mean season, that Swiftness in running, and strength
of body, continue not when death makes dispatch, but vanishe and consume to
naught with the flesh, which is subject to corruption: and that the nature of
Arts and Sciences is such, as it is lincked with eternity, as it makes them
perdurable, as it is to the searchers learners and lovers of them, at all times
and seasons, means of advancement.

This ought to be the meditation, of such as are endued with wisdomo, first
Wise precepts and hoal some counsels
to have in high estimation and reverence, g^d and just governors of common
w^althos: then to g^aunt and give the next degree of dignity, to such as they
be an ornament to their cities, and instruments to gar^ish the same with glory.
Many therebe, (yea, the most part of men) who taking but as it were, a super^
view of these things, fall into this erroneous and prepos^erous opinion, that
all other citizens whatsoever, are like to them, whom we have mentioned. An
objectio^ supposed.
Some peradventure, will assay me with this objection: Is it not reason (sir)
that whosoever labors in the petition of a benefit, and is desierous, it
were attained, should show by evident demonstration, not the thing it self,
wherein he trauelleth, to be commendable* but that they ought in like manner,
to give manifest testimony, them, in whose ^urtheraunce, they take upon them
the office of mediators, not to be unworthy of that, wherein they do their
endeavor by way of intercession, of full intent, their requests might be
satisfied? The resolu^ion.
Thus stands the case, as you shall hear discovered. I have abstained from
the administration or government of the common wealth: I have withdrawn * The
infirmities of Isocrates whereby he was hindered from prac^iising the Art
Oratorie.
my self from controversies of plea in courts and sessions: I have not put in
practice the faculty of an Orator, though I am one by profession: and why so?
Forsooth because I wanted vtteraunce, I wanted a voice to that exercise
answerable, and I wanted likewise, boldness and audacitie: Notwstanding which
impediments, I have not ben idle, Services most necessary in* common wealths.
I have not ben as one, of whose service there is no use, I have not been quite
void of authority. But if you consider well of the matter, you shall find in
conclusion, that I have been a counselor, and an assistant to them, that have
maintained and supported, both the dignity and commodities, as well of your
society, as also of other incorporations. Furthermore, concerning restitution
of liberty and ancient privileges to be made to the Graecians, I have been
more free in speech, then they all, that in solemn assemblies have wasted
many words, and worn with their often going up, the An appointed place for
the pleading of controversies, and matte^s called in question.
Oratorie pulpite. In respect of which premises, you should of dueti^, though
not with rewards, yet with thanks, measure my merits: For this estate of the
common weal, you have always, with earnestness desiered. I suppose, that Two
Athenien dukes or valiant captains.
Conon, and Two Athenien dukes or valiant captains.
Timothy, if they were alive, and A Rhetorician, well deserving of the
Mitylenes.
Diophantus also if he were returned out of Asia, would labor in my behalf
right busily, yea, they would wish, that unto me to be granted, which of them
selves they would desire to be obtained, if they stood in need of your help
and furtherance. Touching whom, to waste many words, it were impertinent to
the purpose. For there is not so much as one among you, although he be but
young in years, so obliuious and forgetful, but remembers well enough, what
benefits at their hands you have received. And touching this present occasion,
you shall be thought to determine with reason, if you ponder, both what he is
that plays the Isocrates.
mediator, and for what manner of Agenor, his father, and brethren.
men he makes intercession. For you shall understand, that to such as have
been great benefactours unto you, I have professed singular friendship, and
favored them exceedingly. Now, they in whose be half I am become a suppliant,
are men of such disposition, as neither to the seniours of the people they will
show them selves troublesome: nor kindle their unquietness, that are in office
of magistrates: but to be young men, of a commendable inclination, delighted in
studies tending to pleasure, and not resisting profit: yea, addicted to such
exercises, as for this our present age, none ca^ be more convenient and
necessary. Wonder not at my plain writing, neither marvel, that I make it a
matter of small labor, being entreated to direct my letters unto you, both in
the cause of others, and touching them that to me are most dear beloved: The
reason that moved him to write to the Mitylonean magistrates.
For, I am desierous to gratify my posterity: and hereof to leave a
substanciall witness, that, although they be not advanced in the weal
public, to degrees of countenance, and titles of honor, but in their course
of life and manners, lively represent my conversation: yet not withstanding, it
is like in time, to win them worship, and to open free passage to estimation*
One thing remains behind, yet unsatisfied, namely, He concludes with the
renning of his petition: for suites must be moved to memory, till they be
obtained.
my petition, which if it be your pleasure to grant. Agenor and his brethren,
shall have occasion to acknowledge your courtes^e, and shall likewise
understand, that through my procurement partly, those things are at length
obtained, which with such instancie they desired.

Isocrates to Dionysio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He rebukes Dionysius the Sicilian tyrant (him as I think, that was named the
younger) for his pride and hautinesse, and also for his contempt of the
profitable precepts of Philosophy, endeavoring to revoke his mind to a better
disposition.

OFficers of countenance and worship, persons in high authority, and in
attainement* of the stately throne of preeminence, what good else do they, but
darken the desire of wisdom, with the mystie clouds of sensuality? neither
can there be found, a more maine mischief, then that, for the speedy
supplanting of virtue, and the utter rooting out of all praiseworthy
properties. Why This Epistle was written to Dionysius the tyrant of Sicilia, of
whom Trog. lib. 31. of this name there be. 9. recorded in old writers. 1. a
Lo gician of Bithynia. (...) a ge ographer of Corynthus. 3. Gramarian of
Alexandria. 4. an historiogra pher of Myletum. 5. Chroni cler of Halicarnassus.
6. King of Hera clea and Antiochia. 7. a President of Athens. 8. a President of
Corinth. 9. a President of Alex andria: and our first named Dionysius (making
ten in number, if not more) Sicilia.
man, though your fortune be changed, yet your nature is not altered: for why,
you carcass is compassed in a corruptible skin. Your nativity and birth, was
like other men's, they are subject to death, and you likewise are but mortal.
This Epistle was written to Dionysius the tyrant of Sicilia, of whom Trog. lib.
31. of this name there be. 9. recorded in old writers. 1. a Lo gician of
Bithynia. (...) a ge ographer of Corynthus. 3. Gramarian of Alexandria. 4. an
historiogra pher of Myletum. 5. Chroni cler of Halicarnassus. 6. King of Hera
clea and Antiochia. 7. a President of Athens. 8. a President of Corinth. 9. a
President of Alex andria: and our first named Dionysius (making ten in number,
if not more) of Sicilia.
To what purpose then, does vain glory inflate and puff up til i^ swel
again, this brittle bottle framed out of clay* what mean you man, to be
subject to such madness: O unhappy wretch, why art thou so be witched? why
art thou spoiled of that knowledge, which put thee in remembrance of thy frail
nature* Have these stately aduauncements of flourishing fortune, so blindded
thine understanding, as that thou art compelled to swerue from thine This
Epistle was written to Dionysius the tyrant of Sicilia, of whom Trog. lib. 31.
of this name there be. 9. recorded in old writers. 1. a Lo gician of Bithynia.
(...) a ge ographer of Corynthus. 3. Gramarian of Alexandria. 4. an historiogra
pher of Myletum. 5. Chroni cler of Halicarnassus. 6. King of Hera clea and
Antiochia. 7. a President of Athens. 8. a President of Corinth. 9. a President
of Alex andria: and our first named Dionysius (making ten in number, if not
more) of Sicilia.
accustomed contemplation? have they brought thee to that point of security,
utterly to abjure and forsake so sober a spirit? In times past, your
moderation did lift it self aloft, now it lies groueling upon the ground,
your fortune is now in her brauest flower of iollitie: arm your self
therefore, to shrink from the vain shadows of false and counterfeit
felicity: prepare your mind and manners, no longer to follow flitting
fortune, whose lightness and unfaithfulness if you can prevent, when souden
alteration of your present prosperity shall chance, your fall will be so much
the more sufferable.

Thus end the nine Epistles of Isocrates.
Epistles of most famous Philosophers, prudent Princes, and other men of great
wisdom.
Solon to Periandro.
THE ARGUMENT.
Wise Solon, writing to Periander of his dangerous estate, gives him counsel
to see to his own safety: Under whose person is represented to the view of
the reader, the miserable case of tyrants, and Princes, who sit in the seats
of their royalty as not possessing them, having not the hearts of their people.

YOu write unto me, that many ly in wait to work your overthrow, but This
Perian der was king of Corynth: and one of the. 7. sapients, yet a bloody
tyrant. Diog. La er. lib. 1. and idem alibi sub tit. Periand. Suidas and others.
you, in consideration of your cruelty, shall not be so excused. For, one or
other of them, whom you have lest in suspicion; fearing his own life to be in
hassarde, and seeing you so mistrustfull of imminent mischiefs, as your mind
is never unloaded of disquietnesse, will (no doubt) e^pying opportunity, as
desirous to gratify his country, attempt your destruction. It were not
therefore amiss for you, nay, it would make much for your commodity, to
abstain from tyranny, that al causes of corosiue cares being escaped, you may
harbor in the haven of quietness. But, if you persist in opinion, that For he
said that to give it over voluntarily, or violent ly was dangerous.
tyrannical power is not to be suppressed* it must be of ^cessitie, so seen
unto and provided on your behalf, that outlandish strength and foreign
force, surmou^ting the might that your ^tie can make, be obtained: that none
turn you to trouble, and that you thrust none into exile.

Fare you well.
Solon to Epimenidi.
THE ARGVM^T.
W^iting to Epimenides, he first makes a discou^se upon laws: the^ takes
occasion to speak of Pisistratus his aspiring mind to (...): shows the
ignorance of some, or rather the blockishnesse, that could not perceive his
purpose: and the timorousness of other some, that seeing wh^revnto he (...),
du^st not (for all that) resist his proceedings. Then he ha^h a Prosopopoical
speech to his country, wherein is testified* his good will in doing his
country service. Lastly, he enters into a d^scourse of the above say de
Pisistratus, detecting his deceiuable doings, bent wholly to the destruction of
the common wealth.

MY laws and ordinances were not much commodious to the Atheniens: neither
were This Epime nides, was by birth a Cretensian, living in the time of
Pithagoras, as Apul. says, Flor. 2. of him read Dio. Laer. lib. 1. sub. t^t.
Epim. and. 8. sub. tit. Pytha.
you, after their abrogation, a proeurer of the cities profit. For not the
Gods only, and law makers, are of ability to see to the safety of cities,
but they also, that have the way to w^n the multitude, to like and well allow
of what sentence soever is pronounced: and to such (undoubtedly) as dis^harge
the administration of the common w^alth, according to justice, laws are
advantage: to the contrary, what are they else, but a hinderance. The laws
and statutes, which I my self did pen, were so far from being profitable
to me, that they were inconvenient: and yet notwithstanding, such as neglected
the observation of them, brought into the weals publi^ue many detriments,
whiles they made no resistance against An Athenie^ ^yrant. Trog. lib. 2. of
this name there was another, a Larislean (...) ^s says Suidas
Pisistratus, being greedily affected to tyranny. My presignificant speech,
and forewarning watch words, were counted unworthy credit. A flatterer was
thought more faithful and trusty, among the Atheniens then I, by whose tongue
simple and plain truth was uttered. Wherefore, putting off mine armor before
the palace gate, I gave this sentence in praise of mine own person, that I was
more courageous and valiant then they, y^ perceiving Pisistratus aspiring to so
pernicious a principality as tyranny, were affrighted to try their ma^hood
for the liberty of the common wealth: and that I was more circumspect and
wise, the^ they that had not the wit and discretion to perceive, in that point,
his detestable enterprise. But they took Solons true tale for a vain toy, his
plain meaning they made a mockery, and accounted his undoubted diuinations,
mad immaginations. At length, calling my natural country to record, I put
my self forth in open view, and this was the speech that I uttered. The
words of a true and faithful lover of his natural country: by the figure
Prosopopeia.
O country, country, that Solon, that same Solon (I say) whose truth thou art
able to testify, is prepared and in a readiness, both in deed and also in
word to succor and assist thee: As for these fellows, what do they else
think of me, but as of a frantique fool. Wherefore, (my country) I among all
the rest, being an adversary to Pisistratus, depart to bestow my time
elsewhere: as for these men, lo, they are at a beck, both to give
signification of their conceived favor, and to scale an assurance of their
dutiful obedience. H^ turn^th his talk to his friend Epimenides, unto whom
this present epistle was directed.
O my friend, thou kno west the man, thou know with what fraudulent and soxe
like iuglings, thou know with what (...) practices, thou know with what
canckred nature, thou know by what crafty collusion, he has clammered up
to the thron^ of tyranny. He began with sweet bayts of flattery, to
circumuent the common people, h^ spared no colored pretense to allure the
vulgar sort, he became a butcher to his body, wou^ding his flesh with a
piercing blade of strong steel, he mangled him self to cloak his determined
mischief: But The pretenses of Pisistratus, to attain principality described*
coming in open place, where people assembled, crying out amain, he
discovered the bleeding gashes, and casting out horrible exclamations, said*
that his enemies had so anatomised his flesh, with their weapons: whereupon he
made supplication, and besought them pitifully, that they would of their
bounty, allow him to the number of four hundred picked and chosen men, hugest
in stature, and fullest of force, to be the guard of his person, and the
defenders of his life. They gave him Not perceiving the mis^ that were lik^ to
ensue.
a grant, and yealded to his request, notwithstanding my negative voice or
denial, to the contrary. The sorecited young men, whom he by petition had
obtained for his protection, were armed with such manner of weapons as would
both break and bruise, as would (I say) bear off many a shrewde blow, and
having these to dance attendance v^on him, and ready at his mandate to do
mischief He crept in like a Fox, ruled like a Lion, and spoi led li^e a Wolse.
he invaded the common wealth, and of the same has wrought the subversion and
overthrow. Now, whiles they dreaming of a dry Summer, labored to set their
poor people at liberty, least being otherwise tempted* they should serve for
salarie, it so fell out, that all, one with another, were forced to bear the
burthenous yoke of bondage: and do now submit them selves to the power of
Pisistratus, etc.

Fare you well.
Solon to Pisistrato.
THE ARGUMENT.
This Epistle (being, as it should seem) written after Pi^istratus his
establishment, in the Monarchy, signifies a certain desire in Solon, to
obtain the tyrants favor: it shows al^o, that feign he would return to
Athe^s, but yet tha^ he is loath: the reason of his suspended and doubtful
mind, appears plainly in the Epistle.

IAm in belief (I may peradventure Thereby meaning that his hope and afsia^ce
might deceive him.
sow my seed in the sand) that you will do nothing unto me, whereby I should
be harmed. For, before you atteined your affected Or, regiment: in ancient
times the name of kings was so odious that kings were called ty (...).
tyranny, I was your friend and favorer, neither am I at this ins^ant, a
greater enemy to your person, then any other Athenien that likes not, ne
loves that kind of government. For, whether it be more commodious, to be in
subjection to the rule of one, or that the administration of the weal
public, should be committed to many, I have not to bewraye mine opinion: let
every one give his several judgment, I mean to be silent. Out of question, I
must needs confess, that of all Or, of all kings: where note, how Solon
praises Pisistratus in presence: who^ he discomme^ded to Epime nides in
absence.
tyrants, you are the noblest, matchless in majesty, incomparable in
prowess, excellent in worthynesse. I know, that it is not for my profit to
return to Athens, least at my arrival, I incur just and deserned
reprehension, for that, not long since, I granted an equality in government,
and having principality prosered me in possession, made a voluntary refusal
of the same: all which deeds of mine, my return (no doubt) would discredit,
for I shall seem to Because I was an earnest enemy to that state of
government, wherein you are established.
ratify and confirm your enterprise, by my souden repentan^e.

Fare you well.
Solon to Croeso.
THE ARGUMENT.
Solon being sent for of Croesus to live in the liberty of his kingdom, after
he was absent from Athens, and yet notwithstanding (as appea^eth) not destitute
of a place answerable to his desire, gives thanks to Croesus for his
courtesy. The letter is familiar, and therefore gives likelyhoodes of their
long and great acquaintance.

YOur This epistle was written to Croesus king of Lydia: touching whom read
Plut. sub ^it. Solonis.
exceeding benevolence, and good will, garnished with grace, whereof we have
tasted y^ sweetness, we have in high estimation: and, by the Gods immortal (I
swear) had not my determination been, long since, there To live at ease and
qui^.
to feather my neast, where the common wealth enjoys liberty, I would rather
have chosen, under your majesty's dominion, and within the limits of your
kingdom, to lead my life in tranquillity, then to continue in Athens, where
Pisistratus plays the tyrant with extremity and violence. But, in such a
place have I taken up my lodging, much more to my contentation, where all
things are equal, and in common. Howbeit, I will come unto you, and accepting
your courtesy, Least I should seem to contemn the fruit of your gentleness.
use the benefit (for a season) of your interteinement.

A Panoplie of Epistles Thales to Pherecydes.
THE ARGUMENT.
Understanding that his f^iende Pherecydes, was assaying a journey into Ionia,
he gives him counsel to change his purpose: after certain other
circumstaunces men^ioned touching his mind, how it is affected toward his
friend, he infers the readiness of his own will, and Solons also, to sail
to Pherecydes. Lastly by an argument of the commodiousnesse of the place, where
he abides, persuadeth him to tarry: thereupon bringing in a comparison of him
self and his friend, he concludes.

I Thales a Mi lesian one of the seven sapi ents: Plu. Dio. Laer. sub tit.
Thaletis li. 1.
hear it reported, that Pherecydes was Pythagoras his master etc. Suidas and
Diog. Laer. li. 1. sub. tit. Thalet.
you are preparing to Ionia a cou^ try in Graecia. Plin. lib. 5. cap. 29.
Ionia, of purpose to reason openly among the Graecians, (...) things
concerning celestial contemplation: But, believe me, your opinion shall be the
more auailable peradventure, and thought more worthy acceptatio^, if you will
read among your friends and them with whom you are familiarly acquainted, such
discourses, as you have already with painful pen entered into paper: then by
letting them that list, have liberty of your exercises, they (in the mean
while) reaping no commodity. Now certainly, If you make me of your counsel in
those points, whereof you write. etc.
if you would make me accessarie to those things, which you attempt, I would be
content you should so do: my will there unto is applyable. As you bid me I
will do, addressing my journey toward you, withal speed. For, neither I, nor
yet Solon of Athens, are so infatuate and foolish, so dull, so blockish, and
wanting ^it, as having sailed to Crete to see the situation of the soil,
passing also through Situate in A sia, of this cou^ try all have w^itten, that
are any thing famous in geographie.
Egypt, there to confer with the vnprophane priests, and learned
Astronomers, would not in like manner, with equal measure of desire, adventure
a voyage, to thee our welwiller? I dare say, thus much in Solon his behalf,
that he will come, if you give him but he will come at a beck, or if you do but
wink: meaning some little token to styr him to at tendaunce.
same slender signification. For, you being as it were, fettered with fancy
and good liking of that place, do but sildome prepare to pass over into
Ionia, neither, yet are touched with any affection of outlandishe men, aliantes
(I mean) forreiners and strangers. But, as I am in hope, you are inclined and
earnestly bent to the exercise of writing discourses, as for us, that live like
idle droanes, not so much as putting pen to paper, necessary it is, that we
travel through the quarters of Graecia, and the lands of Asia.

Fare you well.
Thales to Solon.
THE ARGUMENT.
Solon being determined to leave Athens, and live in it no longer, is
counseled of Thales to address him self to Myletum: he shows that the
conversation of friends ought not to be ^edious, but delightsome: Lastly, he
concludes with Bias, who wrote to Solon, to come and make his abode in Priena.

IF Solon, o^e of the seven sapients or wisemen of the world: whose names are
thus recor ded: Solon, Thales, Pittacus, Bias, Cleo bulus, Chilo, Periander,
tou ching the number, diverse authors are at va riance: Diog. Lae^. lib. 1. sub
tit. Thal.
you forsake Athens, you may (as I think) have a very fit and commodious
mansion at Myletum: for it is one of your liberties, neither shall you be put
to any inconvenience or grieuance. And, and if you account tyrannical
regiment, an execrable regiment, and therefore have it in detestation among the
Mylesians, (for such is your property, that you abhor that principality,
with equal proportion of spightfulnesse) yet notwithstanding, to live with us
your friends, and to keep us company, it is so far from being any cause of
heaviness, that it is a ready pathway to plesantnesse. Bias wrote unto you, to
have you go to Priena, if your affection serve you, in that country to make
your habitatio^ and dwelling, we will not be long from thence, but thither also
after you direct our journey, with al possible speediness.

Fare you well.
Pisistratus to Solon.
THE ARGUMENT.
This Epistle is apologeticall. Pisistratus defends him self, and his
doings, in attainening the Empire, writes to Solon, how the laws by him
enacted (are through his commandment) duly observed: exeuseth him self of
violence and injury, wherwithall tyranny is charged: writes to Solou
earnestly, to return to Athens, promises him honorable advancement on the
same condition: gives him leave to use the liberty of his choice: desires
that he be not counted the occasion of his absence from Athens.

I Al^ne, of all the Graecians, have not obtained the estate of a Monarche by
extertion, neither have I taken any thing, that was not mine own by
usurpation: for I am by birth, a The first kings name of Athens was Cecrops, of
whom, the kings succeeding in the seat were called Cecropians Pli lib. 7.
cap. 5. 6.
Cecropian, I challenge that unto me by right of ownage, which the Atheniens in
times past, having confirmed and made over with assurance to Codrus, and to his
nation, afterward again repealed and with drew. Furthermore, against the
Gods I have committed no crime, and as for me^ I have them not offended. The
laws and decrees which you prescribed to the Atheniens, I command them duly
to be observed, and charge them to frame the course of their lives, after the
same your ordinances: and undoubtedly, the observation of them is better seen
to and provided, then it would otherwise ^e, in When the pe ople rule the
roast, a monster of many heads.
Democracie, when the multitude have government. For what do I? ^isistratus
his purgation consisting in negative points.
I suffer no man to be oppressed with injury: I am content with my
Monarchical majesty or title royal: I diminish nothing that is proper to the
c^monaltie: I am satisfied with these stipends and payments, which were due to
my predecessors, long before this power fell to my possession: I burden none
with new exactions, tributes, or subsidies: To be short, eueryone of the
Atheniens divide the tenths of their revenues, not to be disburssed for our
profit, nor sor our p^culiar service, but for public uses, and common
advantage: and also, to supply expenses and bear out our charges, if it so
fortune, that at any time wars be (...) against us, by foreign enemies; or
otherwise, rebellious ri^ngs attempted. I conceive against you I am not dis
pleased with you for reuea ling mine intent.
no stomach at all, in that po^ detected my counscl^, in that you discovered my
purpose: because (as I do consider) you did it rather of alo^ing desire
toward the co^menwelth, then of malice and envy, to bring my person in
discredit: and also because you kn^we not what manner of man I was of
conditions: or how I would have behaved myself in the kingdom. For, if you
had not ben ignorant thereof, you would peradventure have thought mine enterprise
tolerable, and not have fled from the city, as though you were endangered.
Wherefore Solon, return I pray thee, For Solon had forsaken the city of
Athens, which fell in Pisistratus his possession.
return, in hope to be saved harmless and vndamnified: and trust my words
without an oath, Pisistratus means not any mischief against Solon. For you
know that I wrought no man's detrimint: no, not so much as mine enemies have at
my hands sustained any discommoditie. For end, if it shall please you, to
accept our friendship, Pisistratus his large promises to Solo^, to have him
return to Athens.
you shall be in place with Gentlemen of the best countenance, and highest
degree of honor: for, I have had such experience of your doings, that I must
needs say thus much of truth, your attempts to be honest, void of treason,
deceit, and whatsoever else is vicious. ^ut if you be disposed, elsewhere to
make your continuance, rather then in Athens, He grants him to take his
choice where he best likes.
do as you will, your purpose shall not be hindered by our procurement: only,
my desire is, that it be not said, that we were the cause, why you forsook
your country.

Fare you well.
Chilo to Periandro.
THE ARGUMENT.
The unquiet estate of a tyrant, in this Epistle is most lively decy phered: in
the end whereof, Chilo sets down his opinion, touching the same kind of
government, giving to note, how rare a thing it is, tyrants to die without
violence.

YOu Chilo, a Lacedemonian Philosopher* one of the. 7. wisemen of Graecia. Pli
li. 7. cap 32. and Di og. La. li. 4 sub tit Chilonis Lacedem.
command me to cast off mine armor, to cease from war, and to lead my life
in a foreign country: as though you were in likelyhoode to possess peace,
and to be lulled in the * By cause tyrants common ly are murthe red* and very
sildome or ne uer are so bles sed as to dye naturally.
lap of safety. Nevertheless, I am of a contrary opinion: for I think, that
A monarch or king cannot enjoy, no not that which is his own by inheritance,
and most assured interest, without much turmoyle, disquietnesse and danger:
yea, I account that king or tyrant, most happy and fortunate, whose luck it
is, within the walls of his bed chamber in the court, naturally to dye, without
lifting up of weapon, without slaughter and bloodshed.

Pittacus to Croeso.
THE ARGUMENT.
Pittacus being sent for of C^oesus to come to Lydia, there to lead his life*
pleads his contented mind with a measurable living, for an ex^use:
nevertheless, least ^e should seem to neglect the proffered courtesy of a
king, he condiscendeth to Croesus his desire.

YOur pleasure is, to have me come into A countri^ in Asia, near to the
Aeolia^s and Ioni* ans. Pompon. lib. 1. etc.
Lydia land, to the intent I might see your royal treasure, and great riches:
concerning which, I say thus much, that although I have never set eye
thereupon, and therefore not able in that behalf to give certain judgment:
yet dare I, weout wavering, give this report, that ye son of Meaning C^oesus
the king of Lydia whose fathers name was Aly as, etc. of him read Plut. sub
tit. Solo.
Alyas is the wealthiest king in the world, most richest in gold and
treasure. Again, I am sur^, if we should assay to come unto you at Sardis a
city in Lydia, the kings seat royal. Horodot. lib. 1. Plin. lib. 5. Horat.
Epi. 10.
Sardis, we could ware never a whit the more worth: For, as for gold, we want
it not, being content with a competent and reasonable living, even as much as
is sufficient both for mine own self, and my friends. Nevertheless, I will
not refuse your courtesy, that I may be familiar with you, who^ I hear to be
much inclined to humanity, and not a little delighted with hospitality.

Fare you well.
Cleobulus to Solon.
THE ARGUMENT.
Under the person of Solon, whom he says to have favorers infinite, he
comfort wise and learned men, supposing that they ca^ not be friendlesse nor
harbourlesse He persuadeth Solon also to change his soil, drawing his reasons
from the aptnesle of the place, and from other circumstaunces.

FRiend Solon, you have an infinite number of friends, and with all and every of
them, you have a house, wherein to be harbored: Nevertheless, friend Solon,
Cleobulus was one of the seven wi^e men of Greece: he had a daugh ter named Cle
obuli^a excellently well lea^ ned. Diog. Laer. lib. 1. sub ^it. Cleob. and
S^idas.
Lindus (as I think) will be a most convenient place for you to inhabit, and
make your dwelling in: it is a free city, and Lindus a town wherein Cleobulus
was born^, from whence he tra ueiled into Egypt. etc.
it is compassed round about with the sea: if you be disposed, there to make
your co^, tinuaunce, you shall have no cause to stand in fear of Pisistratus,
and your friends shall have access unto you from all places, by flocks, thick
and three ^old.

Periander to the seven Sapients.
THE ARGUMENT.
This Epistle declares in what estimation wise and learned men were, in former
ages: yea, ^ such time as that estate of government was erected, which many
abhorred. Under the person of Periander, offering courtesy to the seven
Sapients or wise men, princes and such as be in place of authority, are
instructed to have learned men in reverence.

I Of Peria^de^ the king of Corynth, read Diog. La^. sub tit. Peri. lib. 1. and
Suidas.*
Render immortal thanks, to Pythius Apollo, in that mine epistles have had
such prosperous success, as to find you al out, gathered together in one
company, and I hope that, as hitherto they have had no ill happ, so they shall
have good luck, to bring you all to The city Metropolitan of all Achaia.
Strabo lib. 8. it is called Bimaris, because of the two seas, namely the Ionian
and the (...), which flow by it. So (...) it, F^st. lib 4.
Corynthe. These are therefore to let you understand, that I look for your
coming, you shall see and try, with what civility you shall be intertayned. As
therefore, the last year, you took the pains to come from Sardis to Lydia:
so I beseech you, vouchsafe me, king of Co^ynthe, with the like labor. For,
the Corynthian people, will rejoice exceedingly, when they see you entering into
Perianders palace.

Fare you well.
Thrasibulus to Periandro.
THE ARGVM^NT.
An au^sweare to an embassage, first made by an example of violence: then, by
word of mouth importing great cru^ltie, to Periander a tyrant. Wherein is to
be seen, ready counsel, but yet for all that, passing dangerous.

I Thrasibulus the Athenien, of whom Isocrates Orat 5. aduersus Callimach. and
Cic. in Philip. Val^r. sub. ^it, de Modestia. There was an* other of that name,
a Mylesian. Front. lib. 2.
Dissembled not with your ambassador, neither concealed from him the secrets
of my counsel: but bringing him into the corn sield, and smyting off, with a
wand that I held in my hand, the cares of Wheat that were of highest
growthe, he following me in the footepath, and seeing the order of my doings:
I ^ad him report this message unto you at his return, namely, whatsoever he
heard me speak, or saw me do. Wherefore ( Periander) if there be any
impediment, that you cannot, with the benefit of your safety, possess your
tyrannical principality, neither in the same be established: listen to my
lore, and let my counsel ^e your direction. Words sauouring of slaughter and
bloodshed.
Dispatch the Princes and chiefest of the city, whether they be your friends,
or whether they be your foes, dispatch them I say, let them not live, but make
hauock of them one with another, spare not such as seem to be your favorers:
For, many and oftentimes, a tyrant has cause to hau^ his friends in suspicion,

Anacharsis to Croeso.
THE ARGVM^NT.
Anacha^sis being in Grecia, writes to Croesus king of Lydia (who was desirous
to have him come into his kingdom) the cause* why he ta^ieth in that
count^ie: he say^h that he wants no gold for his costage. etc. Wher^by ^ee
signifies, how lightly the Philosophers of old time regarded money, and that
they accounted learning sufficient provision.

I Anacharsi^ the Scythia^ Philosopher, of whom Cic. lib. Tuscul. 5. and Diog.
Lae^. lib. 1 sub tit. Anachar.
(O noble king of Lydia) am arri^ed in Grecia, (...) self to be acquainted
with the manners of the people, and to be expert also in their exercises. I
lack no gold, and as for my purueyaunce, it is sufficient to bring me back^
again to the Among who^ h^e was bor^e and bred.
Scythians, garnished with more commendable manners, and furnished with better
stoare of learning. Nevertheless, I will see you at Sardis, esteeming your
friendship and familiarity, most w^rthie acceptance,

Epimenides to Solon
THE ARGUMENT.
This Epistle, written by Epimenides to Solon, touching (...), first declares
how he came to that kind of regiment, namely by violence: and what manner of
men, he made yield to his power. Secondly, it shows that it is hard for
people ^auing lived in liber^ie, to be kept in long lasting bondage, with a
certain hope, that the Empi^e shall be cut off from P^sistratus his offspring.
Lastly it conteyne^h a petition, wherein he desires Solon to come to Cr^te,
using a reason drawn from the freedom of the Count^ie.

FRiend Of these twain, Diog. Laer. li^. 1. sub tit. vtriusque Plato. 1. and
3. de Leg. and Cic. Tu^cul. lib. 1.
Solon, be not discouraged: For if the Atheniens had been in subjection, as
to a thing usual, and accusto^d: or as people under good laws and ordinau^es,
not well governed: Pisistratus (no doubt) had possessed the kingdom, not for
a season, but in long continuance. Howbeit, insomuch, as by compulsorie
means, he has constray^ed such to yield to enforced obedience and servitude,
as are For noble hearts cannot digest servitude*
both virtuous and venturous: yea, such as rem^mbring Solons admonitions, are
so ashamed of themselves, that they sighe for very sorrow: it is not like,
that they will any longer, suffer T^rannicall servitude. And although,
Pisistratus be now set in possession of the City, yet I hope, the Empire
shall be hereafter in such a case, that ^is posterity shall have no occasion, to
make claim unto it, as their lawful inh^tance. For, For liberty and
servitude are as contrary as any eleme^tarie qualities.
to people living long in liberty, to people (I say), living under most
notable laws, it is a thing, than which a harder cannot be named, to endure
unacquainted subjection, But to let this pass* I would not have you be in the
case of an e^trauagant, I mean hunted ou^ of house and home, but address your
self rather to come unto us, with as much speed as you can, to Now called
Candie under the government of Venice Strabo lib. 2. Virg. ^. lib. ^. Dior li.
6. Plini. lib. 4. c^p. 12. etc.
Crete, where tumultuous tyra^^e is not entertained, to any ones disturbaunce
and vexation. But if peradventure, you chance by the way, to meet with some
of his favorers, I fear me, you are like to incur some inconvenience.

Pherecydes to Thales.
THE ARGUMENT.
After his gratulation finished, he makes mention with what a loathsome
sickness he is disquieted: Then he takes occasion to write something, of
certain inue^tions of his own, the publishing, or not publishing of which,
he refers to the judgment of Thales. Lastly he falls into a conclusion
answerable to his beginning, wherein he painteth out his terrible and miserable
perplexities.

I There were 3. of that name as I read, one an Athenien Philosopher. 2. A
Le^ean hi storiographer 3. A Syrian, and master to Py^hagoras, who was the
Author of this Epist. D^og. Laer. lib. 1. sub tit. Pherec. and lib. 8. sub.
tit. Pythag. Acli^nus lib. 10.
Wi^he thee well to die, when thy fatal ^ay is come. etc. At the receipt of
your letters, a miserable s^ckenes invaded me, wherewithal I was pitifully
tormented: for all my skin cralled with lyce, and my flesh (a loathsome sight)
was eaten with that filthy vermin: besides that, I was troubled with a quaking
Fever, thorough out all my members. I desired my friends (making no account of
life) that after they had buri^d my body, they should procure such pamphlets to
be conveyed unto you, as I left behind me in writing. Which, if you shall
allow, in their examination, let them be published, that they may be read and
perused, as are the doings of other wise writers: but if you shall mislike of
them, then stay their edition, and let them not come abroad. Some what there
is in them, wherewith I am skarcely pleased, for of certain circumstances the
truth is not assured: neither did I, in that point, bind my self in a promise,
neither yet have I professed, that I understand, what truth should be.
Something I have reserved, perhaps, touching Theology: the knowledge of y^
rest, you must seek after, sithence I do not lay all things open to perfect
view, but rather touch them and so pass them over. My disease growing daily
more and more, and tormenting me with greater extremity, I suffer me self
to be no Physicians patient, neither can I abide, that any of mine
acquaintance, should come near mine infection. But unto them, standing
without the doors, and demanding of me, how I fare, I put out one of my
fingers through a crannel of the wickett, thereby making them an answer, that
Touching the order of his death diverse have diversely written.
I putre^e and consume above ground: giving them also a watchword by the way,
that they assemble themselves solemnly, and see my funeral exequies
performed.

Fare you well.
Anaximenes to Pythagoras.
THE ARGUMENT.
In what estimation Thales Mylesius was in ancient time, by this Epistle
written to Pythagoras, it is apparaunt. Wherein is signified the earnestness
of the Philosopher in the contemplation of stars in their course, that he^
thought not on the ground whe^euppon he troade.

THales, Of ^menes, read Diog. La^r. lib 2. sub. tit. Anax. and lib 8, sub ti^.
Pyth.
(from the flower of his youth to his crooked age) given to virtuous exercises,
and of a passing gentle disposition and nature, has ended his life honorably.
He at such ti^e as he went out a stargazing (according to his custom) being
accompanied with a pretty damosel, as he went out, I say, of his own house
early in the morning, having forgotten the situation of the soil where he was
resident, beholding the Heavens with earnest eye, glistering with stars
gloriously, fell into a ditche. * The Mylesians imagine this to be the end of
him, that so narrowly observed the stars revolution: but we, nevertheless,
loving learning, have that man in great reverence, leaning to his doctrine and
precepts Philosophical, as to principles of greatest authority, and we begin
our Or, exercises in reasoning.
talk always with ye name of Thales Mylesius.

Anaximenes to Pythagoras.
THE ARGUMENT.
Showing the perplexities, and troublesome laberynthes, wherewith he is
entangled, he commends the providence of Pythagoras: between whose estate
and his own, he makes a comparison.

YOur doings having been more circumspecte then we thought, cannot but tend
to your commodity, in that you have left The name of two Islands, the one lying
in the Ionian sea, besides Ephesus: the other in the Ae gean sea by Thracia.
Strabo lib. 10. Virg. lib. Aeneid. 7.
Samos and gone to Croto a city in Italy, near Tare^tum etc. Strabo. lib. 6.
Croto, to the intent you may lead a life acquainted with quietness: For, as
well the Aeacides, with others, are very outrageous: and tyraunts also, whose
power is violent, have dominion over* the Mylesians. Furthermore, the king of
Media, lays sore assault against us, except we yield our selves to be his
tributaries: albeit the Ionians seem to encounter the Medes, in maintenance
of common liberty. For they trouble us so extremely, on every side, that
there is no hope for us, to escape the hazard and loss of our lives. With
what heart therefore, with what mind, with what desire, may Anaximenes search
out the secrets of heaven, who is haunted with the fear of servitude, and
tormented with the terror of death? As for you, how can your case be but good,
sithence the Croto a city in Italy, near Tare^tum etc. Strabo. lib. 6.
Crotoniates have you in estimation, and the Of whom he was well thought of,
and beloved.
Italians likewise reverence your person: besides that so many resorting unto
you out of Sicylia?

Archytas to Dionysio.
THE ARGUMENT.
By the sum of this Epistle, it should seem, that Pythagoras was in Sicylia,
and not in Athens, whether, (as it is recorded) he made three several
voyages: and being h^d in suspicion, the second time of his abiding in
Sicylia, to have persuaded and also encouraged the minds of Dion and Theotas
to attempt the Isl^ndes liber tie: Archytas (after understanding thereof had)
wrote to Dionysius this Epistle following, wher^in he purges Plato of the
within mentioned suspicion.

WE The Tarentine Philosopher, of who^ Cic, lib. 3. de orat. and Diog. Laer.
lib. 3. sub tit. Platonis.
all (being the welwillers and familiar friends of Plato) have sent unto you,
Lamisius and Photidas, of pupose to bring back again from you, that same man
(you know whom I mean) as the law and equity of our ancient acquaintance
requires. Your doings therefore shall concur and agree with reason and
conscience, if you call to your remembrance, with what earnestness of words,
you desired us y^ Plato might come into your country: which we considering,
exhorted him to do no less, that your mind might be satisfied: calling also to
memory, that you promised him all things that might seem necessary, and
that by your license, leave and liberty, he should go and come at his
pleasure, nothing to the contrary withstanding. Forgett not, therefore, what
account you made of his presence, be not unmindful how the same was
accepted, and that you loved him above all other, at the same season, seem not
to be ignorant. If there be any di^ention sprung, if any hateful strife be
ingendered, use such prouisoes, y^ you deal with him Because his desartes have
been such, as they ought courteously to be considered.
none otherwise then courtesy requires (for so it behooves you to do, and it
is convenient) restoaring him unto us unharmed, vndamnified, and in perfect
safety. This if you shall accomplish, justice on your part shall be executed, and
we on the other side, shall be gratified.

Arcesilaus to Thaumasias.
THE ARGUMENT.
This Epistle gives us to note, that the manner of making last wills and
testaments, has been a thing of no late i^uention, it conteyneth three
several members. In the first he acknowledges his own weakene^se, whereby
he is forced to leave his will in writing, as uncertain of his death. In the
second is signified, a consideration of one friend to another, with a
commendation of faithfulness, the strong foundation of friendship. In the last
is mentioned an admonition, for the well disposing of things put in Thaumasias
his charge.

I Oaue my last will and testament to Diogenes, to his hands it was delivered,
to the intent that it might be conveyed unto you conveniently. For, in
consideration that I am always surprised with sickness, and that my body is
much in feebled, I thought it necessary to make my last will: that, if any
thing chanced besides expectation, I might pass the pilgrimage of this
wearisome life, without any For, peradue^ tur^, he had made him full exequutour
of his goods: or else the case so stood, that if Arcesilaus had died without
will, some trou ble would have insued to Thamasi^s: which by making a testament
was pre^ented.
injury to you redounding, who alone, among all the rest of my friends and
favorers, have, by the fervent affection which thou bear to my person, best
deser^ed. And for so much as, you have bi^ the faithfullest and most assured
friend that I have, none with you to be compared, so do your endeavor with
diligence, to keep carefully and truly, that I have committed to your credit
and keeping: First, in consideration of our old age: secondly, in respect of
our great acquaintance. Being, therefore mindful of our matters, have a
special regard to that, wherewithal Of Arcesila^, read Diog. L^er lib. 4. ^b
tit. Crat. Crant. and Ar^.
I put you in charge, that to the uttermost of your ability, all business
unto me belonging be honestly ordered.

Fare you well.
King Antigonus to Zeno the Philosopher.
THE ARGUMENT.
In what price and praise Philosophers were, in ancient time, by this letter
of Antigonus sent to Zeno, may be gathered: wherein he confesses first, the
royalty of kings to be inserour to the knowledge of wi^e and learned men:
thereuppon desiring him to take so much pains as to come to M^cedonia,
promising also, both ^*

I Ze^o ^cus, of whom^ Diog. Laer. sub tit. Zen. at large writes: lib. 7. and
Cic. in Oratore.
Am of opinion, that (...) fortune, and glorious iollitie my life is much more
excellent then yours, (learn^d Z^o:) But, if cousideration ^ee had of
knowledge, of liberal Arts, and of perfect felicity* all which are in your
possession, I perceive my condition* in no respect with ^ours to be comparable.
Wherefore, I have determined with ^e self to send for you, d^siring that ^ou
would not refuse y^ pa^nes to come unto me, as I (...) you will do, not
permitting my (...) in so honest a matter to be (...) (...) (...). Wherefore,
e^ploy y^ uttermost of your labor, (...) we may (...) your (...): assuring
your self* (...) you (...) not only be Antigonus his teacher, but master
also, or instructour of all the Maced^ians* For, who so infourmeth the king of
Macedo^ia ^ ^ ^ For, as the king, disposed is in mind: So commonly, (...)
people are inclind.
(...) Prince (...) (...).

Fare you well,
Zeno to Antigono.
THE AR^VMENT.
This Epistle is an answer to the former, wherein is comprised first a
commendation of the king (...), with a declarat^on what (...) knowledge is:
next what they ought to do, ((...) (...) from pleasure) that mean to attain
that (...), and what benefits they r^ape: The a (...) clause, touching quick
and ready wits: Lastly, ^is answer to the king, wherein are pleaded the
impediments of his not coming, with his good will to have the kings mind
contented notwithstanding.

I Cannot but highly commend The king of the Macedonia^s, of whom Diog. Laer.
lib. 7. sub tit.
your vehement desire, toward the attainment of learning: because you offer
your self so appliable, to get that knowledge which is not painted with
pretenses of truth, nor garnished with gay glosses of profit, not coulered
with the (...) ^hewes of popularitie, Zeno and Plu tarch. in the life of king
(...).
finally, not preposterous and perilous knowledge, which is so far from
reforming manners, that it pe^uertech every (...) proper^ie: but the mo^ true
understanding* which then is most beautiful, when it is most naked. For* ^e
that is inflamed with a fervent affection, and ardent desire of Philosophy or
wisdom, declining from the paths of that pleasure which is usually followed,
the poison whereof, whiles some young men have sucked, their minds have
degenerated from their natural disposition, and have (...) ^fected with
effeminate wa^ton^esse: certain it is, that he does maintain, not only true
nobleness, but exercises h^mselfe in the ^rue works of virtue. Moreover, if
one, whose wi^ is pregnant, and capable of worthy di^plines or sciences, have
with his aptness, measurable practice coupled, (provided, that a teacher be
not wanting) such a one, quickly attaineth the perfection of virtue. Assuredly
(most renowned king) were I not His laweful excuses (upon impediments not to be
a^oyded) inferred.
ouerburthened with drowping (...) ^ge (for I am fourscore years old:)
besides that, were (...) my body so weakened, I would address me self to
come (...) you, and by my service accomplish your desires. But, because the
above cited circumstaunces, are impediments to this purpose, that I cannot
personally satisfy your will, I send unto your highness, certain of mine
acquaintance, who in consideration of y^ ornaments of their mind, Or, are
equally matched with me.
are not mine inferiors: and, in respect of bodily ability Or, are far
beyond me, or above me.
are by many degrees, my superiors. With these, if it shall please you to have
conference, whatsoever belongs to perfect felicity, assure you, it shall be
ministered.

Fare you well*
Pythagoras to Anaximenes.
THE ARGUMENT.
Pythagoras now b^ing (as the course o^ the Epistl^ (...) me to thin^) i^
^talie, where ^e wrote this letter toAnaximenes (...) first touches the
condition and estate of hi^* whether seriously or sportingly, it is uncertain:
For I read not that (...) had such (...) as might be coniectur^d: (...) it
seems rather spoken of Pythagoras by way of pleasure* pre^ily putti^g him in
mind that friends should have recourse one to another. Other things are
touched in the Epistle* (...) are p^aine and (...) by perusing.

GOod matchless Gentleman, if you were nothing more excellent then Pythagoras,
by birth and by honor, you wo^d (n^ doubt) have come unto us from Myletum:
But, no (...) (...) take not the pain^, having ^ch (...), (...), the (...)
(...) your (...) and ^ces left you by your father and (...) in (...), which
should also be impedimentes unto me, in the like case, if Or, if I were
Anaximenes his equal: mea ning, in wealth goods and lands: Or, it may be spoken
eiro^ically, for fami liar friends use ieasting now and then, in their letters.
I were in sembla^ estat^ with Anaxi^nes. But touching the purpose, if you
shall forsake the Cities by anguration, persuade your selves that the benefit
of the same will utterly decay and vanish: and the Medes, in like manner, wilbee
more fierce against them and violent. It is not meet and convenient, to be
always gazeing up into the clouds, to mark the course of stars, and
view the r^olutions of the heavens: Nay, it is more auaileabl^* I wisse other
whiles to have consideration of your country, (...) in the estate of the same,
to have your mind occ^pied. For, I am not busied about my fables,
incessaantly: b^t sometimes I impart a portion of my will and power to play the
warrior, as the Italians do, who are at dissentio^ and variaunce one with
another.

Fare you well.
Arc^ytas to Plato.
THE ARGUMENT.
This Epistle should seem to ^e Responsor^: ^or it makes answer in such
order, as if Plato had sent a letter to Archytas before. A^ a^ other (...)
whe^of son) (...) (...) (...) (...) to the (...) being somewhat obsc^* men^
(...) ^ade of certain^ works of ^lato, his de^sing* which Archyt^ had in
keeping.

YOu Plato, of whom Diog. Laer. lib. 3. sub tit. Plat.
have not done amiss, in ^ignifying unto us, that you have recovered your
health, which was shaken with sickness* you have certi^ed us in like ma^er* of
Damasco: touching the Commentaries, we have not been negligent, in doing our
endeavor. We came to the Lucans, and there we had communicatio^* with the
(...) of O^cellus: what treatises (...)* are in our hands* concerning Books
bearing such titles as are here* named.
Regiment, ^awes, Justice, and the Generation ^f all things, so^e of them we
have sent to (...) (...) unto (...)* T^ose that (...) are no^ so readily to
(...) (...) wh^ (...) (...) (...) we will (...) them to (...) (...).

Plato to Archy^as.
THE A^VMENT*
First he speaks of (...) (...), (...) (as it appears*) by an v^nowne
Author: then of other commentari^ that ^ ^ ^ ^.

THe Whereof they intrea^ed was in secret^ to them two alone: for, not so much
as the Authors name is recorded.
Co^mentar^es which you sent us, and we rece^ued, how welcome they were unto
our hands, and how glad we were of them, ^t is a thing vnposs^ble, with tongue
to testi^e concerning y^ Author of them, thus much I must a^irme in his
^o^mendation, that among all other writers, at him we do m^st wonder. For
(...)* he ha^ (...) ^ most evident d^claration, and left a substantial
witness, that he was not unworthy of those his progenitors, men most
ancient and passing virtuous. These men are reported to have been Myraeans:
they were also among those Troyans, that accompanied The father of king Priamus
a Trojan after whose name P^iamus is called Laomedontiades, Virg. lib. (...), 3.
Laomedon, men of commendable demeanor, and praise worthy, as those things
that are concerning them and their doings registered, do verify. Touching the
commentaries, which remain with me, whereof you have also written, they are
not as yet perfected, neither will be, I think, performed to the proof:
nevertheless I have sent them unto you, least you should dream of a denial.
As for the keeping of such pamphlets as you cannot readily find, I am not
discontented: further admonition therefore is not necessary.

Fare you well.
King Darius the son of Histaspes to Heraclitus the Ephesian Sapient.
THE ARGUMENT.
Taking his beginning from a book which Heraclitus did write, enygmatical and
dark to v^derstand, and craving a verbal exposition of the whole work, he
requires him by the title of his royalty to be his teacher: rebuking (by the
way) the insolency of the people, that ^garded not such wise men, as should be
honored. Lastly, to the end he might win Heraclitus to be his instructour,
he promises him intertaineme^t, very largely and Princely.

YOu This book was entitled De Natura. etc. which when he had finished ^e ^id
the same in Dianaes temple, written of set purpose, very darkely, that none
mig ht understand it, but such as were learned.
co^piled a certai^e book, full of obscurities, doubts, and dark clauses, in
many places: which book being expounded, it appears to contain in it a
certain spec^lation or view of the world universal, of al things within the
compass of y^ same included, and of them also that are carried about with
celestial motion circularly. In the reading of sundry places of which your
work, touching these cit^d circumstances, many have been so ensnared and
entangled (as it were) in nets of doubtful reasons, that most of y^ which
they did read, bred an ambiguiti^, though the whole treatise se^med un to you
orderly penned, and plainly enough, to the capacity o^ men, devised. King
Darius therefore, the son of Histaspis, is desirous to be your scholar, and
would be acquainted with the Grecian knowledge. Repair therefore to our
majesty without delay, and appear before our presence inour princely Palace.
For the Grecians, as, many of them have wise men in little reverence, so they
account their precepts mere contemptible: notwithstanding (to say the truth)
they be such, as lack neither learning nor gravity. As for It is reported of
this Heraclitus, that being diseased with a dropsy, not passing a point for
Physic, he la^ded al his body over with tallow, and lying along in the sun
to dry in the grea^ie fat, fell a sleep, and was torn and eaten with dogs.
Suidas.
you, thus much I promise, and assure by perfourmaunce, that with me you shall be
honorable, you shall possess all principallitie, and noble titles of
worthiness, you shall want no dili^ent attendaunce in service requisite, you
shall have me as familiar as can be, both in communication and company, and
(finally) my, whoale life shall be conformable to your manners.

Fare you well.
Heraclitus the Ephesian, to Darius the son of Histaspis.
THE ARGVM^NT.
He answers to the Epistle of king Darius, seeming offend^d at his promises,
as not careing for his courtly, although honorable, proffers: showing also
that he is content with that little, which to his share is allotted. The
beginning of the Epistle, declares at what defyaunce he is with worldly
vanities.

THere He taken oc casio^ to frame his beginning after the course of the
wickedness of the age wherein he lived, and (...) we many a^buses.
is no one man living in the earth, but swerueth from truth, delights in
falshoode, wandereth far and wide from equity, and is (as it were) wedded to
injustice. Covetousness has kindled such a huge and flaming fire in their
hearts, that by liberality it cannot be extingnished or quenched: vain
glory does so puff them up, with blastes of boasting bravery, that by
h^militie it cannot be redressed: and all this is done, that sensuality may be
satisfied, and that men in the madness of their imaginations, may be pampered.
As for me, I frame not the use of my memory to such vanities, but I have
buried in the grave of forgetfulness, al such kind of offensive conditions:
and I, abandoning all courtlike statelynesse, escape the poisoned dart^s Hatred
hunteth honor.
of cankered envy, which is an inseparable companion of hon^ur and hautie
estate: and therefore am not so soon wooed, to be acquainted with the Persian
Princes palace, but enjoying that which is aunswerable to mine own desire,
live with a little, and yet to my co^tentation.

Philippe to Aristotle.
THE ARGVM^NT.
He rejoices first that he has a son of his own body, and shows reasons
of hi^ conceived gladness: He knitteth up his letter i^ hope, namely that a
learned Aristotle, would make a learned Alexander. In this Epistle therefore is
declared the desire of Philippe to have his son brought up in knowledge and
virtue.

These are to let you understand, that of my body I have an Namely Alexander,
who for his valiant nesse, was surnamed Magnus.
heir to succeed me in my kingdom, for the which benefit, I give the Gods
immortal thanks, not so much for that he is borne unto me, whereby I have
issue, as because his birth has so fortunately chanced, in the days of your
life. For I hope it will come to pass, that he, being trained up under your
tuition, and instructed at your mouth, shall prove a prince not unworthy of His
father.
us his predecessor, nor of The possession of the king dome*
those things which we shall leave as his inheritance.

Alexander the great to Aristotle his master.
THE ARGUMENT.
He seems to be somewhat angry* that Ari^totle should make that common,
which he ta^ght him privately: and gives a testimony how he loves learning,
which he prefers before al outward riches.

I This epistl^ is a manifest witness of the earnest desire, that flamed in
Alexander, for the attaineing of knowledge
am rapt into no small admiration, y^ the natural secrets, in the understanding
and knowledge of which, I have at your mouth been instructed, are common
abroode in books by you published. For, in what one thing can we excel others,
if that which we have learned, be free for every man to know and exercise him
with all? For surely, it is my desire and will, to outrunne al men, in things
belonging to learning: yea, I had rather excel in knowledge above all other,
then in riches, lands and possessions to be peerless.

Aristotle to Alexander the king.
THE ARGUMENT.
He aunsweareth to the letter of Alexander, and excuses himself, as he may,
in that wherewith he is charged.

MY Of this Aristotle, read Diog. Laer. lib. 5. sub tit. Arist. and Plutarch.
in Sylla
books, Auscultatorie, so entitled, with the publication of which you charge
me as blameable, when it was more meet, that, as mysteries and matters of high
secrec^e, they should be laid up and kept close from being made common, I would
your majesty understood, that they are published, and they are not published:
For, they are common to none, but to such only as be our hearers in that
exercise.

Aristotle to Alexander the king.
THE ARGUMENT.
This Epistle being replenished with wholesome precepts, for the virtuous
framing of manners, Aristotle sent to Alexander. It may be a general
admonition, for all that be advanced and established, in place of authority:
good to be learned, and better to be used.

Keep Precepts phi Iosophicall most worthy of hearing, learning, and
following.
close secrets. Speak sparingly. Temper thy talk with truth. Be not hasty
and given to rashness. Cut off anger. Stand not in contention. Be not
ambitious. Beeware of wine. Remember the grave. Incline your self to mercy.
With an unknown fellow join none acquaintance. Be not credulous (in any
case) and light of belief. Trust not thine enemy too far after reconcilement.
Be not grieved for a loss irrecouerable. Rejoice not in thy neighbors
adversity. With a stronger then thy self do not incou^ter. Never disclose thy
secrets, either to thy wife or to thy children: because women and children
keep And that which they know they cannot keep in secret, but must needs
make it mani fest.
that in counsel whereof they are ignorant. Covet not the thing which can not
be obtained. An incredible report esteem as a lie. If you wish well to fare,
and in honor to maintain your royalty, learn these lessons, print these
precepts in your memory, and put them in practice. Fare you well, and proceed
in the gift of knowledge.

Peregrinus, or an unknown Philoso -- pher to Aulo Gellio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He shows wherein true wisdom does consist (a lesson as he him self
affirms, most worthy to be learned) namely, in avoiding offense: showing in
what manner, this absteining from doing amiss should be embraced.

THe thing which you required me to note unto you principally, receive at my
hands at this present in brevity. If your desire be to be endued with true
wisdom, beware to offend: yea, take heed to your actions and enterprises,
although it were so, that neither the eyes of the eternal Gods did behold
you, nor of mortal men view you. For, we ought not to abstain from doing
amiss, through suspicion of following punishment, or for fear of infamy:
but, therefro should we be withdrawn, for a regard to equity, and of an
inward honor had to honesty.

Panaetius to Andronico.
THE ARGUMENT.
E^horting Andronicus to the embracing of virtue, he shows that it is more
excellent, then al worldly substance: an admonition to withstand fortune, to
ind^re labors, to set light by life (though it be dear and precious, for the
attainement of virtue) is here also contained. etc.

I Have always been of this opinion, and judgment (my Andronicus) that it is
the duty of a man adorned with wisdom, to pre^erre virtue, before riches,
honor, and all other things vain and trans^torie: to keep off Fortune
furiously offering the combat, and not to be subd^ed with her weapons, to be
armed for the indurance of labors, s^eatings and watchings: yea, We must
think no thing laborious and troublesome for virtues sake.
for virtues sake to put his life in hassard, and to have death in s^ small
account, as utterly to despise it and have it in contempt. These things do not
engender terror in the hearts of such, whose praise can not perish, whose
renoune is joined with eternity and ^uerlastingnesse: but in those they breed
fear and quaking timorousness, with whose life, al things else, whatsoever,
vanish and a^e extinguished.

Socrates to Theopompo.
THE ARGUMENT.
He inciteth Theopompus to the embracing of knowledge, shows that no place is
more meet for to lodge it in, then is man's mind or memory.

KNowledge is a thing most perfect, most honorable, and most beautiful:
deserving not to Meaning up pon leather, which is apt to receive any print and
marcke.
be marked on the backs of brute beasts, but to be imprinted and graven in
the minds of men. Wherefore (Theopompus) commit to the casket of thy memory,
the understanding of those things wherein to be instructed, thou art so
desirous: and from henceforth abhorring the hydes of dead carcasses, frame
your self to be delighted with men's lively voices.

Fare you well.
Apollonius to Estieo.
THE ARGUMENT.
He shows that virtue and riches are contrary: preferring wisdom before
wealthinesse.

Virtue among Of the name of Apollonius there were. 9. as I read. 1. a
Rhodian. 2. an Alexandrian. 3. an A phro disean. 4. an A labandan^. 5. a
Nyssean. 6. A poll. Erophi lus. 7. a Naucratitian. 8. an Athenien. 9. a
Tyanaean, which of the^ wrote this let ter to Esti^us, I can not directly
report.
us, is counted contrary to money, for when the one of these diminishes, the
other increases: and when the one increases, the other diminishes: how then
is it possible, that they should both have place in one person, except after
the opinion of sooles, that think riches to be virtue. Suffer not therefore
your friends and acquaintance, to be ignorant of us, what we are: neither let
them conceive of us this opinion, that we had rather those to be wealthy men,
then to be wise men. For, it is a thing most worthy of disco^me^dation, yea, it
is a foul offense, if that for riches we should adventure tedious and
dangerous voyages, which pass away like smoke, and shadows: neglecting in
the mean season, the nobleness of virtue, which is lincked to eternity and
euerlastingnesse.

Virgil to Augusto.
THE ARGUMENT.
He writes to Augustus, touching his work called the Aeneides, wherein (he
says) things are out of order, thereupon inferring his r^ason.

AS Virgilius Maro, prince of Latin Poets: of whose life Pet. Crinit lib. 3.
de Poet Lat. and Pet. Ram. in scho. sup. Bucol. Virg. largely.
I have received from your hands many Epistles, so some concerning mine His
twelve books treating of the acts and deed^ of Aeneas the noble Trojan
Aeneas, which if it were worthy of your person, I would most willingly present
it to your highness. But it is such a confused and disordered heap, that I
think my self scarce well in my wits, when I took upon me to write such a
work, sithence (as your Grace knows) other devises, to the ^eautifying of
such a book, are more to be required.

Cato to Caesar.
THE ARGUMENT.
This Epistle being written by a heathen or Pagane, might be a mirror to a
Christian. For herein Cato shows his opinion touching the soul of man,
saying that it is heavenly: he declares also in what work our minds ought to
be busied.

WE Cato Vticen sis of the Stoi call philosophers professi on.
must be of this judgment (friend I think it was C. I. Caesar the comen
tariographer: for of that name diverse are recorded in writers.
Caesar) that our souls, concerning the which we have had often conference,
descended and came down from the heavenly habitation, being sunk (as it were)
in the muddie element of gross earthly substance, a place repugnant to
celestial matter, and clean contrary to eternity. Furthermore, we must
believe, that the immortal and everlasting Gods, have instilled and powered our
minds into our bodies, that we should live in the world after a several
order, that we should be occupied in heavenly speculation, viewing the course
of celestial creatures, that in modesty of life and uprightness of manners,
we might imitate and follow them accordingly.

Plato to Dionysius his alies.
THE ARGUMENT.
He writes to Dionysius his kindred and alies, to leave off their lauash cheer
and delicates, teaching them that they shall ^euer be wise or sober, so long as
they be so sensually disposed: and that they shall never attain true delight,
if they learn not to be prudent and continent.

WHen Plato wrote this Epistle to Dionysius the Sicylian tyrant.
I came to see that strange kind of life replenished with Italian iunkets,
and Syracusane deinties, carrying a report of a life flourishing in felicity,
I was so far from allowing the same, that twice in one day to pamper the
paunche, seemed unto me, a thing worthy of much misliking. And as I say of
this, so I say of nightly sleepings taken ab^siuely, and of all things else
whatsoever, to the necessity of this life incident, inordinately used. For, in
such Because fobrietie and moderate usage in all things, is the way to
w^sedome.
superfluity no man shall attain to wisdom, none shall acquaint them selves
with tem^er aunce. For what nature, by such means, m^ learn moderation?
Now* out of question, There can be no life accompanied with perfect
plea^auntnesse, whereon prudence and temperaunce give not attendaunce*

Fare you well.
Plato to Aristodoro.
THE ARGVM^NT.
^

IT is reported unto me, that He was some Philosopher by profession, or else
some favorer of Philosophy.
you, above the rest, are in familiarity with Dion, and that your chiefest
exercise consists in vertuo^s behau^ours, answerable to the precepts of
Philosophy. For, this is mine opinion and i^gement: that, Wherein true
Philosophy does con ^ist: or, the sum of perfect Philosophy to consist in
virtue.
Constancy, faythfulnesse, sincerity, and such praise worthy properties, are
true Philosophy* As for other sciences, arts faculties, and professions,
serviceable to other things, if any man call them by the name of Ornaments,
he shall gi^ them no unfit term, as I suppose. But, Fare you well: and in the
c^mendable conditions, where with^l you are presently acquainted, make
continuance.

Plato to Archytae Tarentino.
THE ARGV^ENT.
He writes to Archytas to^ching some (...) of the an^ent Tro^ans, whose name
is not known, (...) hi^ (...) h^s invention and ord^r, sinally* he makes
mention of (...) commentaries, but treating of what matters, between them two
it was in secret: the like Epistle (if it be not altogether the same) is
before recited.

IT is a wonder, to think with what exceeding joy, I received the Commentaries
which you sent me: with the singular wit of whose author, I maruellously
delighted. * Of this Archytas T^rentinus, it is reported, that he was an
excell^nt Geometrici^n. Of that n^me there was an other, who was a Mity lenean
musicia^.
The in (vnadoutedly, as by his work it is apparent) deserved right well of
those his ancient progenitors. They say* that of them there were ten thousand
men in number, who among all the other Trojans, that accompanied Laomedon (as
it is reported) were most noble and renoumed. Touching, the commentaries, which
by writing, you do require, these are to let you understand, that as yet they
are not finished: nevertheless, receive them as they are. I mean imperfect.
Concerning the custody of the writings; whereof you wot, my mind with yours
is agreeable: wheref^re, ^urther talk^ in this matter is needelesse.

Agesilaus to Plutarcho.
THE ARGUMENT.
He answeareth to a letter, sent unto him at such time as he was busy in
warlike affairs, to put him in mind of his return: In the end of the letter,
he shows with an example of himself, that Prince^ must be ruled by law, and
counsel of highest officers.

WE have subdued a great part of Asia, we have vanquished the Barbarians, and
we have made many battles or skirmishes in Iconia. Notwithstanding, because you
will not have me pass mine appointed day, ^ will be at home at my limited
time: o^, else, peraduent^re before I am l^o ked for.
I wi^folow, or (peradventure) prevent your Epistle. For I bear rule and
government, not for my self, but for my country, and mine equals. And
surely, he that is placed in authority does even then rule with most justice
and equity, when he repineth not, that as well the laws of the land, as also
other magistrates in the city, should be his superiors.

Apollonius to his brother Apollonio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He writes to his brother Apollonius, whom, (being in sorrow) by reason of
the late deceasse of his wife he comfort, giving him counsel not to abjure
or forswear matrimony, by cause he has lost so good a partner and yoke
fellow, but to marry again, least by defection of issue, their name should
wear out of memory.

ALthings This is the same Apo lonius (as by the method and the matter (...)
his Epistle I coniec^ure) of whose life P^ lostratus, and before him Damis,
has written.
that be in the world, are of that nature and disposition, that when they are
at their full ripeness, then are they most fit to fall away and pearish: such a
thing is old age to all men and wom^n living* which being not able to
continue, yealdeth unto death. Wherefore, although you have lost your wife of
late, yet be not therewithal grieved: neither be you of this opinion, that
life is a thing much more excellent then death, because it is reported to
daunt the hearts of men with terror, sithence among men endued with courage and
valliauntnesse, a life, in all respects, is far worsse then death. Or,
declare your self to be a right Pythagorist: or el^e a true Apollonist, of the
first, ^eade Diog. Laer. li. 8. sub tit. Pyrof the second, read Philost. lib.
8. cap. 12.
Show your self the cosen german of a Philosopher, Pythagoras I mean in
profession and property: but be principally, the brother of Apollonius: and
cease not to maintain your family, by marrying a second wife. For, if in
your first wife there had been any quality blame worthy, we would mistrust and
suspect the second marriage, and that meritoriously. But, if she were
beautified with the precious diamond of chastity, if she, toward her
husband, were most lovingly affected: and in consideration of such gracious
behauiours, deserved semblable kindness: what then can creep into your
cogitations, what thought can invade our minds, that we should so despair
and be out of hope, as not to get the like again? Sithence it is likely, that
she will do her ende^our, to be better then her Then your sorm^r wife.
predecessor, because there i^ no occasion offered her ^f slothfulness in
the other, whereby she should wax careless, negligent, idle, and ill
occupied. Let the case and estate of your brethren, sink into your
consideration, and what their condition is at this day, prudently ponder. The
eldest has not, as yet, been acquainted with the sweet pleasures of wedlock:
The youngest i^ in hope to have children, but the same consists upon reasons
and circumstaunces. There are of us, in number, three brethren, to us three no
issue is raised to this day. Ou^ country may not be l^ft frustrate and void
of hope, nor they which succeed us, lose that which has been long looked
after. For, if we, then our father, are far excellent, as he also surpassed
his sire: what impediment is there to the contrary, ^ut that of your bodies
may be bred and borne, children much better then us their parents? Let such
prouisoe^ (...) be used, that we may have posterity, by whom the memory
(...) our names may be maintained, in semblable ma^er* as they have been
hitherto, by That as our predecessors names remained unto us, by tradition: so
our names may be continued to our (...).
our parents imposition. I could not, for abundance of tears trickling
down my cheeks, write any more touching this matter, neither had I any thing
at all, where abouts to occupy my pen, answerable to this that I have
written, in force and efficacy.

Apollonius to Euphrata.
THE ARGUMENT.
A commendation of Pythagoras, in this Epistle is expressed, for he makes a
r^apitulation, first of his knowledge in sundry sciences liberal^ then of the
ornaments wherewith his mind was enriched: lastly of his bodily abilities: all
which iuels they obtained, that framed themselves to his profession. I^
therefore the scholars proved so excellent, what shall we think of the master?

WHo so uses the company and conversation of Pythagoras, it is a worlds
wonder, to consider the commodities, and exceeding benefits which shall
redound to his advantage. I will give you a taste of them in a brief summarie.
He shall attain the knowledge of making laws. H^ shall prove a good
Geometrician, a good Arithmetitian a good Musician, a good Physician. etc.
He shall learn to be skillful in the art Geometrical, Arithmeticall,
Musical, Cheyrurgicall, Physical, Astrologicall, and in all points, of the
science of divination, or Southsaying, he shall be well experimented. Yea,
besides the within named professions, he shall be benefited, with things of more
excellency: as, with Majesty, with magnificence, with constancy, with
eloquence, with an assured judgment concerning the Gods immortal, and not with
an erroneous opinion, which is so far from beautifying, that it blemisheth:
he shall be furnished with a certain knowledge of celestial spirits, and not
carried away with vain persu^sion: He shall not covet excess, but shall be
directed with a mind, of it self, contented with perseverance, with
frugalitie or thriftinesse, with no superfluity of things necessary, with
quickness of the senses, with nimblenesse, with drawing breath without
impediment, with a good color and complexion, with soundness and safety,
with contempt of life, though it be pleasant, and likewise of death, although
it be terrible. Now to come to Euphratas, whither it were the same of whom Dion
writes, In vita Ad^iani, I cannot well say: of any so named besides him, I
r^ade nothing recorded.
you, what shall they reap, that frequente your fields? They shall gather such
gleaning as agree with your harvest, namely the same virtue wherewith you are
iudued, shall be to them advantage.

Pythagoras to Hiero King of Sicylie.
THE ARGUMENT.
Hiero king of Sicylie sending for Pythagoras, is in this Epistle answered with
a flat denial. The reasons that the Philosopher uses, are all borrowed from
abuses: in which ^ee praises a competent kind of living, such a one as he
himself loved: and discommendeth a lascivious life, wherewith Hiero was
delighted. The Epistle is worthy to be committed to memory, and more worthy
to be p^t in practice.

THe The differ^ne between a Philosophers and a Princes life in bre uitie of
words described.
life that I lead, is not acquainted with care, but established upon
tranquillity: as for yours, there is no circumstance, wherein with mine it is
consonant or agreeable. A man addicted to temperance, and not in subjection to
the rage of his perturbations, needs not the Syracusane dein^ie iunckets.
Pythagoras has al things in sufficiency, where upon to live at all times, and
in all places, competently. The service that an underling, or he that is bound
to obey, owes to his Lord and master, Because in conscience, and by custom
of service they are tied to do service.
is neither grievous nor tedious: specially to them, that are already
instructed by honest custom and use, to acknowledge submission and to do
reverence. Moreover, a mind satisfied with his appointed lotte, is a thing of
great account, and has passing privileges of liberty, from imminent
adversities and dangers. For, that one and only mind, has never an enemy,
to lay traps and trains as instruments of further mischief: Wherefore it
follows, of necessary consequent, that such a life approaches most nigh, to
the nature of the Gods, in semblaunce of properties. Furthermore, unblameable
affections, and a constitution or state of the mind framed to the right rule
of reason, has not their generation or issue, from the enticementes of
Venerie, I mean (to speak more sensibly) from carnal pleasures, neither of
abundance of pampering belly cheer: but of Pouer^ie the trodden pa^b to ve^tu
ous* conuersa^ion.
poverty, which leads us the plain pathway to virtue, of whose noblenes
Vile man is most unworthy. Again, variety of desires and delights in
voluptuousness, together with an immoderate wallowing in sensuality, casts
the minds of men, defiled with effeminacie, and bewitched with wantonness,
into the slauishe imprisonment of vices most detestable: yea, into that bondage
it brings them, by using themselves familiarly to such foul enormities, as
P^inces ^ues drowned (...) of (...).
you your self incur, and lie tumbling in accustomably. Where upon it
follows, that you (as a capti^e or prisoner) cast away your target and sword
of res^stance, and have yielded up your self who^y, to the power of those
tyrants, in whose claws since you are caught, it is hap hazard, if you escape
vndamnified. For, among all other things, not so much as your words, but are
as it were, in league with things altogether unprofitable, and very
superfluous. Send not therefore for Pythagoras to come to Of (...): he sent also
for P^darus and Simo nides, as he did for Pyth^ goras.
your kingdom, to enter with you into familiarity, to be conversant with you
in your Palace. For, Physicians (as people report) never wish to be partakers
of the diseases of their grieved patientes.

Socrates to Lysistrato.
THE ARGUMENT.
To a familiar freende, endued by nature, with goodly qualities, and yet sore
entangled with idleness, he writes pleasantly: (after many exhortations before
given, for the avoiding of slouthfulnes) using a fable of the grasshopper, and
the Ant, thereby thinking to incite him to set in open show, the gifts which
lie hidden in him, as fruitelesse.

FOr Whether this were Lysistratus the Sicyonian, an image maker, not of metals
(^or in his time it was not used) but of plastering work, and earthly mixture:
Plin. lib. 25. cap. 12. I dout much: thinking rather it was some other private
man. etc.
so much as, notwithstanding our manifold and marvelous admonitions, for your
commodity used, prevail so little that our labor is lost, and that (with
Penelope) we do and vndooe, no perfection or final success (in the mean
while) following: we will attempt another way, and begin our business a fresh,
using devised fables or moral tales, as instru ments serviceable for our
present purpose. So peradventure it shall come to pass, that the things, which
of us are pronounced, shall of you be sooner heard, and better liked. The
grassehopper (in the ancient world) when the pleasant and flourishing season
of the year served, skipped, leapt and chirpte, in her kind, among the green
herbs and summerlie pla^ts, and co^ceiuing in his song a certain pride, was
delightsomly disposed The ant, on the other side, keeping company with the
laboring reapers, and being provident in purueying victuals for her
nourishment, was occupied in gathering wheat corns together, and hoording them
up closely in her convenient garners, far more prouidently employing her
pains then the grasshopper. Now, when the sun had entered into the November,
December, Ian^ary, etc. winterly months.
Hybernicall signs, harues^ posting from us, and winter hasting to us, a
season unpleasant to the earth: and when the Sea casting away calmness, fell
to continual raging: the mariners took up their harbor in havens, the
husbandmen sat warming their shanckes by a lusty fire that filled the
chimney: and the little pretty Ant couching closely in her country cotage,
inioyed, in due season, the sweetness of her sweating labors, sustained in
summer. The grasshopper therefore resorting upon a time, to the Ant, besought
her instantly, to impart some small portion of relief, out of her store and
provision: but the Ant chyding and driving away the singing grasshopper, from
the door of her homely house, among all other motions showed, to reprehend the
grasshoppers sluggishnesse, fell into an exceeding great laughter, calling to
memory the mellodious tunes, and sweet songs that he sounge in pleasant
summer, there withal quipping the Because it ^elighted in pre sent pleasure,
and had no respect of sutu^e (...).
foolish grasshopper by way of exprobation. To conclude, the sweet harmony of
the grasshopper turned into a long hunger, and the sweating labors of the Ant
were changed into cherishing sustenance. This fabl^ (Lysistratus) is applyable
to thy person, whose property of idleness is such, that thou art in worse
case then any one that is haunted with a fever or quiuering ag^e. For shame,
shake off this sluggishnesse, and use thy self to some exercise: for, sithence
your body lacks no strength, no might, no ability, is it not a rebuke unto
you, to be so v^prouided of knowledge and cunning in all things, only by the
means A ^isease reigning in (...) ag^ too too plentiful ly: ^y the example* of
the little* (...) all (...) (...).
of this mischiefous idleness? and to purchase such a a slander and evil
report, to the (...) of those goodly ornaments, wherewith by nature, you are
enriched? But, Fare you well.

Epicurus to Hermacho.
THE ARGUMENT.
Beginning with a complaint of his disease (which he afterward stays,
through an inward conceived gladness) he puts Hermachus in mind, to keep
very carefully, the books or works of Metrodorus.

AT what time we This was Epicure the Athe^en Philosopher: who writing three
several Epistl^s, to three sundry persons. 1. named Herodotus. 2. Pythocles.
3. Menocreus, divided Philosophy into three parts: Canonical, Physical,
Ethicall, Diog. Laer. lib. 10. sub tit. Epi.
enjoyed the blessed day of our life, the same being likewise the last, we
wrote out this present Epistle: at which time we were so grieved with a
disease of the bladder and the bowels, that worse torments none might endure,
then we suffered. Nevertheless, though my body were so doloro^sly vexed: yet,
with the joy of mind that I conceived, through the memory of my dooinges and
devises, they were somewhat redressed. But according to the inclination of your
will toward me, and the love that you bear to the profession of Philosophy,
which from your young years, in you has been ingendered, do your vttermoste
endeavor, that the volumes of Sometime Epicure his scholar: these two kept com
panie and used con^erence very familiarly.
Metrodorus, may be safely reserved.

Lucianus to Sabino.
THE ARGUMENT.
This Epistle, though it were written, as a special letter, being full of
precepts, and wholesome counsels tending to the reformation of behauiours: yet,
in consideration of the within con^eined circumstances, I see no cause with
standing, but it may be general. To draw the particularities thereof, being so
many and diverse, would exceed the order of an Argument.

IF you be determined to attempt any new enterprise an^ labor, the causes of
your purpose are first to be canuassed, and (...) considered, least your
unorderly pro^ give manifest e^ivence of your temeritie and foolish^sse. For,
we are ashamed The dee^s therefor that we t^ke upon us. ought (...) rather to
be reg^rded.
to speak without license of law, or authority. To Nigrino.
. It is more available and praisewoorthie, with a little loss, to grow to
agreement with an adversary, then with great danger and expense, to stand to
trial of law, whose judgment is hard and doubtful. For, the sentence of the
judge, is oftentimes uncertain, and clean contrary to the expectation of the
Clients, whose cause is in controversy. To M^onio.
. If you be desirous, to know the nature and disposition of any man, mark his
sayings, and view his dooinges: as for his countenance, account it of small
cre dite, though such as be expert in the profession of To give (...) o^ men's
conditions and ^ortune by their countenaunces.
Physiognomie, presume by men's faces to give conjectures. For Dissimulation
or hypocrisy dasheth out all sight of judgment gathered by the view of the
visage. To Nigrino.
. Such works as you take in hand, if they be famous, and worthy, make haste
to have them finished: least you be prevented in your purpose, before it be
accomplished. To Philopat^r.
. They that be lightened with the greater learning, and more exercised, ought
to put this in execution, as a portion of their duty: namely to teach the
unskillful, and to instruct the ignorant. For to the embracing and
entertainment of virtue, it is an exhortation, (then the which none can be
more effectual) if this be your meditation: that pleasures grounded upon
constancy, and assurance, that pleasures (I say) not d^ceiuable by painted
pretenses, spring out from the fountain of honest exercises. Contrariwise,
diss^lowable delights, sauouring of filthiness and indecent demea^our,
sythence they be momentanie and vanishe like shadows, what else do they
engender, but extreme misery, matched with continuance. To Nig^no.
. To your parents, to your affinity, and to your instructours, you can not do
a thing more worthy acceptance, then if you do your diligen^e, that their
hope be not unsatisfied, and that with the exc^llencie of your wit, and the
worthiness of your fortune, (you use such caueats,) that virtue may be joined.
For, sons ought to conform, and exactly fashion themselves to the virtues
which in their fathers ^lorished: yea the good properties, and commendable
behauiours of their parents, ought to be unto them laws and statutes,
requiring precise obedience and exquisite reverence. To Menecra^es.
. Those that you admit to be your counselors, let them be of the wiser
sort: or let the^ be such (at least) as will not spare to speak Not such as
be^ring two ^aces v^der one hoode, blow hor and cold breath out of one mouth,
running with the hare and hu^ting with the hound.
freely what they think, and not such as (...) smothering truth with cloakes
of dissimulatio^. To Sabino.
. The know ledge of Poetical discourses, is most apt and passing profitable
for young learners: either for this consideration, An opinion dissenting, from
diverse that I have heard agains^e Poetry.
because it withdraws them, when they come to be striplings from many foul
offenses: and when they come to be perfect men, from that which is indecent.
To Philopater.
. Good and diligent scholars, are wont to praise, and take for example also,
whatsoever their teachers do speak, or put in practice: As for you, such
things as are cast out unadvisedly, they are to be rejected: and such things
again, as are substantially grounded upon reason, are to be embraced.

Fare you well.
Menecrates to Philippo.
THE ARGUMENT.
What other thing does this letter savor off, then of mere arrogancy. For
he compares himself to a king, nay he aduaunceth himself above a king, for
he takes to himself the ti^le of Jupiter. In this letter there is nothing to
be followed, but all to be ab horred.

IN your possession is the kingdom of Macedonia, and A Syracusane surgian or
physi^ian: of whom Aclia^us in lib. de Var. hist. 9. of the same name there was
a Comoediographer, as (...) Suidas.
I have the principality in the pro^ession and practice of Physic. In your
power and authority it consists, to kill such as be lusty and healthful,
o^ my skill and cunning also it depends to cure such as be sickely, weak,
and diseased: yea more then that is in my possibility: for I can minister
such receiptes unto men, as shall preserve their healthes, till they see many
years, and have grown to a great age, if (at least) they will be ruled by my
counsel. For, I being Jupiter their helping Father, give life when I list.

Philostratus to Tini Philo.
THE ARGUMENT.
To one (belike) that thought his words Oracles, he fendeth this letter,
telling him plainly that they are but vain. In conclusion he uses a precept
to the same person.

YOu I take him to be the same Philostratus that wrote the life of Apollonius.
feed on hope, that your sayings and sentences will remain in the memories of
the Graecians, after your death, by no storm of perturbations remoueable. But,
in so much as they are nothing, when they seem to be something, what will they
be, when they are nothing at all? Tini philo.
Fear the common people, with whom you are grown into such favor.

Anonymus to Anonymo.
THE ARGUMENT.
An Epistle Apophthegmaticall, declaring that in our doings proportion and
measure must be used.

Diogenes craved of Plato a goblet of wine: Plato very liberally, sent him a
flagon. To whom (upon this occasion) the Cynical, Philosopher gave thanks by
letter in this f^rme and order. When you are asked the question, to what ^umber
twice twain do amount, your answer is, that As the number answer^d* is not
agreeable to the number (...): no ^ore is your (...), pro^ (...) to (...) (...).
it arises to twenty: even so, your gifts are not correspondent to the
petitioners request, nor your answers agreeabl^ to the den^aunders question.

Cyrus to Cyaxares.
THE ARGUMENT.
To the intent that Cyaxares might persuade himself, still to be in favor with
Cyrus (which nevertheless he partly mistrusted) this letter is written:
wherein are touched cer^aine points concerning both their ^ersons.

YOu Cyrus, who in his infancy was nourished of a Bytch^ that gave suck: and
afterward, through the boun^ie of fortune, was aduaunc^d to be a king.
S^rabo. lib, 15. Xenoph. lib. 1. 2. 3. 4. etc. Herodo. and Iustine. lib. 1 and
Q Curt li. 4. and 10.
are not of us quite forsaken, (for what man is void of friends, that has
his enemies in subjection?) neither at our departing, did we suppose that you
were in peril: but the further we are distant, the more secure seem we in your
judgment. For, not they that sit at their friends elbowes, minister and
afforde to their friends most encouragement and securite: But they that so put
their valiantness in proof, as their enemies are forced to keep a loofe, or
as discomfited to commit themselves to flight, they I say purchase to their
friends most assurance of safety, and less suspicion of danger.
Nevertheless, Cyrus, who in his infancy was nourished of a Bytch^ that gave
suck: and afterward, through the bounty of ^ortune, was aduaunc^d to be a
king. S^rabo. lib, 15. Xenoph. lib. 1. 2. 3. 4. etc. Herodo. and Iustine. lib.
1 and Q Curt li. 4. and 10.
I would have you to weigh and consider, how to your person, I am affected:
and again on the other side, how you toward me in mind are disposed: this
tried by due examination, spare not to accuse me. I pro^ured you ayders, not
such as you would, but such as I could. You granted me as many as I might
win by persuasion, when I was in a country that showed me much good will
and favor: But now that I am in foughten field against mine enemies, you do
not revoke such only as are willing and inclinable, but all the Medes one with
another. Now certainly, the time was, when I thought me self bound to
either of you in service of courtesy: But at this present, I am by your means
constrained, to bury you in oblivion, and quite to forgette you: and toward
such to show me self thankful and ready to make recompense, as have
hitherto continued in my company. I can not resemble you in manners, who
sending into Persia for more soldiers, give charge and coumaundement, that
how many soever have recourse to my camp, they should (if you stood in need
of their assistaunce) repair unto you, before they addressed them selves to
come unto me, that you might have the fruits of their service, That their
service should be at your commandment, and not at their own pleasure.
not as they themselves lysted, but after your own pleasure. How beit, I will
regard your commodity, although I be the younger, least you should with draw
that which you have already given, and least in stead of thanks, hate be
retailed. Try not to recover them, whom you would have come unto you in
haste, with threatening. As for us, our wills and helps shall be ready, in all
such things as tend to As make for the commodity of us both indifferently.
^ur mutual furtheraunce.

Alexander to Dario.
THE ARGUMENT.
After Alexander had discomfited Darius, taken ^is tent, taken his mother,
wife, and children captive, (whom notwithstanding, such was the nobleness
and clemency of his nature, he commanded royally to be maintained) and had
also put him to flight: as he was laying siege to Marathon, there were
delivered to his hands, letters from Darius: wherewith Alexander (because they
were very proudly indicted) conceived great displeasure. But most of all, this
stirred his stomache, for that Darius did arrogate unto himself the title of a
king, and derogated from him the same name of dignity. In the same letter, he
declared himself a commander, rather then a petitioner, bidding him avoid
out of the limittes of other princes lands, and to li^e content with his own
patrimony: with such like circumstances were the letters of Da^ius infarced.
To answer which Epistle, Alexander, in the heat of his choler, writes in
this order.

THine Darius the king of Persia: a name attribu ted ^o the prin ces of that
region: of who^ we may read, almost in (...) ry historiographer: an^ of this
our Darius and Alexander, much in Q. Curtius.
Ancestors, having received no iuiurie at the hands of the Graecians,
concerning Macedonia, and the residue of the Greekishe region, committed many a
murder and bloody slaughter. In consideration whereof, the Graecians have
created me their sovereign captain, of such enforced violence, to work
reuengement: and therefore am I arrived in Asia. The Perinthians were assisted
of thee in battle, a people working the disturbaunce of my Father Philippe. An
army, which was at our commandment and service, Ochus sent into Thracia.
Moreover, my Father Philippe received his deaths wound, at the hands of them,
whom thou did hyre (or purpose) to commit that villainy: for which heinous
offenses thou vauntest in thy letters and triumphest. Furthermore, thou have
gotten possession of the Persian principality by sinister means, not by
interest of right title, nor according to the laws of the Land. Thou wrotest
letters unto the Graecians, full Which discovered thy malice, and showed the
poisoning sting of thy envious stomache.
of hostility and canckered envy: Thou did use all the suggestions that
ever thou could invent and devise, to make them take weapon in hand
against me, and to attempt a rebellion. Thou did send money to the
Lacedaemonians, and diverse of the Greekishe people, for the accomplishment of
the same purp^se, which notwithstanding, was refused of all the Graecians, the
Lacedaemonians only excepted, of who^ it was received: by which thine
intolerable enterprise thou did lab^ur tooth and nail, to sow dissension in
the place of (...), and to kindle malicious envy among such as I was lincked
withal, in ^shippe and society. In consideration of Or causes in this present
letter mentioned and made manifest.
which premises, I have prepared battle against thee, f^lly determining to
encounter thee in open field. And sithence I have conquered thy Captains, and
(...) thy ^iceroyes: sithence by the violence of my (...), I have discomfited
thy soldiers: sithence I have (^y the grant of the GODS) gotten all The
third part of the world: the other twain be Europa, and Aphrica. etc.
Asia into my possession: ^thence the residue of them that escaped the heat o^
(...) (...), commit their lives to my (...): let them, (...) ^tarie mo^ion,
fight under my banner? (...) (...) (...) ci^cumstances Of prowes^e cour^ge,
puisau^, valiant nesse. etc.
declare, that Asia is ^n my (...)) ^me thou also personally before our
presence. If thou c^ceiuest any suspicion of danger, and thereupon art in
fear, send whom thou will to take my faith and promise, that thy coming
shall not redounde to thy damage. Thus if thou dooest, thou shall For he had
taken them all prisoners, when Darius was discomfited.
receive thy mother, thy wife, thy children, and what thing else so ever unto
the belonging, vndamnified. And take this for a general warning, that from
this day forward, when so ever thou writest unto me, remember that thou
writest to the Because he wrote a letter to Alexander, calling himself by the
name of a king, and not ascribing to Alexander the same title royal.
king of Asia: not as to thy companion and equal, but as to the Lord and
owner of all thy goods, lands, life, and possessions. If thou do contrary
to the words in this letter contained, I will so deal with thee, as with him,
that against my person works injury. And, if thou stand in contradiction
about the right of the kingdom, put thy life in adventure, fight for it
valiantly, win it Conqueror like, and let not fligh^ be thy refuge, which is
proper to a white liuered soldier, and a timorous coward: for hereof be thou
persuaded, that, which way so ever thou seek to escape, I will continue
speedy pursuit.

Nucillus to Gibbo Verno.
THE ARGUMENT.
Because the Epistles of Nucillus, were so Laconicall and short, that many of
them needed none Argument: we have therefore compact them al into one body, or
boundel: not only that we might draw the meaning of them more commodiously:
as because there is such affinity and semblaunce in the matter, that we could
not do amiss to join them all together. Nevertheless, every several Epistle
is distinguished with this mark (*) against which also, in the margent, the
name of the person is set down to whom the same was directed. To be short,
all the letters run upon precepts, and clauses right worthy to be
remembered.

IF * battle be bidden against butter flies, against myce, *1 To Gibbo etc.
He was (belike) some Pomilio or little dwarf, and that made him to use this
eironical method.
against Fleas, or against Frogs, hap hassarde it is, if you be not pressed
out for a soldier. But if war be proclaimed against men of courage and
valliauncie, content thy self man, thou art no fit fellow to fight in such a
skirmish. For To whom you are as much comparable as a mole hill to a mountain.
Caesar never made warxe at any time, against an host of Craines. To Gibbo.
etc.
A deformed and ylfauoured body in proportion, is a lively representation of a
vicious and ill disposed nature: so then, it is a necessary consequent, that,
as your body is crooked, crabtree like, and grown out of all order, so your
mind is monstrous, and stained with many foul qualities. To Regulo
. In that you, being of late surprised with poverty, are made rich and
wealthy so soudenly: esteem it to spring of this cause, that The unjust
dealing of Fortune, in ad uauncing the unworthy.
Fortune is disposed to use a little daliance, who aduaunceth evil men to the
top of felicity, sooner then she does such as live in uprightness and
integrity. Now, having changed your estate, you have forgotten your former
condition, and as for your ancient friends, they are so far from being had
in countenance, that they are grown into contempt: this you do, not
considering with your self, how great is the instatilitie of sliprie Fortune.
For she has advanced you to so high a place, that when she is disposed to
play the deccitfull dame, your falmay be the more grievous. To Bardaeo.
. You must use drinking of wine, and the sweet delight of Venus, with
moderation: if you mean not to beget to your selse the The sickness of the
gout, engendered of immo derate drinking and incontinent pleasure of the flesh.
Podagricall disease for your daughter, to whom, when you are once become a
father, you shall find never a fonne in law, on whom to bestow her in
marriage, no, not if she had most large and infinite riches given to her
dowry: but, as an unmeet wife for any man to match withal, she must be kept
and maintained in thine own house continually, of thy private charges, costs,
and expenses. To B^silisco.
. I marvel much at this one thing, as at a strange monster, that you, having a
wife, with whose company you may satisfy the desire of the flesh, and quench
the flaming coals of kindling concupiscence, continue notwithstanding, in
^lthy suspicion of loathsome leacherie. To Tornico.
I notwithstanding, in the filthy suspicion of Not so much loathsome of it
self, as* loath some for the foul infections which it b^eedeth: as the
spanishe pocke. etc.
loathesome lechery To Tornico.
. I would have you to understand and learn this lesson, that in a perfect
musician two things are required: the first is cunning in his profession, the
second nimblenesse of the fingers in handling his instrument: these twain
must go together, like inseparable yoke fellows, for the one with out the
other is lame and maimed. To Romana.
. So often as I take a view of your picture, which I have hanging in my house,
painted in a table, the remembrance of your person ingendreth my heaviness.
To Regulo.
. I have many times and often, marueiled at your familiarity, and no less
wondered at your injurious usage and contumely: Now, when I had perceived (by
trial taking) that your friendship was leauened with lightness and
inconstancy, yea, that it did wholly incline to slander and reproach, I
forsook your freendshippe, as unwilling to suffer such ignominious and
wrongful usage any longer. To the Sarabaites.
. What with your legerdemaine, your iuggling, and your lying, you have gathered
together such mountains of money, impudently and without regard of honesty,
that in wealth, opulencie, and richesse, you are in manner, equal with
Princes. No marvel then, ought it to be unto a great number, to see what
benefits are obtained, by the sweat of other men's labors, and also by the
fat crumbes of other men's trenchers, To Fontano.
. Our Coniurer has cast out a devil, not with exorcismies or practices of art
magical, but with the filthiness of a foul mouth, whiles his tongue ran at
randon, and found none end when to be silent: of this, I thought you should
not be ignorant. To Tornico.
. We see and are sorry, that the comfortable science of music, whereby old
auncientes did sing and sound the martial exploites and noble adventures of
valiant Capteines: which was the mean and instrument, whereby the minds of
men were inflamed to go on warrefare, and to attempt enterprises most hard,
honest and honorable, is now so degenerated and grown out of so singular a
use: yea, that it is made a servant to effeminacie, to wantonness, and all
sensuality, being turned wholye into a tuneable sound upon twangling
stringes, or a noise running upon numbers, only to fill up the measure of
vain delight. To Tornoni.
. At what time you were a private man, you were somewhat well: but after you
mounted up to more worship, you waxed worse: In former times, heavenly
things were your usual meditation: but that being abandoned, covetousness of
coin has wrought an alteration of your behauiours. To Regulo
. I eat but once in a day: but to day I dyned at your table, and after that at
our coming home, we did eat again: wherefore, provide your self hereafter
of other guestes: For, from this time forward, I will take heed how I come
at your table. To Gibbosulo.
. Beware of the Alluding (peraduen ture) to the name of Regulus before
mentioned, upon some oc casion.
Regulus, a monstrous and venomous Serpent, a beast of the wilderness: least
you be devoured. To Valdo.
. I cannot but account your dooinges, most worthy of commendation, in that
you refused proffered honors and dignities, preferring the inheritance, which
by your fathers deceasse, you have in possession, and a quiet life, before
such things that are but vain and transitory. I wish with all my heart,
that many would follow your example. To Agio
. Praise worthy you are in deed, for the love that is in you, both to
learn and practice Virtue: sythence That is to say, virtue,
This is the thing that is only called by the name of good, this is the jewel
which too man is a beautifying, this is the precious pearl that he ought
properly to possess: all other things are uncertain, vain shadows,
dreams, and fancies. To Ro^leo.
. Understande you, that the richesse of the mind are the true richesse: know
this also, that he deserves rightly to be called a wealthy man, That uses
his riches as they ought to be used.
who is not ignorant of the true use of his substance. To Losmeo.
. I send unto you for a present, the skul of a putrified carcass, the sight
whereof does put us in remembrance, that we ought not to hang upon the hope
of things vain and tran sitorie* but taking a view of our selves by this
looking glass to make full and just account, that into the same form, whereof
this is a figure, we shall be changed. To Iunio.
In the dispen sing or laying out of your goods, you must be touched with a due
consideration of death, which is so certain that it can not be avoided: and
with the little assurance (or rather none at all) of life to be prolonged: lest
you be careful in keeping those things, that you must leave behind you, or to
prodigal * This was not Pindarus the Ephesian xyrant: but Pindains the Thebane
Poet: whose style in verse was so stately that it exceeded immitation. Ho^.
lib. car. 4. Ode. 2.
and lauash in wasting them, whereon depends your maintenance. To Locero.
I heard say, y^ you are translating the most excellent Poesi^s of Pindarus,
into Latiue: Now surely, they are rather to be soung to the melodious Citerne,
then to ^ee turned into another language: For, as it is in hangings of
tapistrie, that, when they be turned, loase a good portion of their brauest
beauty: even so it may be said of his verses, that in turning the^ in a
foreigne tongue, much of their worthiness and trimnesse is diminished. For, in
them is contained an exceeding pleasantness, excellent, inimitable and not
able to be followed. To Quirino.
My counsel and advise unto you, for your avail, is, that you would give over
the trade of a Mariner, and acquaint your self to play the husbandman: For, in
plowing the land there is much more safety, then in sailing on the Sea,
which all men know to be dangerous. To Basilisco.
. How can you be a good man, having in possession riches in such plenty:
considering that your father left you nothing either by deed of gift,
testament, or any other conueyance? A precept, that if it could pearce into the
hearts of wo^ldlings virtue would soon mount aloft, that now hangs down her
head as ashamed of the world.
Covet not to be full of money, to grow in wealth and substance: but labor
rather to be rich in virtue. For he gathers goods together all in waste,
whose mind is naked and not armed with virtuous furniture.

Thus far out of Isocrates, Philosophers, Princes and other writers of
Epistles.
The Extract of Epistles, out of C. Plinius and others.
C. Plinius to Arrio Clementi.
THE ARGUMENT.
He writes to Arrius of Euphratas the Philosopher, whom he commends:
touches other specialties here and there, as the order of his Epistle required.

IF at any time our city flourished in the knowledge of the sciences liberal,
if in any age it glistered in the glory of learning Philosophical, then now is
it in the top of all renoune, and triumphs more then ever it did, in the
flower of felicity. Of that which I have a^irmed there be many examples, and
especial presidents not a few, but among all the rest, Euphratas the wiseman
shall be sufficient. In my youthful years when I did wear and use my weapon,
I saw him in Syria soil, I was in his house, and I enjoyed his company, with
whom to grow in favor I both desired and labored, although there was no
need why I should greatly travel toward the attainement of the same. For he
is a man full of affability, mild of nature, and easy to be entreated, his
humanity is singular, his gentleness is rare, and the courtesy which he
professes is incomparable. I would my luck were so blessed and fortunate, to
reap as abundant an harvest of my conceived hope, as he has augmented his
virtues, and increased the ornaments of his noble mind. But now I have those
Iuels of nature and art in admiration, because I have aspired to a further
sight in them, albeit the understanding which I have gotten is imperfect. It is
not for ignorant and unskillful persons to utter their opinions in that, where
of they can re^ der no reason*
For as to give precise iudgemeut, in the work of a painter, of a grauer or
caruer, belongs to none so well, as to a cunning artificer practiced in that
mystery: even so it pertains to a wise and prudent man, and to none else, to
discern one semblable and like to him self, from one contrary or counterfeit.
Nevertheless, so far forth as my dim and dark eyesight is able to pearce
into the view of his virtues, I perceive in y^ Philosopher Euphratas, many
things which carry with them a countenance of excellency, and surmounting
estimation, which contain in them such efficacy and moving passions, that
they are able ^omewhat to allure men of learning, and are inclinable to
delectation. When he disputes it is done with exquisiteness, gravity, and
eloquence: he represents the loftiness and deepnesse of Plato^s Method most
commonly: his vtteraunce is not only enriched with plenty, but garnished with
variety and choice: Marvelous sweet are his words as they flow from his
eloquent lips, and of such force, virtue, efficacy, and vehement operation,
that they overcome and lead away the minds of such as struggle and resist.
Moreover, The external goods of Fortune described in Euphratas, wherein,
according to the custom of that age, he excelled.
the tall proportion of his body, his amiable countenance, his long hairie
locks hanging down his shoulders, his hoarie bearde wherewith his face was
beautified: al which ornaments, notwithstanding they are thought to depend
upon Fortune, and to be toys mere transitory, yet they were unto him, not
trifles of vanity, and shadows serving to small purpose, but instruments
where with he obtained estimation, and won worship convenient for his proper
personage: in his visage is no stearnesse, no sadness, but much severity: so
that to meet and mark him, would move a man's mind to His fatherly
countenance deserved such duty of reverence.
exhibit unto him due honor, and to abandon all manner of fear and terror.
His order of life was wonderful religious, his humanity was incomparable, and
the goodly disposition of his nature was right excellent. He does not rebuke
the persons, in whom vices be resident, but reprehendeth the vices where with
the persons are infected: neither is it his fashion to correct, and sharply to
nip such as do amiss, but mildely to amend them and to use them to a gentle
reformation. If he admonish thee, tho^ layest too thine ear with
attentiveness, and followest his precepts with a certain greediness: yea,
after his persuasions have pierced into thy heart, thou Or, beginnest.
desire to assault thy self with the like engines, that thy mind may not be
repugnant and contrary to his meaning. He has three children, whereof two are
Masculine, whom he trained up most diligently: and very painefully instructed.
His The wisdom of Pom peius in preferring Euphratas the philosopher* to the
marriage of his da^ ghter.
father in law, Pompeius Iulianus by name, was a man high and honorable, both
in the whole course of his happy years, and in this one respect, accounted most
noble and gracious, that he being a Prince of a Provincial inrisdiction, and
possessing the chiefest place of preeminence among Gentlemen of no mean or
base degree, vouchedsafe to elect and choose out for his contentation, a son
in law, not being a potentate in honors and titles of nobility, but a Prince
in wisdom, and ensigns of knowledge. But what mean I to interlace so many
words, concerning a man, whose company I am not admitted to use, nor yet may
enjoy his learned conference? Do I it to increase mine own anguishe and
torment, because the way is stopped up, that I can not have entrance to such a
benefit? For I am restrained and kept back with a certain impediment, namely
an office of exceeding great authority, and marvelous troublesome for the
pains there unto pertaining. I sit in place of judgment, I compile books, I
indite epistles, I scrible many imperfect pamphlets and letters void of all
art and learning. Sometimes I am accustomed, (for such a thing otherwhiles does
chance) to make my complaint to Euphratas of these weighty and urgent
affairs: He puts me in comfort. Furthermore, thus much does he affirm: That
y^ To perform the office and function of a magistrate, is the principal part
of philosophy.
greatest and the very best portion of philosophy, is, to take charge over
the commonwealth, to know controversies, to decide causes, to pronounce
judgment, to deliver words in good order, to exercise the precepts of
justice, and to put that in proof and experiment, which philosophers the^
selves have discovered in many a wholesome rule and document. Howbeit, in this
point he shall f^nde me impersuasible, and not to be exhorted: y^ it is more
auailable for me to be a practitioner of the premises, belonging to a
magistrate, then to consume whole days in his company: that by hearing him I
might learn y^ whereof I am ignorant. Wherefore I counsel you so much the
rather, for so much as you are not to complain of lacking leisure, that the
next time you come into the city, which I would wish to be somewhat the
sooner, to suffer him without grudging, to supply your imperfections, and to
polishe that in you, which might be more beautiful. It is not my property, to
be envious against other, (which is a trick incident to a great number) for
the good qualities which they have, and I have not: But contrariwise, I reap
pleasure and delectation, If I see my friends furnished with those things,
which I my self do want.
if I see those things whereof I have a denial, and therefore am not in
possibility to possess, abounding in my friends with all store and
sufficiency.

C. Plinius to Catilio Seuero.
THE ARGUMENT.
This letter is certificatorie: wherein he writes to a friend, of a friend
afflicted with sickness: he reckons up sundry circumstaunces to his
commendation, as well for his inward qualities of mind, as for his outward
behavior. Finally, he adds a conclusion of well wishing to his friend,
that they both might thereby reap some benefit.

Mine abiding and continuance in the city has been somewhat prolonged, where
I was troubled in mind, and also disquieted. The infirmity, and weakening
sickness, wherewith Some friend of his with whom he was well acquainted: and
was sorry for his ^icknesse.
Titus Aristo is sore pinched and pined, ministers unto me no small
molestation and heaviness: to whom my love singularly inclined, as to a man
worthy of ad miration. For, the^ he, nothing poudered with more gravity,
nothing endued with more faithfulness, nothing leauened with more learning and
knowledge, in so much that he seems unto me, so far from being a man, that
even wisdom and understanding it self, yea al good arts and sciences, as it
were in a certain mutual agreement, are in him most lively represented. How
skilful is he both in private causes perteining to the law, and in
controversies rising among the commons? How does he abound in reasons and
circumstaunces? How plentiful is he in uttering examples? how deeply is he
grounded in antiquities? with what understanding is he furnished concerning
ancient monumentes? There is nothing in the world universal, which a man is
desirous to attain unto, and with knowledge willing to comprehend, whereof he
is not able to give precepts, and sufficient to teach and instruet, So often
as I make inquisition and search after any abstruse and mystical matter, he is
my treasure, he is my storehouse. O, what truth and honesty is in his
language: what authority rests in his countenance, and what majesty: what
decency there is in his delays, and in his doubtful demaundes: what
subtlety and quickness of wit: what is it whereof he is ignorant? and yet
notwithstanding he labors oftentimes in a Because it is more commendable for
a judge to deliberate and cast doubts in cases of controversy, then to be
ouerquicke and ha stie, which sometimes per uerteth equity.
laberynth of uncertainty? Because it is more commendable for a judge to
deliberate and cast doubts in cases of controversy, then to be ouerquicke and
ha stie, which sometimes per uerteth equity.
he doubts in diversity and sundry sorts of causes, which he thresheth and
sifteth in such sort, that the very original and beginnings of them are by
him rehearsed, discerned, examined, and considered. Furthermore, how parciall
and sparing in diet, how moderate in apparel and clothing? When I enter into
his chamber, and cast my rolling eyes from corner to corner, yea, when I
behold his bed, and the necessary furniture there unto belonging, I see a
lively representation and image, of the frugalitie and thriftinesse, which was
in high estimation among our ancestors. These things are beautified with the
noblenes of his nature, which refers nothing to ostentation, painted
popularitie, and vain glorious opinions, but tries al things with the
touchstone of conscience: and weygheth, whatsoever comes in question to be
decided, in the balance of justice and equity. The reward of a good deed he
fetches not from the report of the people, but sifteth it out of the
circumstances whereby the cause is known. To knit up all in a summarie, no man
would be so mad and ouerseene, as to account any one of those, which by
outward gesture and habit of the body, make a iollie show and a gloss of
singular wisdom, comparable to the man whom I have mentioned. He is no idle
talker, either in hall or gallerie. Neither does he make other men's leisure,
and his own quietness, Because he was so learned and therwithall so witty in
reasoning.
delightsome with tedious disputations: but sitting in his long gown, or rich
robe, is occupied in such matters as are of him to be determined. Or, he is an
advocate to many, and a counselor to more, etc* the words may admit a double
interpretation.
He is a furtheraunce to many, in being their advocate: and an help in hassard
to such as use his counsel: in chastity, in uprightness, in justice, in
constancy, he is preeminent, and no man's inferior. If a man were in his
company and saw his behavior, he would be astonished: such is his patience,
in suffering the sharp assaults of his sickness, in resisting the violence
of sadness and sorrow, in wrestling with thirst which requires moist
recepts, in passing through the incredible heat of burning fevers, without
shrinking. Not many days ago, he called me, and diverse of mine acquaintance
unto him, whom he loved entirely, and desired us to resort to phys^cians for
counsel, and of them to learn the extremity and uttermost danger of his
infirmity and disease, that, if it were past remedy, he might prepare him
voluntarlly to leau this life: but if it were in difficulty, and yet not in
despair, he might resist and struggle with it, till such time as perfect
health were to be recovered. For the petitions of his loving wife, the
lamentations and tears of his dear daugh ter, and the state of us his good
friends, are not to be neglected, all which premises are directed to one
limited mark, namely, that he would not cancel our hopes (if at least wise
they were of assurance and not built upon vanity) with voluntary death. That
thing do I esteem and judge hard, uneasy, and worthy of principal
commendation. For Voluntary death ought not to be attempted of a^y wise man,
notwithstanding many a one among the brutishe swarm of peo ple, use it as a
remedy against misery.
to run as it were with a certain force and violence to death, is common to
many: but to use deliberation concerning the end of life, to consider of the
causes which depend thereupon, advisedly and as reason prescribes: so to be
persuaded either to live or dye, is the property of a well disposed mind, and
a certain token of a man armed with valiantness. As for the physicians, of
whom we asked counsel, they put us in good comfort, promising that all things
will turn to the b^st, and that there is little fear of danger to death. It
remains that God say Amen to their warrants, and that he disburthen me of
this care conceived: of which when I feel my self delivered, I will to my
Lauren^inum a fresh, that is, to my books, to my noting tables, and such
exercises of learning, as are, both quiet and fruitful. For, continuing where
I am, I have no leisure to read, neither yet any lust to write, such is mine
inward anguishe. You understand, what it is that I fear, and you know what
I wish: besides that, what I have purposed hereafter to attempt, you are not
ignorant. As for your self, I would have you write more Merrily, say some
copies, for the Latin word is laetio ribus: Both i^ terpretations are alowable.
largely, that letters may have passage and repassage between us twain, and
that I may be informed, how you have been exercised, how you are presently
occupied, and whereunto you will apply your time, your wit, your labor, and
your leisure. My distressed condition shall be indifferently redressed, and
seasoned with measurable consolation, if you cease from complaining, and have
no cause by smart and anguish to lament.

C. Plinius to Pompeio Falconi.
THE ARGUMENT.
This Epistle runs wholly upon resolutions: For, as it appears, a question
was demanded, whether a Tribune might plead at the bar, whereunto answer
is made with sundry reason^.

YOu ask my counsel and advice, whether I think it requisite, that in y^
office of the tribuneship, you should plead causes. It is a thing not lightly to
be regarded, that you consider what that office is: whether it be a vain
shadow, and a naked title destitute of honor, or a religious authority:
against which magistracy, as no compulsorie means should be used: so ought
they y^ bear the same office, not to try any man by constraint. At what time
I was a Tribune, or protector of the people, I might (peradventure) have
offended in thinking my self to be that which I was not, A Tribune may not be
a pleader of cau ses in common courts of judgment.
and then did I abstain from pleading causes, and meddled not in matter^, which
in common place of judgment are ^o be (...). First, by^ause I suppos^d it a
great (...) and disorder, that he to whom all men ought in rising to
reverence, and in giving place to use most worshipfully* should stand on his
feet like an abject, whiles all other sit in prepared pla^es: and that he y^
might by authority, command al men to be hui^t and silent, should have his
tongue limited and tied, ^o the running of an hour glass: an^ that he, wh^in in
talk to interrupt and hinder* was counted a thing (...) t^lerable, should have
contumelies, and reproaches, ringing about his ears, which if he sought not to
recompense by reuengement, then was he thought straight way a cowardly beast:
and if he would not let them pass without (...) and payment of some smart,
then was he thought proud and insolent. This was also a horrible heart grief,
when as, either In law they are called co^pleynant and defendant.
he whose suite I maintained, or he against whom I directed the force of my
plea, was before my face, and called upon me in open assembly: Because such
offices are never separated from much la bour and toil.
whether it were better for me to be quiet and keep silence, and as it were,
forswearing and for saking so busy an office, become a private person. By
these and such like reasons, which offered them selves to mine understanding
and memory, I fealt my self much moved, in so much that I thought this rather
of the twain to be worthyest of election and choice: namely, to take upon me
the charge and office of a Tribune, for the behoof of all: then to become an
advocate or solicitour for a few. But to you once again I sing this song. It
is I think not lightly to be regarded, that you consider with your self, what
the office of a tribune is. Show your self ^ wise man in the whole course of
your life, that will win you wo^ship abound^tly.
Resemble your own person, and be circumspect whom you represent, yea, put on
the person of your own self, which a wise man ought to make so ^itte for his
purpose, as it is of ability to open wide ways to preferments and promotions.

C. Plinius to Caninio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He expostulateth with Caninius, unto what exercise he applies himself:
gives him liberty and free choice, to recreate his body and mind as likes
him best: shows how desirous he is to enjoy the like leisure and pleasure:
for end, certifiet ^ him how he i^ still occupied in many matters.

ARe you occupied as a student? or as a fisher? or as a hunter? or do you
practice and use all these exercises at once? For there is no impediment to the
contrary, but that they may every one, be put in proo^e and trial at our
manor of Carium* For the ^iuer affordoth fish, the Parckes and forest yield
flesh, and there is a solitary place, merueylous meet and convenient for
meditation and study. But whether you exercise all these at once, or whether
you practice but one of them se^erally, I can not say I am en^ious against you:
Nevertheless, I feel^ my self somewhat stounge with anguish* because* I may
not do as you do, and enjoy those things whereof you have the fruition, the
pleasure, and the profit: which I desire and couef, as the sick and crasie
patient longs after wine* bathes, and water springes. Shall leisure and leave
never be obtained, to untie Matters of weight and great impor^aunce: A speech
Metaphorical.
these tangl^d knottes? Rather then I will ta^ie the loosing of them, I will cut
them in sunder. But I think I shall never have the opportunity to use so
beneficial a privilege. For at the end of old controversies, new spring up
and grow, whiles the first are skarcely dispatched: such a rank and row of
litigious causes, and earnest matters, increase day by day, and hang one upon
another, as linckes in a long chain.

Fare you well.
C. Plinius to Oct^uio.
THE ARGVMEN^.
V^er the name of children signifying books, (the testimonies o^ learning and
knowledge) he couns^lleth Octauius, to keep them no longer in hugger, but to
let them have liberty to show themselves abroad, that thereby he himself
might be commended, his friends delighted, and strangers profited.

O Man too deeply planted in patience* Or rather to hard* cruel, and
tyrannical! He c^lleth the fruits of Octauius his wit, as books and learned
works which he wrote, by the name of children.
Who having begotten and trained up children of such excellency, keep them
to thine own use and custody, not suffering them to go abroad, that unto
others they might impart their commodity. How long will you envy your own
honor and estimation? how long will you grudge at our gain and commodity?
how long will you be an enemy to your own praise and ad^auncement? how long
also will you continue an adversary to our pleasure and delectation? Let your
offspring be spoken off abroad among the multitude, let them take their flight
from place to place, and possess the triumph of renown by the trumpe of every
man's tongue: restrain them no longer, but let them have free passage both
far and near, where the Where the arms and ensigns of the Roman Em pire
are spread* ^o some books are to be ^xpounded, which varrie in the word.
language and speech of Romans is used: Great has been the expectation,
wherein we have labored, touching you and youres, and as it has been great,
so has it likewise been long: which as you may by no means frustrate and
make void, so may you not at any hand, differ and putt it off, to further
time. Certain Uerses of your notable invention, have been read, heard, and
reasoned upon, which against your Are blown abro^de, and noised in (...)
pl^ces, against your mind.
will, violently brake out of prison as desirous of liberty: and certainly,
except you gather your other brood about your body, and keep them close
together, it is to be doubted, least as wanderers not acknowledging any proper
master, they loose you, and find one or other to be their father. Set before
your eyes, the lively myrrour of immortality, which by this memorable monument
alone, you are in possibility to purchase: and lay the lookeing glasses of
this transitory life in your sight, from which you may be delivered, by the
sure fortification and bulwark of your passing pen: for all things else,
compassed within the pauillion of this worlds wilderness are subject to
frailty, to corruption, to decay, to ruin and rottenness: following the
course of an ebb and a flow, as men themselves, in whom is no hope of
certainty, are in general. You will say (peradventure) according to your
custom, it shall be no part of my charge, let my friends look thereunto if
they lust. I wish with all my heart, that such friends you may find out,
being endued with faithfulness, garnished with learning, and not deintie of
their travel, as would vouchsafe As to publish the books and volumes which you
have written in your name, that by your pain, you may win fame and renown.
to take upon them so great a burden, and for your sake sustain such a
labor. But play the part of a prudent and circumspect man: Look above,
below, and round about you, least it be objected against you for a point of
small providence and forecast, to rest in hope of other men's gleaning, when you
are able of your own self, to gather in the whole Harvest. And concerning y^
edition and publishing of y^ work, determine with your self, as you please:
but yet provide so at the length, that it may have liberty to go abread: y^
you may reap some pleasure of your pain, and in your toil find cause of
sufficient joy: which I me self long ago presumed upon, in your behalf, how
beit, not rashly, or without aduisement. For I imagine, what running, what
wondering, what shouting and what silence weighteth upon the sight of your
Books, a (...) o^ translation, from the body to the mind.
children: wherein I am no less delighted, whiles I talk and make mention of
them, then I am comforted in the noysing of your name. Let your silence be
tempered with diligence, earnestness and desire, to hear further touching
these matters, which are in likelyhoode to follow hereafter. And as for your
own person, be so careful and wise, that by your long lingering, and doubtful
delays, you rob not your studies of their due interest, and defra^de your
own labor of their prepared pension: which fault in you if it grow in
excess and pass beyond the limits of measure, it is to be doubted Least
your delays get you the (...) of a sluggarde or idle lubber: or else of a
fea^esul, cowardly, and dastardly loute.
least it run in report of slothfulness and ignorance, or else of
timorousness, and fearfulness.

Fare you well.
C. Plinius, to Saturnino.
THE ARGUMENT.
Writing to Saturninus, he declares what a pleasure it is to him, to see and
hear friendship flourish among men of virtue and honesty. In the end of the
Epistle, he is grieved, that Saturninus is busily occupied in matters of suites
of law, that he cannot have his company.

NExt and immediately unto our friend Priscus, because such was your
commandment, I have most willingly and liberally performed the duties of
thankfulness. For it is unto me the pleasauntest thing in the world
universal, that you being men not of the basest degree, nor yet of the meanest
manners and behauiours, besides that, such whom I love most sincerely and far
above al other, For the mutual agreement of friend^, is a thing where at we
ought to ^eioyce: as the va^iaunce of friends is a thing whereat we should be
grieved.
cleave so closely together in friendly conversation, that you think your
selves mutually bound and tied in knottes of perpetual kindness. For, he
confesses and protes^eth also, that by the benefit of your friendship, he
perceives himself a communicant and partaker of singular delectations,
contending and struggling as it were to outrunne and conquer you, in the most
honest combat of concord and kindness, whereunto process of time will give
large and plentiful increase. That you are entangled and earnestly occupied in
buisie matters, I am for this cause somewhat sorry, for that your service
being yoked to such necessity, cannot satisfy our desires: Howbeit, if by the
help of the To whose hearing and determining the ^atter called in q^estion was
committed.
Judge, the one controversy may be finished, and by your pains the other also
accomplished, you shall begin first where you are to enjoy rest and
quietness, and afterward as you find your self sufficed, toward us to
address your journey.

Fare you well.
C. Plinius to Fusco.
THE ARGUMENT.
He teaches Fuscus how to bestow his time, commending that kind of study
which is applied to translating out of one tongu^ in^o another, wheruppon (by
the way) he touches many circumstances. He shows also, by specialtie,
wherein it is good to be exercised. And though Pliny wrote this Epistle to
one particular man, laying before him (as it were) a platform of study: yet I
see no cause to the contrary, but these precepts of Pliny may serve as well
to teach all young students an order and method^ in study to be observed.

YOu demand of me a question: and what is it, but to be instructed how I
think it were best for you to bestow time, now that you are in Not that
solitarines^e whi^che nature does abhor: but by solita^inesle ^e mea neth in
this place, want of friendly comp^nie, and f^miliar acquaintanc^.
solitariness, and sequestered from company. Mine answer to your question is
this: That in my judgment, you shall find this ex^rcise very profitable, if
you frame your self to interpret out of the Greek tongue into the Latin, or
i^ you tran^late out of the Latin speech, into the Greek. In which point of
practice, the property of the language is to be pondered, gayness of words
to be followed, abundaunce of tropicall and figurative flowers to be observed,
and finally, a patheticall and vehe^ent order in writing to be continued.
Moreover, through imitation of the best and most approved Authors, ability to
comprehend the like things is obtained: and that wherein the reader wants
understanding, is much deceived: the translatour having the direction of
knowledge and the end of art, is not ravished: yea, by the exercise of
translating, we purchase perseueraunce, and by the use of the same, our
judgment incli^eth to ripeness. There is also some aduauntag^ to be gotten,
A ready and exquisite way to attain knowledge in a foreign language.
to write that down which you read, in words of a contrary tongue, to the
intent that the whole substance and argument of that which the book
contains, may be ingraffed i^ your memory: to confer and examine that
which you have written, with that which you have read, and so diligen^ly to
consider, wherein your Author has aptly framed his invention, and you not
unorderly dealt in your translation. Great gladness will be offered, if in some
things you amend your Author: Great shame and discredit also will ensue, if
in all points he show more skilfulnesse, and bring his matters to more
perfection. It shall be lawful also for the translatour, t^ choose and pick out
such things as be most manifest, and apparent: then afterward to canuasse
and sift them with discreti^n. A bold and presumptuous kind of contention, I
must acknowledge this to be, yet neuerthel^sse, not evil or (...) it is
honest and blameless*
malicious: and why? because it is secretly practiced: These and such like
contentio^s, I wot well, many have attempted, and thereby won commendation,
whiles they wanted not sufficient ability to Whiles they (...) skill enoug^e*
and art sufficient to follow their author: and were in hope also to atteine
more excellency.
follow after as it were in a ch^e, and despai^ed not likewise to outrunne the
ringleader, and thereby to get ground. By translating, this commodity
arises: to renew that in memory, which sometime you read and have forgotten:
to ret^ine many things ^n mind, when time serves to be uttered: to pass
over many circumstances upon consideration: to interline here for necessity,
there for exornation: to reject that which is written, by writing it again.
This exercise, I must confess, is laborious and paineful, yea, it is
replenished with toil and tediousness: On the other s^de again, in that by
the difficulty and hardness of the work, perfection is reco^ered where much
was out of square, and res^itution of strength gotten, which was diminished:
the commodity is answearable in proportion and measure, to the wearisomnesse
of the labor. For end, to put too new ^immes, joints, and members, to the
performed body, not displacing them that it had before, is another pleasure
which redou^deth to the Translatour. I know, that at this instant, your study
stands principally in playing the Orator, howbeit, I labor not by
persuasion, to win you to the prac^ise of this skirmishing, warlike, and
f^ghting style: For A similitud^ not to be pre^ with ou^ du^ consideration*
as ploughed lands, are s^atered sometime with this seed, and sometime with
that, because variety is profitable: so our wits in like manner, are to be
exercised, one while with this meditation, another while with that, because
diversity draws with it much pleasure. My Precepts for young scholars to
obs^rue and follow.
counsel moreover, in this case, is, that you buckle your self to translate
some what out of histories, and that in writing epistles you use great
diligence. For it comes to pass, many times and often, that upon urgent
necessity, we must (as it were) leven our Orations with historical
narrations, and beesprinckle the same also with Poetical descriptions: as for
epistles by them this commodity is gotten, The commodity that redoundeth to
him that di^ ligently reads epistles.
not only a method in writing and speaking compact in brevity, but the self
same also full of smoothness and purity. Furthermore, it is permitted to the
translatour, to take the benef^te of relaxation and refreshing his musing
mind, with versifying, I do not mean, in that wherein ampli^cations, and
large discourse^ are used (For I am not ignorant, that to the (...) of such an
e^terprise, much leisure and labor is required) but that rather, which, as it
is quick and witty, so is it short also, and not tedious, which dispenses
with all manner o^ cares and business whatsoever. They are called plays of
disp^t, and trifling pastimes: nevertheless, as much renown otherwhiles is by
them at^hieued, as by matters more earnest and w^ightie, is procured: and to
discover a manifest truth, which silence ought no longer to smou^ther (for
why should I not utter verses, whiles I exhort you to the st^die and meditation
of the same?)

True is this Comparison
As A comp^rison between wax, whose property is to receive eue^ie
impression: and the wi^ of man, which is apt for the knowledge of many and
sundri^ sciences.
wax^ is praisde, if soft it be, and yield,
To every shape, which workemans fingers frame:
Minerua chaste, and Mars with sword and sheeld,
Fair Uenus grace, that ^miable Dame*
Her pr^tie son who Cupide has to name:
With thousand sorts of things that disagree,
In wax by A^te which plainly printed ^ee:
And as the flames of hot and scortching fire,
Are quenched quite with water of ^he spring,
And sloures in field thereby to growth aspire,
And meadows green, of grass which plenti^ bring^:
So wit of man by skill (a goodly thing)
^n diverse Arts must taught and trained be,
What gain is got thereby the blind may see.
And therefore Orators most excellent, and men of great reputation, used
either to give their minds to that kind of exercise, or else in the sa^e were
exceedingly delighted: nay rather, they did both take pleasure in it, and
thought no skorne to make it their practice. For it is a wonder, to consider
and weighe, how y^ mind laboring in this meditation, is (much like unto a
bow) some times bent very tight; and sometimes again made slack for the
nones: that is, it is other whiles busily occupied, and otherwhiles again, it
is pleasa^tly disposed: For the Poetr^e dea^eth in all kind of matters as well
war like and w^ightie, as wanton and pleasant.
subject or argument, whereof ^erses consiste, are per^urbations and motions of
the mind, as love, hate, anger, mercy, mildness, frowardness etc. Besides
that, they contain all kind of things, which beelong to the course of our
life, and, not so much as ca^es of l^we, pleadable in courts of assise etc.
but in them verses are conuersaunt. Poetry has also in it a peculiar
commodity, and it opens a passage to pleasure in other exercises: for that
being tied to the necessity of observing quantity and proportion of
syllables, we delight our selves in proa^e, applying our pen to write that
more willingly, which, comparison does prove unto us more easy and less
laborious. You have (perad^enture) more words spoken in this behalf, then you
required: Nevertheless, one thing has escaped, for I have not made
declaration what I thought worthy the reading, albeit I express what was
worthy the writing. It shall be your part to ^xe and ingraffe this in your
remembrance, that with diligence you must elect and ch^se, the best approved
author^ in their kind of method and exercise: a common saying it is in y^
mouths of many, Multum legendum esse, non multa, That much and often reading
must be used, and For that con foundeth, rather then confirms know (...).
not one thing upon another. And what Authors those are, that are most to be
allowed, it is so manifest and evident, that i^ needs uo demonstration: and
if I should set down a catalogue or beadroll of their names, mine epistle
should extend and stretch it self an unreasonable length, insomuch that whiles
I set down directions and precepts, how you should order and dispose your
studies, I my self seem to diminishe and consume the time, which otherwise on
my book might be employed. Take into your hands again your noting tables,
and write somewhat that is already spoken, or else the self same thing that
you have begone.

Plinius to Traiano.
THE ARGUMENT.
This epistle is petitorie, for it compriseth a short supplication made to his
Prince Traianus, for the grant and gift of an Augurship, or Septemuirship, two
several offices: in the end he adds a reason, why his request is, to be of
the number of the Augurs.

FOr ^omuch as (right gracious Souereig^e) I know of a certainty, that it
belongs to the testimonial and commendation of my behavior, to be adorned
and advanced by the judgment of so bountiful a Prince: I make my humble
supplication to your highness, that it would please you to amplify and
enlarge my dignity (whereunto I have aspired through the benefit of your
Graces clemency) either with the office of an Offices in the commonwealth of
credit and countenance: though he crave promotio^, yet because he might
plead merit, he is not to be thought ambitious.
Augur, or of a Offices in the commonweal^h of credit and countenance: though
he crave promotio^, yet because he might plead merit, he is not to be
thought ambitious.
Septimuir, because there is place void and to be furnished: that I may,
according to the relligious rites, and ceremonial order of priesthood, pray
publicly unto the Gods immortal, whom at this present I worship and adore
privately, for the preservation and happy estate of your highness.

Plinius to Fabato.
THE ARGUMENT.
He begins with the celebration of bearth days: then, descends to talk
of a Village in Camp^nia, (a Country in Italy, Pli^* lib. 3. cap. 5. Flor.
lib. 1. Strab. lib. 5* and others,) whereof Fabatus (to whom he directs
this letter) was Lord and possessioner: showing that somethings were in decay,
and other some things again in good estate: he (...) of his want of
acquaintance with men of the Country, whose natures agree well with labor:
at last, making mention of Rufus, touching some secret matter, he concludes.

WE are bound of duty, no less to A t^ing common in the age of our
Ancestors, to keep banqueting and to v^e other (...) and customs, on the
days of their nativity, a thing sauou ring of Epicurisme, and not of
Christianisme.
celebrate your bearth day, then our own, sithence the joy and delight of ours
depends upon yours, by whose diligence and care, it is come to pass, that
when we are h^ere, we are merry, and when we are there, we are not sorry.
The Uillage called Camilliana Villa, which is in Campania and in your
possession, is marvelous old, rotten, and ruinous: howbeit such things as
are of most value and price, do either remain whole and sound, or else have
but little harm. We will therefore give attendaunce that they may be repaired
in order convenient. I seem to have friends a great number* but of that kind
and stamp, which you seek, and your matter ^oth crave, I have almost never a
one. For they are all They were never trained v^pe in coun^ie matters, and
therefore their skill is to seek.
gowned men and Citizens: and you know this, that the administration and
buisinesse belonging to farm places, and manours in the Country, require a
painful and laborious fellow, and such a one as is hard and toughe, and able
to endure toil and travel enough: to whom, as that kind of exercise is
nothing grievous, so the charge and care thereof is not unseemly, neither is
their solitariness seasoned with sadness. Concerning Rufus you think very
honestlye, for he is lincked with your son (as it were) in In most sincere
and faithful friendship.
fetters of familiarity and friendship: Howbeit, what new thing he ca^ne
compass for himself, I cannot tell: his will is bent to do very much, I
believe.

Fare you well.
Plinius to Quintiliano.
THE ARGUMENT.
The daughter of Quintilia^us, (to whom he writes thi^ epistle) being
toward marriage with Nonius Celer a young Gentleman* Pliny would have so
attyred, as to the office and calling of her husband is most correspondent and
aunswearable: He gives her a sum of money to ^mende her Dowry, and
thinking his gift but small, doubts not for all that* but it shall be well
accepted.

ALthough you are a man of singular continency, and have trained up your
daughter in such dece^cie, and virtuous order, as best beseemed her, to whom
you are father, and Tutillius Uncle: yet notwithstanding, for so much as, she
is toward marrying, with a man of worship and coun^enance, A young man whom
Plini^ favored.
Nonius Celer by name, whose place and office being such, as that of necessity
it requires aunswearable de^king and gorgeousness: she must be trimmed and
arrayed in her apparel and garments, wherewith dignity is not augmented,
howbeit for all that, adorned, according to the condition and estate of her
husband. As for you, I know it to be a truth, in mind you are garnished with
perfect felicity: as for your bodily riches and substance, your st^are is not
excessive, but indifferent. In consideration whereof, I take upon me to bear
on my shoulders some part of your burden, that you may be the lighter: and as
a second father to the dam^sell, I bestow upon her toward her dowry, A
large dow rye giu^n with a young damsel in marriage: wherein though Pliny was
liberal, yet note his modesty.
fifty thousand pieces of coin, having purposed to open the sluses of my
liberality ^yder (...) her further enriching, but that I bear my self bold
upon: confidence of your well disposed and honest nature, in the acc^ptation of
this small and (...), that it could by no means, of you be (...).

Fare you well.
Plinius to Apollinari.
THE ARGUMENT.
He writes to Appollinaris to be a labourer with him, that Sextius may be
furthered to the office of the Tribuneshipp, in whose behalf he shows how
ready he is, not only in taking pains himself, but in strayning his
friends aid also, that such means may bewrought, as to the accomplishment of
the matter which is in hand, might be most auailable.

THe petition of Sextus Erutius my friend, makes me full of anguish, and out of
quiet: I am troubled with thought, and with musing molested and amassed: Yea,
the care which in mine own behalf I avoided, I have, in Meaning his friend,
whom he acco^pteth as himself, be cause true friends are twain in body,
but in heart one.
another, as if it were for mine own sake, sustained: For if I had done
otherwise, my honesty, my credit, my reputation, and my worship had been in
hazard Through the earnesinesse of mine intercession unto Caesar, I have
obtained for Sextus, the honorable authority of a S^natour, I have procured
him access to the office of the Questorship: through my voice and sentence,
he stands in election to be a Tribune: and except his petition prevail, in
that poi^t with the Senate, I am greatly in doubt, least I should seem to have
dealt with Caesar, to whom he was suppliaunt in the behalf of Sex^us.
his highness deceitfully. In consideration whereof, it behooves me, to
labor most circumspectly, that by the judgment of all men, he be proved the
self same person in quality and behavior, as Caesar took him to be, upon
my report and conunendation: which cause, if it should not further my desire,
yet would I wish with all my heart notwithstanding, that he might be favored
and assi^ted, because he is a you^ge man of a virtuous disposition, garnished
with grauiti^* enriched with learning, and as worthy of praise, as he that is
worthiest: and as I wish to him, so wish I to his household and family. For
his father, An argument from the father, to win credit to the fonne.
Erutius, is a noble Gentleman, virtuous, ancient, discreet, and in causes of
controversies not vnexcercised: ^ ^ none more faithful, no^ more (...), (...)
more (...) dably inclined or graciously given, that I (...) The do all love
me, and make of me (...) ^s, one as well as (...) ^her, (...) exception (...).
is ^ ^ of* (...) but (...) number of (...)
indifferently: t^ make the^ al amends therefore in the behoof of o^e, I must
(...) mi^e ability* I ^rge my friends, I pray them* I (...) them* ^ (...) to
their hou^es, I seek out their (...)* and (...) (...) can compass, either by
mine own credit and (...), or by others mediation and favorable furtherance,
I put in experience. My request unto you (...), that of this s^ heavy a
burden, you would bear some part with me for company. I will consider your
pains, if y^u ask your duty: and though you should not ask, yet will I make
recompense. You are in favor, you are in worshipful calling, you are resorted
and sought too of many. Do but give a signification of your will, and you
shall have them ready and at ha^, that to your mind (...) confo^mable*

Fare you well*
Brutus to the (...)*
THE ARGUMENT.
^ ^ due to their governor, (...) by him in displeasure (...). In the end of
the epistle (...) uses a sentence, wherein is declared the merit of free
obedience and forced (...).

THe money which (...) sent us, ^ppon (...) (...) of our commandment, is to
you none other advantage, as you may well be persuaded, but even such as they
(...), who by compulsorie means, or rather, by ^iolent extortion, being
racked, pay that which they cannot keep: I^ ^onsideracion whereof, you incur
a double detriment. For you shall suffer penalty, equal in proportion to your
lingering delays: and so much the worfe shall you be used, as you were
unwilling to (...) that you did, before (...) were forced* and so much furthe^
shall y^u be from finding (...), as you showed your (...) in behavior (...)
obedience. For (...) ^bedience (...) both large^ commo^datio^ and more ampl^
rewards, then that service which by constraint is recovered.
For semblable and like courtesy, is not to be exhibited to such as through
constraint vouchsase to afford their service, and frame themselves to be
officious when they see none other remedy, as is to be showed toward such, as
in time convenient give proof of their allegiaunce, and drive no toff from day
to day* their du^fulnesse.

The Pergamenians to Bruto.
THE ARGUMENT.
^ his love and favor, use arguments (...) upon (...), and allege their
pouer^ie, as ^n (...) (...) (...) of unperformed duty.

^F Pleading dif ^ficultie and hardness in the matter, wherewith they are
charged, they excuse themselves to Brutus.
y^ exhibition or (...) (...) (...) (...) as is (...), might be compassed with
facility and little labor, we would not have been so dissolute and
careless, as by our delays to deserve your displeasure, and by our unwise
dealing to run in^o double danger: Because such as are of ability, if they
^enie to give, are so far from (...) (...), that they procure their private
(...): and such again on the other side as contribute against their wills,
though largely, are notwithstanding frustrate of favor. But of this you are
not (...), that To give with speediness, is an action and work^ of great
wealth and substance* and though festination or have making be (...) ve^ement,
yet pouer^ie so provides in the end, that have is overcome and vanquished
Wherefore For as the stoare of the one is to be (...), so (...) want of the
other is to be pond^red.
it is not consonant to equity, nor agreeable to justice, that such as by
penury are provoked to be loose in obedience, should purchase gr^ater
displeas^re, and ^inde lesser favor, then they that having plenty and
abundance, give presently without (...) or lingering.

Brutus to the Rhodians.
THE ARGUMENT.
By ^ comparison of two sorts of people, he goes about to (...) the Rhodians
to submission, giu^ng a note of his (...) in the end he offers them the
(...) and choi^ (...) ^wo (...) conditions.

THe A people inhabiting Asia, called by that name: of who^ Herodotus in his
first book makes mention.
Xanthians, reno^ting from their service, wherein we ha^ in^erest, we caused
to suffer punishment with severity and rigor: For we* took reuengem^nt-vpon
them in extremity, making of them all ^ bloody slaughter, not sparing their
infants an^ younglinges, so far were we beyond all compassion: and as for
their country which they inhabited, what with fire and sword, we utterly
spoiled it, and made the same des^late. As concerning the Citizens of (...), a
city in Lycia, a country of A^ia the lesser, lying betwixt Pamphylia and
Caria. etc.
Pataraeans* for so much as they per^ourmed their allegiance, and showed
themselves duetifull with faithfulness, we diminished their tributes, and
made less our exactions: Ye^, we did give and grant them the benefit of
li^ertie, and have discharged them, of their (...) ^ubiection. Furthermore,
toward the reedifying, and reparing of such buildings as were bat^ered down,
and brought to ruin, we sent them (...) talentes. Now you may take counsel
with your selves, and use aduisement, whether you had rather be compted (as
were y^ Xanthians) our adversaries: or contrariwise, to be esteemed our
friendly wellwillers, as were the Pa^araeans.

The (...) to Bruto.
THE ARGUMENT.
The aunsweare of the Rhodians to Br^tus, con^mning his offer: with a prai^ of
the (...), and a reb^ke of the Patar^ans, in their su^drie respects. Finally,
the last clause of the ep^stle co^prehendeth a testimony of their own opinion.

ALthough your usage toward the Xanthians, who resisted your power for the
maintenance of their liberty, sauoured of cruelty and blo^shed: yet
notwithstanding We Rhodi ans will withstand thee at the swords point* though
we die: and not yield like bea stes to bondage.
we are so far, from intending to represent the Pataraeans, (who being
overcome with the all^rements of rewards, committed themselves to mere
servitude) that we mean to do that which is clean contrary. And therefore,
we abhorring their fortune and condition: besides that, condemning their
counsels and purposes* in (...) (...)* will keep still o^r uncontrolled (...)*
and do what we c^n to (...) our puisaunce. For we are of this opinion, And
therefore, had we ^a there encounter with thee: then yield and become ^iect
through entising gi^ts.
that liberty purchased with (...) and (...), is much more* excellent, then
any kind of succor or refuge, obtei^ed through gifts and rewards.

Brutus to the Pataraeans*
THE ARGUMENT.
Damasipp^s (...) (as it should seem) not the best (...) (...) in battle, was
^ ce^tified, (...) to the (...) of the foresaid country, to have him removed.

Hermodorus the Samian merchan^, infourmed me, An enemy to Brutus.
that Damasippus the Admiral of the Rhodian fleet, after their conflict
finished, prepared ^ight from the Phractians, and, for his succor and refuge,
is now harbored in your greatest haven. I account it not your fault, and
therefore have you Because (per adventure) you knew not of his coming.
excused, that heehath conveyed himself thither: nevertheless, if you suffer
him there to continue and remain, not indeuouring your selves to have him
thence removed, I will impute it to mi^e own person for Because you succor
mine adversary.
injury, and ascribe it unto you for Because you take part with a coward.
cowardice.

The Pataraeans to Bruto.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Pataraeans answering Brutus, excuse them selves: by pleading of ignorance.

IF Hermodorus had given us to understand, somewhat sooner then he certified
you, of that thing, which to us in writing you have signified, Damasippus had
not escaped, in semblable manner, as he lay lurking in our haven, but should
have had He should have sustained like hassard as the rest of the Rhodians.
his Portion in the Rhodian skyrmish. As for you (all considerations set aside)
you spare not to rebuke us as rigorously, as if the whole matter had been
manifest and apparent unto us, from the first original and beginning. As we
deserve, so also we desire pardon in this behalf, sithence we were ignorant of
the end and Whether any such cause should have been offered, as thereupon
Damasippus should be for ced to take his flight.
event of the battle: neither in this is there any countenance or likelihood
of truth, that we received him as tendering his safety: for so much as it was
unknown to us, whether the cause of his coming was for the preservation of
his life or no: wherefore we are not to be controuled of cowardice.

Hippocrates to the Senate of the Abderites.
THE ARGUMENT.
The Abderites sending for Hippocrates, to come and cure Democrit^s. Whom they
supposed to be mad and beside his right wits, receive an answer to their
me^sage. This Epistle is for the most part, reprehensorie: for therein
Hippo^tates rebukes such Physicians, as neglecting the worthiness of so
singular a profession, addict them selves wholly to gather gain with
greediness. In the conclusion of the Epistle, he declares, wherein true
riches do confist: annexing to that notable sentence, a few words te^ding to
his own priuat^ person.

Your citizen Mellissagoras came to Cos, the day of coronation and assumption
of the scepter, when the yearly shows, and pomp prepared with great cost and
sumptuousness, were solemnized at Cyparissus, which are done according to
custom, by the ministry of them, to whom that religious service belongs.
But when it was apparent, by y^ utterance and countenance of Mellissagoras,
that he came in have, being persuaded none otherwise, then the matter it self
imported: after the view and reading of your letters, I fell into an admiration
and amasement of mind, that for one man's cause, the whole city should be
troubled and disquieted, none other wise, then if the whole multitude of people
therein inhabitant, were but one indivisible person. Now, A true sentence of
Hippocrates, for in wisemens politic government, ^s more safety: then in
other artificial defenses.
happy and fortunate are those people say I, who by wisdom provide men of
honest and virtuous disposition, to be their protectours and defendours: not
taking strong towers, huge castles, and vnbatterable walls for their
fortifications: but the grave and prudent decrees of wise men, and sage
seigniours, for their establishment. Out of doubt I am of ^pinion, that Arts
are the graces of the Gods; and that men* are the work of nature. To you
therefore (O you Abderites) let it stir up no storm of trouble, nor minister
matter whereby your minds should be molested, if I think my se^f not sent
for of you, but called upon of nature to heal that up by the fruitfulness of
For Art con firmeth nature, and gives unto her more strength
physic, which is in great danger to perish and putrify. Wherefore in
taking upon me to cure Democritus, I will rather show my self obedient to
Nature, and duetifull to the Gods, then applyable to the satisfaction of your
requests, if it be indeed, a sickness, and not an error: which is of me the
more wished. For, it should be a signification of your larger bountifulness, to
him exhibited, if suspicion only did affright you with such disquietnesse. For
my pains taken, to restore Democritus to soundness, neither Nature, nor yet
God has promised me any pension. Wherefore you Abderites, The contrary mind
of Hippocrates to al physicians of our time: He deni eth his help to such as
pro fer money: they withdraw will and work except rewards be re ceiued. etc.
assault me not with money: but rather so deal in this case, that a liberal
art may have a liberal access, free recourse and passage without interruption,
to proceed in practice. For such as minister medicines to maladies, and sell
their skill and labor for lucre of money, they go the next way to make the
liberal sciences savor o^ seruilitie, and by chopping their cunning for
greediness of gain, change the free estate of honest arts into bondage and
slavery. And, as the fashion commonly is, when they come to the practice of
curing, if the disease have in it much difficulty and doubtfulnesse, sometimes
they lash ^ut lies largely and shamelessely: and sometimes again, they deny to
repair to their patients, as if the sickness were not to be feared, not
withstanding they promised: and sometimes also they use often recourse, yea
when they are neither sont for, nor desired. O, most miserable is the life of
mortal man, whom intolerable greediness of gain, as it were a winterly
wind, vexes without discontinuance. Which sithence it is more grievous then
y^ phrentique sickness of madness, I wish with all my heart, that Physicians,
had the wit and understanding to see this The greediness after gain is a
disease in physici ans far worsle then mad^es of mind, if it be precisely
pondered.
rather redressed, the^ that amended: which although it engender annoyance,
breed crasinesse, and disherit health of his harbor, yet notwithstanding, so
forceable is it, and of such efficacy, that it is thought to advance the
poor patients to the mount of felicity. I am of this opinion and judgment,
that extreme madness kindles diseases in the mind, because that it works
in them certain opinionatiue imaginations, and phautasticall impressions,
which by no means can be extermined and cast out of the closet of the mind,
except virtue vouchsafe assistaunce: she purges, she cleanses, she heals,
she restores. Now, of certainty, (yea Abderites) As if he had said: what of
fer you me money? I tell you that I sell not my cunning for coin
if I were willing to wax wealthy, if. I had a desire to gather riches, and to
scrape transitory trash together in a dunghill heap, ten talents should not
tempt me to come to your city. To the puisant prince of the Persians, whose
people are not poor, and whose subjects possess riches in plentifulnesse, I
had not denied to go, when I was sent for thither, to appease the pestilence,
which among them was outrageous: But, because that country was at de^aunce
and daggers drawing with the land of Graecia, I withdrewe my will, made
deintie of my labor, at no hand consenting to succor them, in such a
putrefying and festering contagion, and with all my might and maine that I was
able to make, I was an adversary to the Barbarians. Now, without all
controversy, I would blush and be ashamed, to receive money of a king, yea of
such a king as is at enimitie and variance with my native country, considering
that I, being as it were a defender of Graecia, have been so far from having
money in estimation, that as a thing most con^omptible and vile, I have cast it
away from me, and thereof made no account. And why? Because to rake up riches,
is not to be wealthy and worthy: Wherein ver the does consist, is here to be
learned.
for the inualuable mysteries, and secret ornaments of virtue, consist in
justice, and in integrity of life: not in metals and minerals, dug out of
the bofome of the earth, but in those things that are apparent, that are
manifest, that are object to the eye, and fall within the view of the sight, I
mean in outward actions, and commendable behauiours. What will you then
think? will you say that it is of equal discredit, to cure the diseases of a
sick friend, and to salve the sore of a wounded f^e for money, measuring an
excellent profession, with so vile a recompenco? as for me, I mean so to
moderate mine actions, and in such order to direct my doings with discretion,
as that my labor shall not be laid to loan for lucre: because I reap no
advantage, by ministering Physic to patients in perplexity. I am For till
such time as he made his voyage to Abdera, he thought certainly that
Democritus was mad in deed, as it was reported.
sorry to hear that Democritus is phrentique: who if he have recovered, and
be restored to his former health, know you that I esteem of him, as of my
friend: and if he be molested still, with that mischiefous malady, yet being
delivered, by wholesome receipts and preserning electuaries by me ministered,
from the danger of his disease, understand you that friendship between us shall
be augmented, and love enlarged. I hear that he is constant, that he is of a
virtuous and laudable behavior, that his demeanor and usage is such, as to
the common wealth he appears a precious Iuell, and a principal ornament.

Hippocrates to Dionysio.
THE ARGUMENT.
Being determined to take his journey to Abdera, he writes to Dionysius to
ouersee all things in his absence: the excess of virtue worcketh no manner of
annoyance. Toward the end of the Epistle, he writes concerning his wife,
over whom he desires Dionysius to be careful: taking occasion, upon a
certain conceit of icalousie, to discover the corrupt natures of women, if
they be let alone to live at liberty: Other circumstaunces are here and there,
through the whole Epistle, to be considered.

Either stay for me (good friend) at Halicarnassus, or els^ by making more
speed, prevent and over go me. For I must of necessity, address my journey
to Abdera, for the benefit of Democritus: unto whom, in this his sickness
and disease, I am desired, and earnestly entreated, with a common consent of
his citizens, to come, and minister medicines to his maladies. The affection of
The Pronou^e (whom) has relation to the Abderites, for so the sense infers
albeit the worcester des be somewhat prepost^ rously placed.
whom is such, as in words it can not be expressed. For every one of them, as
if they were but one soul, but one life, but one body, are infected all at
once with one sickness: upon which occasion, it is to be thought, that they
stand all in need of some wholesome remedy. Will you hear mine opinion? Now
doubtless, I think, that it is not a disease, but a certain exceeding and
immoderate desire after learning, knowledge, wisdom and understanding: or, to
tell the plain truth, not an unmeasurable desire, but so supposed of the
ignorant and unskillful. For, the desire of virtue, being honest and
honorable, though it be Not as though virtue could be in ex tremitie, (for
every extremity is inclinable to vice) but he means suppositiuely, if it
were so that virtue could exceed.
excessive, yet is it not noisome, yet is it not hurtful, yet is it not
infectiue. As for ye opinion which is sprung, touching this sickness, from
whence flows it, or from what other fountain does it burst, then from the
blunt and dull capacities of them that give judgment. Every one thinks with
him self, that there is ercesse, where one has that in abundance which
another has in scarsitie. So, the timorous and fearful cowarde, thinks
valliauntnesse and prow^sse to be an excess: and the covetous gatherer,
thinks no less of liberality: Thus every defect and want of weal,
esteems every virtue to be a vicious extreme. As for my self, when I shall
see him, talk with him, and hear what he says, the matter shall be more
manifest unto me, and more plainly revealed to mine understanding. Wherefore,
friend Dionysius, do your endeavor to come: for, till my return, here your
abode shall be: my will is that you have the charge of al my matters, and that
above all things, the city be committed to your government. Furthermore,
because I see that this year can not choose but be healthful, keeping the
natural accustomed course, and considering the scarsitie of sicknesses that do
reign or rather raunge, I would that you prepare your self, speedily to be
present. For in my house shall be your convenient dwelling: my wife for this
time of mine absence, shall have her abiding with her parents: unto whom
nevertheless This charge given by Hippocrates to Di onysius touching his wife
^auoureth of jealousy.
have an eye, that she lead her life in continen^ie, least lacking the wonted
pleasure of her companion, she join with others in works of wantonness. And
although from her young years, she has been chaste and honest, having had
progenitors civil and courteous: having a sire like a man indoede, yea such a
sire, as has vices in hate and detestation: yet because he is aged and full of
hoarie hairs, neglect not your charge, considering, that The pronenes of women
to lewdness set down in brevity.
a woman is so lewd of nature, that she needs daily and hourly correction:
she grows out of order, she forgets temperance, and waxes incontinent,
showting and springing still like unto a tree, except she be looked unto, and
kept in subjection. Mine opinion, in this case, is, that in the oversight and
charge of a woman, the service of a friend is seasoned with more diligence,
then the service of a father: For se^blable affection of kindness, is not in
friends and parents, which is an occasion offentimes, that due time of
ministering correction is neglected. For end, that man (in my mind) is endued
with the greater wisdom, who is not blinded with affection: provided always,
that he be not churlishe, but gentle.

Fare you well.
Hippocrates to Crateuas.
THE ARGUMENT.
Writing to Crateuas (a Physician, by profession, as it should appear by the
course of his Epistle,) he commends him, first, for his knowledge and
cunning: Anon he falls into mention of Democritus, whose disease he
discovers: inferring such matter as to circumstaunces and offered occasions
seem most agreeable. Lastly, he enters into a discourse of herbs, and so
taking occasion to speak as knowledge gave him vtteraunce, in matters not
impertinent to his purpose, he concludes.

I Am not ignorant (friend Crateuas) that in knowledge concerning the virtue of
herbs and plants, you are to be compared with the best: hereof I am assured,
as well by your own study in that science employed, as also by the famous
report of your For a man takes after his progenitors, either in things
te^ding to praise or dispraise.
ancestors, who in that profession were excellent: in so much that I must
needs confess, nothing in you to be wanting, wherein your father Crateuas,
and your Grandsire flourished. Now therefore, discover your cunning, and giu^ a
taste what you can do: for doubtless, necessity inforeeth. Gather herbs and
send them to me with all speed possible, for one man's benefit and
commodity, Or, of his country called an Abderite, but having to name
Democritus.
by country an Abderite, but by name Democritus. The whole city complain that
he is phrentique, and fallen into stark madness, which if it be as they
report, he had need take some purgation, to expel the cause of that
difquieting disease. But, although we believe, that medicines and healthful
receipts are not needful: yet notwithstanding, it is the point of a wise and
skillful Physician, and such a one as esteems his credit, never to be
unprovided: but (as he ought) to have all things in readiness, and nothing to
seek when it should be occupied. I have many times marvelled, at the
wonderful virtue of herbs whereof you had good store, as at y^ nature of al
things, y^ disposition of al creatures, and y^ goodly situatio^ of y^ earth:
which is ye mother of al living beasts, of pla^ts, of trees, of food, of
wealth, of riches, and of al things requirable for ye vs^ of men. Which comm
odities, I would the earth did not afforde at all, for then should not
insatiable desire have such liberty: neither should the Abderites, supposing
me to be a hireling ready to serve for a reward, being in deed by profession
and practice a Physician, Thinking that money has me at commandment: then
the which I esteem nothing of less ^alue.
tempt my service with ten talents. I would (friend Crateua) it were in your
ability, to weed out by the roots, the bitter plant of covetousness, and
greediness of gain, that of the same not so much as one branch, sprig,
leaf nor seed be remaining: that as well the minds of men may be cleansed
from the cogitation of vices, as their bodies purged from noysomnesse of
diseases: But these things are to be desired, sithence they are not so easy to
be performed. Now, to turn my talk to you again, touching the matter first
named, I would have you persevere and continue your exercise, gathering such
herbs and plants as grow in high mountains, in lofty and hautie places
inclined to no moystnesse, where the earth has thickness, and the air
finesse. For, what these have in them by virtue of attraction, is forceable to
prolong life. Nevertheless, touching the flowers of such herbs, as spring by
the sides of lakes, fennie soyles, waterie grounds, near to the flow of
rivers, or such places, as we call brooks and springs, they have not in them
such efficacy and notable operation: such quickness, and sweetness, I am
well assured. Wherefore such herbs, out of which you strain and wring the
juice and moisture, procure to be conveyed unto me in glasses: but such
herbs, whose flowers and leaves must do us service, put into earthen vessels,
well covered and close stopped, least, feeling the blastes of the wind, they
wyther, dye, and lose their proper virtue instilled into them by the providence
of Nature, for medicinable co^positions: Thus when ye have done, send them
unto me, with as much speed as you can make. Moreover, I can not but fall in
consideration of the season of the year, being now the Spring: a time, then
which for the purpose, none more convenient: so that I am constrained of
necessity, to take upon me, the cure of the foresaid mad malady. For, as
procrastina ^ And yet ne^, such due deliberation must be had and used, that
^eme ritie and rash^ haste making* be avoided: For as the one is dangerous so
the other i^ commodious.
^ ^ ^ ^, ^ ^ ^ ^ but that he shall be re^ored to his forme^ (...) and safety
in whom, if there be any defection, any want of that which ought not to (...),
it is to (...) (...) to (...), ^ some other cause (...)* For, (...) (...) as we
are mo^tall and subject to (...), (...) it is not, for us to be ^ched with an
universal knowledge: I mean, there be (...) infinite whereof we are ignorant:
to the persect understanding, of the which, because we can attain, neither by
diligence, nor yet by any other means; it comes to pass, that we are lead
into uncertainty. We must therefore be doing, sithence in us appears
ability: for such as are endangered, are not sufficient to compass that,
which is in our power to comprehend, who many times, covet that with
earnestness, which is not granted unto us to perform. All our actions a^e
leueled, and directed in manner, unto two ends, the one is Man, the other is
Art: the first is variable and of no assurance, the other is tied to certain
rules, precep^es, and observations: in which two, a third thing also is
required, and that is, fortune or good success. Because that humo^ which is
clean to be purged, and so clean that no dregs remain: and those diseases
that are to be cured, that they grow not again, is not perfectly in our
knowledge: and we many times, ministering medicines, have present consideration
to the stomach, that that be diligently purged, measuring ou^ medicines after
the nature of the patient, of whose disposition we are ignorant, and in the
constitution of who^e body we have no experience. For, the nature of men are
diverse, and sundry be their complexions^ and every nature has his
proprieti^, and (as it were) Proper qualities ingraffed: for that is the
meaning of Hippocrates in this place.
a peculiar inheritance. Furthermore, some herbs are infected with the (...)
of Serpents, which they cast out, and thereby make them empoisoned. Such kind
of herbs take heed of: for in ^eede of medicine they work mischief, in
place of health they draw indaunger: except some sign appear in them, a^ an
yl^auoured black color, or else some rank stinking s^uour. So that Art and
cunning it self, by the means of Fortu^e, is oftentimes deceived. Wherefore,
such purgations as proceed by the receipt of Helleborus, have in them
somewhat more certainty: the which (as it is reported) * Melamp^s used to
restore Praetus: and Anticyreus to heal Hercul^s. But in curing Democritus, we
will come to no such remedy: only wisdom shall be the most effectual
medicine that can be ministered in this his present passion.

Fare you well.
Hippocratos to Damageto. This Epistle is historical.
THE ARGUMENT.
Democritus, by nativity an Abderite, a philosopher of his time, most famous
and excellent, being weary of house keeping, and ouercharged (as it were) with
tediousness of keeping company with his citizens, giving over that careful
life (as I may rightly term it) and burdened with business, got him ^to a
desert plac^as an Heremite or wilderness wanderer, not far distant from the
city* Abdera, and there leading his life, fell a laughing at what so ever
(...) saw done. Which strange thing the citizens his countriemen noting,
supposing that he was distracted, and robbed of his right wit^es, to speak
plain, phrentique and mad, sent in embassage to Hippocrates Cous, (a man in
the profession of Physic and practice of that Art, most renouned) to come to
Abdera, and to take upon him the curing of Democritus. Hippocrates being won
to the satisfaction of their desires, both by embassage, and also by letters
signified, sayleth to Abdera: and being there arrived, and abid^ng with his
patient, certifieth Damagetus, (to wl^ose credit* in his absence (...)
committed the eustodie of his house, and the whole charge of all things else
to him belonging) both of the doings and also of the sayings touching him
self, and the above named Democritus: as appears in this present Epistle,
next and immediately following.

THe suctesse of al things (friend Da^agetus) was answerable to our suspicion.
For why, For having seen him, and also hard him, he reports other wise the^
he suppose^ of Democritus.
Democritus was not distracted or out of his right wits, but was of a more
excellent mind then all other men, and far beyond the rest in perfection of
indgement: by whose means we are made better acquainted wi^h wisdom: and
others also, by and through our procurement, endued with the more knowledge. I
have sent you your ship back again (best beloved) which as it may rightly
have the name to pertain to Aesculapius: so, next unto the ensign of Sol, I
would have you place the cognisaunce or badge of Salus: because my voyage
which I took in hands, having wind and weather at will, a swift barcke, and
provided to the purpose, was prosperously performed. For the very same day,
wherein I made pr^mise to set forward (such was my happy success) I arrived
at Abdera: and being there landed, we had conference with the citizens, who
were gathered together in a cluster at the gates of the city, gasing and
tooking on us, as on a worlds wonder. This multitude did not consist only of
men, but also of women, both old and young, and (by the Gods I swear) there
were among them children of tender years, in whose countenaunces, a certain
sadness of mind was represented. These were in such taking, as if Democritus
had been outrageous indeed: who was nothing so, How Demo crit us, who was
thought to be mad, was occupied.
but at the same instant, was earnestly addicted to Philosophy, and in
contemplati^n with wisdom. So soon as they saw my person, they began
somewhat to recover, staying them selves (by reason of my coming) upon the
sure anchor of hope. ^ut Philopoemenes besought me with instancie, to take my
^odging at his house: with whom to be entertained, it was agreed upon by
consent. But I said to the Abderites, that I had nothing (...) do, save only
so visit Democritus: which words when they heard me utter, they gave me
great praise, and they themselves also were surprised with souden joy. Then
they conducted me through the mids Or, of the chiefest streat where most
concourse of people use to be.
of the market place, some following, other some going before, and the rest
clustering about me, al giving great shoutes, and outcries with one voice,
Mighty Jupiter tho^ great King succor us, assist us. I hearing this noise,
exhorted the^ to have good hearts, and not to be discouraged, sithe^e there was
no cause at y^ time, of mischief to be feared: and though there were, yet
nouerthelesse, tha^ it was in (...) to (...) re^edied, which words when I had
spoken* I departed For the house was no great distance from that plac^ and to
say the truth, the City it self was of no great compass or (...)* (...) to
the walls and for (...) whereof, Democritus inhabited. For, right against the
turret of the town, there was a mighty mountain or huge hill, plentifully
planted, in (...) order, (...) poplar trees, of The poplar trees grew high and
thick together.
notable tallness: and passing thickness, and from the foresaid turre^; Demo^s
might be ^cried. He ^ate under a Plane tree, with spreading boughs and green
leaves, all alone, coursely arrayed, pale co^red; like one almost famished, his
beard sha^n: thus like an He^mite, face he upon a stone in sleed of a stool,
in solitarines, ye (...) (...) friend of company: On his right hand out of the
hill (...) a pleasant spring, which made a gentle and softly ^unde: with y^
falling of y^ sweet streams. Above this hill, as it may be coniectured, was a
place consecrated to the Nymphs, a place (I say) ouershadowed with vine
branches, growing in y^ place, not Not planted by men's hands but growing of
Nature.
by means artificial, but by appointment natural. At the same moment or
prick of time, Democritus had upon his knees, or in his lap as he sat, an
exceeding beautiful book, wide open, and other books round about him, upon
the green ground. He had also, gathered together, as it were in a droaue, much
cattle, many of which, he did rip, cut, and mangle: sometimes sto^ping forward
or leaning down, he* wrote a running hand: and otherwhiles again restraining
his pen from paper, he sat s^ill, as a man full of muses, and earnest in
contemplation. Thus when he had done, anon after he arose, walked up and down,
his head being fraught with myllians of imaginations, For he was making an
Anatomy. to the end he might attain to the knowledge of the constitution and
composition of man's body.
he beheld the bowels of the beasts whom he had anatomised, took a view of
their entrails, having so done, laid them every one in his proper place
passing orderly, and sat down again to his painful pens exercise: The
Abderites, that stood round about me (as it were in circular manner) being
sore surprised with pensiveness, gored with grief, and tormented with stings
of sorrow, could scarsly re^raine from weeping, at the view of such a
spectacle: See, see (say they) the fashions of Democritus: look on the present
state of his life: behold his strange behauiours: would not any man judge, by
marking his usage, that he is phrentique, and utterly dispossessed of reason?
For he is not master of his own will: over his own deeds he has not power:
he is altogether ignorant wherabouts he is busied. Among these people, in
perplexities of perturbations intrapped, one being disposed, more manifestly to
declare Democritus his madness, The perples ities of the Ab derites, who would
none otherwise be persuaded, but that Democri tus was as mad as the devil of
hell: or worse.
made a harsh squeaking noise, and cast out many shrill shrinkings, like unto a
pititull mother, bitterly lamenting the dead body of her child, lying in the
coff^n, put into the sepulcher, and raked up in clods of earth, all exequies
convenient, done unto the putrefying carcass. Anoth^r makes outrageous
exclamations, and tragical outcries, howling most hideously, as if the dear
child of his own body, and bringing up (before his own face, and in his own
presence) had most unmercifully been murdered. These extreme passions of
mind, with tongue not vntestified, when Democritus had heard, simpe^ing and
smiling, he began somewhat leisurely to write, and wagged his head too and fro:
wherein he had some meaning. Then said I, you Abderites shall in this place make
your tarriance: and I my self aduenturing to go near unto him, will, both by
his communication and gestures of body, soon attain to the perseverance of
his grievous ag^nie, if (at least) he be in any passion. When I had thus
spoken, I attempted to clime the s^eep and slipperie hill, but scarcely could I
come at him, I felt the ascending up so labourious: howbeit, when I approached
somewhat near him, his pen went passing swiftly upon the paper: I stood still,
and gave attendance, til such time as he had finished his writing. Then he,
staying y^ speedy course of his hand a little, and beholding me not far off out
of presence, said, God speed friend. And you also (said I) O Democritus, with
whom, in wisdom, no man is comparable. Then he having in him self a souden
conceit of suspicion, because (as I suppose) he called me not by my name, as I
did him by his, demau^ding of me what my name was? For (said he) through
ignorance of your name, I called you by y^ common term of friend, used at
meetings in greeting to strangers and such as be unknown. I made him answer,
that my name was Hippocrates, and that by profession I was a physician.
Whereupon, he inferred this question, saying, what, of the race of Aesculapius?
of his line are you descended? The praise worthy report of your noble name, in
the practice of physic, has this long time, been blased among us, and is
most famous. But, tell me, (good friend) what occasion constrained you, to
seek access hither? Democritus entertaineth Hippocr^tes.
sit down first of al, and then we will confer. See, here is a heap of
leaves, green, soft, and to sit upon easy and not unpleasant: for such seats
they be as by luck are allotted, more to be accepted, then to be refused. When
I had taken my place, according to appointment, he put forth another demand,
and said: Declare unto me evidently, whether the business, wherabouts you have
come hither be public or private: for, to disburthen you of all doubt, I am
disposed to exhibit unto you so much dutifulness and service, as mine
ability shall grant me by permission. Then shaped I this answer: the cause of
this ^y coming, was to see and hear you, whom I had learned by common voice
to be a philosopher of great fame, and flourishing in wisdom. Your own
country ministered this present occasion, in whose behalf, I bear the office
of an Ambassador. Then says he yet again: you shall first taste y^ benefit of
our courtesy and intertainment. The^, I being desirous and earnestly bent, to
take trial of him in all points and circumstances, as narrowly as I could
comprehend, albeit, I s^we in him no signification of madness, but manifest
arguments and tokens of soberness, began my communication with this que^ion. Do
you know a citizen of this your town, named Philopoemenes? why said you not
rather, y^ son of a devil, whose abiding is The name of a brook near to
the which was his dwelling: as if one of us, noting our friends house, said
thus: he dwells by Alderman bury conduit or some such like speech.
near to Mercuries brook. But (friend Democritus) let min^ intertainment be
seasoned with more courtesy* and tell me first of al what it is y^ you write so
busily at this present. The^ he pausing a little space, said, it was a pamphlet
entreating of madness. Whereupon I fell into these words with a certain
admiration: Oh mighty Jupiter, you write a treatise for citizens, not out of
season. For what citizens? (says he. Democritus (said I) my tongue ouerruns my
knowledge, I say nothing, for being unadvised in my language, I took no heed
how those words escaped. But what thing do you write touching madness? who
made me this wise answer: what else, but what it is: how, in y^ mynds o^ men
it is ingendered: and by what means it ought to be cured: for which purpose, I
have ripped open, launced, cut and mangled, these beasts y^ you see bathing in
their own blood, not y^ I have the work of omnipotent. Jupiter in contempt and
detestation, but for y^ I am ear nest to know y^ places, where y^ four natural
humors be settled, and specially y^ place and property of melancholy. For, of
this you are not ignorant, y^ melancholy being predominant, or more abounding
the^ y^ other qualities, moves men to madness, which humor is not wanting in
any of us, by the ordinance of Nature, although in some it have more, and in
other some less quantity. For the surplusage of y^ same, what is it else but
a mere malady or sickness, which being of it self good and necessary, is,
other whiles, changed into Into that which is noysom, pestilent dangerous and
hurtful.
a contrary? Then said I: Out of doubt (Democritus) your words dissent not
from truth, nether seem they repugnant to reason. Wh^rfore in my judgment,
blessed is your condition, whose fortune is (...) favorable, as to live in
that liberty of quietness, the benefit whereof we are not suffered to enjoy.
Upon these words of mine, he mou^d this question, demanding of me, what
should hinder me, more then him, from the use of such felicity. To whom* I
ma^e this answer: An enumera tion of such impediments and lets, as stop men
^ro^ the use of contem plation: which is here called Felicity, or happiness.
Because my lands, my children, my debtes, my cures, my servants, my wife,
and other worldly matters wherein I am overwhelmed, cut me off from the
profit of that prosperous opportunity. Immediately upon these words, y^ man
(according to y^ accustomed course of his passion) fell into a loud laughter:
and shortly after refrained from that souden motion. Then said I: To what
purpose laughed you in that order Democritus, tell me? what judge you of the
words which I uttered: were they approuable, or were they disalowable? upon
this demand he laughed out of measure. The Abderits, who standing aloof and
beholding his behavior, clapped with their hands, and gave a shout: some smote
them selves on the heads unhappily: other some buffetted them selves about the
face pitiously: and some again plucked their hairs up by the roots most
rigorously. For, as afterward they gave me to understand, Democritus laughter
was never so excessive. Then began I to speak again to the man, and said: I
am desirous, most prudent Democritus, to learn the reason of this
perturbation, or affection: For he suspected that De mocritus had spied some va
nitie in him that was rebukeable.
whether the presence of my person, or the utterance of my words, ministered
unto you cause worthy of laughter: ^o the intent, that I being by your
admonition instructed, may see mine amiss decently reformed: or else, that you
being ^ked, may abstain from such fondness, which to a man is as great
commendation (being unreasonably used) as the having of a quality that
deserves reprehension. Then says he: Now, without all controversy, if you
could control me and my manners, you should heal me of such a sickness,
as you did never any since you practiced physic, by ministering to them
medicinable compositions and receites. Then said I again: what man, may you
not be controuled? Is it not an absurd thing, and to reasons rule most
^isagreeable, at the deaths of people, at their diseases, at their madness,
at their slaughters, or at any thing wo^se the^ these (if worse may be)
chauncing in the course of this mortality: moreover, at marriages, festival
day^s, education of children, rites of consecration, holy ceremonies,
honorable magistrates, high authorities: finally, at what thing else besides
that bears the name of that which is good and commendable, to use a
continual laughter, or an immodera^e geering? For, at the estate of such as
are to b^ (...), you fall a laughing: again, at their ^ondition towa^s who^
you should show your self joyful, you use the like behavior. Wherefore upon
th^se premises, I see entrance to this plain conclusion, that beetweene good
and evil, you make no diff^rence. Then said he, your asserti^ns are
repugnaunt neither to truth nor reason: but, notwithstanding the course of
this your communication, how cunningly so ever you seem in your dealing, yet
in the cause of my madness, your knowledge is blind ignorance: to the
understanding whereof, if it be your fortune to attain, you shall carry away
with you the advantage of a greater benefit, then this your embas^age can
coun^eruaile: namely, this my laughter: whereby * The benefits of Democritus
his mad nesse: if all me^ were mad in that manner, it would turn to their
own avail.
you shall work this effect, as well in others, as also in your own self,
increase of wisdom, and prudence in great plenty. In consideration whereof,
you will (peradventure) make manifest unto me, for mine instruction, the
mysteries of mingled medicines, and the practice of Phys^cke, suspecting with
your self, that m^n buify their brains, about matters wherein they ought not ^o
meddle, hunting after such things, as are not worthy of a creature endued with
reason, but deserving unmeasurable laughter. Then said I* By the Gods
immortal, if all the world wist not that they are subject to sickness,
neither yet knew the means in diseases of danger to seek after remedies,
wha^ might a man else judge of it, then as bewitched, and deprived quite of
reason. Then said he: Indeed Hippocrates, the ignorance of the world is
gross and palpable: for, touching Nature their skill is but superficial, and
like a shadow destitute of substance. O, Democritus, (said I) these things
shall you teach me at times convenient: For I much mistrust, least whiles you
are occupied in detecting the ignorance of this world full of vanity, you
will also interpose and sauce the same with laughter. Now therefore, discover
the occasion of the same, and deli^er unto me a plain discourse of the trade
and order of your life. He casting upon me a ^ower visage, and a stern
look, said: you suppose, that of my laughter there be two causes, that is to
say, a good, and ^ badde, As for me, thus much I am to say, A caus^ that moved
D^mo critus to l^ughter: were the vain studies and practices of men, tending
wholly to ^anitie.
that the man who is a l^mpe or mass of foolishness, is the only occasion of
this motion: yea, at him alone do I laugh, in whom ignorance is graffed, in
whom virtuous exercises are not lodged, who in all his purposes and practices,
plays pra^ckes of puerilitie and childishness, consuming himself with
labors, vain, noisome, and superflu^us. For, such a one, breaks into the
bosom of the earth, opens the secret bowels of the same, being embouldened
thereunto, by insatiable covetousness, which is always feeding like a greedy
worm, and never satisfied. Such a one searches the very heart and entrayles
of the ground, for gold and silver, vnceassantly. And to the end that the
greater store of goods, might fall into his possession, sithence he is cloyed
with carfulness, he spares no labor to fulfill his felicity. One while he
sets his servants and hyrelinges with matto^ks and spades to dig deep
pittes in the ground: in which kind of work and sweating toil, so^e are
s^aine with the soudaine ruin and fall of a banck^: othersome, being as it
were bought and sold to that laborious kind of life, spend their days in that
allotted torment of toil, as in their natural cou^tri^: thus whiles they
search for gold and silver, they search for dust and sand: they rake up clods
of clay in a confused heap, as it were a muckhil: they cut the secret sinews
of the earth, melt the very marrowe, and open the ^idden veins, making their
great grandame L^terr' a plain Anato^e, then which wrong worsse they could not
work, against their sworn and deadly enemy. He, whom they wonder at and also
reverence, they tread upon with their trampling feet: what great cause i^
there offered hereby of laughter? That part of the earth which is hidden, they
desire: and that part which lies open* they despise. Some buy hou^ds, some buy
horses, s^m purchas^ an infinite deal of land, and whiles they seek to be
other men's lords and masters, they become vassalls to themselves, and drudging
servants. Over hasty be they to enter wedlock, and as speedy shortly after
to sue a diuorcement* Whom they love, him in semblable manner they hate. They
beget children, and yet forsake the faith and pity of parents. This kind of
carfulness, is mere vanity: yea it sauoureth wholly of absurd dealing, of
dealing (I say) nothing differing from mere madness. They ^all at variance
between themselves, they deal blows one to another, as it were in battle:
against their parents they raise rebellion: they lay trains of treason to
overthrow their princes: ma^slaughter they esteem as a mockery. Itum ^st in
viscera te^ae: They dig, and delue the gro^d That vauntage may be f^nd.
says the Po^.
They dig the ground like greedy metal mongers, and insatiable searchers for
sil^er: when they have gotten that which they gaped after, they fall to
purchasing: they sell the fruits of their lands with lucre: and still for money
is al their chopping and changing. Alas in what labyrinthes do they lose
themselves: in what silthy puddles do they wallow. He that has not money in
possession, studieth by what means he may satisu^e his desire: and after h^
has caught that within his claws, after which he was ever yawning, he is so
far from putting the same to any commendable use, that he reapeth thereof no
benefit to himself, insomuch as he burieth it in the g^ound, thinking it
safe from y^ purloyning robber, if there it be hidden. These perplexi^ies of
foolish people, when I precisely ponder, when I consider these circumstances
touching y^ manners of men, circumspe^ly: when I behold these indiscreet
behauiours, wherewith they are imbrued, I cannot but burst out into laughter.
Moreover, men quarelling and falling at dissension one with another, rack laws,
violate and abuse politic orders: If truly spoken, in his time, then (no
doubt) much more agreeable to veritio in these our days.
For they are so addicted to kindling of controversies, y^ citizens are
disquieted, brethren set at variance, and parents robbed of their due
reverence. These lew^ and dishonest properties they put in ure, for things
transitory, that vanish, things of no valor, things y^ be bare shadows,
things I say, wherein they have no interest, or right of possession, but like
Tenaunts at will, enjoy them at their lords pleasure. They are en^ious one to
another, deers of violence, murderers, ^oes to their friends, and to their
parents unthankful. Trifles, not endued with life, are beautified at their
expense: to dec^ adorn senseless toys, they spare not their riches* in
buying siatuies or standing images, they spend their substance, because they
appear unto them, not to be spechle^: But yet they that tell truth simply and
without pre^ence, have these kind of people in hatred and detestation. Their
desire is to deuowre that which is another: For the None content with his
estate* whiles they make profit the end of all their actions.
inhabitants of the land, seek ways to wealth by the sea: and Islanders
covet the commodities of the continent, or firm ground. Thus they make profit
the end, whereunto all their endeavors, and practices are referred. Whiles
they advance valliauntnesse in feats of arms, they themselves, being in
batter, are subdued of their own affections, wherewith the eyes of their minds
being bleared and blinded, they lead a life void of all wisdom, counsel
and discretion. Seeing these forecited causes, how should I abstain from thi^
motion of mind, whereat you marvel, sithence they themselves refrain not
from foolishnes, but one man's abuse works another missdemeanour. For, he
that persuadeth himself to be endued with the virtue of soberness, de^ideth
him that is addicted to drunkenness. One abhors him whose heart is haunted
with Venus, whiles he himself is annoyed with a more dangerous disease: Some
scorn at such as venture their lives and goods upon the swelling seas: and
some again on y^ other side as fast, make a mock a^ such as frame themselves
to the trade of tillage, whiles (in deed) they them selves, as ^ore blemished
with blame, deser^e extreme laughter: For, as well their words as their deeds
be at disagreement. Democritus (said I) you have spoken very aptly to the
purpose, neither is it possible, for any man, with more effectual reasons,
then you have used, to express the frailty of this our life, subject to
innumerable inconveniences: But yet, domestical business, matters of
controversy in law, and affairs of the common wealth, wherein men cannot but
be conversant, limit us within the laws of necessity. For Then is it mee^e
and co^nenient, we should therein occupy and exercise our selves, whereunto we
be called and appointed.
Nature has not given unto men their es^ence and being, to be congealed and
frosen in idleness, to slugge and snore in the couche of carelessnesse, but to
acquaint himself with exercises, and still to be doing: for that is the end
of our nativity and creation. But, many times and often it chances, that, from
these arts and occupations, the beautiful flower of vain glory s^ringing,
the minds of men, although their reason be perfect and sound, are
neue^thelesse commonly deceived: who take a trial of all y^ means they can
imagine, to defend and save themselves from falling: but in such blind nesse
and (...) dar^knesse being dispossessed of perseverance, they c^nnot avoid the
fall whereof they be in danger. As if he should have s^d: there is not so much
as one man that do^th so mean or (...).
For what man is he, that in his loanes for lucre looks for death, looks for
separation of this life, looks for deprivation of successi^, looks for loss
o^ lands, looks for sinking of ships, looks to be disherited of royalty,
looks in battle to take the foil of his enemy? Fnally, looks for the lack
of any thing that to him is good and com^odious, sythence no man presupposes
with himself, that one day he must needs fall without remedy. For, one with
another, is carried away with hope of that which is good: as for that which is
evil, they raze it out of their memories. Wherefore, to touch this your
laughter, is it agreeable to these ^ircumstances lately mentioned? You have
(says he) but a blunt head of your own, and your opinion does differ much
from my judgment, sithence you measure the motions of mind, and the quality
of quietness by ignorance. For the very same things that you a^firme, if men
framed themselves to follow, with an upright conscience, they should in short
time be delivered from al annoyance, and cut off al occasions ministered unto
me of laughter. But, in consideration of those things, which they count the
foundation and maine pillar of their life, and which wanting, they are in
belief that life cannot consist, in their own madness they are blinded, and
lacking discretion and perse^erance, refuse to be instructed, as learners, in
that whereof they are ignorant. For The wa^ering and wand^ring asfections o^
people, as unstable as the wind^, or as (...) as a weather cock.
the swi^t, the soudaine, and the often changing of things that daily do
chance, and the continual course of fortune, ministeth to every man, counsel
to serve his turn, sufficient. In a thing of certainty and stayed condition,
they are encumbered with infinite affections, now co^eting ^his, and now
desiring that; whereby no frui^e or profit is to be gained: so that in fine
(...) (...) out, that they being overwhelmed in Maeanders of mischiefs, lament
their follies with too late repentance. But he that attempteth nothing
without consultation, he that knows himself and hi^ own condition, is so
far from falling, that throughout the whole race of his lise, he is not in
fear of any such hazard: and examining his own estate, keeps himself
con^ented with a co^petent stay, not letting loose the bridle of liberty to
his concupiscence, or craving y^ which is so far above sufficiency, that it
is plain supersluitie: such a one (I say) representing Nature the nource of
all men* passes his time in plenty and abundaunce: For, as in a body of a
good complexion, the danger of a disease is quickly perceived: so in the
greatness of prosperity, nothing can be long continued: and in adversity,
what man's mind is matched with valliauntnesse, it is manifest and apparaunt.
Many, not seeing those things that lie (as it were) before their feet, perish
in the fondness of their affections: and such things, on the other side, that
be as bright as the clear Sun shine, they behold, as darckened with a mystie
cloud. And though the whole course of man's life might be a mirror or
looking glass, wherein to view things necessary to be d^ne, and things
inconvenient to put in ure, whereby, afterclappes and perils that in process
of times may chance, are prevented: yet notwithstanding, their eyesight
fails them, and their understandings wax so much the more blunt and duller.
These causes, and the like move me to laughter. Foolish men And yet they will
not be ^aught to frame (...) to wisdom.
feel the smart of their folly daily: yea, when they look not for it, then
it falls upon them: They are pincht with the punishment of their own
naughtiness, of their own covetousness, of their own spitefulness, of
their own maliciousness, of their own craftiness, of their own
deceiptfulnesse, of their own envy, and of other untameable perturbations of
their minds, rebelling against reason, the fort of which, oh how hard a matter
it is to assault, but much more uneasy to batter down or overthrow. To be
short, Ignorance has the rule of every man's li^e: no marvel then, though
they (...).
Ignoiraunce rules every man like a Queen or Empress: For when they (...)
opinion peruersly, they stand in contention with their sophismes and captious
conclusions. ^ertue, which belongs to the beautifying of manners, they
disgrace i^ most preposterously, in that they make pleasure the foot pathe
which they follow, and lying the race wherein they keep their running,
setting as much by laws as an old shoe latchet, or by a thing most vile and
contemptible, which to be no untruth, that they are charged withal, this
giue^h in evidence sufficient: For one finds fault with another ignorance,
whiles in the mean season, he himself is voyd^ both of seeing and hearing:
which two senses, are the most principal in man, a creature endued with
reason, to foresee things to come, and to be wise in things present. This
being unto them a goade of grief, yet notwithstanding they (...) themselves
in the same webbes of woe: For The v^nitie of men's minds* carried away with
inco^stancie, and not setting themselves to a ce^taine trade, science, and
estate.
one while they curse Navigations, or the Art of sailing, yet, forthwith and
anon, they adventure the S^as. They leau^ off the use of Husbandry, and by and
by, fall to tillage again. They put away their wives, and enter again into
wedlock. They bui^ their children whom they have begotten* and immediaely
thereuppon raise up new issue. They desire old age, and when they have it,
they find fault there withal. Their counsel is not constant, for no state is
to their contentmente. Kings and Princes approve the life of a private
Commoner. Commoners allow the lives of lusty Cour^iers. They that have too
much leisure and have little to d^e, praise such as have buisinesse wherein to
be occupied. Contrariewyse* such as have asfaires, wherein to be exercised,
commend those that live at ease and pleasure, as having attained a condition of
more assured safety. Rich men prefer the trade of poor men, as the better
of the twain: poor men wish to be wealthy, supposing meede much more worth
then need. Thus, every man is led awa^ in sensuality, and not so much as
one among many and (...), will address himself ^o learn a life of
quietness and tranqui^itie, which, though i^ be plain, easy to attain,
lightsome, and nothing slipperie, yet to set their feet in so pleasant a
pathe, not so much as ^e has the heart or the courage. But to go a contrary
way, a way (I say) that is hard and tedious, it is a worlds wonder to see,
how they run headiong: passing through which (for the number of them that
frequent it, is great) they blow, and pant like discomfited soldiers, whom
their enemies pursue even to the slaughter. Those that are supposed to be the
first, are reputed the last. Some being (as it were) manciples to impude^ce,
having their own loves in suspici^, satisfy their flaming affections, with
stolen delight of another man's wanton. Another is tormented with the
incurable disease of covetousness. Other, like bloudsuckers, wound the very
bowels. Others again, being puffed up in the pride of their nature, advance
themselves to the hautie heavens: anon, the burden of their vices pressing
down their shoulders make them tumble down to the bottom of hell. Some dig
for mettalls and mineralls to erect stately buildinges, wherein they reap
pleasure most plentifully: shortly after repentance follows their performed
labors. They cancel and cut in pieces the laws of friendship, (...) the
sweet sap of the same, into most bitter iuy^e of envy. Their neighbors
cannot live quietly by them, without disturbaunce: all which specified
enormities, flow (...) the corrupt fountain of covetousness. They Men in
their variableness and ignorance (which is exceeding grosle and palpable)
compared to children.
differ nothing from young children, whose age is a hinderaunce, that they
can at^mpte nothing with wisdom and counsel: such things as carry a
countenance of pleasantness, they throng after with violence, to none other
end, then to staunche their greediness: to staunche said I? when the nature of
their concupiscences is such, as it will never be satisfied? therein not to
be compared to any beast, that lacks the light of reason. For, Brute beasts
wanting the gift of understanding, when their appetite or lust is satisfied,
they beat ease and quiet, for a season, not seeking further to have more when
they are once filled. No Lion has been heard of at any time, to hyde gold in
the secret celles of the earth. So long thirsts the Bear, till he have
water sufficient. So long deuoureth the ravenous Woolfe, till he have enoughe,
and having enoughe, takes his rest, till lust requires sustenaunce again: so
long does the Leopard raunge, til he have his pray, and having eaten to
staunche his hungry mawe, seeks no further: so long feeds the Bull till
his belly beefull, and then forsakes he his fodder: But All creatures are
content: only man is insatiable and has never enough.
man is never satisfied, day and night he desires, and never is content.
Beasts and birds cease from the act of ingendring, a whole years space
almost: man is evermore busy in that bodily pleasure, and like a bottomless
hell has never enough. Whether will you that I laugh at him, that lamenteth
his lewd loves, from the enjoying and sweetness whereof he is excluded, when
his substance is consumed? Whether will you that I laugh at him, who puts all that he is worth, and more too, in adventure on the tossing and tempestuous
floudes, having before cursed the sea with a thousand execrations, when he
suffered shipwreck? Whether will you that I laughe at him, who fraughteth his
shipp with heavier and weightier burdens, having bewailed the loss of such
wares as he had before imbarcked? O Hippocrates, As if he had said, these vain
studies and en deuoures of people deserve exceedingly to be laughed at and
mocked.
seem not these and such like things in thine opinion, worthy of exceeding
laughter? I would therefore, that a stronger remedy be prepared: for this
emplaster is too gentle. But as fortune falls, our sore is none such as it
should stand in need of saluing: and therefore spare your pains, least,
employing it where it ought not, you reap an ill recompense? Your progenitour
Acsculapius may serve for an example sufficient, who when he had by his
medicinable confections, reserved the benefit of healthfulnesse unto mortal
men, was blasted from heaven with souden lightning, for his presumptious
enterprise, reaping that terrible punishment, for a recompense. Do I seem in
your judgment, to be frentique, and rapt beside my self, who to the intent I
might sifte out the cause of madness and understand the reasons of the same,
and see upon what occasions it springs, make a slaughter of Cattle, and
mangle them in this order as you see? But the cause thereof, men themselves
ought to search most seriously. For The words of a Pagan Philosopher, but
(undoubtedly) well worcester thie of christians to be diligently m^rked, for the sh^me
of their sin, and the ame^dment of their lives.
the whole world, as you perceive plainly enough, is replenished with grudging
envy, and repining emulatio^s, the contagious sicknesses, and festering sores,
the putrified botches and irksome scabs of vices, all grow to a huge heap.
What think you of man himself? is he any thing else, even from his conception
and nativity but a very dunghill of diseases? Look upon him with a circumspect
eye, consider of his estate and condition by degrees: in his infancy, he is
fit for nothing: in his childehod, he is wantonly disposed: in the pearl of
his youth he is foolish, resisting to be ruled by a tutor: in his lusty
years, he is at his own swinge, and will (in no wise) bite any longer on the
bridle: he is ambitious, and over busy in many matters, in his manhod: in his
old age he doteth and walloweth in wretchedness, having spent the whole course
of his former life, in vanity, without reason: for, man is miserable even from
his mothers womb. Some swell in wrath and furiousnes: some delight in bawderie
and lasciuiousnes: some live upon rapine and unthriftiness: some spend all their
inheritance, and fall into beggar linesse: finally, one with another is totally
inclined to naughtines. O Hippocrates if I might have liberty and leave, to
make souden entrance into men's houses, to see how they are occupied, whereupon
they spend time and leisure, if (I say) I might have permissio^ also, to bewray
their covert behauiours, abroad to open view: you should see some stink with
surfeiting: some inglutting so immoderately, that they fall a vomiting: some so
full of wine, and intoxicated with Bacchus berries, y^ they be drowned in
dru^kennes: some suffering anguish and torments of tediousnes: some te^pering
empoisoued potions: some putting in practice means to work mischief: some
pitiously plagued with the cholicke passion: some up to the hard ears in their
disports and merriments: some Or, inuenting some q^el to his (...) (...).
pe^ning infamous libels to the discredit of his freende: some swelling in
arrogancy and pecoklike pride, all these falling from their right wits: and
many more enormittes, besides these that I have named, should you see: yea and
far worse, bearing such swinge and sway in the minds of men, that they seem
to be in an extreme madness. For, both A world of wretc^ (...) and (...).
young and old one with another, make this their daily practice, and continual
occupation, to ask, to deny, to swear to forswear, to labor, to ly, and all
for silthie lucre. Some whet their teethe upon sugared deinties: and some are
pined away with famishment: some bury their riches: and some again, set light
by that which they possess, lifting up their minds to the benefit of greater
affiaunce: some are past shame and honesty: some are pinchpenies and notable
niggards: some are always gleaning, and never make an end of harvest: some are
drousie dottrelles: some are lasie lubbers: some are stately and insolent: some
look as big, as if they had eaten bulbeefe: some have a conceit, that they
are lusty gallantes: some take pleasure in hunting: some in hauking: some in
riding: some in pictures: some in pearls: some in writing: some in bearing
embassage: some in fighting: some in religion: some in triumph: some in
bloodshed: some in spoiling, which the most part make their accustomed trade
of living. Al these being led perforce with a certain violent motion of mind,
have their several exercises: one runs to battle on sea: another to
skirmish on land: another to husbandry: another to courts of plee: another
to be an orator: another to be a judge: another to be a plaier: another to
intemperaunce: another to slouthfulnes. etc. These and such like peevish
practices of men, when I do behold, as they are void of reason, and full of
folly, so I can not but laugh at them accordingly. Besides all this, the
profession Parcially spoken: for he himself was a physician, and therefore
this complaint might seem lesle to be regarded.
of Physic is with them in no reputation: for they are too too curious and
delicate of hearing. They call wisdom madness, and soberness outrage. I
have heard my self by report, of diverse that being in sickness, affirmed
with open mouth, yt the art which you profess and practice wrought them very
great annoyance: whether they spoke this of maliciousness, or of
unthankfulness: these words they uttered. For such as be disseased, if it
so chance that they recover, and be set at liberty from the danger of their
sickness, they do either give all the thanks to the Gods, or else to
fortune: moreover, many a one being of an overthwart and perverse inclination,
repine at them with hateful hearts, at whose hands they have received many a
benefit, and they take the matter heinously, that it should be thought, that
they stand in need of another help and succor. Some there be that lie
lulling on the soft pillow of sloth, being far from cunning and knowledge,
as Meaning, heaven from hell.
Jupiters king dome is distant from Plutoes dominion, fall at variaunce
nevertheless with such as excel them by as many degrees of Art and
experience, as the bright beams of the Sun, pass the dim and dazeled
light of the Moon. Their judgment depends Which the brute and unreasonable
beast does partake in like manner.
upon sense only, although they will not be won, to bewray so much by
motion of mind, nor confess themselves to be of that sect: and this
springs from envy principally. Neither are you ignorant, that such toys
bear a swinge in the world, and which you your self have i^sued, through the
force of certain affections of the mind, that are not to be dissalowed.
Fashion In considera tion of the extreme follies and vanities, which I have
rehearsed.
and frame your self therefore to laugh with me, sithence true knowledge is
not to be found among mortal men, sithence it is driven into irrecouerable
banishment, and sithence they are such friends to folly, wherein let them
continue to their own contentment: and having spoken these words, he fell into
a soude^ laughter. Now undoubtedly, (dear Damagetus) the man seemed to me
like an Angel, or rather like a God: and I being obliuious, or not remembering
his former shape and resemblance, said thus unto him. Most courteous
Democritus, my singular interteinour, I will carry into Cos my country,
presents of great excellency, which I have received since mine abode with you,
in this your blessed bower. For, according to the full measure of your wisdom
which is marvelous, you have received me honorably, sumptuously, and
delicatly. I will now return, sounding with the trumpe of report, your
incomparable praises, who following y^ infallible footsteps of thy forerunner
By whose direction whosoever is lead and guided, he (...) not err, he cannot
swar^e
Nature, swaruest not from the truth, neither in deed nor in word: And sithe^ce
mine inclination, is (by you) discovered, in such sort as I perceive what in
me is to be reformed, I will alter and change my qualities, and become of a
contrary disposition. For, both y^ hour exhorts me, and the regard of your
body counsels me thereunto. To morrow I am determined to visit you again in
this same place. Thus when I had spoken, I arose, he being in a readiness to
follow after me. Upon this, there approached toward me, a cer taine man, I wot
not from whence, to who^ I gave my noting tables, and so went my ways, making
all the speed that I was able to the Abderites, who awayted my return,
beholding all this while, the above named behauiours, from a lofty place, as
if it were from a turret, or a castles topp. To who^ when I was come, thus I
spoke: The report of Hippocrates concerning Democritus, after conference had
together.
You Abderitish citizens, much thanks is given you, for this your embassage:
For I have both seen, and also had conference with Democritus, a man so
furnished with knowledge, and enriched with wisdoms wealth, that he alone,
can make men sober, moderate grave and continent. These things had I to write
touching Democritus (dear freende Damagetus) which I give you to understand,
with towardness of will, no doubt to the contrary.

Fare you well.
Diogenes to Hipparcha.
THE ARGUMENT.
He writes to Hipparcha, a favorer of his sect and profession, willing her
to continue unvariable, even to the end, in those precepts of Philosophy,
which she had learned: showing her ways and means to keep her from doing the
contrary.

I am much delighted in Hipparcha: a woman of hi^ acqnaintaunce, given to the
study of Philosophy.
you, and the joy which you minister unto me exceeds measure: and why?
because you, being a woman give your self to the knowledge of Philophie,
mainteining our opinion, with the preciseness whereof the minds of men are
amassed. As therefore your beginning is praiseworthie, so do your uttermost
endeavor to make an answerable ending: which unto you shall not seem so hard
to compass, I am well assured, if you frequent the company of Crates, a man
endued with rare wisdom, and swerve not from the documentes and precepts of
us, the authors of Philosophy. Write often unto us, for letters have in the^
much force and virtue: yea no less effectual be they then present reasoning
and conference.

Diogenes to Hipponi.
THE ARGUMENT.
He writes his opinion briefly touching death: shows that as a man is before
he is begotten, so is he when soul and body be separated, whereupon he
exhorts Hippo not to be touched with any terror of things to come
hereafter, adjoining his reason: lastly, he concludes with his own
fantastical determination.

YOur will is, that I write somewhat unto you, touching death and the grave,
after mine own judgment, as if you should not prove a perfect Philosopher,
except we teach you, as our scholar. I am therefore of this opinion, that it is
enough for us, to lead our lives according to the prescripte rule of nature
and virtue, which thing is not beyond our capacities to comprehend. And as
for things after death, I think they are then, even as they were before
their life.

For, as a man is As is he had said: man before he was endued with life, was
nothing: so, after death he is (in like manner) nothing.
before his birth, so is he after his death. Let not the fear of any thing to
come, turn you to disquietuesse of mind, sithence you shall be senseless and
quite void of life and feeling. As for me self, I have determined, when I am
dead, to have my staff lying close by my carcass, that what beast, bird, or
vermin so ever come to do me harm and annoyaunce, I may ehace them away.

Phalaris to Pythagoras.
THE ARGUMENT.
Writing to Pythagoras, the Philosopher, to come unto him, he beginn^th first,
with the difference of both their estates, showing that daily keeping
company, and use of conference, will make things that be contrary to grow
to agreement: he seems also, to excuse himself of such reports, as were
blased abroad touching his unmerciful tyranny: and so, wishing to be with
(...), concludes.

THe principality of Phalaris, differs many degrees from the Philosophy of
Pythagoras: yet notwithstanding there is no cause to y^ contrary, but (though
things be in such case) we may take trial and experience of our selves For, it
may so fall out, that conversation and daily keeping company may draw those
things into an unity, wherein there is exceeding great contrariety. The
opinion o^ Phalaris concerning Pythagoras the Philosopher.
We, (according to the report that is noised abroad of your worthiness,) take
you to be a man of rare knowledge, and in your faculty most excellent, neither
will we otherwise be persuaded. I would not have you give judgment of our
doings, till you be further instructed. For, the false opinion which is
conceived of me, does so move me, that I am not a little offended. I cannot
have safe access unto you, because of the tyranny, whereof I am accused. If I
should come unarmed, and without defense of Guarde, I were easily taken of mine
adversaries: if I should come furnished with harness and weapon, and a band of
soldiers attending on my person, I should be suspected. As Persuasions to
mo^e him to come unto him.
for you, the case stands in no doubt or danger: For you may have passage
unto me, and suffer no annoyaunce: you may lead your life in my company,
with out occasion of terror: and of my dooinges you may take due trial, no
manner of inconuenie^ce unto you redounding. If you behold me as I am a
tyrant, you shall rather find me a private commoner, then one advanced to
such a kind of government: and if you consider of me, as of a private
person, yet so shall you find me, as having somewhat incident of necessity to
a tyrant. For, I can not by an^ means, possess this principality, His
people and subjects were so intractable, so (...) and so rebellious.
without cruelty. And surely, if humanity and gentleness, may (without
peril) accompany tyrannical regiment: then, not only in consideration of
other circumstances, but for this cause also, do I wish to be with you. For
by your admonitions, I shall attempt a way to rule with more clemency, if,
together with the precepts of Pythagoras, truth be so united and lincked, as
I may have promise to lead my life in quietness, and assurance of safety.

Phalaris to Locrito.
THE ARGUMENT.
This letter of consolation is written to Locritus, whose son wa^ slain in
battle. The comfort which Phalaris does minister unto him, is drawn from
three several reasons: The first, from his valiantness: the second because
his death was honorable: the third, from the integrity of his life. Finally,
he exhorts Locritus not to be ouermuche grieved for the loss of his son.

IN that you take the death of your son, so sorrowfully, you are undoubtedly
For the Father is touched with natural pity to complain for the loss of his
child, being the fruit of his own bowels.
to be pardoned: Yea, I my self pity your case, as much as may be, and
considering the same, am no less grieved then any other of your friends what
soever, although I seem in a much harder condition, for this cause, y^ I
know this to be true, that with such as be overwhelmed in Seas of anguish, and
suffer extreme torments of adversity, bare words are not auailable.
Nevertheless you ought to be comforted, and this should be a Sovereign
consolation unto you in this calamity. First, because your Son died in the
quarrel of his country, like a valiant Martialist: secondly, because in the
very triumph and victory, his death, was most honorable, according to the
appointment of his destiny: and lastly, because his life was so upright, y^
the same was blemished with no stain of filthiness, (...) Death m^king an
(...) of his ver^.
his death in soughten field finishing his noble virtues. For, it is a thing
very uncertain, whether a good man's life may be changed to a worse: For in
things belonging to man, Fortune (for the most part) and not their own
wills, has Dominion: Whosoever, therefore, dies without reprehension, his
estate is most honorable, most glorious, and triumphant. Persuade your self
so, that you have received of him recompense sufficient, both for the benefit
of his generation, and also for the gift of his education, A full and a no
(...) (...) ac^ (...) our (...) (...)
sithence he perseuered in virtue and honest behauiours, even to the last day
of his life: and let this be your requital, to to take his death in such
sort, that you fall not into extremity of passions.

Phalaris to Polydeuces.
THE ARGUMENT.
The state of a Tyrant is in this Epistle plainly expressed, wherein Phalaris
complaining of his unruly people, chooses rather to live in solitariness,
then among such subjects, whose delight is in disquietnesse.

YOu seem to marvel (as it appears by your letters) at the alteration and
change of my life, in that I heretofore exceeding in courage and boldness,
far beyond the custom of Tyrants, mistrusted no company, but put my life in
all men's hands, as doubting no danger: now contrariwise, such a mutation to
follow, that my very friends, and nearest kinsfolks, may not have access to
my person. As for me self, so Because every one was ready to cut his throat
or to have a slash at his sl^she: for he was had in wonder full detestation
among his people.
fearful am I, and so attainted with timourousnesse, that I am persuaded to
live in solitarines, as an Hermit wandering in the wilderness. For we find
faith (sound and assured faith, I mean, and not such faith as being cloaked
with dissimulation, proves plain treason) not only fainting in all men, but
failing also in such as we accounted our friends and favorers. In
consideration of which premises, perceiving my self wrapped in labyrinthes of
troubles, and having to the uttermost, taken trial of all things tending to
mine avail, I have now at the last, made mine election and choice, preferring
the inhabitable woods and comfortless caves of the People of Africa, called
by the name of the countries which they inhabit: L^bya and Numidia: of them
Geographers write largely.
Libyans and the People of Africa, called by the name of the countries which
they inhabit: Libya and Numidia: of them Geographers write largely.
Numidians, before a life led in company, and common concourse of people. For,
as the present state of things is, I see much more safety to ensue a life led
among Lions: more sweetness to solow (...) taken among serpents, then among
people of this age wherein we live, whose delight is chiefly in tumults and
vpprores. We have taken trial, even til we be weary, by many and diverse
alterations of fortune.

Phalaris to Polycleto.
THE ARGUMENT.
To Polycletus a famous Physician, unto whom he did write often, is this
letter directed, wherein he commends the man's knowledge and honesty
(having good cause so to do: for he dealt in such sort^ with him, when he
had him in cure, that he esca^ed danger whereunto he was two ways in
subjection, that his (...) was preserved:) to whom he sends large gyfts, of
his (...) (...), supposing them insufficient to requite (...) his deserts.

I Am in doubt ( Polycletus) whether I should rather wonder at thy At his cun^
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...), (...) (...). Phalaris (...) his (...) (...):
which was brought to a very low ebb: At his faithfulness^, beecaus^ he being
tempted with large bribes and rewards to dispatch and make away the king in
his sickn^sse, yet would not committ such a horrible villani^ against his
patient.
cunning in the practice of Physic, or mer^ at thy (...) and honesty in
behauiours: For, by the virtue of thy Physic, thou did restore the health
of a (...) that was much empaired: and thy manners overcame the rewards of a
bloody slaughter. By the benefit of these two singular ornaments, flourishing
in thee, and grounded upon i^stice, thou sau^dst me from two shrewd
shippewrackes, namely, from the violence of a disease incurable, and from mine
enemies, whose conceived malice is unappeasable. For, it lay altogether in thy
hands, to have dispatched a Tyrant in his sickness: But it seemed that thy
meaning was not to play the manquil^er, sithence, what medicines so ever thou
ministredst unto me, made much for the restitution of my health and safety:
albeit thy faithfulness in fulfilling the office of a Physicyan for thy
patientes a^ayle, empaired thine own profit and commodity, which should have
been very great. But, such was the goodness of thy nature, that thou
would in no wise prefer an unjust reward, before justly deserved praise:
s^thence, peradventure, that occasion of time, had fit cause of due dispatche
and working my death, by reason of that sickness. What commendation therefore
can I give thee, that is counteruailable with the singularity of thy virtue
and (...), considering thy usage toward me, (when my life lay in thy hands,
to ^aue me, or kill me, at thy will and pleasure) so faith fully testified. Of
this one thing I am assured, that thou haste attained to that ripeness of
understanding, and perfection of skill in this thy faculty, which may well
^efeeme that God, by whom the Art of Physic was first invented and put in
practice. But, I hau^ sent unto thee, (together with the commendation of thy
knowledge, and the praise of thy faithfulness) certai^e pledges of my good
will toward thee inclined: namely, The gifts and rich^ rew^es that Phalaris
sent to Polycleto his Physician.
a (...) (...) (...) made of pure Gold, two standing cups of (...) (...)
from the fashion of this time: ten couples of (...) cruses: twenty young
Maidens whose (...) (...) never stained: and fifty thousand pieces of Ath^men
(...). furthermore, I have written to Teucer, that in the dispensation and
ordering of mine affairs, he should pay you the salarie and wages, that is
given to the governors of my fleet, the guarde of my body, and a Captain
ever hundrethes. A small and ^lender recompense (I confess) for so singular a
benefit: but think upon this, that to my small signification of
thankfulness, this mine own confession is to be added, that I am utterly
ignorant, how, or by what means I might bring to pass, that my rewards
should counterpeise thy merits.

Phalaris to Perosthenes
THE ARGUMENT.
He pardons (of his ^lemencie) twoe women, the wives of two men that were
rebels and Traitors, upon the view of their valiantness: wherein he quiteth
himself of the name and property of a tyrant: for, in a tyrant what
sparckle of pity rests, after the apprehension of an offendour against his
person.

YOu have sent unto me women prisoners, condemned wretches, being the wives of
Eubolus and Ariphantus, rebels against our person: whom although I was
determined to have committed to the executioner, that he might do with the^
according to y^ definitive sentence of judgment: I have yet notwithstanding,
altering my former appointment, pardoned them, and vouchsafed them their lives:
you marvel, no doubt y^ I could quench the coals of mine anger kindeled
against them so extreemly: but if you once hear the occasion, of this change
in me upon such a souden, issuing from an The valiant hearts of two women,
being, prisoners, over came his (...), and tu^ned his ty^nie to p^y his
cruelty to clemency. etc.
incredible noblenes and valiauncie of their minds, you shall have greater
cause to wonder. For, when I demanded of them, whether they were accessaries
and of counsel with their husbands, to work me mischief: they answered with
bold affirmations, that they did not only give their consentes, but that they
were fully intended also, to take up weapon against the tyrant, and in their
own persons to offer him violence. Again, when I asked the^, what injury I
had done them, either little or great, whereby they should attempt such an
enterprise. Their answer was, that they knew no private wrong that should
i^cite them to such a deed: but a public and universal injury they anouched,
whereby they found themselves so stoung, and pricked, that they could not
refrain from seeking remedy* This public, or open injury, this wrong that
was universal, and touched the estate of every man, they said, was this: A
forceable cause to kindle coals of reb^llion.
Because a free city was forced to serve. Again, being demanded, what
punishment their hatred and hostility which they showed against me with such
outrage did deserve, they made this answer: that they thought death a fit
reward for their offense. In consideration of which circumstances, and
perceiving also their valiant hearts, and souldierlike stomaches, how little they
regarded to dye, I deemed the^ worthy to live, and therefore spared them, and
gave them both pardon. Wherefore, whatsoever you have in your hands, that you
took from them, at such time as you sent them unto me, like prisoners,
restore them, undiminished: that they may have no occasion of injury offered
them, whereby they should, against us and our dealinges, raise any complaint.

Synesius to Anastasio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He writes unto one that neglected the duty of a ^reende: therein showing
the course of the world, that in a man's welfare he shall be favored, but in his
misery quickly forsaken. Lastly, he seems not to dis^alow mutual sufferance
of sorrow (an opinion maintained, in manner, of the most: for that it is
naturally ingraffed that one man, much more one freende should bemone another
friends ill fortune, or else what place is left for compass sion?) in saying
that the one half of his sorrow is diminished, if his friend be merry.

NOt Two very friends that wished well one to another.
Amasis doubtless, (who whites he showed himself very loathe to lament the
calamity of Two very friends that wished well one to another.
Polycrates, to whom he wished happiness) sent unto him an assurance of
freendship, at such time as he was forsaken of fortune: but eue^ then, wh^ he
was in the per^e of his prosperity. Whereby he gave a manife^ testimony, y^
his heart would have been heavy, and his eyes ready to gushe out bra^kish
tears, if misery had prevented so comfortable a message. But, in you y^
contrary appears: who, so long as fortune vouchsafed us her favor, remained
with us, as not discontent with our co^ dition: but so soon as she withdrew
her (...), and ^unged her smiling countenance into a sower visage, then did you
leave us sticking in the mire, as forlorn and forsaken. For, such as have
come out of A country in Europa, bordering upon Macedonia. Mela. lib. 2. and
Pliny. lib. 4. cap. 11.
Thracia, having had resort unto us, and some communication also upon occasion
in^erchaunged, have made unto us this report, y^ such is your dealing now in
absence, as that you cannot afforde (...) word, no, not so much as a good
thought. What is this else, but to be at defyaunce with freendshippe, and to
take up weapon against us, as a soldier of hatreds host. It had been
sufficient, not to be touched with compassion in our misery: but to aggrauate
and increase sorrow, where grief should rather be assuaged, is a token of no
relenting nature: Amasis might not allow it, nor any man else like well of it,
sithe^ce it is against al humanity: but peradventure in this doing, you see
better to your own commodity. Well, do what you will, so that your doings be
not destitute of delight and a merry motion of spirit. For, the one half of
my sorrow, shall seem to be diminished, if you do not languishe, as I waste
in anguishe.

Synesius to Theotimo.
THE ARGUMENT.
To a singular Poet named Theotimus, this letter is written by Synesius,
wherein is first signified, (by comparison of Simonides and Hiero) that
commodity did spring from the acquaintance, which was between him and
Authemius: he ends with a commendation of the same Theotimus, for his
excellency in the Art Poetical.

Hiero King of Sy^acuse: of who^ Aelianus, in Var. histor. lib 6. of the same
there was ano there, an Athenien.
had more commodity, by keeping company with Simonides, then This Simonides
was the first inuenter of the Art me moratiue: Cic. in Ora. he devised also
these double letters in the Greek Alphabete (namly (...) as says Eustathius.
etc.
Simonides had by using the familiarity of Hiero. Even so (by the heavenly
virtue which governs the freendship wherewith we be united, I swear) thou
art not more happy by being acquainted with Authemius, then Authemius is, by
the benefit of knowing your person. For, what makes more for the honor of a
man in high advancement, and supported with power, then to have such a
friend, as is faithful and unfeigned? such a one, I am certain, Theotimus is,
a man passing courteous, and with God most acceptable. But in this point you do
exceed and go beyond Simonides: in that Simonides measured his service by
profit and advantage: Again, in this you agree, and seem to shoot both at a
semblable mark: in y^ This Simonides was the first inuenter of the Art me
moratiue: Cic. in Ora. he devised also these double letters in the Greek
Alphabete (namly (...) as says Eustathius. etc.
Simonides commended Hiero to everlasting memory: and in that also the Poesies
of Theotimus, so long as any Grecians shall be left on live, have made
Authemius famous by the report of every man's mouth, famous I say in the ears
of al, that shall hear of his person. It is his part to seek the increase of
the Romans renoune: and it is your duty to extol his name with the
instrument of your profession. For, to the practice of Poetry, is granted (as
it were by divine influence) the wreath of worship, and the garland of honor,
the excellency whereof, most evidently in you appears.

Dionysius to Philoxeno.
THE ARGUMENT.
He declares how glad he was, when he received a letter from his friend
Philoxenus: adding moreover, that his joy would have been the greater, if (as
he wished) he might enjoy his presence. Furthermore, to win the more credit
of freendshippe, he uses a comparison of two lovers, whose delight is to see
and talk one with another. Lastly, he concludes that tokens are a fitt^
thing to keep acquaintance in custom.

THe letter which you sent unto me, was both wished and welcome: and I
would, that as I saw the Or, that as I saw and read the letters of your
running pen, so I might also hear your lively voice.
characters of your hand, so I might (to my full contentation) hear your
lively voice. For, if I might once obtain my desire in that case, I should
reap pleasure in more plenty: like to a young man, whose comfort is then
passing great and sw^te, when he sees and talks with a fair damsel whom
vnseignedly he loves. And this fruit of delight we do also reap, that when
absence of person, and distaunce of place, hinders us from visiting and
keeping company with them, whom heartily we love: to have their Which
representing them whom we love, we might still have them, by continual view
of their pictures, in fresh remembrance
pictures in our sight, that by one means or other (though somewhat sle^der) we
might suck some solace: and gather, though not the whole and perfect harvest,
yet some gleanings of pleasure, in our beloved. And surely, tokens are meet
things for this purpose, in mine opinion: which I esteem so much more in
value and price, as I do your person, from whom they were received.

Dionysius to Abramio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He declares the occasion of his long lingering, before he did write: excusing
himself by the allegation of two circumstances, name ly, opportunity of time,
and good order of inditing. He signifies also, that his mind continues
unchangeable, so that there is no cause of fainting in freendshippe to be
mistrusted.

IT is a thing necessary and convenient, that such as write to virtuous and
honorable personages, should have a regard both To opportuniti^ of time
because it is a circumstance of every wise man to be observed: of a decent and
convenient order, least want of discret^on be detected.
to opportunity of time, and also to a plausible method, or good order of
inditing. For, it is an offense insufferable, to take a thing in hand, wherein
not only rashness and want of aduisement is bewrayed: but virtue also with
homelines of style and baseness of phrase is abused. In consideradion whereof,
we have been constrained to make delays, and find occasion of doubtful
conceits. We seemed as though we had quite cast off all remembrance of
freendshippe, in that by the mutual recourse of letters, we did not visit
one another. The cause therefore of this impediment, being understood, you
have not to suspect, but that our freendshippe remains still steadfast, and
that I (for my part*) am in mind unvariable. I think you ^il not mislike of
my doing in this case, nor suppose my delay worthy of rephe hension, having
in it so slender a shadow of security an^ carelessness. Wherefore be
mindful of us: For, so to do, Or, is both to you and also to me, not
profit only, ^ut pleasure also.
is to me both acceptable and pleasa^nt: and to you also profitable and
requisite.

Libaniu^ to ^zalo.
THE AR^VMENT.
H^e comm^ndeth Izalua for certain^ behauiours of courtesy, which ^e reckons
up by (...) office^: he finds fault with him for too much libe^ie of tongue,
exhorting him to amend that misdemenour. Lastly he acknowledges himself
thanckful for the receipt of ^rtaine benefits*

THe trade of life whereunto you are accustomed, as it is sim ply the bent, so
for the profession of Philosophy it is the fittest: For Necessary lessons,
for all such to learn as intend to at taine the true knowledge of Philosophy.
yo^ do what you can, to live ^prightly, and accor^ing to the rule of
wisdom. You entertain strangers: you succor the needy* you give true
sentence in deciding controuers^es: you keep your conscience free from the
corruption of brtherie. Nevertheless, as you are in y^ premises to be
praised, so in this following circumstance you are to be rebuked, in that you
have not the ability of reason, whereby to bridle your tongue* which oftentimes
is busied in vain talk, too too abus^uely. In this case therefore, you annoy
your friends, who feel themselves grieved, thorough your fruitless and
immoderat^ tatling. Wherefore, these are to admonish you, to frame your self to
an ame^dment of this A tongue given to vain talk and nedelesse language* a
foul fault* and here rebu ked in Izalo, in whom other honest be hauiours were
not wanting.
foul fault, that you may become meeter metal for the image of Virtue, and
more apt to receive the precepts of Philosophy. You shall not cease to write
unto me, touching al things, whatsoever you please: because it is my wonted
fashion, to certify you of all affairs and business done among us, which I
perceive necessary for you to understand. I am fully persuaded hereof, that as
I have a regard of your commodity, so you are touched with a consideration of
my profit: For, you are the man, of whom I have received many benefits, in
recompense of the which I render thanks immortal. Be careful of your own
health from day to day, let your mind be discharged from al cumbersome
cogitations: and possess all pleasure after your own hearts desire.

Fare you well.
Libanius to Rupino.
THE ARGUMENT.
This Epistle is made by Libanius, and of him invented ^or imitation, and
example, to make the like: not left as a testimony, e^ther of his own, or of
his friends misfortune: so the name of (...) i^ surmised.

ALas, with what waves of wretchedness, are we ouerwhe^med, by keeping
company with that unhappy Hermogenes. By these exclamations and pitiful
complaints, he she weth what a sore plague it is, for any man to keep ill
company.
In what gulphes of mischiefs are we drowned, into what dangers are we brou
ght, by acquainting our selnes with his execrable conditions. Better had it
been for us to have rolled the stone of Sisyphus, with weariness: better to
have been tormented with Prometheus, even with the g^awing of a greedy
vulture: better to have thyrsted and famished in abundance of tooth^ome
de^icates, and pleasant streams of lively liquor: better to have pitched our
tents next to Plutoes pauillion, then to have used the (...) of such an
infamous fellow, who is to the earth a (...), and an idle burden, and one
whom y^ heavenly ^habitants (the immortal Gods I mean) are offended withal,
and account accursed. Then so, in what labyrinthes of w^es are we lost, in
what seas of inconveniences we sail, to the utter shipwreck of our honesty
and honor: in what pitts of perplexities we be plunged: in what snares
(almost inevitable) of unluckiness we be entangled, except that by the
direction of virtue (as it were by Ariadnaes line) we be rescued. This it is to
touch pitche: this it is to taste wormwood: this it is to posse in puddles.
Wherefore, I would wish, that upon the perusing of this epistle, you be
circumspect: not te* merous and rash to intrude your self into any company:
but deliberating with your self, how you may join in fellowship, and save
your self from prejudice.

Fare you well.
Seneca to Lucillio.
THE ARGUMENT.
This (...) does partly admonish, and partly disuade: for he exho^teth to
constancy of mind, and to stick to certain exercises of learning: he
disuadeth also, from reading the works of diverse (...): which coun^ell is
proper to young beginners, sithence it is a kind of (...) tender (...), to be
meddling with many writers. He exhorts also to study approved books, and
such as abound with the pleasantness of the latin tongue, out of which (...)
must be le^rned, and committed to memo^ie. He that i^ well mon^ed is not
thought to be rich, but he to whom a little is enough.

BY the cyrcumstances of your own letters, and by the reports that I hear of
you, I conceive good hope of your doings. You shi^t not from place to place,
neither do you trouble your self with change of readings: this turmoyling is
the token of ^ mind disquieted. The chiefest argument of a settl^d and well
ordered mind^* is (as I think) if it can stand fast by it self* and be not
subject to alterations. Have a regar^ (in any case) that the Reading ma ny ^e^s
works without order breeds varia blenesse.
reading of many authors, and tu^bling over the valumes of diverse writers,
draw not after them the discommoditie of ^ckle headiness and variableness.
If you be (...) to reap some fruit of your labor, which may continue and
rest in your mind vnremou^ble, you must tie your self to certain studies and
exercises, choice and change being avoided, which (...) in disorder and
confusion. He is no where, that is every where. The life of trauel^rs is
strange to consider, for they b^e such as even now we named* they have many
harbors, but no friendships: even so, it ^areth with them, that acquaint their
wits with all writers, not applying their minds to certain that be
special* Neglecting in the mean^ space, their own common ditie and benefi^:
whereof they should o therwise taste the swe^nesse* ^f they used leisure i^
the^ labor.
but with post have a^ it were, pass^ over what soever (...)* under their (...)
gers. That meat is unprofitable, and ministers to the body no measure of
nourishment, which so soon as ^t enters in to the stomach, is (...) and
pr^sently (...) out a^aine. Nothing is more noisome and hurtful to the bodies
of m^n, then the often change of (...) and curing remedies. That wound never
grows to a skarre* which is not ply^ with playsters. That young plant does
not prosper, which is always removed. Nothing is so profitable, as that it
does good in a moment or the turning of a hand. The much meddling with many
books, is a spoiling of the wit. Wherefore, sithence you may not read as much
as you have, it is sufficient if you have as much as you may read. But, me
thinks I hear you say: A supposed question.
Due while I will be doing with this book, another while with that, and thus I
will frame me self to choice and variety of writers. The answer or
resolution.
It is the point of a loathing stomach to taste diversity of dishes, which are
so far from nourishing the body, that they fill it with cruditie and raw
humors: Wherefore if you read, read such authors as be notable and approved:
and if you be desirous of choice, then have backward recourse to those books
which you did first peruse. Be not without some (...) against poverty: and of
remedy against death, be not ^tterly (...): neither would I have you
unprovided, it happly (...) (...) disperse their infecting properties. And*
(...) over many leaves and lines, learn one goo^ (...) for thi^ own
comoditie. This is a practice of mine own, ^omething to hold fast, among many
things that I have read. For, I ^m wo^t to enter into others tents, not as one
y^ wou^ ru^e away, but as a spy for advantage. Merry (...) (^aith (...)) is a
goodly treasure: but ^uch kind of (...) (^ay I) is not poverty, howbeit merry
it is notwithstanding. For But very few or none, be there that can away with
want: and therefore, where i^ Seneca his sup posed wealth?
whosoever can agree well with poverty, y^ m^n doubtless is rich and wealthy.
Who is poor? not he that has little, but he that coueteth more to that which
he has, he is needy: For what avails it him* how he hoord up in his co^ers*
how he rep^enish his garners, how much he ra^e together by extortion, how much
he poll and pill by vsuri^ and loaning, if that which he yawneth after be
another mas goods: If he make reck^ng of that which is to be gotten, and not o^
that which he has already in possession? You ask me a que^ion, namely, what
measure * A demand answered.
there is in riches. I answer you, that the first is to have no more th^n is
nece^arie and the second is, not to be without that which is sufficient.

Seneca to Lucillio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He teaches that it is an indecent thing, for an aged man to wax childish,
and to grow again into infancy: moreover that death is not to be feared,
sithence, we see very many, that set light thereby, through the ^orce of their
perturbatio^s, as through the passion of timorousness or fear: and through
the concupiscence of carnal pleasure. Lastly, he sets down the common
course of man's nature, together with the law whereunto we are tied, even in
our birth and nativity.

AS you have begone so continue: make speed to the uttermost of your ability,
that you may enjoy the benefits of a well ordered and disposed mind: which you
shall the longer enjoy, as you are For nothin^ does more pervert the minds of
me^* then wickedness and vice.
less subject to the infection of vice. Incomparable is the pleasure, which is
purchased by the contemplation of a perfect and pure mind, of a mind (I say)
free from all staynes and blemishes. You remember with what gladness of heart
you were surprised, at such time as you, having cast off your When you had
outgrown the age of a child, and came to ma^s (...).
childs coat, put on your long side gow^e, and were waited upon to the
common place of plee: look to reap joy in great plenty, when you leave your
childish conditions* and when Philosophy admits you into your manhood.
Even yet to this present day, not only childhoode, but (a thing somewhat
grievous) childishness remains in us, and has an abiding: and surely, it is
so much the worse, because we bear the countenaunces of old gray beardes,
and yet have r^igning in us, the vices that be proper to children: and not
proper to children only, but also to very infantes. Children fear light
toys, infantes fear counterfect follies, we fear both. Consider I pray but
a little, and you shall soon understand this matter: ^ome things are less
feared, because in other things, greater occas^on of terror is offered. It is
(say you) a Yet many cast away themselves upon light occasions (as he says
himself) and what is that but to contemn the benefit of life*
hard piece of work to persuade the mind of man to contempt of life. Do you
not see, upon what trifling causes, death of diverse is despised? One hanges
himself under his sweet hearts window with a twyned haulter: another
throws himself headlong from the topp of an house, and breaks his neck,
because he would no longer hear his angry masters bralling. One cutts his
own throat, least he should be brought back again to service, after he has
played the runnagate: and another leapes into ye water, not to swim, but to be
drowned, because he is pi^cht with poverty etc. Now, think not you, y^ the
nobleness of virtue will do as much, as too much timorousness has done? Let
your daily and continual meditation be, According to the counsel of the word
w^itten: Memorare nouissima, and non peccabis in e^ernum: Remember thine and,
if thou will not sin eternally. etc.
to forsake this wretched life with a well willing heart, which many hold in as
much assurance and certainty, as a running stream is stayed by weeds and
shallowness. Some waver between the fear of death, and the torments of life:
live they would not, and die they cannot: wherefore, so rule your life, that the
same may be free from such kind of carefuln^sse: so moderate and dispose it,
that you may be able to shake ^ff al combersome cogitations. No good thing is
a comfort to a man, except his mind be prepared willingly to sustain the loss
thereof: and nothing that is lost, breeds less anguish, the^ y^ loss of y^
thing, which when it is lost, cannot be recovered. Wherefore arm your self
This force must be wisdom, wherewith whosoever is furnished, the same is able
to with stand and endure all mise^es whatsoever.
with force sufficient, to withstand all assaults of misery whatsoever. Trust
not quietness to far; and of prosperity be not too bold, through the bait
of vain^ confidence: least you afterward taste the bitter bane of repentance.
The sea is not always calm, in a moment of time it rages with a storm. Call
to remembrance, the examples of such, as in their own houses have been
dispatched, as with open violence have been murdered, as by privy deceiptes
have perished: and you shall find, that as many masters have been slain by
the hands of their servants, as there have been offenders put to death at
kings comaundements. These and such like circumstances ought to occupy a place
in our brain, upon these things we ought to study and deliberate, if we
look to live, till our last day and hour, without troublesome thoughts: if
we wish the approaching of death not to be terrible, the fear whereof fills
all our life with disquietnesse and vexatio^. But, to finish mine epistle, take
this poesy* of flowers gathered out of other men's garde^s. Poverty used
according to the prescript laws of nature, is great riches: and what limits
nature has assigned and tied us unto, you are not ignorant: namely to hunger,
to thyrst, to sweat, to ware chill, against which infirmities she has also
appointed remedies. It is a bootelesse toil, to adventure the seas: it is lost
labor to follow the camp: that which nature requires is easy to be gotten,
and is bought for a small price: but things superfluous require tedious
traueile.

Fare you well.
Seneca to Lucillio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He commends Lucillius for continuing at his book. He (...) out true life
Philosophical, that is, the life of such as live more sparingly and ba^ely
then other: that they may perform that in behauiou^* whereof they make an out
ward show, and representation.

IN that you continue so earnestly at your book, setting all things aside,
and ^irecting al your thoughts and actions to this one marc^e, namely to become
better day by day, as in years you do increase, I allow it, and I cannot but
rejoice: In which your approueable procedings, I do not only exhort you but
also beseech you, to persevere. Hereof I admonish you, y^ you do nothing after
y^ ma^er of them, whose desire is not to do good, but to be gafed upon, si^
hence such acti^s Because they be (commonly and for the most part) leuened with
vain glory.
deserve due reprehension. Let not your hair grow out of order, to ye
disfiguring of your head, nor your beard be vncombd and rough, to the marring
of your favor and conntenance. The very name of Philosophy, although it be
moderatly used, is much envied among a great number. Let not your go^ne sit
upon your back Which curiosity might be left to women, in whose apparel and
garments, not so much as a plight must stand amiss.
too nicely, nor yet wear it too slouenly. Let us not conceive this erroneous
opinion, that y^ judgment of frugalitie or thriftinesse, consists (...)
gold, s^uer, or the muc^e of this vading world. Let us be so occupied, as that
our actions may tend to a better life* then the common sort of people do
ins^e: howbeit, not a li^e c^ntrarie to theirs: for in so doing, we shall drive
away from us such as (...) would aw^nd, that they will be loath in any thing,
to take us for an example. Let us have a regard, that the things* whereby we
would grow in admiration among men, be not ridiculous, trifling toys, and
frutelesse. Let the scope of our determination be, to frame our lives
according to the For that is a ready way to anoyd error and offense, which
otherwise, by not re garding her rule, we are like to incurr.
rul^ of nature. To desire delicate and nice vanities, is the point of
prodigality. Philosophy requires thriftinesse, and not lauash spending. Let
our life be governed, between good behauiours and usual manners. Let our life
be in sight of al men, and from the knowledge of any man, let it not be kept
it secret. Shall we do as other do? Why, then between us and them there shall be
no difference. Let them have occasion to wonder rather at our persons and
vsages, then at our store and provision. A wealthy man (no doubt) is he, who
applies earthen vessels to semblable service, as he would pottes of silver
metal: and he is altogether as rich in like manner, who uses silver plate as
he would use vessels of clay clodds. It is an argument of an As says the
Poet: Th'enuious heart does boil in hate To see another^ happy state.
enui^us heart, not to abide y^ another should have riches. But, to the ^ntent
that I might communicate with you, th^s days ^duadntage, I have, in our Cato
his short sentence, found the end of our desires. Thou shall cease to Or* to
mistrust.
fear (says he) if thou cease to hope. How can these twain, say you, being
of such diversity, agree in equality? It is even so (friend Lucillius)
although they appear to have in them co^trarietie or difference, yet are * Or
to doubt
they joined together, like two coupled with one and the self same chain. And
as the shadow does follow the body from place to place: even so these two,
how soever they seem discrepant or diverse, keep one another company. Hope
follows fear, and fear follows hope. Mauy of our own goods work our
annoyaunce.

Fare you well.
Seneca to Lucillio.
THE ARGUMENT.
That Philosophy rejects none, but offers it self to all indiffer^ly* and
without exception. He speaks somewhat touching true nobleness: and decla^eth
who he is that deserves the name of a right noble gentleman.

YEt again you make your self of no account nor calling: and you complain
that your luck is overthwart. I tell you that Philosophy has not respect to
the person of any man: she offers her self indifferently to every ones
embracing. Socrates ruffled not in his robes of magistracy. Cleanthes was a
water drawer, Cleanthes playde the gardener, Cleanthes let out his hands to
hire. Philosophy made Plato famous and honorable, being before but base in
degree. Why then should you cast doubts of despair in your mind, as though
there were such impossibilities, that you should never aspire to the like
worthiness? Who is a Gentleman? Who is a Noble man? Even he, who of nature, is
applyable to virtue. The court replenished with vain shows of bravery,
makes not a noble Gentleman: but the mind which wrestleth and overcomes
fortune, in what condition of life soever, perf^rmeth that function, makes (I
mean) a right noble Gentleman.

Fare you well.
The extract of Epistles out of Paulus Manutius, and other late writers, most
meet for imitation.
Paulus Manutius to Francisco Vargae Orator to Charles the fifth of that name,
Emperor. etc. and Philip his son king of Spain.
THE ARGUMENT.
He complains of his present occasions of sorrow, namely, the sickness of
his wife, his children and his brother at one instant, He commends the virtue
of reason, which so ruled him, as that he was an able man to moderate and
measure his passions of sorrow. He praises Francisco Varga, for sundry
peculiar and special properties: touching whose person, and the person of him
self, he uses many words, even to the conclusion of his epistle.

THE remembrance of your singular courtesy, and exceeding great gentleness,
does put me oftentimes in mind of my duty: this duty which remains in me
toward you to be performed, in consideration of distance of place, and absence
of body, is writing and sending letters: which long since I had procured unto
you to have been directed, but that I was intercepted and hindered with most
grievous and sorrowful thoughts. For, A complaint containing a catalogue and
brief summa rye of his calamities.
in those same things which you know to be most dear and right precious unto
us through the whole course of our life, and with which none are to be
compared: even in them fortune has begun rigorously to afflict me, namely,
my wife, my children, and my brother, at one and the self same prick of time
(in manner) being sore invaded with sickness: and as for me self, I am not
free from anguishe, but am a partaker with the rest, in my portion of trouble.
For An argument ground ed upon necessity.
my mind being s^rprised with sorrow, and hewed with heaviness, how is it
possible that my body should continue in healthfulnesse? Nevertheless, sor so
much as your counselles of comfort stick in my memory, heavenly hope,
(whereunto you refer all things,) makes me valiant, in suffering the
miseries of this mortality: and (surely) except I had followed you my good
guide and captain, and haled in my leaking bark into the haven, at ^ase (a
while) to harbor, no doubt, the maine seas of mischiefs, and souden tempests
of sorrows, wherewith I was miserably ^ossed, had quite overwhelmed me, and
wrought my remediless dispatch. That i^ration of one word* signifies the
vehement passion^* of his mind.
See, see, how uncertain the success of our purposes be, and how those
things which w^ immagine and persuade our selves, will chance none otherwise the
we are in expectation and desire, fall out ouerthwartly, yea, chance clean
contrary to our account and reckoning. I took upon me* a journey, into the
coasts of this country, not without great expense of charges, not without
sore burdens of labor, in hope that I should recover my health, which
sickness had empayred: I forsook I think he meant Rome, for there he lead a
great portion of his life.
a fair and famous city, I gave over my necessary affairs and weighty
business, I was content to withdraw me from your company, whereon (I am
persuaded) the chiefest and worthiest portion of mine estate depends: these
incomparable commodities, are so far (notwithstanding) from being recompensed
and counterpeised with other aduauntages, that many crooked chaun^es have
succeeded, which if they were referred to the sense of feeling, might (not
undeservedly) be called by the name of misfortunes, torments, and
inconveniences. But, because reason rules the inward passions of my heart,
when outward smart does sting me, and work my great grief: I am so much the
less discomforted. This The benefits which reason yealdeth to such as love
and im brace reason^
reason instructs me, that nothing is to be counted evil, but that only
which falls on us through our own default: this reason techeth me, that
judgment in things incident to this transitory life, is doubtful and not
assured: this reason instructs me, that nothing in this world continues in
one state, but is subject to ebbes and flows of change: this rea^ resolves
me, that even adversities, miseries, calamitie^, ^ough they draw us nighe the
gulf of despair and destruction, suffer a soudeine alteration, and that from
them flow flat contrarieties, namely, prosperities, happiness, and choice
of commodities. Again, that those things which put on a pretended show and
visard of felicity, (to speak more familiarly) which in our opinion are
embalmed with blessedness, turn into most bitter extremities of vexation and
wretchedness, that is to say, banishment, poverty, beggerie, shame, reproach.
etc. In this cogitation and consideration, when my mind is occupied, I feel my
self inwardly somewhat refreshed, and as the measure of my ability will give me
leave, I take unto me that kind of courage, and valiantness of stomach, which
in time of Fortunes frowning, and glooming clouds of overthwart chance, does
most gloriously shine and glister. Touching which virtue, as many traditions
are left registered, by the pens of most excellent philosophers in writing:
so none of them al are to be compared with C. Jesus the pledge of our
redemption, the prince and Christ Jesus an especial pattern of fortitude and
valiantnes^e.
pattern of heavenly philosophy, the author and welspring of true and
perfect godliness, who was (him self) a most lively example and express
image of the same: whom if we be content to acknowledge our master, and to his
teaching (as scholars) submit our selves, we shall soon learn and vnderstan^,
what valiantness is indeed: and we shall Who would not then (except ^e be
wholly and altogether a wretched worcester ldling) be glad of so gra cious a guide.
quickly perceive, where lies the plain and infallible pathway which leads
to the true and perfect attainement of all right commendable Arts, and praise
worthy professions. And (undoubtedly) my good friend Francisco Varga, in that
you account all other studies but lost, in comparison of this whereto you give
all the preferment, I can not but for this special occasion, have you in
singular reverence, countenance and estimation: ye^, I must needs think of
you more honorably, for the cause above cited, then for the office of your
Oratourship, by the virtue whereof you deal in all the affairs and business
of Caesar, the most ^ictorious and noblest emperor that has lived in ^ ^
wealth of the Venetians, (...) (...) (...) (...) (...). For, A singular
commendatio^ given to Fran cisco va^. by P. (...).
in the self (...) (...) (...), ^ich you ^t th^s ^resent ^ioy and possess^,
other (...) ^ntlemen (in ^ ^ your ^ualt* bu^ I ^aue (...) hear^ ^o much a^ o^
one, that has been your supe^ur* (...), after my departing from you, yo^ will
not thin^e no^ bel^e, ^owe often my ^art, By this phrase of spea che he
testifies the vnseinednesse of his affection.
(...) (...) (...) (...) your words, and the (...) ^ (...) (...)* (...) (...),
though (...) things here where I do now (...), ^ere (...) to mine ^wn wish and
will, yea, if I were (...) ^at (...) (...) (...), as by the (...) and access
(...) (...) (...) ((...) (...) and (...)) it could not be made better* If I
say, I sailed with full sail (...) the (...) of felicity, as I am almost
drowned in the depth of irrecouerable danger and distress: yet
notwithstanding, my life (...) (...) (...) ^ith (...) of ioyfulnesse and
delight, because I being absent from you a great distance, taste the sweetene^e
of your exceeding gentl^nesse, find my self inwardly comforted, with the
memory of your prudent and hoalsome counsels, reap marvelous fruit and
advantage, by the precepts and admonitions which you have uttered, v^ry
auailable (no doubt) and necessary, for the leading of my lif^ (...) Not as
though his behauiours were to be amend^d, but that in ^uffering sorrows, he
should show him self a wise man: for i^ is indecent, and unseemly that a man
should be ou^rtrode^ wi^h g^ef and such like c^sualties*
(...) and seemelinesse, in health and safety. I begi^e (...) ^o (...) ^
greater ^iking, the^ I have (...), (...), ^ (...) (...) (...) an^ improve my
former (...), (...) my ^welling and house keeping in B^rnacum mar^e. Your
^ngular ad^ertisements, your friendly forewarnings, your honesty and your good
will, call me home again to keep house in the city. As for f^nnie (...),
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) seru^th, (...), (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) t^me that place is (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)) if I
be troubled with (...) (...) (...) (...), (...) (...) (...) to resort for my
pleasu^e. In the mean while, I will so see to (...), with due observation o^
di^t and abstinent (...), as shall make best for my commodity: and
peradventure it will (...) fall out in tra^t of time, because All things
depend upon Gods providence, that I may wax lusty again, and recou^ my
health in Where I am now resident and abiding.
Venice, within the walls of mine own dwelling, having my friends round
about me, with whom^ I may rejoice, and li^e in such sort, as to my
contentation is most agreeable, that no necessity of the weather, no occasion
of season, shall constrain me to remove: which if I may obtain, you shall
find me (if it please yo^ to admit and like w^ll of my presumption, and hope
of your humanity and gentleness, as I know you do not think it (...)) a
familiar companion, in man^r ^n ordinary guest, and a con tinuall
chamberfellow: and (doubtless) with this confidence I am wonderfully
comforted, succored and supported.

Fare you well.
P. Manutius to Hieronymo Faleto Orator to Hercules Duke of Ferraria.
THE ARGUMENT.
^ing much moved with angry passions, against one (belike) of whom he was
^bused, and i^iuriously dealt withal, he (...) to Hieronymo Faleto the Duke of
Ferraria his ^ratour, wi^ whom he was w^ll acquainted, desiring him to be hi^
s^ccourer and assistant, otherwise, he says, his luck will be but (...):
lastly* he makes mention of a book which he wrote conce^ing four kinds of
common wealths, and so concludes with ^ (...) farewell.

THe words which (not long agone) you uttered, have taken root in my
remembrance: and how much the more diligently, I call the matter into
s^crete consideration: with so much the more earnestness and speediness, I
have (...) al (...) (...), al my (...), (...) (...) and (...) (...) new (...)
and (...), (...). For, He was c^rried away with the stream of his (...) ons
and (...) motions, wh^ h^ did i^dite this Epistle.
I am (...), tornien^, and (...) dealt withal, (...) the hands of a n^ghtie
varlo^, yea, a^ the hands of such a wicke^ ^ellow, a^ in (...) (I (...)) is
matchless^: He i^ ^ot content to (...) (...) of a (...) (...), but ^e (...) me
in such (...), despigh^, (...) (...), (...) (...) co^teth me a vi^e person, an^
such a on^ ^s i^ (...) (...) o^ (...) (...) A defense of his, (...) and
vpright^.
shoe lea^her, when he (...) (...) for an^ (...) (...) come unto (...). Surely
Note his mod^stie and mildn^sse: for he was destitute of neither of both.
I (...) nothing to ^y self: I play not the part of an (...), ^ ta^ not (...)
any thing contrari^ to custom^ an^ order: I hau^ no^ing in my self, neither
of^ (...), nor yet by (...) (^ must (...) confess) whereo^ ^ (...) (...),
(...) swel^. with vain glory^ Nevertheless, (...) (...) (...) eue^ (...)
away, with the (...) of right (...) and honorable men, that have dai^ ly
^ecourse unto me, and think not (...) to step oue^ and (...) (...) my (...)
Eu^n y^u, ^riende (...) (you I say, bo^ (...) (...) Hercules Duke of Ferraria:
^o who^ M^rcellus Palingenius did d^dicate his zodiak of lif^.
most (...) (...), an^ ^ne of (...) (...) (...) (...) among the Nobl^, to who^e
(...) (...) of special (...) (...) importa^nce ^re committe^d* whose pen i^
oc^upied in writing histori^all (...), (...) (...) the ^nowledge of laws, most
(...), (...) well those that were mad^ long since in aunci^ yea^es, (...) those
als^ wh^che have been en^cted of la^ (...)) (...) me the courte^e, to repair
unto my h^use, (which I (...) (...) ascribe ^o your good and gentle ^sposition)
and that not (...): there to spend the time away in sweet an^ (...)
co^unication. A suppositi^ appliable to his purpose.
You will, per^, say, It is a (...) thing to be conte^d, t^ be (...) (...)
(...) (...), of a ^aughtie and ^ewdly inclin^d ^erson* I^ (...) no less
(undoubtedly) then you say: but it is ^ far worsse (...), for a man ^o loose
that which is his own, and to be (in manner) ^obbed. If your wisdom, deal^
not in this matter, and provide a plaster for this (...) sore, all the fr^ite,
all the profit, all the advantage of your (...) has suffered (...) wrack,
and is lost without (...)* For, By this prouerbial speech he gives to note,
with what a naugh tie and overthwart man he had to deal.
I may sooner* (...) Hercules his clubbe (...) out of his (...), then get mine
own money out of the (...) of this (...) holdfa^. Wherefore let the commodity
which I hoped ofter, through the benefit of your labor, be restrained to my
use and serui^ or else, let him, that gapeth greedily after our undoing, (...)
off the sauce of sorrewe which we (...), and let all fellowship (...) (...),
with the overthrow of many. Howbeit, when I (...) the eye of my consideration
upon the goodness of your nature, when I examine in my secret conscience, your
authority, and the passing benevolence Or, whereof I have been a da^y partake
whereof I have been a (...) communicant, I feel my self fastened upon the
infallible anchor of affiance: I do as it were underprop my mind with piller^
of promises, making due account, that all things will (...) to my quietness,
to my commodity, and to mine enriching* It shall be your good deed, only and
alone, to restore our a^eted estate, to amend and repair that which is in
decay, to comfort that which y^fortunes storms has shaken: and The injury
which he suffered was (helike) intollera ble: and that made him so hot and
choleriqu^.
as for this petty fogger, this false fellow that is in no credit or (...)*
being a man of the meanest degree, a very ^lot, and fraught with all kind of
vile vices, such a one as is most unworthy to be partaker of our fellowship,
and deserves not so much as to come in our company, no not to hear our
communication, we will thrust him out as a wrangler, y^ he may (...) him co^tes
of mischief with whom to be conversant hereafter, and with like lewdly
disposed persons lead his life, wal^wing in the filthy puddles of wickedness,
being separated from us, that have humanity and honest behavior, courteous
usage, and friendly fashions in reverence: that Which every virtuous man will
do, without grud ging.
p^ferre (I say) virtue before all advantage. In the mean season, exerc^e
your self in reading that which so often and so iustantly y^u required. A part
of our book entreating of four common wealths, which I wish to be by you
authorized and allowed, when I am at leisure (which that I may be I will do
what I can) my purpose and intent is, to finishe the whole volume (if else
where I can not) in your Manor of Bellombra. From our house. etc.

Fare you well.
P. Manutius to Christophero Madrutio, Cardinal.
THE ARGUMENT.
He is altogether in praise of Christophero Madrutio, whom he commends, not
so much for his good fortune, as for his singular virtue: he extolleth him for
sundry circumstaunces, and among all the rest for this one, because he does not
him self alone highly esteem of virtue, but also shows his liberal nature in
ad uancing and furthering such as be of a virtuous disposition: lastly, he
gives him thanks for the good report that he gives him, whereupon he
infers the gracious offer of his friendship, whereof he promises to show
him self a receiver not unworthy.

IT is reported unto us, that you do both speak, and also * Which ought to
minister greater cause of joy and gladness, for how much more is the
excellency of the person commending: so much more is the comfort of the person
commended.
think of us passing honorably. It is an excellent thing to be praised of a
princes mouth, yea, and of such a prince, with whose fortune virtue is so
worthily coupled, y^ in either of the^ he is to be counted peerless. As for
my self, thus much I confess with out dissembling, that I did always reverence
your person, yea long before I had either spoken with you, or seen you. I was
much moved with your excellent exercises, and with the certain rumors of the
people spread abroad in all places, touching your incomparable commendation. I
did not so much wonder, if any man praised you for your riches, for your
nobleness, for your (...): these things are common to a great number, and
^ore to be desired then to be extolled. But when I heard of those ornaments of
an inualuable price, being your own in proper possession, Which opinion I
conceived upon necessary reasons.
I counted Christophero Madrutio, such a man, as had virtue in high
estimation, and singularly honored the same himself: besides that, so
bountiful of nature, that he bestowed most large and rich rewards upon such
as he perceived semblably disposed: Special praises ascribed to cardinal Chri
stophero Madrutio.
an intertainer and harbourer of the sciences liberal, a mainteiner of the^,
and as it were, their fosterfather, at such time as (I can not tell whether I
may justly say, by y^ ^ruell dealing of destiny, or through the iniquity of
the time, or else through the proferred injuries of naughty people) it
suffered uncomfortable banishment: finally, a searcher after the sound
substance of glory, and not after vain shadows of temporal renoune, which
many hunt after with insatiable desire, but he contemns as trifles and
transitory toys. At what time I heard The conside ration whereof could not but
kindle reverence in the mind of a man virtuously inclined.
these things, I was inflamed with an earnest affection, to declare my
special dutifulness, and to present you with a manifest and most assured
testimony of mine obedience unto your highness to be exhibited, for the
fruits of your goodness which I have oftentimes, and diverse ways digested.
But to trouble so noble a Gentleman, with vain and unnecessary letters, (who
does not only with power and majesty, but also with justice and uprightness,
govern the chiefest cities in Italy, and the sundry estates of many people,)
I suspected that it was the part of a man bewitched with extreme foolishness:
or else of one y^ is drowned in the whirlpoole of shamelessness. But* ^thence
your talk touching me, has been uttered in my praise and commendation, I am
ready to catch occasion whiles it is offered, and I tender to your highness,
great and infinite thanks, both with my heart and also with my voice: as well
for that it has pleased you to vouchsafe me the worthy witness of your
judgment, which none, I am certain, does improve and disallowe, sithence
among all men it wins great authority: as also for that through the virtue
of this your courtesy and undeserved gentleness, yon do as it were, set a
door wide open unto me, to enter into possession of your ^auour and
friendship: whereof that I may seem worthy, howsoever in other respects I am
insufficient, yet notwithstanding I will do mine endeavor, with all
singularity and dutifulness to deserve the same, sounding abroad the report
of your virtues incessantly, that I be not thought altogether an unworthy
receiver of such a notable benefit. Which thing, although in times past I have
neglected, being thereunto provoked through the force of mine own judgment:
yet notwithstanding, I mean hereafter to do it with more courage and
diligence, being constrained there unto by the operation and working of your
exceeding gentleness: which to continue vnuarible from this day forward, and
so for ever, not only your accustomed constancy, but your natural goodness
holds me fully persuaded.

Fare you well. From Venice.
P. Manutius to Jo. Sambuco.
THE ARGUMENT.
After he has made mention of his inward sorrow conceived through the death
of his young son, be begins to be comforted with the remembrance and
consideration of his friends counsel: he declares his infallible affiaunce,
touching his joyful estate of heaven, after his transmigration out of the
labyrinth of this life: he shows what kind of life true wise men do embrace:
he signifies what great odds there is between Sambucoes his condition, and
his own estate: he complains of the benignity of princes, which in old
time flourished, but is now banished: cries out against the vanities of men
and their inordinate usage: lastly, he lamenteth the miserable case of
learning, detecting therewithal the hypocritical dealing of diverse men, and
their notable dissembling: this being done, he makes an abrupt conclusion.

AFter that the heavy and ruthful news of my sons death, had pierced into
mine ears, I was so full of grief, sorrow, and anguish of heart, that I
remembered mine own mortality, and considered also that his entrance into this
wretched world, was like the state of a soiourner in a common Inn, that when
so ever it pleased God, to call him out of this painful pilgrimage, he might
pass into the paradise of heavenly pleasure, the joys whereof are not subject
to corruption, but coupled with euerlastingnesse. And though this lamentable
luck, had so wounded my heart with weapons of woefulness, that I should have
fallen down, as one overthrown and vanquished: yet notwithstanding, I should
have recovered, tasting the prudent precepts of your learned letters, wherein
you discourse right worthily, how lamentations should be allayed, and
heaviness of heart assuaged: wherein whiles you occupy Your brain or your
wit, and your pen, the one to invent and devise: the other to write and set
down your meaning.
your head and your hand, you give manifest declarations of your good and
virtuous disposition, well beseeming a true and unfeigned christian: and toward
me, you show most assured warrants of benevolence and hearty good will. But
(friend Sambucus) by the experience of many foul misfortunes, I have learned
to contemn and to be at des^aunce with blind Fortune her self, who shall
never have the power to deprive me of those things which she can not give (well
may she dispossess me of Because all outward thin ges (the external ornaments
of the body, and the abilities of the same, which are called corporal
faculties, excepted) are said to be the gifts and goods of Fortune.
tra^sitorie vanities) neither is it in her ability to bestow upon any man,
an upright mind, a true meaning conscience, honest and virtuous purposes, love
and reverence toward God, and such like precious ornaments. I despair not
of my son, he is in exceeding good case, I am not otherwise persuaded: he
enjoys the company and fellowship of angels, of holy men, blessed martyrs,
and innocent souls: the cares of this world do not choke him, wherewith a
great number are stoung and strangled. He is not carried away with vain hope,
as many be in their misery: he is not a slave to fear, wherewith innumerable
multitudes are tormented in the flower of their felicity, least it should
wither, and then they to incur the inconveniences of alteration: He is free
from all these molestations, they touch him not, they have no power to invade
him, or do him violence. But, we wretched people, that are said to be alive,
in whose eyes nothing appears more glorious, then the inioying of a
counterfeit and deceiuable light, which is nothing indeed but a very vapor and
the shadow of a vapor, and has a time assigned wherein it shall vanish, with
how many myllians of miseries are we tormented, tossed, and turmoyled to and
fro, not unlike a ship upon the sourging seas? we labor, we take care, and what
though we obtein the end of our desire, and the scope of our travel, our life
must have a time to cease. Wiseme^, I mean not such as be worldly wise, but
those that be wise to God ward, are wont to wish, what? a long life? nay, but
a good life, and such a life as is not repugnant to virtue, whereunto I (in
semblable manner) contend and do what I can to aspire, hoping that I shall in
the end obtain it, to my full contentation and hearts ease. For nothing
does so much occupy my mind, and draw away my cogitations, then the desire
to frame and fashion myself orderly in that trade of life, whereunto I am
appointed, and in such due and convenient sort to continue the course of my
years, that I may be able thereof both to God him self to render an account,
and to men also to give a reckoning: this is my meditation: this is the mark
whereat all my purposes and intentes are leuelled. Wherefore, in that you call
upon me, not to withdraw, but rather to apply my pen to writing, (I must
needs say the truth as it is) my determinations and counselles, are
established with your judgment: and you (undoubtedly) in giving me this
exhortation, do as many more besides, to whose desires I could (peradventure)
show my self satisfactorie, if I were not otherwise, with the burden of my
private and domeslitall business, hindered. But, I beseech you, measure not my
leisure by your vacations and times of pausing: considering the estate of us
both: you have all things ready at hand, you need not doubt of their
uncertainty, you have them at commandment and service, without
cumbersomenesse: as for me, mine estate is far otherwise, mine own industry
is my provision and maintenance, none other succor have I: that is my only
and alone supportation, the staff and stay of my children, the prop and maine
post of all my household and family: thus to do I am constrained, and if
therein I show my self dissolute and negligent, I must needs forsake all
humanity: and if I be as careful, diligent and circumspect in seeing to the
charge thereof, as I am bound in conscience, then must my exercises at my
studies cease of necessity, which require a mind free from all kind of
worldly thoughts, and not a mind clogged with cares, and quite ouer^yed. A
supposed objection, whereunto follows a full answer, touching his own estate.
But you will say (peradventure) your own studies will be your advantage, they
can not but affoorde some profit, they will be your sufficient purueyance.
Sing this song to others, that do neither know manners of people, nor seasons
of time: the sound thereof should not so sink into mine ears, I will not be
persuasible thereunto, sithence I am one, that in either of both have not wanted
experience. The bountifulness of princes, which in ancient time most
prosperously flourished, it is now wasted and withered. The greatest part of
men, what do they? even follow vain fancies, toys, and transitory shadows:
they love nothing that has in it * sap and substance: they set not their
affection upon that which is renouned, they care not, neither have in any
account, that which is honorable and excellent. You shall see some, Telluris
inutile pondus: as the Poet says. Great burdens to the ground,
That does their life maintain:
No good in them is found,
But vices fond and vain.

good for nothing that is virtuous and honest, much like unto Caterpillars
devouring the revenues and increase of the earth, being thereunto, even from
their birth, appointed and ordained: spending and confuming, wealth, riches,
treasures, lands, possessions, hereditaments, etc. in excessive belly cheer,
and pampering the paunche, far beyond the bounds of Epicurisime. You shall
see othersome, so married to mischief, and wedded to most detestable
wickedness, that they do not only wast their wealth and all that they have, in
consuming the increase and crop of the ground, by means immoderate, but also
(which they count nobleness and valiancie) in committing that which tends to
the destruction of people, in preparations for battle and bloodshed, which
draw after them most miserable and manifold calamities, wastefulnesse and
spoil to arable lands: setting on fire whole towns and cities: and to one
man wrapped in woeful wretchedness, by another want of wit, loss of life, an
irrecouerable casualtie. Thus whiles the minds of men wander in wildernesses
of enormities, the By Muses in this place, speaking figu ratiuely, he means
learning: For the Muses were the Ladies of learning, as not so much as the
most ig norant, but knows.
Muses famishe, they starve, they perish with want of mainteinance, they are
thrust out of house and home, and turned (as it were) a begging, from post to
pillar, through their cruel usage, who as they ought principally, so they
might most liberally have seen the^ succored. Furthermore, what a shameful
and detestable thing is it, that some under the pretense of a liberal heart,
hunt after their own honor and advancement, having in their mouths that
virtue whereof they have no portion, so common and familiar, as though they did
highly love it, esteem it, and had it in reverence. But thus far sufficient,
and too much peradventure.

From Venice. Fare you well.
P. Manutius to Benedicto Accolto, Cardinal.
THE ARGUMENT.
First he complains of his tedious journey, and also of his sickness, both
which turned him to trouble, and made him prolong his time of writing. The
greatest part, and in manner all the Epistle, contains a commendation and an
acknowledgement of Benedicto Accolto his courtesy, with certain professions of
his own thankfulness: both which, the one in his friend, the other in him
self, he continues even to the last line of his letter, and thereupon
(immediately) infers his farewell.

SO soon as I returned to Venice, although I was somewhat weary with the Two
great occasions of intermitting the writing of letters.
tediousness of my journey, vexed with the Two great occasions of intermitting
the writing of letters.
sickness which afflicted me, grievously enoughe, when I was at Ferraria,
being not yet delivered and set free from anguish: yet notwithstanding, the Two
forceable prouocations to take pen in handeand fall to indite epistles.
exceeding greatness of mine obedience, and special dutifulness which I
acknowledge to your highness: and Two forceable prouocations to take pen in
handeand fall to indite epistles.
the remembrance of those benefits which to my profit and comfort, have had
issue from your goodness, constrained me to write an epistle to your
worthiness: which kind of service, how often I am bound to show and to
discharge with diligence, I am not ignorant For, in so much as it pleased you,
even the very same day, that I had access and entrance to your favor and
friendship, not only to be careful of my commodity and furtherance, but also
bus^e and painful in procuring my promotion if my will be no less toward then
it ought to be, if I am loath to be thought unworthy of those honest studies
whereunto ever since I was a child, I was addicted, then must I circu^spectly
cast mine accounts, that I may be able and sufficient, to give manifest and
evident assurances of your readiness to do me good, and deliver testimonies of
certainty of your forward will to work my preferment: to comprehend which
enterprise, that my desire may be somewhat satisfied, I see none other remedy
at this present time to be used, then to devise and to direct Which may deliver
unto you, the true message of mi mind.
my letters unto your person. If ever mine ability be answerable to my desire,
I will do mine endeavor to make full recompense: and yet nevertheless, I will
let slip no time wherein I may give some trial of acquitaunce. In the mean
season, I will not only confess my self to be your debtor, and that
unfeignedly: but mine own tongue shall bear witness of the same, with my
conscience in all places and in all companies, and that not unwillingly. He
makes it a matter of great account to have the friendship and favor of such a
one, as is not only in au thoritie, but also furnished with the preci ous
ornaments of virtue, and learning.
For what can redound more to mine honesty, and to mine honor, then that you,
being a man furnished with all virtuous ornaments, possessing a stately room
of authority and excellent dignity, discerning the secret dispositions of
men's several natures, by the soundness and certainty of your judgment,
should pretermit and let pass, no kind of courtesy, no kind of friendly
usage, which might tend either to my commodity, or to my commendation? Now
undoubtedly shall I disclose the truth without hypocrisy? there was never any
thing so auailable as this, to make us grow in credit among men through this
praise worthy opinion of learning and honesty. Wherefore, as mine intent was to
tread in the same path, which my father before me had passed through, and
worn with his frequent and often going, leading directly to the triumphant
tower of renoune, as (I say) I framed my self by my fathers example; to be
thus exercised: so now, through the incitation and incourageme^t of your
courteonsly conceived opinion, I will be y^ more earnest, and advised, to make
it mine accustomed practice: unto which opinion, I fear greatly, that I shall
not be able to affoorde answerable service: and thus much I knowy^ it is no
easy thing, nay, it is as hard a matter as can be, to see the same satisfied,
with such measure of dutifulness, as is requisite. Nevertheless, because I
lead my lingering life in such order, that so much time and leisure, as my
weakness of body does permit, I bestow at my book, and (as it were) de
siring to quench y^ continual thirst wherewt I am attainted, draw liquor out of
y^ self same springs and rivers, from whence even y^ chiefest and the greatest
instruments of your renoune took their beginning. I build upon sure hope and
steadfast confidence, that all men shall think your benefits well bestowed:
and that you your self (in like manner) shall perceive (though it be
somewhat long) that the amends which I am to make, are not to be contemned,
nor lightly to be regarded: till the accomplishment and performance whereof, it
is my duty, Which is the duty of a thankful man and upon such a one a
benefit cannot be ill bestowed.
to remember your singular benevolence, yea so to remember it, that I never
forget it: and it shall beelong to your courtesy, to continue for ever that
goodwil which of your own accord you have applied to the procurement of my
profit, that in the same, by the same, and through y^ same, I may not be
destitute of my desired succor: y^ one of which, I mean to the uttermost of
my power, to see accomplished: and touching the perfourmance of the other,
(such is the incredible bountifulness of your noble nature) you are not to be
admonished.

From Venice. Fare you well.
P. Manutius to Hieronymo Capilupo, Bishop.
THE ARGUMENT.
This epistle differreth very little from the former: for though in words it
varrie, yet in sense it does very little disagree: the sum and total effect
thereof, consists in the acknowledging of benefits received: whereunto are
annexed certain significations of his own thanckfull heart: In the conclusion
of the epistle, he promisseth to show himself reco^penceable to his power,
though not with like recourse of benefits, yet with giving thanks.

THe He be ginneth still with the consession of a thankful heart.
ancient duetifulnesse, which I owe to your reverence, taking beginning and
root, srom the gracious ornaments of your noble nature, required
(vndeubtedly) to write some thing unto you in an epistle: but there were
hindraunces always in these purposes, whereby I was both amassed as
mistrusting, and discouraged as not daring to take in hand such an adventure:
namely, the dignity and worthiness of your calling, and the excellency of
your person. For, I was carried into thoughts of uncertainty, and conceived
an inward reuoking fear, least in sending vain and trifling letters, to such
a man, upon whom continual burdens of great and weighty buisinesse do
attend, I should show and bewray the point of an impudent and shameless
fellow. But now I will declare my mind truly and unfeignedly: I find fault,
and do almost even accuse Which is in some so about dante, that it turns to
their discommoditie: where fore modesty in measure and with reason, is
commendable and also profitable.
my modesty: because, whiles I am consulting and deliberating to write to your
reverence, and yet bring not the accounts of my determinations to perfourmance,
it comes to pass (in the mean season, these delaying causes being used)
that your Which is in some so about dante, that it turns to their
discommoditie: where fore modesty in measure and with reason, is commendable
and also profitable.
humanity outrunneth, and recouereth much ground of my duetifulnesse,
although I am full loathe, that your benevolence, should suffer further trial
(whom I know, to be a man for the excellency of your virtues, right praise
worthy, whereunto I may not, neither can aspire) considering that even in
this which you have already done (being a principal point of your good will
toward me, and then the which I esteem nothing more precious,) no idle
proof of your bounty, (in partile requiting whereof, I remain a debtour,)
appears. Wherefore, as I am ashamed and repent me of my bashfulnesse, in
that I had not the audacitie and boldness to write to your reverence, no not
even then, when my will and desire was in exceeding great towardness: even so
I feel my self meruayloufly delighted, in this comfortable and joyful
declaration of your woonted kindness, together with the commendations which it
pleases you to bestow upon me, in your praising Epistle. And surely, I
would not you should think, that I have either attempted, or accomplished any
thing without mine vnwearisome labors, and incessaunt watchinges (which
deserved well lyking, and not controlling contempt) that I was in hope to reap
any other advantage, or to obtain any better reward, then I have already
recovered, through the judgment and testimony of you, and such as be like
you: Prelates (I mean) of high calling, and for their virtue most renowned:
which if I have gotten, I think me self well recompensed, and I triumph
therein, and rejoice. But if you do so commend me (which indeed I may suspecte)
as if by your words you would encourage me, fainting (as it were) and waxing
weary in the race which I have to run: yet notwithstanding, even thereby, as
with a principal benefit, you bind me to have you in reverence: fythence,
if any thing in the world be forceable and effectual, to persuade and
provoke me, it is your authority, wherein that working chiefly consists.
Wherefore, I will so order my doings, and therein use such diligence, that I
may be thought, truly to interpret and expound the meaning of your epistle.
For, I will be more industrious, more circumspect, more earnest and painful,
to obtain those things, which whosoever does purchase and possess, he
cannot but enjoy the pension of perfect praise. And to turn the residue of my
talcke to your highness, whom it has pleased courteously to visit me with
the embassage of a most loving letter, and voluntarily (without the help of
any mediator) to grant me free passage and access to your friendship,
which a long time I desired, and now at length to the full delight of my
heart, I have obtained, if I be not able to make sufficient recompense for
such special benefits as I have received, (sythence I owe more to your
goodness, then it is possible for me to discharge, and see fully paid) yet
will I (at least) not show my self Lest all that you have don for my weal,
should seem utterly lost and cast away.
unthankful: and I am content, in consideration of ability, to remain your
debtour, but in respect of my will and desire, I will do what I can, that my
duty be not unsatisfied.

From Venice. Fare you well.
P. Manutius to Francisco Commenduno, Cardinal created.
THE ARGUMENT.
Writing to a certain Cardinal, a friend of hi^, whose name is Francisco
Commenduno, he begins his letter with an interiection of joy, or a kind
of speech importing his inward gladness, through the honorable estate of F.
Com. conceived. He gives a short note (by the way) of such things, whereby men
ostentimes are advanced: among which he makes mention of virtue, which being
lest regarded, is also lest auayleable to prefer such men, of whom she is
possessed: he praises P. Pius the fourth of that name: shows that rewards
and punishments are the maintenaunces of all well ordered commonwealthes:
praises him, for sundry considerations, to whom he writes this epistle:
professes that he was exceeding glad, when he was infourmed, that he was made
Cardinal, and so concludes.

O Most happy and glorious day, which has ministered unto us perpetual
pleasure, comfort knit to continuance, and everlasting ioyfulnesse. O most
blessed day, being the On which day he was created C^rdinall: for which
advancement, he had to thank P. Pius the fourth.
fourth of the Ides of March. For, upon that day it pleased our Gracious Lord,
and high bishop, with other worthy Prelates and excellent men, to nominate and
create you Cardinal, which thing all good and virtuous men most heartily
desired. Let us now stopp the course of our complaints. Let us not say that
virtue is unprovided of a place, which heretofore has been the lamentable
song of a great number: and surely, not wichout just occasion. For some have
been advanced to degrees of statelynesse, through the nobleness of their
birth: othersome have grown in countenance by the means of their riches and
possessions: and some by one thing some by another, have crept up to
authority: only Virtue has been to a very few an instrument and help to
preferment. This blemishe and offensive inconvenience is now abolished, and
the ancient custom of high Bishopps, which very few have observed, that
long has been desired, by and through y^ wisdom of P. Pius (the fourth of
that name by succession in the seat of supremacy) which is so excellent, that
it can never be sufficiently commended, is renewed. Which being come to
pass, I am assured, that according to the full measure of perseverance and
knowledge, wherwt you be stoared, you are not to be taught, what belongs to
the function whereunto you are called, nor yet what things your present
dignity requires, or to your life past virtuously governed, is agreeable.
Thus much I have to say, and I may bouldly affirm it, that with one heart
tongue and voice, al good men throughout the whole co^monwelth, rejoice and are
exceeding glad, for this your advancement: and that they give infinite thanks,
with all reverence, to our Gracious Lord and chief bishop, for that it has
pleased him, in these troublesome and dangerous days; to choose such a sure
prop and substantial pillar (as you) to stay up the Church, when it was like
to fall, and ready to run to ruin: offering unto you this honorable room,
whereunto you are now elected, of his own voluntary motion, not being
required: bestowing upon you (I say) this place of preeminence, which Francisco
Co^ menduno, pre ferred before many gentlemen of a good house, to the dignity
of a Cardinal.
to diverse noble Gentlemen, earnestly laboring and making great suite for the
same, he thought more meet to be denied, then to be granted. You know that
virtue hu^teth not after rewards, neither does it arrogate and take to it
self any external thing, wherewith to be adorned and beautified.
Nevertheless, if in y^ due administration of two specialties (namely
Punishment and Recompense) the safety of the commonwealth consists, as
Philosophers and men of exceeding great wisdom and learning, have left
witnessed in writing: good cause then (no doubt) there is to rejoice in both,
sythen^e to virtuous men the very best aduauncementes that be, are largely
given: and that wickedness is so noted and revenged, that none has to vaunt
himself of his ill doing, nor yet to make reckoning that in offending he
should escape unpunished. In consideration whereof, you, as well as other, have
necessary cause greatly to rejoice in this your honor, and not to make light
account of such a benefit, deserved, and yet Wherein a testimony and proof
of your worthiness appeared.
not desired, though for the commodity of the seat apostoticall, you refused
no labors, albeit passing burthenous: you withdrew your self from the
adventure of no danger. You cast all your care, fixed all your thoughts, had
your mind wholly occupied, and your travel altogether employed, in the
maintenance and preservation of all, none excepted. So soon as it was
aduouched unto me for a verity, that you were chosen and created Cardinal, I
was immediately swallowed up (as it were) in a gulffe of gladness. My hear^
was so inflamed with ioyfulnesse, that it triumphed: yea such was the plenty
of my pleasure, that it is not possible with pen to be expressed: howbeit,
though it be so abundaunt, as the tongue seems an insufficient instrument
to testify it: yet notwithstanding in Which is able to compre hend that, that
neither tongue nor pen can express.
thought and immagination it may be comprehended: if it would please you to
call in examination, the greatness of my goodwill, which remains at all
times undiminished: and the reverence I have of your person, daily increasing,
as your honor is enlarged, through the brightness of your virtue. Which that
you would do, I beseech you most instantly.

Dated at Rome the xii. of the Kalends of April. Fare you well.
P. Manutius to Carolo Borromeio, Cardinal.
THE ARGUMENT.
Having a certain petition to Carolo Borromeio a Cardinal, which he is
desirou^ to have furthered, he renueth his suite: whereunto he seems to be
drawn by necessity, not being so venturou^, by reason of his bashfulnesse and
modesty, to move it to memory. Howbeit taking stomache and (as the Proverb
says) heart at gras^e, after many things uttered in the Cardinals
commendation, he proceeds in his petition, which is nothing else, but that
he might live quietly in Rome: for (be like) some there were that sought his
disturbaunce.

SUch is your bountifulness unto me plentifully testified, and the perfect
experience that I have of your conditions, that I cannot put you in mind, or
rather, that I may not claim perfourmaunce of those things, which unto me,
not once nor twice most courteously you promissed. And surely, He confesses
the softness of his own nature and his exceeding modesty
such is my nature, that I am ashamed to crave that the second time, to the
attainement whereof, I have once already plaide the part of a suppliant,
although it touched mine estate so narrowely, that thereuppon my making and
marri^ge seemed to depend. Nevertheless, I labor not in mistruste, that the
renewing of an old suite, will be tedious in your hearing, sythence it is the
suite of such a man, specially, as does exhibit unto you singular reverence:
beesides that, as shows himself, according to the measure of his
imbecillitie and weakness, not unmindful of your surpassing praises. A
reason following of verity, but ^ot of nece^itie.
It is a thing much to be wished, that such as couette principal benefits,
should either have in themselves, a sufficiency to serve their contentation:
or else should be in great credit and favor with such princes, nobles and
Gentlem^n, whose words and authority are most effectual, for their poor
suppliants furtheraunce. In the want of which two things you do not wade, as
wise men hold opinion. For you are by nature, meruaylous proane and
inclinable, to those things which are most precious and honorable: besides
that, this your readiness and aptness, being coupled with singular policy,
and not separated from virtue, does so purchase the favor and well lyking of
your Uncle, our * Metropolitan, a man fraught and furnished with all wisdom
and understanding, that he thinks nothing to good to bestow upon you, but
does, as it were, load you with burdens of benefits: and has committed to
your charge and credit, a great part of his weighty affairs, (such is the
opinion and good lyking that he has conceived of your singular worthiness)
to the intent that by the communicating and imparting of them, unto you, he
might be some what eased. Wherefore, embrace and make much of this acceptable
time, as best beseems your gravity, or rather so keep it, that you lose it
not, sithence it is your good and gracious luck, therein to have interest. The
these words are to be me^t of himself: for ^e was belike in some trouble,
wherewith he was so disquieted, that ^e forgatt (in manner) accustomed service
and dueti^ to his benefactours.
misery of the ti^e, has weeded out all woonted well deserving: which if it
shall please you to plant a new, and to see that restored, which you have
already attempted, and will (I hope) also accomplish, you shall mount up to
the heavenly Olympus, even by the self same steps, that your predecessors
before you have ascended, leaving behind you such a monument of honor and
worthiness, as no age, no succession of years shall wast and confume. And as
touching mine own person, thus much I am to say: that if it be my happy
chance to obtain that by your means, which does wholly rest in you, or
wherein (at least) you may do much to the purpose, namely that I may live at
Rome to the co^tentment of my mind: (for what man would willingly lead his
life in such a place, where things are so preposterous and overthwart, that
disquietnesse, and a worse inconvenience follows?) I will do the uttermost
of mine endeavor, yea I will peradventure bring to pass^, that such a singular
benefit shall be thoroughly acknowledged: and though for lack of ability
answerable to my will, I might s^eme accusable of ingratitude: yet daily and
continual remembrance of your goodness, from which I will never revolt, shall
plead me excusable of vnthanckfulnesse.

Dated at Rome the 4. of the kalends of November. Fare you well.
D. Erasmus Roterodamus to ^lermo Burbanco, Secretary to the right reverend
the B. of York, and Cardinal.
THE ARGVM^NT.
He begins his epistle with a sentence, touching friendship: commending
Ilermo Burbanco for his courtesy and kindness, which ^ee professes on his
behalf to be undeserved. Reckons up by name diverse Gentlemen, with whom
he was in fau^ur: where, by the way, he calls him self happy, and rich,
because he has the goodwilles and freendeship of such as he (...): commends
(by the way) the Lord Cardinal, in that he vouchsafes to make wise men of his
counsel: Then toward his conclusion, he says, that as he has welwillers, so
he has adversaries, noting also that he had rather have a very few (so they
be^ ^ertuously disposed) to be his friends, then to have the hearts of many,
being viciously inclined. For end, he wishes malicious and envious persons a
better spirit then they (...) to possess^ and so wrappeth up all with
commendations.

TRue is In the acknowledging of thankfulness, this, or the like begin ning is
usual with (...) of Epistles.
his love and unfeigned, that measures not his good will^ with rewards: but
loves freely, not looking for recompense: but you have loved Erasmus, whose
desartes are not to make any challenge to kindness, with such constancy,
with such zeal and earnestness, that it is not possible to pick out one man
from among a great multitude, that loves him more sincerely, more heartily, or
more faithfully, whose merits might make just claim to such exceeding
kindness. How singularly did you love me when I was resident in Rome,
giving you no occasion of exhibiting such courtesy: and therefore, being so
much the more bound unto you, in special dutifulness, I have not suffered
your undeserved humanity, to wax cold in me, no not a little to languishe:
sithence between us there have been, these many years, often and sundry
re^ses of freendely services, which once ceassing, freendshippe must needs be
in danger of a consumption, O This is somewhat (...)* mently spoken and may
therefore (...) to (...) ^ith (...) the (...) cred^t ^f ki^nesse.
hear^ appointed even from thy creation to harbor kindness, towa^des whom
if I should not show some (...) of goodwil again, then do not I desire, that
men should say of me, how I bear my fr^d and beloved, about me in my body.
And here by the way the old a^ge or proverb must not be unremembered, while
says, that M^nus manum (...) so (...) the pro^erb
one good turn requires another. My freende Montioy has made you privy,
what good will he does bear me, and the desire of you both, inclined to do
me good, has procured me many friends and favorers in o^e family. For
what should I else conjecture to be the occasion of so gracious a benefit?
and what is there in me that (...) have in it such force and effectual
woorkinge, that it (...) kindle the affection of He rehearses the names of
(...) gentlemen that were his (...)* tours an^ favorers.
M. T. Louell, the mo^e wise and learned Ciuilian, toward mine vnwort^ie
person? Or that He rehearses the names of (...) gentlemen that were his (...)*
tours an^ favorers.
M. R. Tonicio, a man of rare (...), should pro^esse and put in practice, such
apparaunt tokens of conceived ki^enesse? Or that He rehearses the names of
(...) gentlemen that were his (...)* tours an^ favorers.
M. F. Phil^ppo a young Gentleman of great hope and towardness, should
affoorde me such singular favor? What should I stand ^eckoning up in the
number, He rehearses the names of (...) gentlemen that were his (...)* tours
an^ favorers.
M. Francisco, the Physician, whose courtesy, is not newely kindeled, but
has been long a burning? What should I make mention of He rehearses the
names of (...) gentlemen that were his (...)* tours an^ favorers.
M. D. Samsono, a man of incomparable knowledge, then whom a faithfuller and
freer heart can not be wished? What need I repeat He rehearses the names of
(...) gentlemen that were his (...)* tours an^ favorers.
M. Gonello, him whom I account, not as a freende, but esteem even as the
half of my life. Among the rest, what should I (...) to name He rehearses
the names of (...) gentlemen that were his (...)* tours and favorers.
M. Clemens, to whom He rehearses the names of (...) gentlemen that were his
(...)* tours an^ favorers.
S. T. Moore has discovered a few sparckles of his benevolence toward
(...)? What should I stand adding further to t^ese whom I have recited, He
rehearses the names of (...) gentlemen that were his (...)* tours an^
favorers.
M. R. Pacaeo, who both in promi^ng and also in perfourming, proves himself a
most trusty and faithful Pylades* What should I setdowne in this r^gister,
the Right Reverend Sometime Bishop of Dy^rham.
C. Tonstallo, whom I may compare with the best of them, that in ancient time
have been highly commended for the synceritie and vnfeignednesse of their
freendshippe? O happy man that I am, blessed with abundance of richesse: O
most honorable family through whom I am made a communicant of such special
ben^fites: O right Noble and renoumed He means the Bishop of Yo^ke, to who^
thi^ B^banco was (...).
Cardinal, whose wisdom admits such men to be of his counsel: whose
table is furnished with such stars that cast so glorious a brightness. But
(good God) how entierly do they love Erasmus, in what account and rep^tation
they have the man, considering that his meri^es have not been such, as that
they should purchase this unmeasurable good will. Howbeit, as these men are my
favorers and love me (I thank them) exceedingly, so Eras^us is not without
many an open and a secret enemy, He excuses himself by report of his own
merit^s and behavior.
although his usage has not deserved such doggishe dealing: and I pray God,
these seeds of envy b^ not further scattered, and so taking root, increase
to greater inconvenience. I am at this point, for so I think it best, to
please a few and let the multitude alone, and these few whom I would gladly
please and so enjoy the advantage of their favor, I wish them to be such as
are virtuous. This done, I rather desire as I say, to have the favor and
goodwill of a few, so that they be commendably disposed, then to have the
freendshippe of an infinite number, whose malice is infected with many The
words following, next and immediately, expound those words plainly.
a foul and ougly disease: as for example, with grudging hatred, the very
canckar and Caterpiller of all kindness: with frowardness and wilful
folly, the adversary of wisdom and aduisement: with backbyting and
slander, the professed enemies of honesty: where with whiles they acquaint
themselves, wishing well to none, they inda^age themselves, they wound
themselves with their own weapons: but to such malicious people we wish a
better mind, and a more tractable nature. Be you my deputy in mine absence,
and commend me to every one of my friends, by name particularly.

Dated at Louane, in the Calendes of September. Fare you well.
D. E. Roterodamus, to S. T. Moore high Treasurer to the Kings Majesty.
THE ARGUMENT.
He commends to S. T. Moore, Lord Treasurer of England, a sreende of his,
named Conradus Goclenius, a man (by his report) of singular learning and
praisewoorthie p^operties: who having but a bare maintenance, in consideration
of his worthiness, which deserved far better, Erasmus is moved in mind to
write for his preferment, having such a special regard of modesty,
t^roughout the whole course of his letter, which is in deed pe^itorie, that he
seems not to crave at all, when he craves most earnestly.

I Can not This Epistle in the form^r part thereof, commends S. Thom^ Moore
(...), for his courteous and (...) nature.
but highly commend (Right noble and Honorable) this your well disposed mind,
in that you seek to inriche your self with nothing so much, as with friends
faithful and sincere, on whom the most part of your pleasure and hearts
delight, you are persuaded (and that not amiss) does depend. Some there be,
that are marvelous circumspecte, least they should be deceived, with counterfeit
pearls, precious stones, and metals of value: you contrary wise making none
account of the admission of such transitory richesse, think your self to be
(as you are in deed, who calls it in doubt?) wealthy enoughe, yea to swim
in abundance of all necessaries, if among all other your possessions, you
have one faithful friend and vn^eigned. Neither is there any man to be found,
whose mind conceiueth more pleasure in casting a pair of dyce, in playing at
tables, in riding and running a hunting, in the sweet and comfor^able so^nde of
musical instruments, then you reap pleasure in having free talk and
liberal communication with one that is learned, and endued with understanding.
And although you have plenty and store of this kind of substance, yet
notwithstanding, because I know thus much, that Those words are not to be
taken in an evil but in a good sense.
the covetous man's heart is always greedy and evermore unsatisfied, and for
that also I consider, that you and I have had (oftentimes) passing fortunate
success:: I thought it not amiss to commend unto you, and as it were to
deliver into your possession, one special man, whom you might love with all
your heart, and to have him in singular estimation: the man, who^ I mean, is
named Conradus Goclenius a Westphalian: which kind of country people, as
there be of the common sort, very many that be ignorant and uncivil: so there
are to be found among the^ (as we have had experience) many that be of a noble
nature, fraught with all manner of learning, and in knowledge most excellent.
There is no kind of people more painful, able and willing (I mean) to
sustain labors, none in manners and behauiours more trusty and deserving
credit, none for simplicity plainness and vprightnes in dealing, more to be
commended, or at least wise, they principally praise worthy. You are not
ignorant that in Louane there is erected and founded a College, wherein
Whereupon it was named Collegium trilingue, the three tounged College.
three several toungs or languages are professed: in that College it was his
happy luck, to read in the open schools in Latin that thereby he purchased
to him self passing praise and commendation, and procured to his hearers
exceeding great profit by his learned lectures: yea the whole University
has reaped singular advantage, by his readinges. Besides that, he is a man of
such a mind and gentle spirit, so honest and upright in conversation, and not
destitute of any thing that is requireable in humanity, that the same
concurring, and as it were running hand in hand with his wonderful knowledge,
that he makes A thing deserving singular commendation.
such to love learning exceedingly, and to have it in reverence, as before
could by no means digest it, by reason of their continual loathing. He^
has (moreover) a pleasant invention and a subtle, whereof he has given
substantial significations, yea, in those exercises, that are usually
prosequuted in the common schools. He has in him also very many, (and the
self same approuable) merry conceits, sauouring altogether of Athenien
delightsomnesse: and for pleasant hystories, pretty fables, and such like
gifts in times convenient not unnecessary, he may contend and strive even
with you, for the maisteries. In versifying, he has a peculiar majesty, and
grace: his devises are not darkened with mystie clouds of doubts, the
conueiaunce of his matter is manifest and perceiuable: to conclude, the soil
of his invention, memory, and judgment, is so ordinarily ploughed with
practice and experience, that in all his dooinges he is plentiful and
delectable. There is no Argument, no matter (I mean) so barren, so to be
misliked, so vndisputable, but if he have it in handling, it shall be both
pleasant and profitable. In writing proese, he is so like, or rather so unlike
him self, that a man reading and marking his method and style therein, would
think that in versifying he is but a smatterer, and not that scarcely. As for
freendely behavior, he is of the right moulde, none to receive so worthy a
stamp more appliable: and surely, if you do enter acquaintance and
familiarity with him, thus much He had full expe^ence and proof of his
qualities in freendship, or else he would not have used such earnest words,
specially, to a man of so high a calling.
I dare able, that you need not to fear the violating and breaking of the
same, through any kind of casualtie: though we see it does chance most
commonly, that such as are of a faithless nature, being hollow hearted, and
in subjection to the f^rce of their unbridled and es^ raunging affections, for
every light occasion run into an apostacy or reuolting from freendshippe,
cracking in sund^r the conditions of that covenant, which with the seal and
subscription of faithfulness, was never confirmed: and yielding themselves in
obedience, to their own vain minds, and deceiuable desires. But in the
behalf of him, thus much I am to auouche, that he is constant, that he is
not ambitious, that he is not greedy of vaineglorie, that he is no revenger of
suffered injuries, and that there is no pleasure, but he knows how to use
the benefit thereof with measure: so far is he from surfeiting in excess:
His forbearing an inward hate and envious mind against any man: he is so far
from understanding and being acquainted with the mischeefes of such a
monster, that never so much as once dreampt of the shadow of the same: such
is the goodness of his nature, in all points most worthy commendation. As
for keeping company with him, somewhat I can say, that he is gentle, loving,
easy to be dealt withal, far from frowardness, and such like rebukeable
conditions, so that his freendshippe can not but be alloweable. Furthermore,
he cares not for gain, he sets light by lucre and advantage, though his
estate and calling be but indifferent: and haueing (in deed) nothing beside
bare findeing, apparel, and books. Now, Sir, if our Lords, they of the
Temporaltie, and they also of the Spirituality, had learned to exhibit unto
learned men due and deserved honor, as The Italians make much of lear ning
and learned men: where in they deserve greatly to be praised.
among the Italians it is not ^nprouided, then (no doubt) Goclenius our freende
had wanted no manner of wealth, but should have had in present possession
mountains of Gold and Silver, and aboundanuce of all other necessaries. But
now, after their long sleep and slugging, they are awaked, and every noble
man, is desirous and careful, to have his children trained and brought up in
learning, albeeit among gallant courtiers, there is none that is learned in
deed, but M. G. Halloinus, who is so far from reaping any profit thereby,
that he has had none other reward for his labor, but envy and grudginge
stomaches: Nevertheless, ere it belong (I hope) he shall gain by the
bargain, and recover great commodity and preferment. Now, I have this
considencein you, that hereafter, when you are better acquainted with
Goclenius, there shall be occasion on both parts, as well yours as his,
sufficiently offered, to give me hearty thanks for this my Because special
benefit is like to ensue thereupon.
good motion: as chanced but of late in M. Francisco Craneueldio, who is so
deeply in your books of accountes, and with you all in all, that after a
sort I do, in manner, bear him an inward grudge.

Fare you well.
D. E. Roterodamus, to the Right Renoumed, King Henry the eight, King of
England. etc.
THE ARGUMENT.
In this letter are specified three principal points: in the first he
commends learning and knowledge, but specially that learning and knowledge
wherein Christ is glorified: in the second he praises the kings highness,
for refourming religion: in the third is mentioned an adversary of his,
against whom he complains, and sends a book to the Kings maiesti^,
written against the same his adversary* Finally, he wishes good success^ to
the Kings proceedinges, and concludes with a petition to his grace, for the
continuance of his wonted favor.

Most high and mighty King, sithence a great part of the life of man, and
of the felicity thereupon attending, consists in learning and knowledge,
which how much in this blind time of ignorance, Learning and knowledge.
they are sought to be defaced by a company of bussardly pezantes, so much
the more are they to be supported by the favor and cou^tenances of Kings,
Princes, and Nobles, toward whom, thereby, in process of time, singular
advantage is like to grow. And because there are diverse kinds of exercises
belonging to learning, of which not so much as the least is to be neglected:
so principally and above all other, those About the d^e of this Epistle,
resourmation began in the English Church.
studies are chiefly to be seen unto and regarded, which are necessary for
the advancement of godliness, and auailable for the increase of Christ's
glory, our sovereign Lord and Monarch full of majesty: in this respect, I
wish with all my heart, ^ea in the feruentnes of my zeal I desire it, that
all other Kings, Nobles, and P^eeres, would follow the example of your
puisaunce, and make your dooinges the pattern, to frame all their actions and
inventions accordingly. Some there be that do so, and I hope the number of
them hereafter, will multiply, so that you shall not want disciples, you being
so worthy a schoolemaister. Small is my knowledge (I must needs confess) and
little (yea whose so ever is least, mine is lesser) is my learning:
nevertheless, howesoeuer be the measure of mine understanding, so God be my
good guide and gracious comforter at al times, and in my necessity, as I
refer all my dooinges to the glorifying of his name, and make his honor and
praise the aim whereat I level, all that I have hitherto written, or
hereafter shall write, whiles I am able to put pen to paper. Undoubtedly,
even til this day, al godly minded men allow and well like of our doings: and
among all other, the P. Grace does count them worthy acceptance. How be it
Such there be in the world, at this day, that have their close cor ners to
lurk and lie in.
some privy nippers there be, and close whisperers in the world, who taking
their pleasure of custom in old leeze and thick dreggs, can in no wise frame
their stomaches, to the digestion of this our new and wholesome wine. There are
not many of these malicious men, that are thus fettered in extreme folly and
blockishnesse: nevertheless, though there be of them but a very few, yet
with most accursed and execra^le hearts they have conspired against learning
and religion: yea, they wish, though it were to their own harm and
detriment, that the reformation of things amiss in the church (at the
prosperous flourishing whereof they grudge and are aggreeued) might come to
naught, and have no good success. The suggestions, and vehement persuasions of
these men (as by conjecture I gather) have drawn one Ed. L. to rail against
us with outrageous language: and they them selves not having the audacitie and
bouldnes of spirit, to come upon the stage, have gotten this youngman, being
desirous of vain glory, to play all the parts throughout the whole interlude:
I would he had otherwise set him self a work, in writing and devising: or
else I would it had been his fortune to have been borne in another country,
and not within the coasts of England. I owe nothing to the man: howbeit,
Erasmus gives an example, in himself, o^ Christian charity.
as it is the duty of one Christian to another, I wish him well, though he
wish me ill, and worse to himself. I owe to the English nation, more then I
do owe to any other Region. I present to your highenesse a little book, wherein
I make him answer, ye^ void of reprocheful speeches, taunting terms, and all
irreverent usage of the tongue: which book if he peruse and examine, he
shall soon see, how with him self he is at contrariety and disagreement. I
would not have him turn to the filthy vomit of his cont^melious and
shameful language, if he love his own honesty and honor: and as for
argument, to replye upon mine assertions, to bring any, I know he is unable
and insufficient. In the penning and compiling of the same, I have bestowed
almost forty days: He seems sorry and grieved, in occupying his pen (as by
the course of his words, is to be coniectured) so unnecessarily.
which time, I would I had spent, either in the extolling of your
incomparable nobleness, and encounterable valiantness: or else in the
advancement of the glory of my Messiah Christ: so might I (in deed) have
been better occupied. I beeseeche Christ Jesus, the most mighty, to favor
and further your majesty's godly and religious proceedinges, to give them
fortunate and happy success, and that it would please him, to grant me the
use and benefit of this life, but till I have given some signification and
testimony, how much I am bound to your highness, for your unspeakable
goodness: whom I beseech, like an humble Suppliant, to vouchesafe me your
Graces poor Client, with your accustomed favor.

Dated at Antwerpe.
D. E. Roterodamus to King Henry the eight, King of England. etc.
THE ARGUMENT.
After his duty done in most obedient manner, by way of greeting, he
declares what pleasure he took in the gift which the King bestowed on him:
in the commendation of whom, he spends the best part of his Epistle,
praising principally his liberality to learning: this being done, he reports
honorably of the kings court: wishes the King a long and a prosperous
reign: touches briefly, in how short a time he is constrained to set out the
new Testament, which he turned into Latin: and lastly dequeatheth him self
and his service to the kings commandment.

GReetinges and immortality most gracious King. etc. Your majesty's gift,
for diverse considerations, was most worthy acceptance, either because in
respect of it self, it was of great value and price: or because it came from
a king, By iterating that same one speech, he notes the worthines^e of the
Kings maiesti^.
yea, from such a king, whose noblenes is passing famous, both for the love
that he bears to all honest and virtuous exercises, and also for his
inualuable treasure and abundance of all kind of riches: in whose opinion and
judgment to be allowed and liked, it is far greater honor, the^ to be made
Lord and possessour of much gold and silver. Nevertheless, I had it in high
estimation and reverence, for this cause principally, that I accounted it to
be, as it were, a certain pledge or assurance of your Graces woonted good
will, never declining from Erasmus, whom as your majesty most bountifully
entertained into favor, so most honorably your highness has enriched him
with many rewards. And as though this seemed, but a thing of small reckoning,
to the intent y^ your affection and love toward learning, might be more
manifest and apparaunt, it pleases your highness, By that All go^cal clause,
he magnifieth the King for his love and lib^alitie to learning.
to open the sluses of your gracious goodness, that the rivers of your
liberality running abroad, many a dry and simple soil, is thereby abled, to
yeald plentiful fruit: I mean, that your majesty, of your own accord,
give many pensions to the maintenance of learning, and not only many, but the
self same also very large: among which number of them that have tasted the
sweetness of your Graces liberality, I am one, to whom your highness has
offered a yearly living, the profit whereof I might enjoy for term of life:
which sithence it is so freely given, I may not seem thereof to make a
refusal, being the gift of such a Noble and Renowned Prince, within the
compass of whose dominion I could find in my heart, to live and dye,
(though I were not rewarded:) under such a Prince full of valiantness, I
would gladly employ my service, without hope of pension: with whom there is
such respect of persons in their worthiness, that how much one excels
another in learning and knowledge, in uprightness of life, and virtuous
conversation, These words give to note, that the king, had a respect and
considera tion, where, and toward who^, he showed favor and good liking.
in so much the more favor is he, in so much the more credit, countenance,
and estimation with his Sovereign: whose court being replenished with famous
men, furnished with all kind of understanding, is a lively example of
Christian discipline, in so much that every University repineth at it, that
it should so flourishe out of measure. I beseech the most mighty Monarche,
whose kingdom is eternal, and power infinite, that it would please him of
his goodness, to continue this your well disposed mind, that it never become
subject to alteration: to bless you with the long possession of your kingdom,
in health, wealth, and all happiness, that under the scept^r and government of
so excellent and Conquerous a Prince, it may flourishe in all true felicity.
We are constrained to publish the translation of the new Testament, with in
the space of a four months: that work being dispatched and rid out of my
hands, I and my labors are all and wholly at your Majesty's commandment.

Dated at Louane, the seventh of the Calendes of May.
Io. Rauisius Textor, to N. L. Maluerino.
THE ARGUMENT.
This letter, not being sent of Textor to any manner of person: but made and
invented for the behoof of young scholars, runs altogether upon the
dispraise of idleness: the whole ^cope of the ^ame may serve for Imitation,
and may rather be called a Theme, then an Epistle (as many more may be of his
making) though he gives it that name and title. After he has showed (to the
supplanting of idleness and slouthe) how all creatures, as well heavenly as
earthly, attend on their calling, and do such service diligently and
ordinarily, as is to them appointed, he draws toward an end, using reasons
of persuasion to avoid such a vicious annoyaunce. Lastly, he writes in that
sort, as if one young scholar were encouraging another young scholar, to some
scholerly exercise, and immagining that audience is present ^o hear what they
have to say, ^e feigneth to one of them a declamation, whereof he sets down
a methodicall and proper beginning.

THe statute enacted by Amasis, a king of Egypt. There was also besides him, (^
Herodotus w^ nesleth) another of the same name, who was captain general of
D^ius his army of footmen against the Cy^eneans..
Amasis the Egyptian king, and at his commandment solemnly proclaimed, is most
commendable and praiseworthie, whereby it was provided that all, and every one,
lining within the limittes of his lands, should be called to a yearly account,
and give a true reckoning to the magistrate of the Province, where they lived,
how they spent their time, and whereupon they were maintained: which who so
did not, he was (...) to suffer sharp and extreme punishment. Unto which
singular law and most politic ordinance, the custom of the Wise men of
India. Cic. Tuscul. quest. lib. 5.
Gymnosop^stes of India, seems (...) agreeable, among whom such as by their
daily labor, brought to their Parents none advantage, should loo^e their
middayes meal for their negligence and idleness. With certain Ilanders in
Spain, named Of them, Pliny. lib. 3. cap. 5. Silius. lib. 5. Flo. lib. 3.
cap. ^. Diod. sic. lib. 6. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 55.
Bal^ares, this was a use and received order, that the mother should show the
son a mark to shoot at, which if he did hitte with his arrowe, then had he
for his desarte, meat measurablie ministered: but if he failed, and was either
short, or gone, or wide, in directing his shafte, then was fasting the penalty
of his amiss. For, as in the common games plaide and practiced at Olympus,
none is to challenge the garlande of victory, but he that is called lawfully
to give a testimony of his actiuitie, and passes all the rest in the trial
and proof of those exercises: Even so, he is not worthy to live, who like
an idle and ^outhfull Droane, does nothing that deserves life. In all the
Elements and other celestial bodies, God or Nature has set them in such
estate, that they are never idle, but still occupied in the ^ffices, whereunto
by and through divine providence they are a^igned. The Heaven it self, which
incompasseth the whole world, moves it self orbicularly, that is, in circle.
The The two com^ortable lights of the world.
Sun and the Moon, have their distinct seasons, wherein they run their
course turn by turn, according to eternal appointment: to the one is
committed the government of the day: to the other appointed the guideing of
the night. The winds, keeping convenient places and regions, blow with
continual blastes. The signs of the Zodiake, one with another, observe their
prescript times of circular moving. The Sea, when the winds cea^e puffing, is
allaide with calm^nesse: when they cast out blustering blastes, it is stormis
and full of roaring outrage: it gives increase of fish, for the food and
sustenaunce of man, without intermission. The earth lying barren and
fruitelesse, in the comfortelesse time of Winter and Summer, contrary seasons.
Winter, makes a large amends of that idleness, with yielding a goodly and
gallant (...) in the pleasant season of Summer. Trees and plants, so soon as
they feel the time of the year approcheing, which serves to bring forth
fruit, they conform themselves to the nature of the time, and yield their
increase accordingly: they receive sap through out all and every part of
them, they ^hoote forth their blossoms and buddes: their Pears, their
Apples, their Cytrons, their Pomegranats, their clusters of Grapes, and every
tree in his peculiar kind, their several fruit, in due and convenient order
Persuasions to move men to shake off unprofitable idleness: and to frame
themselves to be thristily occu pied.
The Oak yields akehornes: the fyl^ert yields Nuttes: the Hawthorne, the
Iuie, the Baytree and the Olive, yield berries: the Service tree, the Medler
tree, yield their fruit accordingly. Not so much as the pricking
Blackthorne, the hedge bushe, the Bryer, the bramble, which are wild, but
give their increase, as nature has ordained. But among all other trees,
Plants, and Herbs, let us busy our brains about the marking and
considering of the spreading Uine: let us occupy our cogitations and wit, in
the weighing of the precious Pearls which it does yield, to the singular
comfort and delectation of man's heart. Let us prudently ponder with what
faithfulness, and trusty service, the earth, being the moother of all
things, imbraceth the seed cast into her bosom, nourishes it with the
milk of her own pappes, ministers convenient fustenance unto it, that it
springs up and grows gaily: whereby it turns to the succor of man in
due season, haueing received ripeness: and thus does the earth apply her
self to the maintenance of all creatures: for without it, where shall the
creeping things of the ground, vermin, and such like, (that we may begin
with those creatures, which in our estimation and thinking are most vile and
yrksome) have (...)? where shall the birds of the Air find their necessary
nourishment* where shall the fishes of the Sea be succored? Or what should
become of the water, if it were not imbancked with the earth? should not all
kind of cattle, that live by the benefit of the ground perish, and be
hungerstarued? Finally, should not a creature most excellent, for whose
commodity all these forecited graces were given, consume with famishment: How
bountiful a seruitour is the earth, to the husbandeman? what usury does it
pay for that which it borrows? How does it inriche the husbandman with all
manner of increase? with Wheat, with Rye, with Dates, with Barlie, with
Beans, with Pease, with Lupines, with Lintelles, with Uetchesse, with
Millette, and all other kind of pulse in great plenty and abundance? What
Reasons of experience to prove his purpose.
shall we say of the year it self, and the four quarters of the same, which
we know to be the measurer and meater of our life and all our dooinges, when
has it reuoulted from the qualities wherewith naturally it is endued? what
man is able to affirm, that he ever saw the Spring tide without March
Uiolettes, Primeroses, and other pleasant flowers? What man can say, that ever
he saw Summer without Grain, Berries, and quickening heat full of comfort?
what man has so impudent and shameless a countenance, as to affirm, that
ever he saw a harvest unfurnished of fruit? what man can say, that ever he
saw a Winter season with out ysickles, without hoare frostes, without snow,
and such like cold Under that word: lightening, thunder, fires in the ele
meant, rain, wind, snow, hail, deaw, and such like things, my sts fogges,
earthquakes. etc. are to be understood.
meteors? Do not the very Months throughout the year, successively and in
due order, perform their several offices? who at any time can prove the
contrary, and dares say that this inuielable ordinance and everlasting
appointment has been broken? wherefore, if so be that al these creatures,
some being of most excellency, other some of baseness, and some again of
indifferency, show such obedience and dutifulness, in accomplishing the
laws and statutes, which nature (not with out singular providence) has
made, and from all beginnings enacted ratified, and established, all and every
one of them in their kind, some to yield increase, and some again to other
services not unnecessary, were it not an intolerable shame, that Man, the
Lord and King over all creatures.
Man (who^ God has made Lord and Owner of all these special benesites)
should lie tumbling upon the bed of ease, and shrowde himself, head and
ears, in (...): that he should (as it were) putrify and ^ott in idleness,
and tear out the term of his years, till be enter into old and crooked
age, in occupying himself about nothing that is profitable? to run ou^ his
race, not reaping any advantage, because labor is too hard meat for his nyce
stomach to digest? Finally, that he alo^e, among the rest, whom he should so
far excel, as God surpasses him, should dye like a beast in dishonor, not
leaving behind him, of his former life orderly lead, any commendable
testimony? What man is there, that will think this allowable: who can like of
it? but such beetell headed lubbers, as neither have in them discretion,
reason, wisdom, judgment, nor any other property praiseworthie^ sythence
br^te beasts, that be estranged from reason, and other creatures endued with
life, leave unto us certain testimonies of their sustained labors, which are
in our sight as it were looking glasses, wherein to vewe and behold the
fowlenesse of our slothfulness. What beasts they be, none can be so igno
raunt and blockish, but may perceive and testify.
Some beasts there are, which unto us are most profitable, by yielding the
increase of their bodies, for our succor and maintenance: and as they are
unto man principal benefits, so to themselves and to their kind, they are
most loving and tender: very few or none at all, are there to be found, so
barren and fruitless, which yield not some commodity or other for our
behoof. If we seek a proof hereof in fishes, that live by water, we shall
see a manifest example. The fish called Balena, nourishes her young with
milk: the fish called Cephalus brings forth eggs: the Dolphine feeds her
young with milk in like manner, and that abundantly: when the Springtide
approaches, they couple, and they bring forth in the Summer season: the fish
called Echinus, brings forth eggs: the fish called Hippocampus, is a
present and sovereign remedy, against the biting of a mad dog: and as all
these love their own kind tenderly: so they are by one means or another,
serviceable to man. Now let us see the kindness which rests in the fowls of
the air, which is wonderful: and let us mark their qualities, for they are
strange. The Eagle ^ryeth her young oues against the bright sun shine, which
clear light and (...) (...), if they cannot abide, she forsakes them, and
accompteth them no better then of bastard byrds. Pigeons bring forth two
eggs, the first a cock, the second a hen, in forty days they conceive and
breed. The cock brings forth l^ng eggs, the hen round eggs: the cock
also bewrays the breaking of the day, by his crowing, and awaketh the (...)
headed lubber to his daily labor. The Peacocke does sit abroode of twelve
eggs. The A straung property of natural affection described in the swallowe.
swallow brings forth four young ones, whom she fostereth and feeds in
true measure of equity and love, beginning with the eldest, and so keeping
order in the residue. Now I will descend to other living creatures, and what is
to be said in this case, concerning the beasts of the field, you shall
likewise understand. The Ore is a fellow labourer with his master, he
aswageth the tediousness of his sweating travel: they are husbandmen, for
they till the land, they draw the plough, they furrowe the soil, they carry
the croppe of the ground into the Barn, and other services do they, so that
we find special benefits redounding to us, by and through the use of their
ministry. The sheep is s^orne and yields her woll, which is wouen and
wrought to make us wearing garments: they are ^eade and slain, that their
flesh might turn to our nourishment: they love their young bleating lambs, to
whom they give suck most tenderly. The Be flies about the fragrant feeld,
and the sweet garden, gathering of every flower somewhat, to carry to her
hiue, where she labors in making honey. The hog is fatt fed, with
oakehornes and other meat, of purpose to become our sustenaunce. Johannes Ca
ius, in his letrer sent to Co^ radus Gesnerus, shows at large the properties
of dog ges, their several kinds and services.
The dog is a diligent dorekeeper, a circumspect watchman, a necessary
servant: drives away the ravening. Woolfe from the flock, least there should
be a spoil and flaughter committed: they keep, preserve, and defend our
houses from thieves, vagaboundes, lewd fellows, robbers, and false knaves,
who watch opportunity, leisure and time convenient, when they might (to their
contentation and fulfilling of their desires) put their mischefous devises in
practice. The Catt frayeth away rattes, myce, and noisome vermin, and haunteth
every chamber though it be never so secrets. Thus whiles I look before me,
behind me, beeside me, now on this hand, and then on that hand, I find
nothing, but is occupied and that most diligently, in perfourming those things
whereunto by Nature they were appointed. I find What a shame is it then for man
being endued with reason, (or at least ought to be) knowledge and
understanding etc. should give himself to idleness?
nothing that loves sloth, that is inclined to idleness, but every creature
in his kind, doing their duty, in that service whereunto they are allotted
accordingly. What then, (that I may yet at the length come to my purpose)
should we do, to whom the light of reason so graciously is given? What (I
say) should we buisie our heads and hands about? Wherein should we be
exercised? Are we brought to so low an ebb of discretion, and to so high a
flood of folly, that we are content to be overcome of brute beasts, whom
we ought to excel (for how do we pass them, or how can we be better
then they, unless we have the use of those benefits which we are ^uriched
withal, in such convenient order, as it be comes our calling and
condition?) in reason, understanding, majesty, worthiness, nobleness:
Finally, in all other things belonging to our Nature? Let us not so wallowe
in the waves of idleness, that at length we be overwhelmed. Let us not use
the society and fellowshippe of lazy slouthe, with satietie and excess,
least at last we be so entangled in her snares, that we find no way to
unwind our selves again. Nay rather, let us follow the example of painful
Apelles a no ble painter of the country Cos, an Island in the Acgean sea: of
him Quint. lib. 12. de instit. orat. Plin. lib. 35.
Apelles, of whom Pliny makes mention, who was such an enemy to idleness,
that his pencill was never dry, but still drawinge a line, in one color or
another. Let us abhor to resemble that slothful slouen, who lead all his
life in the country in such order, that he differed nothing from a dead
carcass, lying in the grave. The year has run his course. The ground has
yielded her cropp. Ortchardes have given the increase of their fruit. The
Garden has given Uioletts, Roses, Marygolds, Gilliflowers, Cornashions, and
whatsoever else is pleasant in savor and smelling. The Uinetree has yielded
her purple grapes, by clusters: and all trees have affoorded their fruit, in
abundaunce: only we miserable wretches, are behind hand, and have not paid
our yearly rent, which if we pay not, then are we not like to make any
claim or challenge for a quittaunce. Having dealt before with examples: Now he
falls to admonitions, exhortations, persuasions, etc.
Let us (for shame) start out of the cabbine of this carelessnesse: Let us
shake off this slothfulness, and now at length (though somewhat late, yet
Better late then never,) call to remembrance, what reproach and infamy does
flow from idleness. Let us call to consideration, what an ignominious name,
we are like to purchase, if we wincke at such a foul and loathsome vice: if
(I say) we will not see it in our selves, and do what we may, to have it
redressed: let us call to memory, what hazardes and inconveniences hang over
our heads, being ready to fall upon us, for this our dissoluteness and
negligence. Let us spring out of our nastie nestes of sluggishnesse: Let us
leave sleaping in idleness: Let us catch the ploughe by the handle, and fall
to furrowing: Let us take it by the tail, and think no scorn to toil: Let
us lift up lustily the mattocke and the spade, and fall to deluing: Let us
take the axe, the wedge and the beetle, and settle our selves to cleaving and
riueing: Let us get a hedgebill and fall As well in bodily exercises, as in
the^ also that beelong unto the mind: for in so doing we shall reap singular
commodity.
to repayring broken fences, about fields and pastures: Let us play the
practitioners within our own houses, in declameing, reasoning, and
discoursing, about questions and causes of learning, that we may be able to
speak in the Senate, and to defend Milo against his adversary: to prevail
against conspyring Catiline, and to thrust him out, and his fardle of troubles,
that he breed no more annoyaunces to the Common wealth: to supporte and
maintain Cluentius, that he be not abused with too much injury: to further
the cause of the Orphan and fatherless, that they may not utterly be
forsaken, as forlorn and succourlesse: to expel oppressors, extortioners,
unjust persons, whose whole delight is in devising mischief, and putting
the same in execution: to be profitable members to the body of our natural
country, within whose vowels we are so tenderly and lovingly included and
clasped: to resist the usurping potentacie, and outrageous rule of thundering
Tyraunts. Let us try what we can do, a few of us gathered together, not
contemning one another infancy and young knowledge, but alowing one another
weakness of wit, which, though it be but raw, yet in tracte of time, (there
is no doubt) it will wax riper. Let us challenge one another, who can do best,
for the obteyning of victory. Let us stretch our invention, and search every
corner of our brains. Let us rub off the rustinesse of our tongues, that our
vtteraunce may be pleasant and eloquent: this let us do before we come in
place and presence of stately counselors, of subtle headed Lawyers, of
curious attourneis, and such like fine fellows, that be Curiosity (...)
speaking, or sine and affected speech, not wanting in many.
very deintie and circumspect in speaking, least any word should escape them,
unaptly and improperly placed: and to whose ears, it is a thing, then which a
worsse cannot be named, to babble beside the book: considering that what
soever is uttered in such men's hearing, must be done in printe, as we say
in our common Proverb. Behold, the head master of the schole lysteneth what
we have to say: he waits when we will buckle our selves to our buisinesse:
his ears are ready to receive our reasoninges: his hands are prepared to
take our written papers: he refuses not to bestow upon us his present
service and love. The Usher, with as much modesty on the other side, is
willing to give us the hearing, and to determine the controversy. The rest
also of our instructours, are in a readiness to lysten attentiucly: men of
great learning and singular understanding: they look upon us with a favorable
countenance, and with a smiling face promise us their benevolence. We must not
be afraid to take upon us this adventure: why should we avoid so
profitable and so commendable an experience, having at this present so gentle
an audience. We have no cause to suspecte, that-they will scoff and mock at
our doings, though we should speak scarce eloquently, smoothly, finely,
plaustbly, pleasauntly, artificially, and Orator like. Let us give the onsett
to this exercise.

The Proeme of a Declamation.
MOst learned audience, you are not ignorant, that even * The declamation: or
rather the proeme and beginning of the same, worthy to be marked of young scho
lers, and fruitful to be followed.
knowledge it self, has a kind of infancy, and that Marcus Fabius began
with his first elements and principles, before he had that name and title,
which in process of time, he deserved. The strong Captain and valliaunt
warrior, was once wrapped in swathling clowtes, and lay crying in a wicker
cradle. Those grave and wise counselors, that are propps and pillars of
Princes places, and the columns or maine posts of the weal public, though
now for their knowledge and policy, they draw the minds of people into an
admiration: yet the time has been, wherein they had their first beginning,
going to schole, and learning their Alphabet or A. B. C. Will you require that
at the hands of a simple child, (whose wit is but weak, whose understanding
is slender, whose judgment is raw) which beseems Cicero that incomparable
Rhetorician? Will you lay a heavy and weighty burden, upon the necks and
shoulders of a young beginner, of a weakling, of an infant, which is able to
make Demosthenes sincke under it, and falter to the ground? No, but you must
have due regard and consideration of years. For The first me^ ber of the
clause follows of necessity: but the last is not always grounded upon
certainty: for we see the contrary proved by daily experience.
old age is not endued with the strength and lustines of gallant youth:
neither is youth furnished with the wisdom, counsel, gravity, and
experience of sober old age. etc.

Fare you well.
Macropedius to Chrysogono.
THE ARGUMENT.
This epistle contains three parts in respect of the persons, namely, him to
whom it is written: him by whom it is written: and him in whose behalf it is
written. In consideration of the matter, it co^teineth four parts: in the
first is comprehended the seeking of goodwil, by circumstaunces: In the second
the causes that moved him to write, etc. In the third, he praises Gualtero,
whom he commends to Chrysogono, etc. In the fourth he touches the matter
it self, by circumstances, well worthy of reading* marking and learning.

BUt that I know of a certainty, your singular benevolence, not te^ding to
mine avail alone, but freely testified to the profit of al such as love
learning, albeit they be meet strangers: I should be in doubt (friend
Chrysogono) to interrupt the quietness of your studies, through my temeriritie
and rashness. Nevertheless, sythence I am not ignorant, that for the
renewing of old friendshipp, your desire is rather to be solicited, then, to
the utter vanishiug of acquaintance, not at all to be visited, I armed my
self with audacitie: and in my friends behalf, I confess me your
suppliaunt. My welwiller Gualtero, at whose hands you receive these my letters,
is one whom I do most ardently love, and (for his singular kindness unto me
always professed) exceedingly favor. For, Which good nature in him so
apparent and plentiful, kindles in me the more loving affection.
ever since the time of his infancy, he has exhibited unto me, as to his
father natural, passing reverence, duetifulnesse, and obedience. This man,
understanding undoubtedly, that I was one of whom you did well think and
esteem, and hoping also by the mediation of my letters unto you, to get your
favor and furtheraunce, beesought me instantly, to write unto you in his
cause, that his suite might be satisfied: although I mistrust not the
modesty of the man, his honesty, and virtuous behauiours, but that, without
our commendable certificate, he is like enoughe to please and prevail. For,
he is a proper youth, descended of well disposed parents, though somewhat
base in degree, and with substance not so well furnished. His education and
bringing up was so good, as it cannot be misliked, and from his tender years
til this present day, he has been not only inclined to learning, but (...)
ben^ y^ way, with a ^esire (in manner) irreu^cable: insomuch that, thorough his
own diligence, employed in exercises of knowledge, and the good success which
the Gods have granted him, in his proceedings: he has reaped such pro^te,
both in poetical co^ueyaunce, and also in the fa^ultie of R^etorique, that
there is not so much as one comparable to him, among al our scholars. For, As
who said: there is nothing so hard and difficult, which passes his capacity.
what is too hard for him to compass (as you shall perceive quickly if you
take experience) whose wit is s^ quick, and of so ready a capacity? His
manners deserve commendation: for, no man has seen him i^oderate a^ ^eate and
drink: no man has taken him play^ng any ^ranck of l^wdnesse, like a wanton:
no man has (...) him (...) or fighting: no man has taken him quarell^ng and
co^playning: but he has always been obedient to his parents: dutiful to his
friends: tractable toward his teachers: gentle to al his companion^, and
therefore beloved: that ^eedes multitude of words in this matter? Such a young
(...) (...) is, as good men do ^oth love and laud. (...), at such (...) as
he left our schools, and providing to study in your University, having none
acquaintance in Louane, whose friendshipp and conference he might use, was
desirous, that through mine industry and labor, means might ^ee made, ^o
(...) ^uour with one or other, to whose wisdom, coun^ll, ^elpe and
assistance, he might committ himself: and above all other, did choose you,
whom he knew but by report, to ^ee to him in steed of a father or
governor: Which thing, sythence you want no ability (friend Chrysogonus) to
perform sythence (I say) you may without any disco^modi^ie redoun^g to your
own person, take upon you this char^e, execu^e this office sim ply, justly,
and according to the rule of a r^ght conscience, to the greater increase and
advancement of your virtue, What could he say more, in the behalf of Gualtero
to Chrysogono, the^ in this present (...) is compris^d.
I beseech you heartily, that you will ^ouchsafe this young man, y^ benefit of
your patronage and countenance, in penury, in plenty, in prosperity, in
adversity, in weal and woe, finally, in all chaunge^ and chances, even as
you would do to my (...) and kinsfolks, if necessity required, that they
should have recourse ^o your assistaunce: that in so doing, he may understand,
how the friendship between us is not so frus^rate, but that the commendable
report wh^che I have sounded in your ears, touching his credit, has had
very good effect. I, on the other s^de, will strain mine ability in such
sort, toward the requi^ing of so singular a benefit, on us both bestowed,
tha^ of your well doing, repentance shall not be the reward: but one day
(albeit, to tie friendshipp to promis^s of duty, seems a thing not to be
allowed) to reap such fruit, as shall not be unworthy of your bene^lence.
For, I will be your debtor, and Gualtero shall be as deep in your books of
reckoning.

Fare you well.
Macropedius to Hieronymo.
THE ARGUMENT.
This Epistle is a persuading Epistle, and it consists of five necessari^
parts. In the first is contained, the person of him, whom Macropedius does
per^uade, with the circumstaunces thereunto belonging. In the second, his
narration, which is short and compe^dious. In the third, (...) and arguments
perteining to his (...) ^urpose. In the fou^th, a confut^tion of contrary
allegations. In ^he fi^th, the conclusion, wherein he endeavors to win the
mind of Hieronymo, to the accomplishment of such things, as are comprehended
in his Epistle.

ALthough (well beloved friend) there is no doubt of your wisdom, which
flows in you abundantly: yet I can not choose (if I have any desire at all,
to satisfy The con^ide ^tion of which two ci^cu^stances, con^raine me to
cease from ^lence.
mine own thankfu^nesse, for your singular courtes^es, plen^fully on me
bestowed) but freely declare unto you, such things as tend both to your
worship, and also to your safety. And for so much as, we consider the estate
of others, more precisely then we do ponder our own, I am bound of duty,
to minister some counsel, (though homely, yet hoalsome) unto you (my
well-beloved friend) by whose words, seasoned with the salt of wisdom, I have
been comforted. Your brother Theodoricus, not many days since, told me, not
without great heart grie^, that you have forsaken your book, applied your
self to an occupation, and that you will not be weyned from that untoward
purpose of your own, neither by parents admonishment, neither by friends
exhortation, neither yet by any inward motion of care touching your own
honesty, your own commodity, their present condition, or y^ greatness of
their former expenses, laid out in hope, that in s^udie you would have made
continuance. Wherefore (my Hieronymo) if my counsel may win with you any
authority, then would I wish you to change this preposterous determination,
and forsaking all ^laueishe ha^dicraftes and drudging trades of occupation,
stick still to your tackling: and as you have begone, so proceed, so
likewise end, in the study of humanity I mean, in the knowledge of liberal
sciences, whose commendation have no limited measure, but surpass all the
praise, that can, either be ascribed, or devised: and which, next and
immediately after virtue, deserves before all things in the world,
souereignitie and preferment. To the embracing whereof, you ought to be
applyable, not only in respect of Though those wo^des ^e ^poken in (...), yet
may they ser^e for a ge^erall (...).
your parent^s, to whom (even by the law of Nature) you are straightly ^ounde
to be obedient: or for that you are entreated so to do, by such as bear you
good will, being indeed your very friends, whose requests you ought not
lightly to regard: but in consideration of honesty, and discharging of your
own dutifulness, then which nothing is more to be approved, nothing more
profitable, nothing wherein you should be more delighted. For, if ho^estie mo^e
you* which in all well disposed persons should work singular effects, what
thing then can be named, Nothing is to be compared with learning and honesty.
comparable to learning and honesty, which al wisemen, many years ago, had
in great price and estimation, although in excellency they were matchless,
and had, even from heaven above, their original? what thing can be more honest
then that, which makes a difference between you, and such as are so^ed in
sensuality, in blockishnesse, in vnciuilitie, and mere barbarousnesse? what
is more honest, then that, which if it want in men, they are no better then
brute beasts, carried away with the force of their appetites, and not lead by
the rule of reason? what is more honest, then that, which brings you to the
c^ntemplation of celestial spirits, of the true and The majesty of God,
which the reason of man can not reach^ unto: but in spirit it is somewhat
tasted and percei^ed.
incomprehensible eternity, to the understanding of things supernatural, and
to the most comfortable embracing of virtue, wherewith what man so ever is not
furnished, he may be compared ^o a filthy swine, whose service tends to the
filling of the paunche, praying upon worldly vanities, and gaping after the
gaudinesse of this transitory earth, heaven and heavenly riches, in the mean
season, had in contempt? If you seek pleasure and delight, you shall find the
same so lincked to learning, that I am much in doubt, whether there be in
learning, more honesti^ or sweetness. For, what can there be, which is
tempered with more del^tation, then to keep continual company with the
Muses: and to enjoy thy pleasure (as it were in a bedchamber) with chaste Ladi^
learning? what can be more fraught with joy, then to have their friendship,
that never flit, but follow thee, or rather, go even hand with thee, and
tread foot by foot? If you are in the field, they offer talk: if you are
within the house, they are at your elbow: they rest with you: they take pains
with you: heaviness shall never haunt your heart, whiles your mind is marching
with the Muses. In their conversation is no tediousness, no (...), no
vnsweetenesse. If you consider of things profitable, (which many do now and
then) more then such things as savor of honesty, or be tempered with
delight: then would I know, Which is so excellent, that nothing therewith is
counterpeisable.
what thing in worthiness ca^ co^teruaile learning: nay, what thing is more
requisite and necessary? For, the want of this, brings ignorance of virtue,
ignorance of philosophy, ignorance of things divine, ignorance of things
devised by the head of man: and what but ignorance does the lack of learning
breed in so much as, in whom this fails, he can neither understand, teach,
nor interpret. Take learning from among men, and what insueth but disorder?
what follows but mere confusion, and a hotch potche o^ precious Iuells* with
vadeing shadows, and uncertain vanities? Take away learning from among men,
and how shall the common wealth be administered? Take away learning from
among men, and how shall your house and family be governed? Take away
learning from among men, and how shall trades mechanical, occupations (I mean)
be maintained? take learning from among men, and shall not domestical rule
suffer ruin and decay? what shall become of all things else, incident to so
religious a profession? how shall consolation be ministered to the diseased?
how shall the offender be reprehended? how shall the virtuous and upright
liver be rewarded? how shall these duties, and insinite more, be accomplished,
if among men, no place be left for learning? If you seek riches, (which a
virtuous man should contemn) what man having been learned, has lacked? If He
li^eth in his co^ntrie, That has an oc^upation: W^he reasonable bo^tie, ^to
his contentation. as says the ancient and vs^all proverb.
(...). every country mainteines the crafts master, then why should you
otherwise think, but that your learning, is of sufficiency, to supply your
necessities, wherewith, far beyond any artificers ability, you may profit
and prevail: but not without labor, say you, not without sweating, not without
wringing, not without pains taking. For, say you, The condition of men, even
from their generation, is, in their own sweat to earne their own meat: the
law of Nature, or rather, of God, in this case so provided. I grant, your
words do agree with truth and reason: nevertheless, shall I think that your
wit is so ch^ldish, that your discretion is so feeble, and your understanding
is so base and gross, to take this for the meaning of that divine ordinance,
namely, that in bodily sweat and labor only, men are borne to provide for
their living? does not Labor and learning ind^ solubly lin^ked: wherefore
tryants and loyterers that love not labor, can never obtain learning.
exceeding great labor accompany learning? is stud^e without pains? did you
attain^ the knowledge, which you have already gotten, without i^dustrie and
travel? No: labor follows learning, as the shadow does follow the body,
and yet in that labor is no lothsomnesse. Are men idle, and like unprofitable
droanes, are they free from pains taking, neglect they labor, after they have
lodged learning in the castles of their memories? No: they are still occupied:
they are in one exercise or an other delighted: One instructs the people in
things whereof they be ignorant, another teaches children their first
elements, their A. B. C. (I mean) the seed of all sciences: and the
principles of sundry professions: One gives counsel to the distres^ed, and is
^arnest in pleadable controversies of law before a Judge: another employeth
his labor in curing the sick, in searching wounds, tempering o^ plasters,
coniecturing of vrines, op^ning veins, and such like offices belonging to
physic and surge^ rye: Thus you see, labor and learning are indissolubly
lin^ked, wherefore (friend Hieronymo) now at last to e^de my long letter,
considering the weak disposition of your body, when but a little labor is
more then you can suffer, I pass it over with silence: and sithence, there is
within the whole compass of the world, no special thing counterp^ifable with
learning, nor valuable with wisdom and knowledge, either for honesty,
profit, or yet for pleasure and delight: you shall revolt from your unadvised
and rash intent, not so much for my counsel in this behalf ministered, but for
the very truths sake, which at this present in my letter, I have discovered:
and Drawing ^wards the conclusion of his epistle, he falls to exhorting,
wher^in he vs^th p^oper reason^.
you shall according to the ableness of your discretion, and the ripeness of
your judgment, frame your self to learned exercises, wh^re to your capacity
is ready, and from one ^cience to an other you shall proceed, as it were by
degrees, as well to the increasing of your knowledge, as also to the confirming
of the same. Let not your f^thers desire, in this case, ly frustrate: let not
your mothers moist tears be fruitless: let not the int^eataunce of your
friends, and well will be unregarded, and let not the considence of your
friend^s in general, be dece^ed. You can not (for h^nestie) I am sure, deny to
do as we give you counsel, but you must needs set our persuasions at naught,
and acc^unt of us as of persons not es^eemed, and (as I may well say) contemned.

Fare you well.
Macropedius to Mossellano.
THE ARGUMENT.
A form of an Epistle called, Conciliatorie, wherein he craves acquaintance
with one whom he never knew, but by report: it consists of three special
members. In the first is contained an enumeration or rehearsal of his virtues
to whom he writes etc. In the second is contained his petition, wherein he
craves acquaintance. etc. In the third, is contained certain circumstances
touching his own person, which tend to his purpose, al which are mentioned in
such order, as arrogancy is avoided.

I Can not tell (sir) how it comes to pass, that men excelling in virtue, in
wisdom, and in learning, draw (as it were) diverse into an admiration of them
selves, and are so deeply planted in the favor of some, that So great a
desire bredeth in the^ of their compa^e, for their learning sake.
they will never be in quiet, till they have taken up a lodging, lying somewhat
near them, notwithstanding the distaunce of place is very great, whereby they
are separated. I received your exercises, your verses I examined, and surely (I
speak without flattery, I would not have you otherwise to think) I have not
read any thing wherein more learning is showed, or more ^loquence used. I have
heard great report of your myldenes, of your modesty, of your gentleness, of
your honesty, finally of other the excellent ornaments, and ines^imable iuels
of your mind, in so much that I can not, but (as it were) offer my self
impudently and without shame, to Or, to be acqua^nted with you.
your acquaintance and friendship, of a mere voluntary motion. I crave thus
much therefore at your hands, that it would please you to admit me (though
an unprofitable friend, though unlearned and ignorant, though a stranger to
you, and unknown) into the number of your friends, and to enter my name into
the register of your acquaintance, that I may not be destitute of one, so long
as I have you, with whom I may use familiar conference, and reason pleasantly.
I dare not promise you any benefit of great learning, to be looked for on my
part. I Speeches of much modesty and mild nesse.
dare not make any vaunt of virtue remaining in my mind: I dare not put you in
hope, of any rare riches of knowledge and understanding, to make account of:
(none of which I acknowledge in me to be harbored:) but I promise you perfect
love, I promise you a faithful heart, I promise you mutual good will, and
this I offer freely. You shall find me such a friend, as slatterie shall not
attaint, as hypo^risie shall not seduce: such a o^e shall you find me, as to
whom you may be bold to commit most secret counsels: such a one (I say) as
is no Which is an insa^ l^ble proof of unfeigned friend ship.
less careful for your commodity, then he is circumspect for his own
advantage: Fare you well, and to him that loves you exceedingly, make
recompense with a lively requital.

Macropedius to Theodoro.
THE ARGUMENT.
This Epistle is expostulatorie, wherein he calls Theodorus to reckoning, why
he writes not to him: considering, that for te^e l^tters, he deserved one. It
consists upon three p^rtes, because it passes from friend to friend. The
first controuleth him for negligence of duty. etc. The second shows
reasons, why he ought not to be insolent. etc. The third contei^eth an excuse
of his doings, with an exhortation that he should not neglect ancient
friendship.

WHat impediment was ^here (my friend Theodorus) that you have not written so
much as one letter unto me, ^ince Christmas, considering that I have sent you
half a score by my friend Tribonius? Is that old acquaintance which did
knit us twain in an unity, so frosen and consumed in you, that you can scarce
vouchsafe a friendly greeting? If I As if he had said: I have not been behind
hand in any office belonging to ^ friend.
had been behind hand in duties of courte^ie, if I had not used means to
maintain our acquaintance, if I had omitted intercourse of letters wherein you
were named, and (not a few times) remembered: ^inally, if whatsoever I did,
concerning you, had not made for your avail: the^ could I be well content, that
you should wax strange, and it should not so much make me muse, that I grow
out of your acquaintance. * Have not I (even from the very swathling cloutes)
nourished thee, and seen thee well brought up in the years of thy youth, have
I not thought of thee, as of mine own brother: nay rather, have I not loved
thee as dearly as the son of mine own body? what then should be the cause
that I am blotted out of the book of your remembrance, and that my name is
raced out of the register of your acquaintance? how comes it to pass, that
for my good deeds, I reap such ill pay? does nature allow this dealing?
does honesty dispense with it? does conscience account it uncontrollable?
What law, either holy or profane, what commendable custom among men, what
ill disposed persons opinion, and corrupt judgment, can excuse this your
silence: nay, can not but condemn this your insolency? at As if he had said:
your protestations in times past differ much from your practices present.
what time you parted from me, you made an other covenant, contrary to this
your present usage: you promised (indeed) that which you have not performed.
But, for as much as I can not, for all this, be persuaded that I am forgotten,
or that of very negligence you pass not for my friendship, but rather that
some infirmity, or some thing hapening against your hope and expectation,
restrained you from writing: I am to request thus much at your hands, that yet
now at * Meaning the suspicion of ingratitude or unthankful n^sse, which among
all other vices, deserves the name of a (...).
length, once after so long an intermission, you will vouchsafe to visit me,
though but with one Epistle, serving as an answer to those many that I have
sent you heretofore: in so doing you shall disburthen my mind of a great and
foul suspicion.

Fare you well.
Macropedius to Sadoleto.
THE ARGUMENT.
To Sadoleto is this Epistle written, wherein is contained an accusation, by
way of friendship intended. etc. a commendation also of Soph^onius, who for
good will in admonishing a lewd fellow of his unthriftiness, was but ill
rewarded for his labor: an in^ectiue (the same being short and somewhat
sharp) against him that is accused: lastly, an exhortation to him in whose
hands it lies, to see the ill behauiours of his son reformed, and
punished: This Epistle consists of four parts in respect of the persons.
First, him that co^pleyneth: the second, him to whom the complaint is made: the
third, the party accused: and the ^ourth, ^he party abused. etc.

FOr as much, as I have learned by common voice, that you are a man not only
endued with wisdom, but also of a very good and upright conscience, besides
that of a rare disposition to virtue and virtuous exercises, I hope you will
not be offended, if I, being touched with a certain brotherly kindness,
discover unto you the crimes of such as be of your affinity and consanguinitie
(notwithstanding I am unknown unto you, and a mere stranger) to the intent
that he which has done amiss, may be allured to amendment: or that you (if by
any means it may be brought to pass) may (yet in time) save your good name
from the blemishe of rebuke, and your worship vndamnified. For, it is the duty
of a good man, to wink no more at the faults of his kinsefolke, then at the
misdeedes of such as are neither of his alliance, nor yet of his
acquaintance: and no less to punish such as are near to him by degree of
blood (so far forth as law pronounces sentence) then such as unto him be
altogether. unknown. We are enjoined by a precept from the supernall prince,
to have a regard of our honest report: for that (says mine author) shall
continue with thee, when thousand treasures passing precious, shall vanishe and
consume. Not many days ago (as it was told me of a certainty) which word
being englished, notes a man of temperance, conti nence, wisdom knowledge,
honesty, and much virtue: such aone was that Sophronius, of whom he writes.
M. Sophronius (whether he be your son or no, I can not directly affirm) a
young man, out of question, very well disposed, and one whose behauiours are
answerable to his name, for he is wise, discrete, sober, and courteous. This
young Gentleman, rebuking some what sharply (I pray you let not my words stir
you to anger) your son for diverse abuses, after sundry admonitions and
friendly warnings given him, for the avoiding of vicious annoyances, and among
al other his misdemeanors, for the filthy abusing of his body with courtesans
and common strumpets, for his inordinate belly cheer, and beastly surfeiting,
to the intent that he and all his friends might escape the gulf of infamy,
and keep their estimation from stains of reproach: procured unto him self, by
speaking the truth without dissimulation, a doubtful inconvenience: namely,
malice and mischief. For, anon after he had rebuked your son, with mild
words and humility of spirit, (wherewith nevertheless his choler extremely
boiled) to the end he might appease this outrageous perturbation in your
son, he made a supper which might content any honest man (for the cheer was
not so homely) albeit, the fare (peradventure) was not fine enough, but over
gross, for the mouth of such a delicate ruffian: to this supper your son
being invited, came accordingly, and like a malicious villain, dissembling his
canckred stomach, and poisoned heart, with hypocritical pretenses, when the
table did (as it were) sound with pleasant merriments, when the cup went
from hand to hand in most friendly fashion, and when the guestes, at that
instant* gathered together, were in the midst of their pleasantest conceits,
what does the varlot your son, but (even like a thief that uses violence
for his avail) Goodwill and courteous interteinme^t cur rishly recompensed.
with naked sword in hand, falls upon Sophronius suspecting no harm* as he
was putting the pot to his lips ready to drink, and wounded him to the very
skul: yea, he had cleft his head in two pieces, if the pewter pot which was
between the sword and his head, had not broken the force of the blow as it
fell. Thus much I thought it good to certify you of, that in perusing this
Epistle, you may see the shameless usage of your son, and so provide in due
time, that to him self he bring not destruction, and to his kindred an
ignominious name*

Fare you well.
Macropedius to Nicasio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He writes to Nicasio, a friend of his, upon occasion of his young children,
whom he is very desirous to have virtuously and learnedly brought up, and
that he may make his matter good, wherein the whole sum of his letter
consists, he begins with the commendation of learning: showing how
necessary it is in the life of man: and what inconveniences ensue the lacking
of so singular an ornament. Lastly, he concludes with an exhortation to the
said Nicasius, whom he moves with diverse reasons, to satissie his mind, in
that whereof he writes.

AMong all things that be in the use and possession of man, deserving
commendation, Learning described and set out according to her ex cellencie and
nobleness.
Learning (in myn^ opinion) is worthy of the chiefest praise that can be given:
by the benefit whereof, he in whom it is lodged is so lightened, that the
darkness of ignorance can not make him stumble: besides that, it is a
special help unto him at all assayes, an excellent ornameut full of worship
and honor, and such a purueyaunce as shall never be spent or wasted. This
noble gift of learning, ever since the foundation of the world, was bestowed
on men, among whom it continued in degrees of ages and posterities, never
loosing any part of her brightness, but even to these our days and times, has
reserved the same undiminished. A thing it is, so necessary in the life of
man, that it can no more be missing, then can meat, whereby the body is
nourished. For, if man representing an heavenly figure, be not beautified with
the Iueis of learning, nor enriched with virtue, what little difference (I pray
you) is there between him and brute beasts, in whom reason has no rule? we
live as beasts do, we move as they do, we go as they do, we use our
outward senses as they do, we enjoy the pleasure of our appetites as they
do, only learning and dertue, are the things that make a difference between
them and us, by the which we bear the resemblaunce of a more worthy, namely a
di^ine, nature. And surely, if we will give any credit to poetical
inventions, these twain, ( Learning and Virtue,) are the two virgins of
heavenly descent, which promised The son of Jupiter and Alcmena: Macrobius
says that Her cules is the sun: and that by the. 12 ^abours which he
sustained, nothing else is signisied, but the yearly course of the Sun through
the. 12. signs Zodiacall.
Hercules, being a well disposed young gentleman, if he would embrace, and have
them in estimation, such honor as never should wear out of memory, such
glory and renoune as should be joined to immortality. Between these twain,
there is such affinity, that the one is abased if the other be absent, because
the one increases the others dignity, when they be both present, and keep
continual company. And, if I may speak what I think without offense,
learning is the mother of virtue, because from her principally virtue does
proceed: Learning gives understanding of all things, as well of heavenly
precepts and Oracles, as also of all other sciences by y^ wit of man invented,
out of which, as out of a clear and hoalesome spring, we can draw nothing but
that which is virtuous, but that which is honest, but that which in all
respects is allowable. And, to the intent you may not be ignorant, what
credit and worship is won by learning, the next way is to consider the
contrary, that is to say, what discommodities follow ignorance: for the
nature of opposites is such, that the one by the other is made manifest.
Ignorance is such an impediment in man, from attaining those benefits which
tend to his special behoof, as a greater can not lightly be named: this
breeds such blindness in him, that he is utterly void of that judgment,
which makes distinction between things to be desired, and things to be
avoided: it takes away the right use of election and choice: it makes him
unacquainted with civility: it ingendreth in him rusticalitie or
clownishnesse: it makes him unmeet metal for the impressions of virtue: it
makes him unfit for good company: it does kindle in his mind,
forgetfulness of him self: yea, the greatest duty of all other, is, by
ignorance, withdrawn from him, and that is the knowledge of God, from whom
he received the incomparable grace of his creation: finally, what enormities be
there, (...) ignorance does (as it were) pile them up one upon another,
whereby all ability, to compass that which is praiseworthy, and commendable
indeed, is brought to naught, and quite turned out of possession. But the
commodities of learning, are not only manifold and diverse, but they are also
singular and necessary: sithence, in consideration of it self, it is soon
gathered, what a treasure it is, and how expedient the happy having of the
same is, not only for that it procures private profit, but also because the
whol^ common wealth, reapeth thereby special aduaunatge: in so much that I am
in doubt (I tell you truth) whether in the world universal, there be any
thing more requisite in the life of man, any thing of equal worthynesse, any
thing so behoofull, any thing more noble and honorable. If you take learning
and knowledge from among men, what d^e you else make of a public body, but a
stable of Asses, a wilderness of Bears, Wolves, and beasts untameable. Take
What confu sion and disor der there is* where lerning is lacking.
learning away, and what shall become of h^alsome laws, which are the sinews
and bones of every common wealth? shall not that foul monster ignorance, with
her sister confusion, enter in and make spoil of all goodness? if this do
once rule the roaste, learning is as much set by as a bench whistler: laws,
and execution of laws cease, and lie gasping under foot. The innocent is not
defended. The oppressed persons cause is not supported. Arts and sciences are
not maintained. Finally, nothing that makes for the profit of the people, is
regarded: and these be the inconveniences that ignorance ingendereth, with an
infinite number more, too tedious to recount. O what In the commendation and
aduaunceme^t whereof none can speak suf ficiently.
an excellent thing, therefore is learning, whereby all these disorders are
redressed, all these abuses abolished, and reformation of things amiss,
introduced, and set in sure possession. By learuing, the common wealth is
rightly governed. By learning, the true use of laws and statutes, are
executed. By learning, the Prince is taught to favor his people: the subjects
to be loyal to their sovereign. By learning, due order is observed in all
offices. By learning, domestical affairs, household matters (I mean) are
well governed: children virtuously instructed: the whole family well provided
and seen unto. By learning, men of mean condition grow in countenance, and
by the credit which they get by their knowledge, are advanced to degrees of
honor. Learning makes hard things easy. Learning makes doubtful things
perceiuable. Learning is a comfort in adversity. Learning keeps men from
waxing insolent in felicity: yea, and to be short, then is the possession of
learning most pleasant and profitable, when a man is solitary, and (as it
were) forsaken. Wherefore, after his pro longed commendation of learning (in
the praising whereof, too much is too li tle) he falls to persuading
^thence the comm^dities of learning be such, as the like unto them can not be
found among men, I am to give you counsel, that (for the advancement of your
own persent to perpetual renoune, and the purchasing of perpetual praise to
your posterity) you will, not only show your self a good patron to
learning, a favorer and furtherer of such as apply them selves to learned
faculties, whereby in time they grow to be necessary instruments in the
common wealth: but that you will also, sithence you are a father o^ children,
whose towardness in their tender years, promises great hope of singular
gifts, hereafter to be showed, so provide and see to their vertu^us education,
that like young plants, under the diligent hand of a painful and running
Gardener, they may spring up, and fructi^ie in such decent order, that you
their father (through the benefit of the learning and knowledge, which by
your careful means they have attained) may have iu^ cause to rejoice, at y^
happy success of those labors, which in trayning up your yonglings, were
employed: that I say you may in them be comforted: that they may see and
perceive in what duties of obedience they are bound, to such good parents, by
whose bounty it is come to pa^se, that they are enabled, both Which been
fites, learning breeds and brings, to such as love and embrace it as we see
by daily proof and expe^ience.
to aspire to preferment them selves: and also to be means, that others be
^urthered. Thus if you do, as I have put you in mind, persuade your self
that you can not be more virtuously disposed: that you can not bestow a more
excellent thing upon your children: ^or this (though you should dye in
poverty, which hard fortune be far from my friends and favorers) will be a
sufficient patrimony to maintain them in their youth, and to succor them in
their age. Besides that, when your bones are putrified in the grave: yet so
long as the pledges of your presence are to be seen and viewed (your children
I mean) the memory of you shall flourish, and such fame shall follow your
name (though your bo^ie be dead) as never shall cease to sound your praises,
among people far and near: that by the mirror of your doings, they may be
won, sembl^bly to see their youths taught and instructed, that for their
well doing, they (as you have already before them) may reap an everlasting
commendation.

Forget not, and Fare you well.
Macropedius to his Sovereign, N. O. P.
THE ARGUMENT.
In this Epistle following, it is Macropedius his desire to set down a perfect
platfourme of a prince* wherein (under the person of Alexander, whom he
comme^deth, as well for outward as inward qualities) he shows what manner
of person, a King or Emperor ought to be. He begins first of all, with the
infancy of Alexander, which ministered manifest and manifold probabilities, of
things which came afterward to pass. He proceeds with his younger years, and
declares how he was then disposed. Lastly, he concludes with his estate when
he came to the possession of the kingdom, after his father Philippes
deceasse: in all these digressions, and discourses, under the example of
Alexander, showing how a prince ought to apply him self, if he intend to be
famous, and after his death, yet to live among people.

ALexander * king of Macedonia (whom I have determined, Whose name is so noble,
and his deeds so renouned, that who has heard least of his fame, may sone
judge of his inconquerable valiantness.
above al other Princes and Emperors of his time in the world, to praise to
your majesty, my most gracious sovereign, and that in few words, least I
should seem too tedious, in recounting his worthiness, whose noble deeds,
give a sound, loud enoughe to his commendation,) descended of the loins of
Philippe, who possessed the Macedonishe Monarchy, next before Alexander his
son, and lawful successor. His mothers name also was Olympias, a Queen
much commended in histories, and a passing goodly La^ie. But if you esteem it
a thing not so precious, nor so much sending to the praise of any person, to
come of an honorable house, to have princes to his parents, to be a Gentleman
borne, to have this title or that of dignity, because (as you say) not the
place where a man is borne, nor the stock from whence he draws his descent,
should so much commend a man, as his own virtues, and inward qualities of
his mind, whereby he is indeed highly aduannced: hear therefore that which you
can not choose but praise exceedingly, and not lightly regard like smoke or
shadows. This Alexander, even in his infa^cie gave many and the self same most
assured significations of excellent gifts, naturally ingraffed in him: yea,
and above all other, of prowess and magnanimity he showed manifest proofs,
insomuch, that the Macedonish Soothsayers or wisemen, expert in the art of
divination and foretelling things to come.
magicians, upon circumstaunces made a conjecture, or rather a prognostication
wherein was certainty, y^ he should be a whip or scourge to al Asia. Touching
the order of his education, histories most plentifully make sundry and
strange declarations: For, he was not only trained in exercises of actiuitie,
but also in the knowledge of sciences liberal, and specially in Khetorique and
Philosophy: then which two necessary stays, the first serving the body, the
second serving the mind, nothing for a king or noble man more convenient. In
actiuitie he did excel (considering his person, and his descent): For it is
said of him that in running he was singular, and in ryding not to be amended:
and though his father Philippe, in this last quality, did wear (as they say)
the golden spurs, yet his son Alexander did better deserve them, sithence
his knowledge in that Art, was (as it seemed) much more assured, and his
cunning grounded upon better experience. As for other properties to the body
belonging, it is no question to be asked, whether he had them or no: For, it is
not an unlike reason, that he, in whom the greatest and the best things were
to be found, should want the lest and the baser. Concerning his person, his
complexion, his proportion, and such like things requisite in a noble man,
they did al concur in him, and nothing did lack y^ might make him amiable.
He was ruddie colored, much like the damask rose, not only in his face, but
throughout al and every part of his body: insomuch that whosoever looked upon
him, and beheld his countenance, they might well marvel at the uniformity
that nature kept, in frameing so goodly a creature. His complexion was of the
perfectest, and soundest, and as for his proportion and making, there was
nothing in him that was out of square, but every ioynte and limme, both in
measure and in place, very formal, and passing hansome. This Alexander
commended for the ornaments of his mind.
Alexander, as he was furnished with external gifts, beautifying and well
beseeming his body: so his mind was garnished with all manner of
understanding. For, as he was a Prince of rare renown, so had he to instruct
him, a Philosopher without peer, ( Aristotle I mean, of whose fame al places
of learning do ring at this day) who taught him not only moral precepts
touching humanity, but other secret sciences, which he did impart but to a
very few, the same being special persons, among whom Alexander was one. O
happy Prince whose luck it was to have such a master: and O no less
fortunate Philosopher, in whose lapp the lot fell to have so noble a scholar.
No doubt, this was the Gods foreappointment: For, as He means Alexander the
king: and Aiistotle the Philosopher.
these twain were incomparable, in consideration of the ornaments, wherewith
they won immortal memory: so neither of them lost their labor, not
Aristotle in teaching, nor Alexander in lear ning, but the one and the other
did reap convenient profit. But what need I heap up so many words in this
matter, my pen has not the power to paint out that puisaunt Prince, in such
lively colors as he deserves. For it passes my capacity to draw out his
portrayture in suf ficient liuelynesse.
Lysippus the cunning ingrauer must be sent for: and Appelles the famous limmer
must be fett, to accomplish this curious piece of work. We had need of a
Cicero or a Demosthenes, both tried Rhetoricians, to set him out with their
blasing eloquence. Maro and Homer must take in hand to write in heroical
Uerses, y^ virtue and nobleness of him, whose worthiness when I examine, I
see such odds, between the majesty of his person, and the homeliness of
mine invention, that I think it more auailable to keep silence, and so avoid
blame, then by saying little, and y^ same super^ciall, to incur reprehension,
for attempting that, which I am not able to compass. Nevertheless, because
every man has knowledge delivered him, as it were by weight and measure, it is
my part to employ, that which remains in me, insemblable proportion: and
therefore (most Gracious Sovereign) according to mine ability, I will
proceed in commending my Alexander, as I have already begun, least I should
give occasion to your highness, that I have taken upon me a piece of work,
whereof I cannot be the master. To pretermitte his infancy, to let slip his
younger years, both which were never destitute, of most honorable behauiours,
and to come to his riper age, to come to that time wherein he gave singular
manifestations of his valliantnesse, which was never separated from policy, it
is a world to consider y^ victories which he obtained, to recount the countries
which he subdued, to number up y^ people whom he drue to his subjection, to
make rehearsal of his straung adventures, finally to declare the manifold ways
which lay wide open unto him, to good fortune, and the getting of every thing,
according to his own will, whereby be purchased that rare title of Empire, to
be called (...), Magnus, Great and mighty, it would Because an epistle should
be short, and trussed up in a few lines.
exceed the due proportion and length of an epistle, draw the vein of mine
invention dry, breed wearisomnesse to you in reading, and seem rather to
savor somewhat of the nature of an history, which rippeth up circumstances
to the very proof, leaving little or nothing unremembered. What Prince in power
has ever been heard off, comparable to Alexander? What king in his adue^tures
has had more happy success? On whom have the Gods and Goddesses more
smiled, that he should strike such an astonishment of his own person into the
minds of people, as to be thought and named Jupiter, and not Alexander the
son of Philippe and Olympias? When he was twenty years old, he was
admitted to the Scepter of the kingdom, and had in his hands the Macedonian
Monarchy, after the deceasse of his father, who was slain of A young
Gentleman, of Macedonia, and a gallant cour ti^the occasion why he slew king
Philippe, is mentioned in Trog. and other historiographers, to long here to
insect.
Pausanias: who being no sooner installed in the seat royal, and wearing the
Diadem of empire, was much troubled with commotions of his people, and such as
ought to have been most loyal and obedient to their leage lord and king, made
insurrection and played the arrant rebels, seeking not his dispossession only,
but also his destruction: nevertheless, he esteeming these tumults but as
vain shadows, was so far from being carried away with the conceit of
fearfulness, (the next and ready way to cowardice) that with boldness of
heart, and constancle, he suppressed them all, and that in very short space,
confirming to himself the true service of his subjects, and winning the favor
of his Peers and Nobles, that he could not but prosper in all things which he
attempted. He beseeged the city of Thebes, overcame it, and did ransack it. By
concluding peace, he reconciled unto himself and his people, the Atheniens. He
discomfited Darius and his whole army, took his wife and children prisoners,
whom he used very parcially, nay, very mercifully, considering y^ he had iuster
occasion to execute tyra^nical violence, then to show any sparkle of co^passi^.
He behaved himself in all his warlike enterprises, like a puisant Martialist,
having virtue his forrunner, and Fortune his weighting maid. Pamphylia,
Cilicia, Pisidia, Phrygia, Paphlagonia, Cappadocia etc. fell into his dominion,
and thus most miraculou^y were y^ bo^ds of his kingdom amplified and enlarged.
He passed over the ^oud Issus and came to Damascus, tolte Cyprus, all Phenicia,
Tyrus excepted: which city, when he was assaulting, there appeared unto him in
his dream, Hercules calling him by his name, and offering himself to take him
down from the walls. Another thing appeared also unto him in his sleep, a
Satyr playing with him, whom when he would have caught, it ran away from him:
nevertheless, at last it came voluntarily, and yelding unto him, was taken in
his hands. This last dream, being put to expositours, to be interpreted, was
thus understood, that by the division of the word Satyrus, the dream did
import this meaning, namely (...). Tua Tyrus: The la^d of T^ (...) sea^ yflown
At (...) desire, shall be thine own^.
(...): The city Tyrus shall be yours. After that he took Gaza, a great and
stately city in Syria: he conquered Egypt, in which country, he was
desirous to leave some monument of himself, that the memory of him, and his
people, might flourish throughout all posterities. This city he called after
his own name, which he built in such a plott of land, as a better, neither for
pleasantness, nor commodity, might be chosen in all that region. Thus
proceeding from worcester thinesse to worthiness, from renown to renown, mounting
as it were by steps, he became so famous, that all the world heard of the
deeds of Alexander, counting him rather a God, then a man. So He draws to
his conclusion, wherein he makes an application of that which is before spoken
then your Grace may see by these confused and disordered discourses, packt
together in praise of a right praise worthy Prince, what a valliaunt spirit
he was directed withal in all his adventures. How far he was to revolt from
manhood, no not when he was in extremity of danger, but withstanding all
inconveniences, thoroughe the good guiding of virtue, and the favor of
fortune, that never failed, he purchased a name of nobleness, which remaining
in the registers of many Chroniclers and writers, may serve for an incitation,
or encouragement to other kings and Princes, to follow his steps in
puisaunce and martial excercises, though their luck be not like his, nor the
success of their labors so fraught with happiness. Now, to end with that,
wherein I should have begun, namely, the ornaments of his mind, which
proved him a noble gentleman in deed: it is manifest in all that was written
of him, how studious and painful he was, to be seen in the knowledge of the
sciences liberal, and no less earnest and desirous to put that in experience,
wherein he was instructed. The learning of Which consists in the precepts of
mor^ll Philos^phie, whereof Aristotle wrote a learned wo^k called his Ethickes.
things tending to humanity, what goodly effects wrought it in his heart, yea
even in the heat of war when the force of his anger should have plucked him
violently to reuengement, then was he passing appliable to compassion, in
so much that he did both forgive and forgett offenses committed against his
majesty, albeit they were oftentimes done to work his own mischief. In the
mysteries of nature he labored so diligently, being taught of Aristotle, that
there was kindled in him such a marvelous delight, that he could not abide,
others to be communicants and partakers of that which he knew, but himself
to have the understanding of that only and alone, whereof others should be
ignorant. In the art of Physic he did profit wonderfully, not in that only
which consists in speculation, but in that also which is altogether occupied
in practice and experience: in so much that when he was but sixteen years of
age, he was able to do such things, as men of greater age, and longer
practice, could not compass, neither by knowledge nor cunning. Thus your Grace
sees the express picture of a prince, to whose paths I would wish you
direct your footestepps, if you mean to be a partaker of his praise.

Chapter Hegendorphinus, to Laurentio Czocho.
THE ARGUMENT.
This epistle is written to Lau. Czo. not as a dehortation unto him, to leave
the foul abuse of drunkenness (for he was a sober young man, and such a one
of whose virtuous disposition Hegendorphinus, and others had good hope:) but it
is sent unto him, as an example or president to make the like epistle in
dehorratorio genere, if occasion so served him to write, either for exercise
sake, or otherwise.

IS A Proeme or beginning expostulato^e wherein he reasons with authority.
it a good hearing, think you, that you are never from the Alehouse, nor the
Tavern, but like an Epi^urean porket, wallowe day and night in the dregs of
dronckennesse? Have you not the wit, and discretion to perceive, how foul and
filthy a vice it is? and how unseemly a quality for any man to use? There is
but one thing that makes a difference between a man and a beast, and that is
Reason: in this property of the mind, he excels all other creatures, as
far as the glory of ye heavens passes the vileness of the earth. This
gift of reason, by the benefit of the Gods given unto you, for your own
avail, you do most miserably abuse, by ingurgitating and pouring down your
throat continual streams of delicat^ wine and strong drink: insomuch that
the light of reason, being greatly dimmed, and in manner clean put out, you
differ very little from a filthy swine. What meanest thou man? what
sweetness do thou find in tumbling thee self in such a loathsome vice? Is
all thy judgment consumed through thine excessive abuse? Have thou not one
sparckle of perseueraunce left, to examine and take account in thine own
conscience, what inconveniences give attendaunce upon drunkenness? Does not
the huge arruie of mischiefous maladies, whereof Pliny in his Pliny lib. 4.
de Naturalib.
Naturals makes an enumeration or rehearsal, make thee afraid to frequent the
same? Of drunkenness (says he) come hanging and blabber cheeks: from
drunkenness proceed disseases in the eyes, as bloudshotts, etc. From
drunkenness proceeds trembl^ng hands, spiced with the Palsy, not able to
hold a cupp of wine from spilling: from drunkenness do proceed terrible and
fearful dreams, unquiet sleeps etc. These things would be considered.
What As if he had said: your adversaries will take an occasion, by your
misdemeanour, to give you a very ill report.
will be the communication of your adversaries, and the usual talk of such
as bear you no goodwill? What will be the words of such as marcke your
missdemeanours? Yea, what will your best friends say, when they hear of this
your beastly beehauiour? See, will one say, this fellow could take upon him
to disuade us from drunkenness, who should be unto us as a burning Beacon, to
give us warning to beeware of abuses: and who is more immoderate then he? who
is given to excessive swilling so much as he? Whooe swerueth so far and wide
from sobriety as he? He is never from the I^e bush: his lips are always
staynd with the With wine. For the grape is called the berrie of Bacchus, whom
Poets feigned to be the God of wine.
Juice of Bacchus his berries. What a shameful report is this? Do you not
remember, that the property of drunkards is to keep nothing in secret, but
with the Terentian Parmeno, to blab abroad in the hearing of all men,
whatsoever is told him in silence, though it be a thing of never such weight
and counsel? I say no more but end with this caveat: Take heed that you
forsake drunkenness, and fashion your self to soberness, if you mean to
keep the credit and opinion of a wise man, and the report of one that is
honest.

Fare you well.
Chapter Hegend. to Laur. Cz*
THE ARGUMENT.
By this short letter, he teaches how a letter of request should be made by
one friend to another, if the one may refourme that wherein the other is
abused: immagining his argument or matter of a Sycophant, or vain lying
merchaunt, whose study it is to carry tales up and down from ear to ear,
that truth might be falsified.

I A letter of petition and complaint.
Have a request to your goodness (right worshipful sir) wherein I would
gladly be satisfied. So it is, that a certain Sycophant, and ^alse varlot,
well enough known unto you, ouercloyeth me with many and continual troubles:
in consideration whereof, because upon sundry considerations I see it
auayleable, I have thought good to open ye matter unto you, as to one that
favors not any such deceitful and lewd fellows, to the intent you may take
him in hand, suppre^ his ^awcinesse, and make him leave off his mallapertnesse,
that I, through your benefit, may find an end of disquietnesse. Can any thing
be seasoned with more justice, then one friend to take another friends part, to
defend and maintain him against the backbiting, slanderous, and hellish
barking of a maliciously disposed Sycophant? And surely, I cannot see what you
may do with more facility and easiness, sythence a countenance of your
authority, may redress this abuse. Do but so much as give this By whose
means I am so molested* vexed, and disquie^ed.
naughty fellow warning, to rule his spiteful tongue: and to leave his
opprobrious speeches, and raseallike raylinges. This may you do passing
conveniently, at such time as he comes to sal^le and visit you, as he is
accustomed: and I am yours in what you please, at service and commandment.

Fare you well.
Chapter Hegend. to Laur. Czoc.
THE ARGUMENT.
A letter of imitation, made, in Suasorio scribendi genere, wherein
Hegendorphinus goes about by counsel and reason drawn from that which is
dishonest, from that which is discommodious, from that which is hard and
laborious, from that which is not necessary, from that which is wicked, from
that which is dangerous, and from that which is impossible, to win his
friends mind, from the trade of a merchant, and to frame himself to some
facul^ie of learning.

ALthough (my bes^ beloved friend) you are of sufficient wisdom to be your
own counselor: yet notwithstanding, in consideration of my Which in a true
hearted friend, cannot but show fruit suff^cient.
singular love and special kindness, wherewith I tender your safety, I
cannot smoulther silence in a cause of constraint, but needs must impart unto
you for your profit (as I hope) my private opinion touching your determination
and purpose. It is reported unto me, that you mean to be a merchaunt venturer:
I am sorry that you should so employ the time and your labor, yea I would (if
I could) disuade you from this intent. Consider with your self that your
substance and wealth is not very great, and therefore you cannot deal
franckly in traffic: and surely, the trade of merchandise, except it be
sumptuous and costly (according to the authority of Cicero) it is lightly to
be regarded: yea it is to be thought a kind of pedlarie exchange, to buy that
at the merchants hand, which shortly after is set to open sale: what gain or
advantage do they reap by their chopping, changing and intercourse of
traffic, unless they lie most odi^usly? neither is there any thing in the
world more beastly and dishonest, then vanity etc. Thus says Cicero.
Furthermore, An enumera tion of such hazardes as merchantes and occupiers are
^ubiecte unto.
set before your eyes, the dangers which pursue you from place to place,
whether you ride, whether you go on foot, or whether you sail. If you carry
money with you in your budgett, you are in a thousand hazards. For, either you
are like to loose them and your life likewise, in the swelling waves: you are
in peril of Pirates and Rouers to spoil you: of cuttethrote thieves and knaves
by land to rob and take them from you: what should I talk of the stormy
shoures that you must suffer in your journey or voyage: what should I talk of
thunder, lightning, blustering blastes of winds, hayle, and other tempests,
whereunto you be subject when you are abroad. I will say nothing of the labor
that is employed in bargaining: of the toil in packing: of the pain in
shipping, of the care in conueying your wares and merchandise home to your own
house. These inconveniences well considered, it is great marvel, if you
abhor not the trade of a merchaunt, as much as you abhor an Adder or
Toade. But A supposed objection where to follows immediately after a fit
resolution or answer.
peradventure the gain that arises by occupying, pleases you marvelous
well, so that you think it in no wise to be mislyked. But weighe with your
self on the other side, with what drudgerie it is gotten, with what small regard
of upright dealing, honesty or conscience. For, you buy a thing good cheap,
for a small price, and in manner a trifle: you sell the same again to your
Brother too dear and out of reason. See I pray you, is this kind of gain to
be liked? is it to be commended? Nay, is it not to be detested, is it not to
be abhorred, hated and despised? what if you loose by one kind of ware, or
twoe, more then you shall recover again in many? what if you have not money
for present and ready payment, whereby you are forced (because of credit and
forbearaunce) to give a greater price, for that which you buy, then you take
by their vtteraunce, yea, many times it comes to pass, that in thus
bargaining you are so far from being a sauer, that you are a great looser.
And what if it so chance (as peradventure it may) that most men buy such
ware as you want, whereby your merchandise lie upon your hand, in your
storehouse unfold: where is your gain become now in these hard cases? To
conclude, what need (in Gods name) have you, to give your self to such an
uncertain trade, so dangerous, both in consideration of loss of goods, and
in respect of loss of life in like manner? What man, are you not As i^ he ^ad
said: being learned as you are, what need you tie your self to a trade or
occu pa^ion.
learned? have you not knowledge in the scienc^s liberal? are not these a
sufficient purueyance, in what place of the world soever you chauuce to
travel? For (as says the proverb)

No land there is but does maintain
Each Noble Art with goodly gain.
Why do not you apply your self, to some one kind of profession, or other,
wherein there is certainty and stay of living? as for example, Physic, or the
Law, which of the twain you do best like? By these you shall soon and safely
mount to be rich and woorshipful, whereafter* I know you hunger and thirst,
like to one that is famished for want of necessary sustenaunce: wherefore, if
you mean, that I shall continue toward you, mine accustomed favor and
freendshippe, change this your perilous purpose, and determine otherwise to
shifte in the world.

Fare you well.
Chapter Hegend. to Laur. Cz^cho.
THE ARGUMENT.
This Epistle, being in d^liberatiuo genere, runs altogether upon
persuasions. The whole sum of the letter does signify thus much. One friend
being desirous of another good friends estate, gives him counsel (because he
was learned and well seen in the liberal Arts) to frame himself to the study
of the civil law: and to the end ^e might per^uade himself thereunto, he
uses sundry reasons, drawn from sundry Rhethorical places* a^ for ^xample:
first from that which is honest. 2. From that which is pro fi^able. ^ From that
which is possible. 4. From that which is necessary. ^. From that which is
easy. 6. From that which is pleasant o^ delight some. etc. It may serve very
well for (...).

I Hear say (my good freende) that you are consid^ring with your self upon what
kind of profession, it were best to be^ow your time and labor. Surely, if it
please you to admit the counsel that I shall minister, which is both
freendely and profitable, above al other faculties, I would wish you to be a
A professor o^stu lient of the Civil law, which yeeld^ great advantage.
Ciuilian. For, then this profession what can be reckoned more honest? what can
be immagined more honorable? By the benefit of this, you may succor the
distressed, you may maintain the right of the Orphan, you may defend the
wronged widow, and what is there that belongs to justice and equity, but
you may put it in experience? And what (I pray you) can be more necessary?
take out of Cities and incorporations the civil Law, and what will follow but
an overthrow of common wealths, a displacing of order, a confusion of estates,
and other incon^eniences? you are not ignorant (I suppose) of Ciceroes words,
had in his Oration pro Cluentio, wherein he says: That Ci^r. in orat. pro. A.
Cluentio: as I remember, he speaks there of lawe^ in general, not meaning any
certain especial kind of Law.
the Civil Law is the bond of the City, it is the foundation of freedom. For
(says he,) look what our bodies be, when the soul has forsaken them, even
that is a City, wherein are no Laws: these laws, are to the common wealth
(as it were) members, limbs, joints, sinowes, veins, blood, soul and
spirit, the use whereof wanting in a City, no good can ensue. Lysten yet a
little further, and hear what the same Orator says, in his Plee for
Caecinna: There is nothing, that ought to be maintained with such care,
diligence, and circumspection, in any City and incorporation, then the civil
Law: which being abolished and put to silence, what man is there that can have
certain knowledge, what is his own right, and what is another interest? The
civil law labors wholly to this end, namely that every City be brought into
such good frame and order, as a better can not be devised: so affirms mine
author Alcinous. Lo, now you see the necessity of the civil Law. As for
the credit, the countenance, the favor, the estimation, and the honor
which it does bring, who is there but is able to testify? To pretermit and
pass over a great number, who by this faculty have been advanced: what
shall we think of There were many Gentlemen, (...) by the name o^ Mutius,
touching whom, Rapha ^l Volaterane has spoken somewhat largely.
Mutius Scaeuola, who by this profession grew in exceeding reputation, among
the Romans, in so much that his house was called Oraculum Ciuitatis, the
Oracle of the whole City? A certain Sabine, descending of a simple stock, and
being therwithal in like manner very poor, was made a Knight of the Noblest
order, by Tyberius Caesar, for none other cause, then for that he was a learned
and skillful Ciuilian: yea, to this state of honor attained he, when he was
aged, being almost (as it is registered) fifty years old. Whom Nero
commanded to be put to death because he bare the name and gave the badge or
cognisaunce of the same Cassi^ that slew (...). (...). Pompon.
Caius Cassius Longinus, by and through the same science, became very
worshipful under the forenamed Tyberius, and under Claudius he was created and
made Lord President of Syria. Now, if so be the thing whereat you lay the
level of your thoughts and purposes, be gain and commodity, then I say unto
you, and that out of the book, there is no profession that affoordeth larger
advantage, no trade that yields the like profit: which words of mine to
be true, that usual verse, although it hault in one syllable, manifestly
affirms, saying:

Galene gives richesse and substance good store:
Iustiman gives honors and titles of glore.
D^o you not see, that the simplest Lawyer of all, he who in comparison of
other, is but an Idiot, to live like a Gentleman, in ability to maintain his
house and famili^, to bear a port and countenance. etc. So that there is no
cause (as far as I can conjecture) whereby you should be discouraged, and
driueu into dumpes of doubtfulnesse. The study of this science, is marvelous
easy, if a man be sufficiently armed and furnished with the knowledge of
other Arts: and An enume^ of such (...) and (...) as make (...) for the (...)
of (...) (...) in (...).
^thence you have tongue at liberty, that is, vtteraunce at pleasure: sithence
you are more eloquent then eloquence is it self, sithence your memory is
cortaine and i^fallible, sithence your judgment is sound (...) not to be
dissalowed: what hardness can there be in studying the ciuillawe? Nay rather,
what can be more easily learned, especially of you, in whom is such
ripeness of learning? Here unto is to be added, as not unworthy the
consideration, that the whole substance of this science, is contained in
certain books, not infinite and innumerable, so that it is but a kind of
pastime for you, to atteine the knowledge of the same with perfection (which
you can not but do, if you apply your mind thereunto) whereby you may in
time, grow to be a second Scaeuola: in the studying of this Art, this caveat
must be had, namely, to take unto you one certain writer: you must not do,
as a great many do in these days, who whiles they are buisie with this book
of law, and that book of law, following the interpretations and notes of
diverse men, they themselves be uncertain which chiefly to immitate, and
their counsel, in the mean while, is no furtherance to their clientes. To be
short, in the understanding and perfect knowledge of the Law, there is a
certain sweetness and delectation to be gathered. For (that I may use the
words of Cicero) if any man conceive pleasure in the study of foreign and
strange things, let him have recourse to the Civil law, let him search the
Priests registers, let him look upon the twelve tables of antiquities,
whereby the ancient customs of the Romans, their diverse kinds of
exercises, and their trade of life are discovered: and he shall find much and
manifold matter, in the which he may be delighted. Go too then: sithence there
is no faculty, then the civil law more honest, none more necessary, none
more profitable, none more easy, for end, none more pleasant: you shall be
counted as very a dawcocke and dizzarde as ever was This was not Corocbus the
Athenien, of whom Pliny lib. 7. cap. 56. but the same whom Virgil speaks
(...). 2. Aeneid.
Coroebus, if to the profession and practice of the same, you show not your
self appliable.

Fare you well.
C. Hegendorphinus, to Laur. Czocho.
THE ARGUMENT.
He sets down an example, how to write an epistle in demonstratiuo genere,
concerning the commendation of some worthy and famous deed. The places, from
whence, he boroweth his reasons, are these. From that which is honest and
honorable, from that which is hard and ^ karse venturable. etc. All which
belong to the confirmation of his purpose.

MAny are the Noble deeds of arms of the Romans, but among all other, this
carries away the pearl of praise and renoune: that Of whose valiantness
diverse authors have written: and among the rest Valerius Max imus.
P. Decius, for the preservation of his country which was in irrecouerable
danger, offered his own life (then which nothing in the world more sweet and
precious) to a gaping gulffe, and that of a voluntary motion, to be swalowed
up and devoured. For, what could he attempt sauouring of more honesty and
honor, in consideration, either of his private estate, or in respect of the
whole body of the common wealth? In consideration of his own private person:
because it is no small argument and token, of a courageous hearted man, of his
own accord, to pushe upon the pykes of death: because it is a manifest
testimony, of a valiant spirit, not to love life, (then which among men
nothing more dear,) but to forsake it, and that most willingly, that others
by his death might enjoy the benefit of life. He did not put himself into
this horrible adventure, upon temeritie and rashness: but being warned so to
do by a vision in his sleep, or rather being so admonished by revelation from
heaven, he was not wayward to show himself conformable to such forceable
representations. In respect of the whole Common wealth: because it can not but
be honest and honorable, that a good and virtuous man dies, for the
deliverance of his country, from an inconvenience. Let us proceed and
consider what commodities did redounde to the Common wealth, by this his deed
of valiauntuesse. He saved the life of many a Noble Duke: The fruits and
commodities which insued the valiant death of P. Decius.
he wrought the safeguard of many a conquerous Captain: he sent home the army
with victory and triumph: to the Romans he purchased everlasting renoune:
for end, to his own self, he won a name of immortal majesty. He may (of
right) challenge to him self this singular title, to be called Pater Patriae,
The father of his Country. What should I here stand in rehersing the danger
of the enterprise, what should I do spending the time, in putting you in mind
of the hardness of the adventure? How terrible a thing it was, that he so
courageously attempted, you may gather by the circumstaunces. As who said:
there is none but thinks and persuadeth himself that life is passing sweet.
What man is there but loves his life? and good reason: neuerthe less, what
is he among a myllia^, that is not surprised with sorrow, when he sees that
soul and body must be separated? yea, this parting in sunder, makes the
valiant man's heart to quake and tremble. Howebeit, this Noble Gentleman,
understanding by revelation, that if he enjoyed life, the whole common wealth
was like to be maruelously molested, did choose rather, of his own life to make
a resignation, then that his country, which he most tenderly loved, should
fall in the greedy jaws of devouring desolation. And specially lusty
Gentlemen and gallant Courtiers, who should be a spectacle and pattern to the
rest.
All noble hearted men therefore, setting before them, this worthy fact of
Decius, let them put in practice some part of his prowess, if they mean to
be partakers with him, of his perpetual renoune.

Fare you well.
Conradus Celtis, to N. Patritio.
THE ARGUMENT.
He exhorts N. Pat. a young Gentleman being in warrefare, and desirous to
return home to his country, to continue still in battle, and as he has
begun, so to persevere. To prove that there i^ no loss, but gain gotten by
absence from ones natural country, he uses the example of Medea. Lastly he
concludes with a short sentence out of Euripides.

IN all the Epistles that I send to your Captain and governor, I see good
and necessary occasion offered, not to pretermitte your commendation: touching
which I must say somewhat, even with an upright judgment, and evident
witness, of my benevolence toward you always inclined. First, I would wish
you to set aside Wherein to be busy and occupied, is a thing ^arre vnsitte for
your person, and degree.
all trifling affairs, and vain follies: shake off that delightful desire
which you have, to be conuersaunt in the City: and thereunto labor to aspire
by continuance and virtue, whereto you have once given assayes to mount
already: Fie man, mi^se not of your adventure. Let Medea be a pattern and
example for you to follow, who although she were a nyc^ and delicate Lady, at
what time she returned home to her country, after a certain time of absence
expir^d, and being asked the question of Matrones and ancient Gentlewomen,
how she liked thereof: she made them this answer to their d^maunde: says she:
to get virtue and honor, it is a goodly thing (doubtless) to be absent from
ones country. For, many when they are far distant from their native soil,
^inde themselves thereby much benefited, and their dooinges and dealinges (in
such a case) are more allowable. Contrariwise, many that have spent their
years at home, have been so far from being therefore commended, that they
have incurred rather a great mislikeing, in the number of whom, it had been
your luck to have been reckoned, had not we perforce thrust you out, and urged
you to attempt that, wherewith you were very loathe to meddle. But we will
defer these matters till When we sha^ have (...) leisure, (...) ^etter op^ to
(...)* and (...).
another time, intending to write of them largely, when we are at more leisure.
And because I have taken upon (...) to represent the person of ^ueene Medea, I
think it (...) (...), to put you in re^embraunce of this sentence:

A sentence taken out of Euripides.
That wise man's wit is naught but vain,
Who for himself no good can gain.
Look to your health: and fare you well.
Conradus Celtis to Hasilina Eudemia.
THE ARGVM^NT.
In this epistle he sets down an example, how one that is in love should
write to his beloved: beginning first with a certain affection of mind
somewhat (...) to (...): (whereby ^oe (...), that men being b^nded with love,
must, if they mean to get her favor, feed her with f^re speeche^, tend^ng
(...) the praise of her person: for therein women conceive a passing pride, and
are much delighted) then falling into a complaint of her cruelty, and his
misery: after that he falls to entreating and to promising: by which he
does nothing else, but set down a president or an example, (as I said) how
he should write that is in love, and would obtain goodwill for his ki^dnesse.

I Can not but sighe and be sorrowful, so often as thou come to my
remembrance. He describes the beau tie and comeliness of his love, a ^aire
Damosel, in re peating the occasions of his perturbed* and vexed mind,
I can not but feel me self much pricked with grief, whiles I thin^e upon
thy golden glistering hairy locks: when I think upon thy most comfortable
countenance: when I think upon thy crimson cheeks: when I think upon thy
sugared lips: when I think upon thy neat proportion: when I think upon thy
sweet tongue: finally, when other heavenly ornaments wherewith thou art
enriched and beautified, of^er themselves to my cogitations and memory. But
(Oh cruel and blo^die woman) thou regarde^t not my wa^ling words: the have no
compassion upon me in my perplexiti^s: thou suffer me to pine away in
grievous agonies: thou let death swallowe me up, the art art so full of
unkindness. I wot not how i^ comes to pa^e, whether by the frowardness of
my fortune: the vnhappin^sse of my destiny: the cro^ of my luck: or the
cursed hour of my birthe and nativity: to which of these, I may best ascribe
it, I am uncertain: that I loving thee so exceedingly, can not obtain so
much as one lovely look: not so much as one wanton wink: not so much as
one privy token of goodwill, whereby I may feel my self refreshed. I send
thee a lamentable letter, a letter written with tears. He pleads like a
suppliaunt, for pity and compassion* a thing not out of use and custom with
lovers.
Alas, be not so savage, be not so cruel, be not so merciless: repair unto
me, sit by me, talk with me, and let me enjoy thy company. For what thing
is more pleasant, what thing is more ^electable, then that we two should live
together, should love together, should embrace one another, and minister long
required recreation one to another? Our age is not far spent, gifts we want
none to bestow upon thee, thou have our heart wholly in thy perpetual
possession.

Fare you well, and have me in remembrance.
Conradus Celtis, to Paleologo Constantinopolitano.
THE ARGVM^NT.
This Epistle ^eacheth, how one should indite a letter of consolation to his
distressed freende. The order which he uses in his example is this. First he
begins with the person of himself, showing that his sorrow is such for his
friends sak^, that he had no less need himself to be succored, then his
friend by his counsels and exhortations to be comforted. Then he proceeds,
showing that he ought not so much to be grieved, for his pre^ent loss,
because others in times past, have been, partakers of the like. Lastly, he
gives him counsel to shake off sadness, persuading him to hope, and not to
despai^e.

Although I have more need to be comforted, then to minister consolation to
such as be grieved: yet notwithstanding, in consideration that nothing does
so much molest me, as At the remembrance whereof* I feel my self assaulted
with much sorrow and anguishe.
the thought of your loss and ill luck, I can not choose but earnestly exhort
you, and heartily beseech you, for the special kindness which knitteth our
two harte^ together, that you would not be discouraged, but show your self to
be manful and valiant: I would have you to consider the condition whereunto all
men are subject, the ma^folde miseries wherein we be wrapped, and the unhappy
times wherein we are borne and conceived. Your virtue (Man) your virtue has
done you more honor, then your fortune has wrought you disworship: and
though by the last, your riches are diminished, yet by the first your estate is
advanced. For you have ob^eined that which many men have not gotten: and you
have lost that, whereof many a Noble Gentleman (in like manner) has been
deprived. Then, sithence it is so, let not grief and heaviness of heart, bring
you into such thraldom, as that you should forget Which is, no^ to relent at
any molestation and trou ble, but to endure al with patience, forbearaunce, and
valiauncie.
the duty of a courageous man. You are not the first that have suffered ship
wrack: you are not the first upon whom fortune has frowned: you are not the
first whose flower of felicity has been soudenly blasted: then why should
you so yield to sorrow, as though there were no hope of after joy? why
should present heaviness so vex you, as though by future comfort, you were
not to be revived. The Sun is not always darkened with clouds: the Sea is
not always tossed with a storm: the winds do not always bl^steringly
blow. The Winter Frostes do not always endure: no more should your grief
heaviness and anguish be continual. You have had the name of a wiseman, and not
without deserte: show not your self therefore in time of necessity, when
wisdom should show her self in brauest and brightest beauty, an indiscreet
person, wanting wit, judgment and reason. Words of comfort and consolation
prouerbially used.
Remember: there is nothing that is perpetual, the hard rocks consume in
time, so does iron, so does the hard flint: and think you that your fall is
so sore, that you are never like to rise, that your ebb is so low, that you
are never like to have a f^l tyd^? I warrant you I* though you wade betwixt
hope and despair^, (...) uncertain yet, where your lotte will ligh^, yet*
because Hope and Despair
despair is a sign of (...), and hope an argument of valiantness, lean to
the one, and forsake the other: for in despair there is no succor, in hope
there is some comfort.

Fare you well.
Conradus Celtis, to Marco Cardinali.
THE ARGUMENT.
An example or president to make a letter of commendation, for the furtheraunce
of a man's freende, if n^de so require* wherein first he confesses the
benevolence of him to whom he writes, and so makes an entrance into his
purpose. Then he moves the matter it self, and names the person for whom he
laboure^h. Lastly he concludes with a repetition of his request, showing
therein a certain earnestness.

B^use the proofs of your benevolence unto me, are not only manifold, but
also manifest, in so much that they are s^led with A ^mber (...) (...) an
(...) (...) a (...) (...) (...)* meani^g innumer^ble, and exceeding the ord^r
of accomptes.
a thousand testimonies: therefore it comes to pass, that many have recourse
unto me, requiring that I would be a mediator for them unto you, that upon
the ^ght of their commendable report, signified unto you by letter, it wo^ld
please you to be their furtherer. Wherefore, among al other, in whose behalf I
am to entreat, and make reque^, F. Francisco, a very friend of mine, and a
Citizen no less honest then worshipful, comes to my remembrance. This man
has a younger brother, very modest in behavior, and virtuously disposed, and
such a one, whom we can not but like and love: he it is whom we commend at
this present to your courtesy, and goodness, desiring you to stand his
faueurer and furtherer. This manne^ of concluding is familiar and usual, with
the best ^hethoricians, in this kind of lipistle.
Yeu shall do me an exceeding great pleasure, if he may understand by some
assurance, that my letter of commendation, written unto you in his behalf,
has been for his profit and preferment.

Fare you well.
Jo. Ludouicus Viues, to Idiaqueo etc. Secretary to Charles the fifte.
THE ARGUMENT.
This Epistle contains a Catalogue, or rehersall of such as have written
Epistles heretofore. Some of the he commends, othersome he dispraiseth,
showing wherein they deserved liking, and whorein again they were worthy of
reprehension. His meaning is that their authorite is rather to be used, whose
Epistles carry away most credit: and who they are, the Epistle manifestly
declares.

HAueing written unto you a method, or platfourme of inditing letters, not
that I thought, thereby to be your teacher, (for I am not ignoraunte how
exquisitely you have the knowledge of that faculty) but because my desire was,
that under the protection of your name, this small Epistol^call treatise,
written and devised by me for the instruction of the ignorannt, might be
published: I thought it not amiss, after many precepts given, for good order
keeping in making a letter, to say somewhat touching the Authors of Epistles.
And to begin with the Epistles of Writers of no less excellentnesse then
auncientnes^e.
Plato and Demosthenes, because they are most ancient and but a very few in
number, I omit with silence. As for the Epistles of A man, in his kin^e of
profession, without match.
Tullre, although we have diverse of them re^erued unto our own use, even
till this age (as it were through many tempests, and dangers) wherei^ as he
excelled all other writers, and specially the (...), in cho^en words,
finenesse of phrase, and eloquence of style; so in them are many things to be
learned, both touching matters of common wealths, and private precepts
tending to judgment and wisdom: yet notwithstanding, many of them were lost,
but how many, it is uncertain. The Epistles of A dark and mystical
Philosopher, crab bed and harshe, yet profound and learned in writing.
Seneca are full of Philosophy. The Epistles of Pliny are necessary for use
and exercise: both in consideration of men's private buisinesse, and in
respect of affairs tending to the weal public: nevertheless in both
points, because Cicero is the better, I count him the rather of the twain to
be chosen. Pliny in his Epistles, is short, pleasant, ready, abounding with
apt, sententious clauses, and merueilous convenient, for quick witted youths
to read and peruse, when they send letters one to another for practice sake,
sauouring of an eloquent vein, though the matter and Argument be not so
weighty: among the Graecians there are found some, whose Epistles are read
here and there, in diverse writers volumes, among whom Lucianus is one, whose
Epistles are So are they also short brief, and compendious
plain and easy: and the Epistles of Philostratus, which are fuller of
painted words, then beseems the matter wherein he is conuersaunt. The
Epistles of them both, to say the very truth, are vain, trifling, and
serving to small purpose. The Epistles of A christian Philosopher, of
Pentapolis in Africa, president of Ptolemais. etc. Suidas. he was a great writer
Synesius, are not a little labored in, and chiefly for Metaphors, which he
most uses. There are also Epistles of Basilius, Gregorius, and Libanius, and
many more, brief and witty (I must needs confess) but yet more meet for
common Schools, and men to read for pleasure, when they have nothing
whereaboutes to be occupied: then fit otherwise in matters of weight and
importance. But let the Grecian writers pass, and let us come to the
Latins. After Caius Pliny, by succession of time, were many Christian
writers, not only more learned then the residue of their profession, but
excelling all other whatsoever without controversy. Ancient Fathers of the
Church, epistoliographers, or writers of epistles
Tertullian is mystical, obscure, dark and hard in his method of writing.
Cyprian is not so doubtful and entangled in his style, though he were of the
same Country and Region. Augustine is somewhat smoother then the other twain,
but not so eloquent and curious. Hieronymus is pathetical and vehement, as
though he seemed to be always directing his talk to Judges, sitting upon
matters of life, and death.

Ambrosius is somewhat milder and nothing so earnest: in some places,
nevertheless perplexed and cumbersome to be understood. Symmachus, neither by
the hautinesse of his Argument, nor yet by the finenesse of his phrase, could
win fame and credit with Or with them that suc ceeded him from age, to age,
by degrees of times.
his posterity. Sydonius Apollinaris Aluernas, is so enigmaticall, so dark
and mystie (as I may term it) that a man can searse tell where to find out
his meaning: in so much that he obtained not the favor and well liking of
his hearers, because (in deed) he deserved no such benefit. A long time after
these, Franciseus Petrarcha, appeared as it were a bright shineing star, in
thick and palpable fogges: this man is somewhat long and tedious, curious also
therewith all, and not void of difficulties, drawing to his method, very many
observations out of rustie and mouldie antiquaries. After him succeeded
Gasparinus: who (among many other seniours) was the first that set pen to
paper, in Italy, to write latin Epistles: whose letters, even for this cause,
deserve to be read, because they are reckoned in the number of them that be
learned. After this man followed diverse others, a^ A catalogue of late writer^
or at leastwise of no great antiquity or auncientnesse
Leonardus Aretinus, not all of the finest: the twoe Philelphes, namely the
Father and the Son, pretily garnished with painted words, but in uttering
wise sayings, not so full of grace or majesty. Then Poggius the babbler, the
trifler, the railer. Pius Socundus pontifex, whose name was also Aeneas
Syluius, had a good natural invention and style of his own, but he wanted
Art. Aegidius Cal^ntius and Campanus, neither of them are to be contemned,
although one of them seem^ vaineglorious and arrogant. Sabellicus in all his
doings is like himself, both for copy of matter and words, and also for
facility, easiness, plainness, and pleasantness. Pomnonius Loetus, being
desiro^s of the purity of the Lati^e tongue, refused Whether his r^susal
deserned com men^tion or reprehension, shall rest (for me) in controversy.
to study Greek writers, because he would not make a mingle mangle, of the
properties of two several languages, and so corrupt the one, with the other:
his words that he used, were chosen, and his style was clean, and not to be
amended. Io. Picus, and Angelus Politianus, embrace them both, for they are
not unworthy of credit with the Reader, though he be nouer so deintie and
delicate: neither of them is to be dissalowed* One of them passes in sweet
sentences, carrying with them matter of weight, worthy to be considered, the
other for his witty invention and pleasantness of style, is not to be
neglected: yea, he is much to be esteemed (...) all (...), save only for his
(...) (...) (...) an (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) due order.
greediness of glory and (...), which makes him (many times) to wander out
of (...) ^ust limittes of an Epistle. He occupies his pen (...) then in
toys, and conceits of his own immagi^ or fancy: again, in some things
wherein he shew^th ^reat learning* knowledge and gravity, he may seem scar^e
delightsome: because in a trifling matter, of no weight nor importance, he
bestows much labor, to give a show principally, of his fine compa^ing
wit and eloquence: quipping and nipping such, as dissalowe of his dooinges.
These things like young heads passing well, and therein they delight them
selves, as it were in questioning and reasoning for the maistrie: but to men of
more gravity and judgment, they appear as mere ridiculous, and not
approueable. The tender and younger wits, in whom reason has not yet taken
fast root, are infected with two vices, very dangerous and noisome among men:
the one of them, is An affection not proper to younger vvitts only, but often
times also inci dent to more settled heads.
vaineglorie or a^rogancie: the other is bitter railing and (...) abuse of the
tongue: by reading such Epistles: which is so much the more odious and to be
abhorred, because such bitter bra^ling, and wrangling words, spring from
very small and light caufes, yea from such, then which more vain and vile
cannot be: as upon a letter of the Alphabet: upon a syllable: about a vowell,
about a consonant, about a liquide: about a double: about the skanning of a
Uerse: about the understanding of a sentence, etc. Yea, many times by reading
such tryfles wherein more words are uttered, then wit is declared, the manners
of young learners are disordered: wherefore they are not to be regarded that
set down such frivolous fancies, of their own running invention. In
Hermolaus Barbarus, there is more gravity, and more knowledge of Arts bewrayed
* Commendation wonn^ by desarte.
in his writing, then in any one beeside, I admit no comparison:
nevertheless, I must needs say, that he is somewhat intricate, and hard to
be understood. Among these, the counterfect Philosopher Marsilius Ficinus
shows himself, * A proper and pleasant comparison.
like unto a sea Gull among a sort of fair swa^nes: this man's epistles
sauouring of Platonicall questions and reasons, though in matter they be
pithie, yet in words and phrases they want beauty, and delight not the reader.
The epistles of Franciscus Picus, although they are not fully so sine and
eloquent as his Unckles, yet in consideration of their style, they are not to
be dispraised, because it is good and not blame worthy: and in respect of the
weighty sentences, which he does use, they deserve to be commended: but this
man lacking luck, did also lack well lyking. Rodolphus Agricola, if he had
amended his own doings, if his own works had fallen under his correction, he
might have worn the wreath of worthiness with the chiefest, and the best,
among the ancient writers: and why? Because of the soundness of his
knowledge: the deepenesse of his learning: and the perfectness of his
judgment. We saw (of late years) the epistles of Ioannes Capnio, both Or,
in the gloss of their glory, and the blemish of their beauty: that is, when
they were most famous, and when the prosperous vpspring of other writers was an
occasion that his wonted worthiness with red and wasted.
bredd (as a man may say) and also buried: the common consent of the learned
sort, did so much mislike them that they did quite condemn them: how then
could they continue long alive? Nay, how could they but quickly dye? for, ere
many months were expyred, they grew out of credit. Christophorus Longolius,
being too too curious in imitation, marreth the readiness of his natural
invention. He has many of Ciceroes words, which whether he observe of a good
meaning, or for a fashion, it remains to be decided as a case of doubt? This
is once true, the sense of his epistles may be amended, and made better and
sitter for his phrase, because in small matters he uses great and thumpiug
words, wherein is no good agreement. For, it is not sufficient and enough for
him, with exceeding diligence to imitate the words and y^ phrase of Cicero,
except he had also expressed Cicero in all other points. By this Allegorical
speech he means nothing else, but that Long. took more upon him, the^ he was
able to perform in imitating Tul lie.
Should he feign to himself a weal public, and immagine y^ government of
the same, he himself being but a private man, and shutt up close in an odd
corner, far unlike a man allotted to such a calling? Wherein he deserved as
much to be laughed at, as if he had put upon him the attire of a Giant, and
had spoken his words with a feigning voice like a Giant, to the end men might
believe ^e was indeed a Giant: nevertheless, he is not altogether not to be
regarded: but for his words sake, wherein he comes somewhat near Tullie,
deserves to be read. All the writers of epistles in this age, they are but
^enche whistlers to Erasmus Roterodamus, and Gulihelmus Budeus, who in deed,
excel all their predecessors, that lived either in the days of their syers,
or their grandsyers, in wisdom, in learning, in eloquence, in variety of
writing and choice of invention: and either of them in his peculiar style, and
proper kind of excercises, notable men both, and singular. Erasmus is easy,
plain, perceiuable, and never swaruing from his accustomed vein. * Budeus is
delighted in a new, strange, and unusual order of writing, which is more
meet to be wondered at, then to be followed. The epistles of S. Paul, are too
lofty, to mystical, to deep, and profound, so that it is not seemly for us,
to measure them by our judgment. And thus have I run about a round row of
writers, and have showed wherein they are to be marked: it remains to choose
the best approved, and to let the other alone as less necessary.

Fare you well.
Christophorus Longolius to Petro Michianello.
THE ARGUMENT.
He excuses himself of intermission or ceassing from writing to his friend
Petro Michianello, in the constancy of whose friendship he confesses himself
much comforted. To conclude, he shows that his love is so far from being
reptoued, that it is augmented. Lastly he gives a short reckoning of his
estate.

THe coming of Some Gentleman and friend of his.
Antonius Francinus unto me was simply and of it self most pleasant and
joyful: yea so much the more delightsome was it, and fuller of gladness,
because by his report unto me made, I was certified that you continue the
benevolence and remembrance of courtesy, which old acquaintance requires,
and approved frendshipp challenges. For surely, I was surprised with a foul
suspicion and motion of mistrust, least you Or, having ^ against me some
conceit of displeasure. for my delaying and putting of my let ters etc.
having taken an offense at my long intermission, and ceassing from writing,
had alienated your mind, and so suffered the same to be estraunged from
accustomed kindness: with which doubt I was the rather troubled, because in a
thing which I promissed to do the last year in a letter, I have cracked my
credit. But into the dangers of those times, upon a soudaine, I am tumbled,
which have not only cut off all liberty of coming unto you, but have also
not given me so much leisure as to send: with the allegation of which probable
causes, although I did suppose my self not inexcusable, and that you could not
but admit such impedimentes as, I might not withstand: yet thus much be you
persuaded off, and well assured, that the report which our friend Whom in the
beginning of his epistle he names.
Francinus made to me, touching the constancy and vnuariablenesse, of your
goodwil toward me inclined, was most delectable, and so singular a comfort,
as a greater might not be wished. For, thus be you fully resolved of my
nature, that with such reverence I remember you in your absence, as that not
only any part of my love and affection toward you is diminished, but the
same also, how much soever it has been in measure and proportion, is through
a longing desire of your company and presence, so kindled and increased, that
I make reckoning of nothing so much at this instant, as I do of the sight of
your person, in comparison of whom An earnest protestati^n ^o give testimony
and witness of his hearty affection and kindoes.
I set light by all things else beside, whatsoever. I would write unto you a
discourse of the trade of my life, and the order of my studies, but that I have
already communicated and showed the same to Francinus, upon condition, that
he should certify you thereof, by word of mouth in every respect, as by me
he was infourmed* Wherefore he is to give you understanding of all manner of
circumstances more precisely: thus much in brevity, least I should seem to
say nothing to the purpose. Such is my life (through the bountifulness of God)
as I am therewith contented: such is my quietness, as therewith I find my
heart singularly delighted: for end, this comfort of conscience I have in like
manner, that if Or, that if a Christian ma^s mind may be contentable.
a Christians man's mind be not defective, then am I not forlorn, wretched,
or miserable.

Fare you well. At Patauium, the 7. of the Calends of July.
Chapter Longolius to Francisco Belino.
THE ARGUMENT.
Between Chapter Longolius and Franciscus Belinus, as there was great^ and
familiar acquaintance, so there was no great distaunce of dwelling (for so the
brief of the epistle seems to import) insomuch that they had often meetinges
and talkings together: Now Fra^ciscus Belinus promising Longolius to come to
him home to his house, (where he was looked for of Longolius) but being not
so good as his word, he is therefore charged with unkindness.

HOw desirous you were to visit me to day, I am not able to declare, at whose
request made unto me but yesterday, I was wylling to he entreated, gyuing
attendaunce at home. in mine (...) (...), of purpose to look and tarry for
your coming* I Or, I found and felt my self much grieved with the expectation
and hope of your coming.
was much troubled with (...) and looking (...) you* but it makes no matter,
you are not like to escape scotfree, and as for (...), which peradventure you
will make by reason of the great showers, I mean to admit none. For the more
foul the day was, the more blustering, and the more tempestuous* ^omuch y^
more meet was it, to be spent in friendly company, and familiar communication,
which might have mynistered occasion of delight. Now, thoroughe your offense it
is come to pass, that I did not only want your presence, whereupon a special
portion of my pleasure depends: but did lack, in like manner, A man of great
fame and worthiness, tho^ough the notable learning and knowledge wher^with he
was endued.
Petrus Bembus his meeting, with whom I would have been marvelous merry, this
day chiefly, wherein I was at such leisure. For, I was fully determined to have
gone to him, and to have spent away the tedious time, in some talk, if you had
not been so car^estly in hand with me yesterday, to tarry within the walls of
mine own house, in hope of your company. Thus much I did mean to let you
understand, to the intent that hereafter, I should not be deluded and mocked
with vain expectation, of your coming: besides that also, to the end you
might allege (if you can) some other impediment which cut you off from keeping
company, beeside rain, lightning and thunder excepted. For, I think that you
are neither tongu^ tied, nor unprovided, what to say for your self in this
behalf, though such be your degree, that whatsoever you allege by the way of
excuse, it is not of me to be dissallowed or despised, unless (perhaps) you
use these or such like words, that our company and conference is not with you,
in such great account, that you should in stormy weather, and durtie ways, set
al aside, and come tripping to me in your silcken sleppers. But, of durtie way
you are not to complain, for you might have gone al along the O^ galleries*
both interp^etations are tolerable.
cloisters, and so escaped the showers: again, the rain did not fall
continually, but at certain times, now one shower and then another, so that
you might have found the means to have come and seen me, according to
promise. But I will omit this matter, desiring rather to (...) informed by
your own mouth, for the more certainty: Do what you can (if not to your own
hinderance) that we may meet and Beelike they were not far distant one from
another.
talk together after supper: For I have in my head to tell you, that which I
am desirous to discover.

Fare you well.
Chapter Longolius to Nic. Draconi.
THE ARGUMENT.
Writing to N. Dra* he certifieth him first of all^ of the ^^ceipt of his
letters: telling him that in reading them he was delighted: comme^deth by the
way somewhat at large, the famous Orator and Rhetorician M. T. Cicero* both
for his eloquence, and also for other his singular ornaments of Art and
Nature: exhorts D^aco to exercise himself in reading and studying* so
learned a writers works: annexeth the commodities that grow by laboring in so
notable an Author: From thence he descends to particular affiyres, touching
him and his friends: gives him thanks, for his readiness to do him
pleasure: says somewhat of one Fuluius a Student: and lastly makes a
discourse of certain pleasant delights, whereof he wishes himself a
partaker.

Even then (as also long before) I began to labor and long after your friendly
letters, when in good time, namely on the nynthe of the Calends of Auguste,
they were delivered unto my hands: in reading whereof, among all other
circumstaunces therewithin contained, that one thing was most pleasant, yea so
effectual was it to make me glad and joyful, as I saw nothing to that end
so forceable: and what was the thing wherewith I was delighted? Even the
assurance which I got by the sight and style of your writing, that you are
more diligent, then you You have ta ken pains at your study in times past
very diligently: but the order of your style and phrase, gi ueth evidence of
your exceeding earnestness, therein presently employed.
have been wont, in studying the works of Mar. Tul. Cicero. For undoubtedly,
there were in your epistle, diverse and sundry appearances, whereby I gathered,
and that manifestly, the thing to be (...) which I have affirmed ^ (...),
shall I ^ell you further ^ ^ did so well like of your letter* that from the
beginning to the ending, I cannot but give this (...) that it sauo^red
altogether of Ciceroes phrase, (...) with finenesse and sweetness, I do
highly commend your purpose, and inde^our, instantly exhorting you, (...) as it
were, hastening you forward in your running race) to exercise your self in
the works of this approved Author. For, if the knowledge of the Latin
tongue, be obtained, not so much by private practice at h^ame, or by public
pleading in the common place, as it is by usual trayning our minds in the
books of famous and learned writers: to whom then may we submitt our selves
as Scholars, then to him, who by the judgment and general voice of all ages,
has the name to be more eloquent then all the best lea^ned: and more learned,
then they all that are thought most eloquent? I am of this opinion, doubtless,
that it is a thing impossible, that any man should sufficiently painte out in
pure and picked Latin tearme^, the inventions of his own brain, haueing not
diligently and attentively laid to his lystening care and labor for the In
which two fingular (...) requisi^ (...) a Rhetorician, C^cero excelled. (...)
writers of all ages.
fynenesse of Tullies phrase, and his * variety of (...) Again, touching him
that is buisily and studi^usly occupied in reading and marking his style, this
is my judgment, that although his knowledge be but indifferent, yet (...) it
is like in time to come to pass, that even by that indifferent knowledge, he
shall grow to greater understanding, and in the end shall beecome to many, a
very myrrour* More^er* if the knowledge which he has be but simple and
small* nevertheless, thorough the due observation and marking of his master,
he shall use such on orderly conueying of such things, as he deuiseth in
writing* that through the whole course of his doing, none shall be able do find
any thing amiss, and blame worthy. I In wh^t respect Longolcommendeth Cicer^.
do not reverence Cicero in this respect so much, because he excels all
other authors that ever have been in any age, both in pleasantness, and also
in plentifulnesse of words and matter: But because such is the subtlety of his
(...), so per^ect and exquisite of judgment, that with him there is none to be
compared: besides that, in disposing and aptly placeing that which he has
devised, by the help of his wisdom and the benefit of his knowledge, that
nothing can be immagined more meet, nor to the purpose better agreeable. To
the forecited qualities, right worthy of commenda^ion, a third is to be added,
namely A rare gift, and therefore deserving peculiar prai^e.
the method and form of his style in writing, mere angelical and heavenly,
which as in eloquence it is singular, so for the easy understanding of the
same, it is meruaylo^s and matchless: insomuch that even those things which
are pouldered with most gravity, and polished with most beauty, seem smothly
and mildly to offer themselves to the readers capacity, and not to savor of
any curious labor therein employed, t^ough they be tied to the observation of
numbers in syllables. It shall be your part therefore (even as you do) to have
Tullie he means, of whom, and touching who^ he has commendably written.
this man in estimation and reverence, and so far forth as your ability
will permit, let him be a president and example for you to imitate and
follow. For, although you cannot (be your study never so great and your
labor never so earnest) aspire to the perfection and fullness of his praise^
yet notwithstanding, it shall be no small commendation unto you, nor lightly to be
esteemed, if you draw toward him y^ is most excellent, though you come not
near him by a great distance: it shall I say make much for the advancement of
your name, if you be next him, though but in y^ third or the ^ourth degree. But
I am fallen from my determination, sythence it was my meaning, to answer your
letter. I could not well have kept in silence, that which I have somewhat largely
declared, to y^ intent I might give you a signification, of my good lyking and
well allowing of your endeavor in Tullies works employed. Wherefore He ^cheth
certain specialties contained and mentioned in his friends letter.
to let y^ pass, and to come to your epistle^ in the which, whereas you say
that your authority was to Fuluius needelesse and little auaylable, he
signified the same unto me in his own letter: whereby I found me self
delighted twooe sundry ways, both because you were disburthened, of that
trouble, (for I am certain that it could not but be cumbersome to you, both
at this time to come into the city, and also to be drawn from your purposed
studies) and because those of your affinity, had showed the^ selves reasonable
to their brother. Howbeit, there remains behind a certain cause deserving
the duty of giving thanks, in y^ you promise, that you will hereafter, and are
ready even now, i^ the matter so require, for my sake to ^traine your
ability. I would have you to confirm Fuluius, in the good mind wherein he is
now, touching Or, being disposed to his book, and the love of (...).
a students life, this must you do by ^aire persuading means, whom, when you
have encouraged and established in that his towardness of will, send him back
again to us as soon as may be, with sufficient proui^ion and maintenance. For
you (if you be wise, and as I take you to be) never remove from the place where
you be harbored, sithence you enjoy such an heavenly life, in comparison of
which, my leisure, my liberty, and all my quietness, seems unto me
unpleasant: and yet you would not believe, how happy and blessed I think my
self sometimes, through the use of this benefit. To be raised out of your bed
early in a morning, with the chirping noise and sweet singing of birds: to be
encouraged to sit down to your study, and to bestow a few hours at your
book: to rise out of your chair and walk about the flelds bravely beautified
with flowers, herbs, and blossoms: to fetch a clyming course up and about
the pleasant and delightsome hills: Then, after your return from walking, to
betake you to your accustomed companions, and with them to have conference, til
the heat of the day decline and be ouerpast: or else, all noonetide to solace
your self in the refreshing shadow, or else to be exercised with shooting in
a crossebowe, and to make trial how you can level at a mark. Sometimes to
mount on horseback, and go abroad a hunting: then to sit close at your
book, for a while, and when you are weary with reading, nay, when your reason
has persuaded you in a measure of study, (for By that clause he mea neth
nothing else, but that in lea^ning is no loathing, except it be in a loytere^.
the Muses are such pleasant companions, that the more we frequent them, the
more desirous we are to use them, ^o far they be from breeding
loathsomenesse) then you have your deintie suppers provided, and dishe upon
dishe presented to the table: After that, you have your fine walks, in places
of pleasure, and therewithal communication seasoned with the leven of
learning: to c^clude and shut up all in brevity: you have your sweet and
delicate sleeps in your comfortable chambers. I would I were dead, if these
^e not such rare delights, to me specially, as that I could find in my
heart, if I wist where to have them, even to sail ever seas, but even to see
them: and what I would then gladly do to enjoy them, may soon be ^uspected.
A protestati on of hearty goodwill and friendly af^ection.
Day and night I think, nay, I wish that I had wings, that I might flee unto
you. Wherefore, see that you look for me about the Ides ^f September. For I
mean (by Gods help) at that appointed day, to be present with you: neither
will I go forward with the rest of my determined peregrination and voyage,
before I see the event and full success of my labors, and the whole trade of
my life: that is, til I have part of your pleasures, a few days, in your gay
green meadows.

Fare you well. Dated at Patauium.
Chapter Longolius to Ia Sadoleto.
THE ARGUMENT.
He confesses what pleasure he conceived by the letter which M. A. Michael
received, from Sadoletus, to be conu^yed unto him: prefers the bounty of
his nature before perfourmaunce of promises: acknowledges him self to
continue myndfull of Sadoletus his courtesy: discovers the occasion why he
rather choseth to dwell in Pata^ium, then in the city of Rome: declares that
when his troubles be untwisted, he will visit Sadoletus: Lastly, he
concludes, with the moving of a petition, in his former lett^r mentioned.

THE letter which M. Antonius Michael sent me the last day from The situati^n
whereof, to gether with the ancient descent of the people there inhabiting* i^
to be read in every geog^ pher.
Venice, minis^red unto me a great signification of familiarity between us
both, and a manifest proof of your good liking of me: of our familiarity, in
that you persuade your self to be excusable, and that I will not burden you
for the long delaying and silence which you used, before you writ unto me: of
good liking, in that you be desirous to have me lead my life with you, and to
turn all that is yours into my use and service. But surely, although such be
my condition at this present, that nothing unto me could seem more worthy
acceptance, then the receiving of letters from you: yet notwithstanding,
here^f I would not have you ignorant, that your good will and kind heart, is
to me in more price and estimation, then the p^rfourmaunce of all promises: not
for that by them you give a testimony and declaration, to outreach mine
opinion (for I have been always resol^ed thus in mind, that what soever might
be looked for at the hands of a v^rie friend, should, (nothing to the
contrary) pass from you unto me, that Though ^he seed, ostentimes, upon
things of gr^t (...) and uncertainty.
hope in her account might not be unsatisfied) but because I reading and
perusing your Epistles, might in them see and beh^ld a most lively
representation of your liberal and bounti^ull nature. In consideration
whereof, I yealde you infinite thanks, as by duty I feel my self
constreined: and also, that it will please you to continue this your accustomed
kindn^sse, to my behoof, I beseech you most earnestly. For, I trust so to
escape the rocks of forgetfulness and unthankfulness, which have caused many
a one to suffer shameful shipwreck, that I shall be able enough to perform and
accomplish as I hope, with daily dutifulness and continual recourse of
courtesy, all such service as your deserts do exact and require. In that you
say, you see no cause, why I should rather desire to dwell at A city in
^talie, now called Padua, fou^ ded by Antenor a Trojan Duke whose ancient tumb
or sepulcher is there remai ning to be seen.
Patauium, then in another house within the city, to the end I may keep in
secret, the inward grudge of my heart, and not discover my hidden thoughts
touching the city, I tell you truth, that if the world did laughe upon me,
as it does upon you, I would not pass a (...) in what place I spent the
time that I have to live. As for you that have all things about you, which
are necessary and requirable, it makes no great matter, sythence in any
country whersoeuer you come, you are able to maintain your self in wealth and
honor, according to the nobleness of your fortune, and the worthy calling
where unto you are allotted: but my condition and estate is far otherwise,
that even in this plenty and abundaunce of all things, I am so far from
bearing any port, or having a train of men to dance attendance upon me, that
I am not of ability sufficient, to find a poor lackie to do my necessary
service: and what should I then do (think you) at Rome? But, for so much as
it pleases you, to offer me the use and commodity of your house, that is, to
draw me thither where you be resident, I will not show my self so untoward,
as to refuse the benefit of your proffered courtesy, neither will I show any
sign of such foolishness, as to labor longer in the lack of your
familiarity, which I have desired most heartily, yea, so earnestly, as
nothing above it, whatsoever. But because Matters of necessity, belike, for so
it may be con iectured.
my matters are brought into so narrow a straight, that they can not with such
ease, nor yet with such speed, be set at liberty, and obtain a larger
scope, I have not as yet to write any thing upon certainty to you, of my
coming: so soon as I have vntwinde my self out of the briars, I will give
you informatien. In the mean seas^n, remember I am so affected in mind, that
I wish with all my heart to enjoy your bountifulness, and your familiarity:
moreover, the same petition which I made unto you in my former letter, I renew
again in this: namely, that through your friendly furtheraunce (when you are
at convenient leisure) I may have access to our He means the P^in whose
favor this Sa doletus was, and might therefore do much in his friends be^lfe.
supreme Bishop, and with him obtain favor, by the means of your commendation
tending to my credit. Thus much I crave at your hands, and that most instantly.

Fare you well. Dated at Patauium: the third of the Calends of August.
Thus far out of later Epistoliographers.
The last extract of Epistles, belonging to this Panoplie: out of M. Gualter
Haddon, and M. Roger Aschame: Gentlemen of late memory, for their rare
learning and knowledge, very famous.
M. G. Haddon, to the right noble and honorable the Duke of Northumberland.
THE ARGUMENT.
This Epistle sent to the Duke of Northumberlande, was written in the name of
the whole university of Cambridge: wherein occasion is taken, first of all to
commend the Dukes worthynesse, both by land and sea, testified. In
consideration whereof, together with a certain hope conceived of his courtesy
and gentleness, they offer and give him, with one consent and agreement, the
office of the Chauncelourship: (for, if that be not the sense of the words, I
can not tell what should be meant by their chief magistrate) for the receiving
whereof, he uses diverse persuasions and reasons.

GOD has enriched you (Right noble Duke) both with the excellent with goodly
virtues, to the increasing of your honor and noblenes.
ornaments of mind, and also with gracious gifts belonging to the body: he
has advanced you to high honor, and placed you in a degree of singular
dignity, to the end you might be a beautifying to the other parts of the
common wealth. For your industry, your diligence, your valiantness, etc.
has flourished both on land and sea, at home and abroad, in war and in
peace: in so much that there is between your labors sustained on sea, a
certain strife and variaunce, with them that you have endured on land: and
your domestical commendations are at dissension with your foreign praises,
for superiority: and the stormy skyrmishes of bloudsheading battle, O^,
wherein you have showed manifest testimonies and as^urances of your
valiantness.
from which your puisaunce has not been withdrawn, contend with your doings
in time of peace and quietness for the more worthynesse: neither is it
possible to attain certain knowledge, whether your enemies abroad stand in
more fear of you, in consideration of your prowess: or citizens at home bear
you more love, in respect of your often proved goodness. It is not easy to
judge, whether in playing the part of a captain in foughten field, or in
discharging the office of a wise Senator in court and counsel, Because in
both, your excellency appears, to the admiration of a great number.
you express the more nobleness. Wherefore, sithence the manifold virtue
wherewith you be adorned, spreads it self, both far and near: and
opening unto it self a passage throughout all and every part of the common
wealth, offers to some full and flowing founteines: so to us (as we hope) it
shall be so favorable, as to let the rivers of your bounty, run to our
behoof: it shall vouchsafe (we doubt not) govern by gravity and sage
counsel: rule by wisdom and policy: defend, support, and maintain, with
authority: this our little (but learned and not lightly to be regarded) common
wealth. Upon a certain affiaunce conceived in our hearts, of your clemency
and goodness, The head and body of the whole Vniuer sitie.
we have with a general consent and universal voice, committed to your
nobleness, the chiefest office in our University, and made you our high
magistrate, as not repining to render, to s^ worthy a person, obedience in
ample manner, and convenient order. In the which thing, we are not discontent,
that our wills should be pressed and applyaunt to do your commandment and
pleasure: but not so ready to allow and pay you any pension and reward. For,
it is not requisite, that by our means you should reap commodity: but it is
rather necessary and expedient, that through you, we should be partakers of
advantage. And though we our selves have a denial, yet to our letters made in
the behoo^e of learning, be gracious to give a grant, unto which, in their
petition, albeit you be not satisfactorie, yet in respect of their humble
supplication and intretance, Which is both honest and honorable.
let them in the sum of their desire and suite, have full effect and
perfourmaunce. Great are your possessions, great your revenues: great also,
yea, very great is our want of that which is necessary: we crave not your
riches and substance, but In this clause the sum of their request is com
prised.
your authority and countenance: which for so much as it may deservedly
challenge immortality, it shall therefore be so much the more worthy of the
Arts and sciences which among us are professed and published, wherein does
consist as it were a myr^our of majesty, continued from age to age by
incessant succession and perpetual memory. Our petition appears to have in
it an orderly proceeding: for sithence, the rest of the commonwealth has by
you been administered and governed: vouchsafe therefore He means the
university in the behalf of the which he wrote this letter.
this our common wealth with semblable authority, this our common wealth (I
say) last in date, but first in price, coming and offering it self
voluntarily to your nobleness. Now know the cause, now understand the
matter, if you were ignorant thereof before: and if you knew it. yet
understand it again. The charge and maintenance of learning, to whom does it
belong, but to Princes to Dukes, and such as are placed in stately seats of
principality? for the supportation of such things as are most precious,
pertains to those that are of Among the number of whom you are to be
reckoned.
most worthynesse, of most honor, of most nobleness. If it be so, then
account our letters worthy acceptance, and like a favorable patron, let them
(as clients) have access to your person: of which if it shall please you
accordingly to consider, to esteem and deal with the^ after ye measure of
their worthiness, it shall so come to pass, y^ in manner of recompense, they
shall advance your honor with monuments of eternal memory: and for the present
helps, adiumentes, and furtherances which by and through your goodness are
thereon employed, they shall make requital we such future benefits as shall
never vanishe, but bear For learning makes full satisfaction, in time, to al
her benefactours, sauourers and aduauncers.
brave blossoms throughout all ages: yea, they shall make large restitution
(esteeming your good deeds but borrowed and lent) and far surmounting that which
they received. Loose and set at liberty the toungs of our studies, our mute
Muses make to speak and sound their triumphant voices, that by the tr^mpe of
their vtteraunce, sounding far and near, the fame of your worthynesse may
pass through all places, which having already the goodly possession of all
other praise worthy ornaments, needs no further advancement by any thing,
but only the notable and renouned testimony, the undoubted assurance, the
special and perdurable warrant of nobleness, from our Arts and sciences
redounding. May it please you now at the length, (Right honorable) To bring
that to pefecti on, which you have attempted and begun.
to finishe the building whereof your own worthiness has laid the
foundation, which as it has in martial exployts, warlike adventures, matters
of policy, and affairs tending to good government, been sealed with sundry
and certain testimonies and assuraunces, so to make the advancement of
learning and knowledge, the end of your purchased renoune, that the
lightsomenesse and beautiful brightness of the same, being made gloriously to
glister (by the means of your honor and nobleness) all For as the bright
beams of the sun drives away darkness: so does learning chase away ^g
noraunce.
mystes and fogges of ignorance, may be driven away out of all the corners of
this kingdom: that by this benefit (the promoting of learning, I mean,
wrought by your procurement) you may win singular renoune to your own
person, and perpetual praise to your posterity. God give your honor
prosperity and happiness in abundance.

Fare you well.
M. G. Haddon, to the right honorable, the Lord Robert Dudleie, Earl of
Leycestre. etc.
THE ARGUMENT.
Writing to the Earl of Leycestre that now is, he takes the beginning of his
Epistle from his own person: then exhorts him to bestow his convenient
leisure in the study and learning of the sciences liberal: brings in an
erroneous opinion, long since held of the ancient Romans, and answers the
same by the authority of Cicero: thereupon he takes occasion, yet again, to
exhort him to the study of Arts, reckoning three several things not unmeet
for his person: and to the intent his words might carry the greater credit
and countenance, he uses examples, both foreign and domestical, one among
the rest drawn from her own highness (I mean the Queens majesty, now in
possession of the English Empire) in the mention whereof he touches sundry
circumstances: Lastly, he concludes with a special exhortation, wherein he
shows his love to GOD Almighty, to his sovereign* and to his country.

THat Diverse excel lent epistoliographers have used this ky^d of beginning and
among all other that I have read and remember, Erasmus to sun dry Gentlemen.
etc.
my service is so acceptable with your honor, I see good and substantial
cause to rejoice: and sithence I see it has such happy success, I will not
be sla^ke in continuing the course thereof, even for the time it is allowed of
you, and is thought aunswerable to your will and pleasure. How much mine
ability is inferior to your honors commendable report, so much is and ought
your favor and courtesy to minister unto me the more delectation: in which
point, I shall never give sufficient testimony of the love which I bear you,
till I have s^t abroad in open view of the world, some singular monument:
and sounded in the ears of people, an especial kind of melody, whereby it
may not only be known and understood, but also sealed and assured, what
benefits I have received of your honor specially, and of yours in like manner
generally. In the mean season, as I may, and as I can, I will be your He
means for the increse of knowledge: it is not other wise to be understood.
fauo^rer and furtherer, that so much time may be bestowed and confecrated to
tearning and study, as the affairs of the weal public, and your necessary
buisinesse do afford: and though it be not so much as you would, yet let it
be as much as it may. In the ancient years of the Roman common wealth, it
was an opinion of a great number, an opinion (I say) which prevailed not a
little in those days: and the self same, as yet, even in the Courts of
Princes, has taken too deep root, An opinion then which a more absurd and
repugnant to reason can not be maintained.
that the knowledge of Arts and sciences is nothing necessary to Noble men,
neither that they ought to tie and entangle their minds in such toys and
trifles. But ^he authority of Cicero, leauened with great gravity, and
pouldered with wisdom, is at contradiction with this barbarous opinion, that
Noble men at their meetinges should not be mute and tongtyed: neither that they
ought to spend the time in vain prattle tending to no purpose, but that as
their degree is high and honorable: so is it convenient and seemly, their
knowledge should be aunswerable. Wherefore, although you have not full
leisure, to apply all your labor to the study of Arts and sciences, yet must
you so acquaint your self with them, and as it were The line next and
immediately before going, shows the sense and mea ning of that allegory.
dye your wit in their unchangeable colors, that in every liberal science,
you may have a certain sight and judgment: especially in those which are
most plausible, popular, and prayseworthy, as are for example, eloquence, the
civil law, and histories. But, in this kind of study, it is needelesse to
give you exquisite precepts, because you have attending upon you, one for the
same purpose, sufficiently furnished, the benefit of whose service you have in
use. Or, wherein you have well and wisely pro ^ided.
Wherein appears a perfect proof of your prudence and providence: For, you
shall not* find, among all your rich and precious possessions, any one thing
of the like value and estimation, if he be such a man indeed, as by your
letters unto me directed and delivered, I do gather. In that, after the
example of Neoptolemus, you impart a little leisure to Philosophy, it is well
and not to be misliked: For, that leisure, shall procure unto you great
profit, and nolesse pleasure. But the life of Neoptolemus, as it was never
free from weighty affairs, but always occupied in matt^rs of importance;
besides that, still busied in battle, skirmishes, and conquestes, like a right
Martialist: so I must needs confess, the trade of your life to be accompanied
with much business, but how it is warlike I see not, neither would I wish it
to be so, I tell you truth. And yet The co^me^ tariographer: he was called
Julius, of the mou^th Iulie, wherein he was made L. Dictatour: or, because in
that month he was borne, as it is reported.
Julius Caesar, which was a Monarche of the world universal, even in the midst
of extreme heat and rage of battle, brought over with him, into this English
Island (then called Britanie,) Trebatius the lawyer, to the intent he might not
loose, no not that little leisure, but by the use of the same, reap some
learning. A noble To mane: of who^ Atheneus some what largely writes.
L. Lu^ullus, in that most dangerous conflict, which he adventured against
Mithridates, was so far from forgetting Philosophy, that for the continual
increase of wisdom, he had a Philosopher in his company, throughout all his
iournies, to the end that the course of his studies should not be hindered.
Of * Alexander the great, it is not unknown, with what daily diligence he
heard Aristotle his master. But these be old ancient examples, and also
foreign. I will bring you home to our own country: yea, even to the heart
of the court, and I will set before you a principal pattern, after the which
(as I suppose) you are very well content to frame your self precisely. You see
that The Queens majesty that now is (God prosper and preserve her high nesse)
paineful and studious at her book: a notable example, and not lightly to be
regarded.
her Majesty has matters manifold and innumerable wherabout to beat her
brain, and yet you are not ignorant, how her highness is addicted to
study, and with what a desire she longs after learning. When I am in the
court, and consider this, I am somewhat ashamed of my self. For so often as I
have recourse to her highness, I find her commonly at her book, and yet
such resort and daily attendaunce is there on her Grace, and such a multitude
of suites of all sorts, that it is to be thought her Majesty has not so
much leisure, as once to think upon learning. But of this her earnest and
diligent (...), that way employed, she has reapt profit plentifully, namely,
the knowledge and understanding of all things, in which she is able fo reason
and confer with men of learning: besides that, great glory, yea, such
glory as is lincked to euerlastingnesse: because she, being but a woman, is
so provided of al^ furniture belonging to learning and wisdom, that all other
noble men, Princes, and potentates, may rather stand musing and maruelling at
her majesty, as at a worlds wonder, then set her highness before them as a
president, or an example to immitate and follow. And The praise of the queen's*
majesty still continued, for the variety of her goodly gifts in ^undrie
toungs and languages.
as her Graces gifts be exceedingly commended in these quarters, among
foreign people and strangers: so likewise, her passing praise, as well for
the learning wherewith she is endued, as for the sundry languages also whereof
she has understanding, is spread abroad and published, by the report of such
persons, as in whom wisdom and judgment is not wanting: and this her praise
being noysed far and near, is so far from perishing, that it is
perpetual: and the flower of her fame does never cease flourishing. If An
effectual persuasion, grounded upon a special and singular example.
you will be applyable to the like diligence and continuance in study, as
this excellent Lady and peer^lesse prince accustomably uses, it can not be,
but you must needs be a communicate of the like renoune, and in the chiefest
commendations that can be attained, have your deserved portion. But whiles I
call to remembrance the nobleness of your person, I find this my long
exhortation to be a needelesse lesson: because, to love learning comes wholly
to you Sithenc^ your progeni^ours were favorers and furtherers of learning and
lea^ned men.
by inheritance. For, your father, although he him self was unlearned, yet he
was a great favorer and furtherer of such men as were learned: which to be
no untruth, by this proof is most apparent and manifest, because he made so
much of me in consideration of that same uncertain shadow of learning which
in me he perceived: for the sound substa^uce of learning, he could not see in
me, sythence thereof I was void and destitute. Furthermore, John of Warwick
the elder brother, was so inflamed with an earnest The commendation of a worthy
gentleman.
love to learning, that in comparifon thereof, he had all things else in less
account and estimation: next whom, though your brother, who even now is
aduaunc^d to his honor, eni^yeth the self same titles of dignity and
noblenes, be not endued with the like abilities of knowledge, yet is he affected
with equal measure of love and good liking toward learning: in so much that
he gives none the hearing with more readiness, then he does such, whom he is
persuaded to pass others in wisdom, judgment, and understanding. Touching
He turns his talk to the Earl of Leycester* wherein is much matter to be
marked*
your person I will say nothing, specially in presence: only thus much in
conclusion shall be added, that sithence God (of his gracious goodness) has
planted you in place of promotion, far above the degree of other men:
necessary it is and requisite also, that you be circumspect and diligent,
first to pray unto God with humbleness of spirit, and to do him service
continually, from whom all things flow as from a full founteine: secondly,
that you spare no labor, but do the uttermost of your endeavor, that with the
knowledge of all sciences, you may be absolutely furnished, that through so
precious and auailable a benefit, you may have in you* ability sufficient,
both to perform to your prince that duetifull obedience, which you owe to her
highness, and to discharge the service which is due to your country: then
which thing only and alone, I account nothing more pleasant and acceptable,
employing therein what so ever I can at this present, or hereaster shall be
able to compass. From Brugesse. Fare you well. Nothing is of me more wished
and desired, then the continual health and prosperity of my He means the
Queene^ Maiesti^.
sovereign Lady and gracious maistresse, and next unto her highness, the
welfare and good estate of your honor: Wherefore, in that you certified me of
both, you showed a point of special courtesy, and you did even as much as I
was able to require.

Once again Fare you well.
M. G. Haddon to Sir Thomas Smithe, Knight. etc.
THE ARGUMENT.
He begins with a testimony of love, and a comparison of both their
conditions, wherein he proves to be great inequality, by sundry circumstances:
he touches both their estates, as well his own being the writer of this
letter, as also his to whom it was, written, showing that they can not long
continue, albeit they be contrary: he touches the miseries of this life,
showing (by the example of a ship governor to his purpose aptly applied)
tha^ we ought not to struggle with necessity, neither yet to disalowe of what
soever is appointed us by Gods good providence: Lastly, he concludes with
hope, saying, that death which is always nigh and at hand, (like a^ haven to
harbor us) will make an alteration of this wretched life, for a life happy and
blessed.

BUt that I love you much, I would bear you a grudge, sythence between your
present fortune and mine, there is such difference and inequality, as to me
it is a great grief, but to you an exceeding joy. For, you have gotten at one
time, the love of your country, the favor of your Prince, a wife, friends,
leisure with pleasure, and the For at the same time he was ambassador into
France, as the title of the Epistle imports.
honor of an Ambassador: as for me, such is mine unhappy fortune, and
matchless unluckiness, that of al these consolations belonging to the life of
man, I am boyde and destitute: yea, I am so entangled and wrapped as it were in
a certain labyrinthe, that not Dedalus him self if he were alive, could
find a way to get out again, after he is once entered. But your happiness
can not be of long continuance, nor yet my^e unluckiness everlasting: and
why? because The life of man, even from his infancy to his decrepite age, full
of variableness and misery.
such is the frailty of our nature, and the variableness of our condition,
even from our birth and generation, that no part or parcel of our life is
pitched upon perpetuity and steadfastness, but shaken to shiuers with a
thousand sundry and uncertain chances. Wherefore, even as Governors of
ships, keep that course in sailing which they can, not that which they
would: and cut the waves as they are furthered with a merry wind: even so let
us frame our study and labor, to that whereunto we are constrained by
necessity: and show our selves not discontent, with that whereunto we are
appointed by Gods gracious providence, because For there is no striving against
the stream: Gods ordinance and fore appointment none is able to resist.
we must be ruled thereby, there is no remedy, how so ever we seem to
wrestle and withstand. Furthermore, let us fasten our selves upon the sure
anchor of this most certain and infallible hope, that although we be
overwhelmed, and as it were in manner sounke, in seas of miseries, though we be
tossed too and fro with most outrageous storms and tempests of troubles,
incident to this wretched life: yet Death, the port or haven of peace and
quietness.
death (being the port of peace and quietness) is never far from us in these
dangerous extremities, by and through whose singular benefit, we shall be
removed out of the ruinous cotage, of this world fraught with vanities, into
heavenly houses and most blessed abidings, where eternity and euerlastingnesse
reigns, where we shall live in all pleasantness, seeing, feeling, hearing
nor tasting any thing whereat to be offended and grieved. In the mean space,
God of his goodness, bless you with perfect health and long life, to whom I
commit you and all yours, what soever.

From Brugesle.
M. G. Haddon to M. Thomas Henneage. etc.
THE ARGUMENT.
Writing to M. Thomas Henneage, with whom he had special familiarity, he
begins his letter with an occasion taken of the benevolence and kindness*
which between them was not vntestified. He says that friendship must not be
considered, according to the number and greatness of gifts: but after a man's
mind and goodwill. He commends him for mainteining the memory of his father
in law, least in time he should be forgotten* by having his picture (as I
think) in lively proportion and represented* twyting (by the way) such a^ set
out their friende^ after their death, much otherwise then thy were of person,
when they e^ioyed life. Finally, after a short commendation of his
solitariness, compared with that wherein Scipio took pleasure, he concludes.

YOu owe me nothing (most dear and well-beloved friend) but love and well
liking, wherein I would have you my So shall the fort of our friendship and
familiarity re main invincible.
continual debtor. Our deserts, if they be examined and weighed, are yours,
being of so much the more account and worthynesse, as they are in their kind,
and their due time considered: but in contracts and bonds of vnf^eigned
friendship, benefits must (at no hand) be called in reckoning: only the
heart and mind of a man is to be marked and esteemed, which in either of us,
as well you as me, has (in mine opinion) been most agreeable to our ancient
acquaintance, and well beseeming the old friendship, that of long time we
have professed, and by the use and conference of many and sundry things
established. In that you are careful not to forget your father in law, your
so doing (in my thinking) is not to be disal^wed: but in that you give him his
own proper likeness, and not a false and counterfeit: your doing is so much
the more to be approved. For, He discommendeth the^ that cause the pictures of
their predecessors, and of such as they loved when they were alive, otherwise
to be painted the^ they bare semblance or likeness.
I could never conceive well of those v^ine and light headed people, who
commend to their posterity after their funerals (more like flatterers then
friends) such whom they loved and favored: as though they that be living,
had quite razed the dead out of their remembrance: or as though the yrksome
ghostes were delighted after death with ye publishing of a tie, which none in
their life time, being of an honest and virtuously disposed nature, can abide,
but rather abhor it, and have it in contempt and detestation. I like
marvelous well of your solitariness, because it has in it a certain
semblaunce of the solitariness wherein Scipio took pleasure, who was never
more busy, then when he was best at leisure: or if you have nothing wherein to
be occupied, yet you escape many disco^modities of all sorts, whereto young
gentlemen a great number of your state and condition are subject. To morrow I
will visit you, in the evening, if you be at your house. In the mean season
reap ye fruit of your studies, enjoy the benefit of your The right using and
well ordring where of, procure great inc^ease of learning and knowledge.
books and solitariness, then which two specialties (with your wives sweet
company, and your friends comfortable acquaintance) you shall find nothing in
this life, of more worth, value, account, and estimation.

Fare you well.
M. G. Haddon to M. T. Henneage.
THE ARGVM^NT.
As he began his former epistle, to the self same Gentleman, with a
commemoration of frendshippe and goodwill: even so he ^keth the same occasion
in this letter, as a fit entrance to other circumstaunces. Then, he makes
mention of (...) matters, wherein they were both careful, which
notwithstanding were hindered by the means of one, against w^ome he^ took
stomache: he touches a specialtie concerning Germani^, which I leave to the
readers conjecture to gather if he can: something (beelike) it was, that
belonged to the common we^lth. He speaks much concerning his wife, whose
death he lamenteth: he seems to be sorry for her highness sickness,
therevppon inferring an exclamation and (...), against the ^roked and accurssed
condition of this life. Lastly, he concludes with a prayer to God, for her
preservation, briefly teaching (as it were in a word) the remediless misery
that England should suffer, if it pleased God, to call her highness out of
this vile earth, into that glorious heaven.

I Doubt not that the friendship which has flourished so long between us,
and has wanted no assurances of duetifull courtesy, has taken root with
such deepenesse, and is grown to such perfection and rypenesse, that no
tempest of violence can have the power, to displace and pluck it up, so long
^s we do live. I know you be grieved, for that our matters have no more
forwardness: for they are not private but public, and in such cases (as I
can tell well enough) you have a special care and regard to have them
furthered, and with the like affection in that behalf, ought every good and
well disposed Gentleman to be touched. Mine opinion Or, there is no disagreme^t
between your opinion and mine: O^, you think one thing, and I think the ve^ie
same.
is aunswearable to your conjectures, but in such sort and order, that I think
D. himself, to be a great impediment in this point and an hindraunce, then
which man, if you judge any thing more troublesome and untoward, you are in a
wrong belief, your opinion is erroneous. Touching yt which you tell me out of
Germany, I rather wish it then look for it: of mine accustomed sentence in
this matter, you are not ignorant, from the which nothing has the power to
pull and withdraw me, but one only thing, which that I might see and behold
in presence, I am most desirous. For, in this case, I am altogether To believe
no further the^ I see: the next and ready way not to be deceived.
Dydimus, to give credit no further then mine eye seals an assurance. That
there is some hope, in the mean while offered, it is well: and I am glad to
hear so much I tell you truth: not for min^ own sake, whose life is not long
to last, as for the comm^ wealths cause, which I would, if I could, make
immortal. I thank you for my son, to whom I can wish nothing of more worth,
then that he should be like his mother, then whom (in my judgment) nothing
has any time been more pleasant, and more profitable. By the ingemination
and twice repeating of one thing, ^ee signifies the pas sion of his ^inde.
I would to God she had lived, I would her life might have been excused by my
death: and yet she lives I doubt not, yea she lives everlastingly: But I,
ever since I was without her, have been no better then a dead ghost: yea I
suffer death daily, in consideration that the staf^e of mine estate is taken
from me, and the comfort of my whole life utterly lost, as you remember and
can testify, and I at this present would forget (if I could) very gladly. But
it is more then I can do, or then I shall be able to do, whiles I have a day to
live: no, I may not so much as think upon her, without weeping. The health of
our By this exclam^tion he testifies how heartily he loved her highness: so
ought ^l subjects to do, be their degree never so hautie and hono^rable.
Gracious Lady* and good mistress, as it appears is somewhat shaken. O *
miserable and ^ost cruel condition of this our life present, which is always
assaulting either with sicknesfe or with death, such worthy persons, as
without whom it is impossible to live. So that we are always either in
grief, or else in fear, and at that stay are we like to continue still, till
that last and lightsome day be come, which into the hearts of the rascal
rablement strikes sadness and terror: but contrariwyse, fills the minds
of good men, and ^uch as be wise in deed, with all joy and pleasantness.
God of his infinite mercy, preserve and keep at all assayes, my most
excellent and matchless mystresse, by whose death (chance when it shall
chance) the ^lower of all womankinde shall fade, and England shall have a most
dolerous wound, yea a wound irrecouerable, and smarting with continual
anguish. This I leave to you that be of younger years: as for me, I am in
great hope, that after I have waded out of the woes of this world full of wret
chednesse, I shall meet her There to wear a crown of immortality,
blessedness, and everlasting feliciti^. Amen.
in heaven. Commend me to your good wife. From Brugesse the 15. of the Calends
of Iulie.

Fare you well,
M. R. Aschame to the Queens majesty, his sovereign Lady, Elizabeth by the
grace of God etc.
THE ARGUMENT.
Writing to the Queens majesty, he begins very Rhetorically, with a
comparison of he^ highness, wherewith he was discouraged, and her goodness
whereby he was imboldened to write to her majesty. He touches himself,
upon consideration of duty to be (...) to hi^ gra^ious prince. He m^keth
mention of two things, namely knowledge and dignity, (a goodly accouplement)
which in her majesty are not wanting: he shows that the one should be
joined with the other, which he proves by examples, as well Poetical as
Historical, and that does he in brevity. Lastly, he concludes with a
short exhortation and a prayer.

MOst excellent Lady Elizabeth, I have labored long in doubtfulnesse of mind,
whether I should be more discouraged in consideration of your Because of your
Majesty, i^ that you are a Queen, etc.
highness, or more imbouldened in respect of your Because you are fauou rabble,
l^berall, v^rtuous. etc.
goodness, to present you with an epistle. But after I had made up my full
reckoning and account, and thoroughly considered, how mindful it has pleased
you to be of me in mine absence, and what singular gentleness and courtesy I
have tasted oftentimes in presence, I did rather choose to be accused of
writing out of season, then to be convinced, in any point of unthankful
silence: and I am better content that my too much duty should be reprehended,
then as one that is toungtyed to be reproved, The experience and trial of her
highnes^e bo^ie, min^stred unto his heart ^at boldness and considence.
sythence I am most assuredly persuaded, that my letters are so far from
being combersome to your highness, that they cannot but be welcome to your
goo^nesse. And although I have in^nit occasions, wherein to occupy my pen
touching your majesty: yet do I nothing with a more towardness and readiness
of heart, then in showing me self glad and joyful for your sake, in that I
see you daily busied in beauti^ing and making more glorious, those so great and
incompar^ble ornaments of Or, o^ body and mind: ^or so the words may (in mine
opinion) not unaptly be interpreted.
Fortune and Nature, with such vnbatterable bullworkes and singular safegardes
of learning: whereby whether your true renown shall be the more enlarged, or the
worthiness of your capacity, together with your unknown diligence, by the
report of all people, more commended, it is a matter of doubt and uncertainty.
And although thi^ your majesty's purpose and intent, in coupling excellent
knowledge with passing dig^ie, has (as I am net ignorant) Plato the famous
Philosopher for an insample and president: yet nevertheless, thus much I do
know, and I may bouldly affirm it for a truth, that through Nobleness of
wit and singularity of ^udgment commended in her (...).
your own noble wit and singular judgment, you prospered exceedingly: that by
the conference which you had with y^ most worthy gentlewoma^, the Lady
Champernowne, you were also much furthered: and that by the precepts and
instructions of my G. Grindall, you reaped no small benefit and advantage.
We read recorded both in true histories, and also in ^eigned poesies, that
before the age in which Plato lived, every notable and virtuous Prince, took
unto them one Philosopher or other, in wisdom and judgment famous, to whose
counsels and aduertisementes, they applied themselves thorough the whole
course of their life, accustomably. This to be no untruth, the fabulous
inventions of Poets testify, saying, that Jupiter used the advice of
Prometheus and Agamemnon of Nestor. By histories also the same is to be
verifyed: for it is read, that Hiero used the counsel of Simonides: and
Pericles of Anaxagoras: whereby we have to learn this fruitful lesson, as
well I mean by the excellent deeds of most noble Princes, as also by the wise
and grave precepts of profounde Philosophers, that A detection of his own
opinion, (...) upon the examples before going.
nothing ought to be of more account and estimation, then that power and
principality should be always linked to singular knowledge and great
learning. And to what end are these words spoken? not as though I seemed to
withdraw you Which are so fa^re from being to be found in your Grace, that
the contrary is of you embraced and followed.
from lingering delays, but rather to encourage you in your voluntary
towardness and readiness in running the way to learning, and to give you, now
that you are even at the end of your worthy race, as it were with shouting and
clapping of hands in token of exceeding ioyfulnesse, your deserved praises. In
which notable course of commendation and renown, there are none, with whom
you should Because you have not your equal, neither yet your superior.
contend and strive for maysteries, victory and triumph, but with your own
peculiar person. As therefore (most gracious Elizabeth) you have done already,
so continue and persevere, that you may daily outgrow your self in dignity
and excellency, and that through the glory of your lerning and singular
knowledge, the nobleness of your birth may be the more renouned: then which
worthy deed, nothing can better beseem your royal estate, nothing can be
more wished and desired of such as bear your Grace goodwill: nothing can
purchase greater praise in the judgment of this present age: neither can any
thing be left more of force and effect, to set the minds of such as shall
live hereafter, by succession of years, more a museing.

The A familiar and usual conclusion o^ well wishing.
Lord Jesus prosper and increase your highness from day to day in virtue,
knowledge and nobleness Amen.
M. R. Aschame to Sir Th. Smithe. etc.
THE ARGUMENT.
He makes a commemoration or rehearsal, of such notable benefits, as Sir T.
Sm, received by and thorough the bountifulness and liberality of the
University of Cambridge (he means not corporal benefits, benefits I
mean belonging to the body, but inward benefits of the mind, as learning,
knowledge etc) thereupon inferring a persuasible reason, ^o move him to the
perfourmaunce of deserved du^tie.

IF you be the man (right worshipful) on whom this University of Cambridge,
has bestowed all her abilities: if it has practiced upon you, all duties of
reverence and godly affection: if it has furnished you with all kind of
knowledge and learning, with all manner Iuells and ornamente^ of her
Commonwealth: if she have sowed in you only and above all other, the seeds
of her renown: if in you especiallyshee has fixed the affiaunce of her
safety and good estate: Note his necessary conseque^t, inferred upon the
enumeration and re hersall of the forecited circumstaunces.
Go to then, think and consider with your self what you are bound to pay her
back again, for such inualuable benefits: call your conscience to a straight
account and reckoning, what the University, what the learning and
understanding, what the weal public, what Almighty God himself for such
singular assura^nces of kindness and bounty, whereby your worship so
flourishes, does of right require. The University does deny you nothing:
nay what is it that she has not beautified and enriched you withal, sithence
she has bestowed upon you, all things, whatsoever she her self
possesses: in consideration whereof she does not simply and without cause
crave a good turn again, but requires such service as might counterpeise her
deserved duty. She does not set before you some one particular cause, but
she puts her own self in your credit: and all things unto her belonging
the commits unto you: neither is it needeful, that she should discover unto
you her counsels, sithence you know them all thoroughly, yea, be they never so
privy and secret. In this his persuasorie speech, he gives a testimo nie of
the passing love and af f^ction which he did bear to the University of
Cambridge.
Do that therefore you know: let your will labor with your ability, and
that which you owe of duty, see discharged: so shall you bring that to pass,
which good learning, which the University, which the common wealth, which
Religion, which Christ and your prince look for, at your hands to be
accomplished and performed.

Jesus prolong your life many years in health and prosperity.
M. R. Aschame to Sir Ioh. Cheek. etc.
THE ARGUMENT.
The course of this epistle (wherein sundry circumstaunces are touched about
learning, and the commodities of the same, in one Gentleman of great fame and
worthiness, appearing:) gives me to conjecture, that the meaning of the
writer was, only to move Sir John Cheek (to whom this letter was directed)
to be mindful of the University of Cambridge, and unto the same, to
continue beneficial. The reasons which he uses are all grounded upon
persuasion.

Among all the number of notable men (Right worshipful) that have had
enteraunce into the Common wealth, by the benefit and furtheraunce of He
means the University of Camb^idge the garden plot of Arts and Sciences. etc.
this University, you are one, (whom before all other,) this University has
in more countenance and estimation when you are present: and in more reverence
and admiration when you are absent: upon which, you have beestowed, in the
time of your presence, and impart now also in the time of your absence, more
then any other beesides, whatsoever. For, at your being in the University,
you gave notable and singular pre^eptes of learning and knowledge, for all
others instru^ion: and such examples of wisdom and judgment, for others
imitation and following, unto which whiles many were appliable, they reaped
great profit: howbeit Sir John Cheek his deserved commendation.
few or none grew to the like perfection and ripeness. There is not so much
as one among us all, so ignorant but can testify, neither yet so envious that
can auouche the contrary, that this happy and blessed success of our
studies, these sweet founteines of all our excercises in learning, (whereto
many have atteined and also tasted, by their great labor, pain, and hope) to
have flowed from the praise of your excellent wit, from your safeguard, from
your example, and from your counsel: so that these monuments of your
humanity, of your wisdom and of your learning, imprinte in our minds, an
cuerlas^ing remembrance of your most worthy person. As Wherein he showed
himsel^e a true and a right noble Gen^leman.
for the helps and furtherances which ye University has always had, both
for the more certain supply, and the perpetual maintening of the same in
fame and dignity, through your means they are more then either all our
favorers besides could conceive, or we our selves might look for at any
time, wherein to have our portion. For, whiles He means king Edwa^de the sixth
of most famous memory.
the kings majesty, being of you taught and instructed, has such a love and
regard to learning: what others also in like manner, by and thorough your
counsel, will, or ought to do for the behoof of our University, we are not
ignorant. This our hope have we, and this our lesson learn we, out of your
Plato, to that vi^ious and ill disposed king Dionysius: nevertheless, ye
profit and advantage of the same we have, but of late, thoroughe your help
and assistaunce, sufficiently proved in our most Uertuous Prince Edward.
Wherefore, sithence such recourse of mutual duty, such assured service of
bounty, so many bonds of gentle and liberal deseruings, have passed between
you and the University, to begin with the remembrance of your infancy, and
so forward to the praise of the worshipp and dignity which you do now
possess and ^nioy, That which he says here to sir John (...), may likewise
be said to other Gentlemen, a great number.
there is not in you to be found any one benefit of Nature, any one comm^ditie
of lab^ur, any one comme^dation of wit, any one supp^rtation of Fortune, any
one ornament of renown, but our University has been a procurer and
furtherer of the same to your profit, or else a partaker thereof with you, to
her own glory and honor. We doubt not, but our University may hope for,
and also command you this service, considering the goodly and precious Iuels,
wherewith she has enriched you, that you would continue to the vttermoste of
your power and ability, a mainteiner of her dignity, as you your self arise
by degrees to advancement. We do not co^mitt unto you, the cause of one
particular person, but all our causes in general, wherein we hope, you will
bestow no less labor, then either you ought in our behalf to employ, or as
we look for at your hands to be performed.

The Lord Jesus be your preserver and keeper.
M. R. Aschame, to the two young Gentlemen M. John, and M. Dominicke Vacchan,
brethren: and their sister M. Mabell Vacchan, the flower of Virginity.
After his salutations ended, he excuses his delays of writing: wherein he
bestows a good part of his letter: all the rest of his letter touches the
praise of the young gentlemen and young Gentlewoman to who he wrote. So that the
whole sum of this Epistle, may be reduced un to two heads or principal
points: The first, an excuse: the second a commendation: the excuse touching
his own person: the commendation tending to other, in this his Epistle
specified. Lastly he concludes with a prayer to God, to prosper them and their
doings.

Most happy children descended of most worthy Parents, commendations. etc.
In that I have not hitherto answered your letters, which are unto me for many
considerations and causes, most acceptable and pleasant, Or, it is not, for
that you are worn out of my remembrance nor yet because in the perfourmance of
my duty I wax loose and dissol^te.
this my delay is not to be imputed to forgetfulness, nor yet to be ascribed to
negligence of duty. I can not complain of want of matter, wherein to be
o^cupied in writing, because in great abundance I have had it offered:
neither can I excuse my self with want of opportunity and convenient leisure
of sending, because it has continually been proffred: so y^ the de^alt
remains only in me, why these commodities have not been used: not because my
goodwill and loving affection toward you, is diminished: but because I seemed
(in mine own thinking) these last months past and expired, with all kind of
learning somewhat offended. But having entered again into favor and
reconcilement with learning, I took pen in hand, devising with my self,
how I might, though not wholly have all my former silence excused: yet
notwithstanding in some respect at least touching the same be pardoned. I
confess, that great is my fault, and much am I to be blamed, for being so
long silent: as for mine opinion otherwise then I ought of you conceived,
wherewith nevertheless I am so sore charged, I acknowledge none at all. For By
an earnest obtestation he declar^th the reue^ opinion which he con ceiued of
the^ to whom he wrote this Epistle.
I pray God all the Muses may be angry with me for ever, and bear me an
endless grudge, if this has not always been my judgment concerning you,
that you are very rare examples of virtue and learning: yea, especial
patterns, not the like to be found in this our present age: nor yet heard
off in the days of our predecessors many years already paste, and long since
expired. I meruailed, yea upon good occasion I meruailed, that you, being but
young Gentlemen, and M. Mabell Vachan, a virtuous gentlewoman.
your sist^r also a young Gentlewoman, continuing within the walls and
compass of your Parents dwelling, daily tasting the sweetness of your
mothers loving kindenes, and living in the sight of all bravery and
gallantnesse, could attain to such singularity and excellency of learning,
knowledge, and judgment, as many have labored for with earneftnes, but very
few have gotten for all their painfulnes: and that also, you having entered into
more ripeness of years, are content to bestow your time in Cambridge and
Oxenford the twoe lamps of England, for learning, know ledge. etc.
the Uniuersities, with hard and sparing diet, where nothing is to be found,
that may to learning be a hinderance: but al things in a readiness, that it may
iucrease and have sufficient furtheraunce. You are deceived therefore, if you
think this my meruailing is to be referred to any doubt concerning your
ability, and not ra there to pertain to the praise of your wits, to the
commendation of your knowledge, and to the aduauncing of your education and
bringing up. For, at these three things, namely, the worthiness of your wit,
the manner of your knowledge, and the order of your bringing up, made me
wonder at you exceedingly. All the praise that belongs to your wit, it is
your own, by you it is purchased, of you it is possessed, because the use and
service consists in virtue: the commendation of your knowledge and learning,
To you, for the readiness of your wits and quick capacities: to him for his
painfulness and diligence in tea ching. etc.
is common both to you and to your instructour: for as he is therein to
challenge a part, so you have (in like manner) a portion. The praise of your
education and bringing up, is to be ascribed to your parents. For, in
consideration of your wits, I have seen therein a rare towardness, a
voluntary readiness, and a continuing painfulness. In your instructour or
teacher, I have allowed sufficient ableness, and also his faithfulness. In
your Parents, I have commended both their wisdom and their bounty: their
wisdom, in that they were so well advised, and so circumspect, in Wherein
appea^eth the wisdom and true love of Parents to their children.
the goodly and virtuous bringing up of you their children: their bounty
(which I perceived in them not only plentiful, but also principal) for the
great costs and charges which they sustained, to have you grow to that
perfection of understanding and learning which you have gotten. These
circumstances when I called in consideration, I could not but in y^ very front
and beginning of my letter, use this gracious greeting, rightly and
meritoriously to name you, The beginning of his letter, which was his
salutation or greeting.
Most hapie children descended of most worthy parents: for which happiness
sake, both redou^ding to you, and also to your parents, I am right glad and
joyful at my heart: to you, in consideration of the great and singular
benefits which you do now reap, and are like hereafter to enjoy: to your
parents, in respect of y^ vnme asurable gladness, which they shall conceive by
and through y^ exc^lle^cie of your learning* and which you again on the other
side shall be filled withal, by weighing their providence, wisdom, and goodness,
tending wholly to your commodity. Where fore, touching the duty which unto
me belongs, Promise of duetifulnesse touching his own person.
I will as I have hitherto, continue a ready beholder of your course a daily
exhorter of you to persevere and persist in your diligence, an especial
commender and a wonderer at your virtue: yea, for the full satisfying of my
judgment concerning your persons, I will also live in most assured confidence
and certain expectation, of that honorable advancement, which such a
course, such a diligence, such nobleness of virtue, seem to deserve. For,
Note the or der of his drawing to a conclusion of this his letter.
through this course so discreetely begun, through this diligence so
constantly employed, through this virtue so happily obtained, nothing is to be
looked for, but that which is singular, but that which is precious, but that
which is honorable, but that which is excellent, so far as I can discern
and perceive: which thing that it may come to pass, yea, that it may come to
pass within a short time, he (no doubt) who is both the well head of all
wisdom, the author of al diligence, and the giver of all happiness, Or, will
grant of his gracious good nesse. etc.
say Amen: who prosper you and ^our studies continually, and fulfill your
parents good hope, with much joy and long gladness. God. etc.

M. R. Aschame to the right worship full young Gentleman, Barnabe Fitzpatrike.
THE ARGUMENT.
Writing to a young Gentleman, of good countenance in the cour^ (as the
Epistle testifies) he exhorts him to love learning, and for the increase of
the ^ame in him, to spare no labor. And that his persuasions might carry the
more credit, he uses reasons drawn from the person of the Gentleman to whom
he writes, whom whiles he exhorts, he commends: to the same purpose and
effect, he brings in the right noble and virtuous King Edward the sixth, for
an example, worthy to be followed. Lastly, he concludes with twoe several
prayers to God, the one for the Kings majesty's prosperity, the other for the
young Gentleman, whose name, in the titl^ of this Epistle, is declared.

ALthough I am not to learn (Right worthy Barnabe) what a Which is an
in^allible proof and (...) arg^ meant, that you are a virtuously dispo sed
Gentleman.
vehement zeal and fervent love you bear to learning: yet notwithstanding I
have purposed and attemp ted somewhat to assault you with letters of
persuasion, both because it was your own request and desire I should so do:
and because (at such time as I was with you in presence,) my promise in that
behalf made unto you, might not be unperformed. And sithence there be many
encouragements, and reasons of force, which may much move you to the love of
learning, and the embracing of knowledge, namely, the notable towardness of
your own wit, the convenient time of your age, the excellent hope of your
^iligence, this place of preferment, which above the rest, you possess in the
Kings majesty's Court, and the singular precepts and instructions, which you
want not for your furtheraunce, though every one of these, severally, are of
force sufficient to mo^e you exceedingly, yet ought they not all being joined
together, so to stir you up, to forstowe no time toward the attainement
of such a benefit, King Edward the sixte with what goodly gysts of min^e he
was endued.
as the nobleness of wit, st^die, virtue, learning and knowledge, which in
our worthy and renouned King Edward daily appears (you your self seeing and
bearing witness) and most gloriously glistereth: a better pattern of
diligence, a more perfect example of learning, a more manifest hope of praise
and conunendation, you cannot set before you to follow. Your promise was to
write back again unto me, which shall not of you be neglected, either for
being as good as your word* or else that I may see, by your own
signification, how well you handle your pen, and how diligently you exercise
your wit. A more convenient bearer, then he is to whom I have delivered this
present Epistle, you can not require. I have sent Or, Copies.
examples to the Kings Majesty, and the rest of that noble and gallant
company. He kni^teth up his letter with an earnest prayer, wherein he gives
witness of his well wishing heart.
Christ Jesus, grant of his gracious goodness, that my Lord the King, may
excel his father in renoune, his instructours and teachers in understanding,
and that the multitude of his years in possessing the Empire, together with his
flourishing felicity and happiness, may exceed and pass the prayers of his
English subjects. And the same Christ Jesus, of his large bounty, increase
in you continually, the goodly gifts of virtue, learning, and nobleness,
abundantly.

M. R. Aschame, to the most noble Gentlewoman, Lady Anne, wife to the Right
honorable, the Earl of Penbroche.
THE ARGUMENT.
This Epistle consists of three members: the first is gratulatorie, touching
the person of himself and his freende, M. Mid. the second is petitorie in the
behalf of M. Pin. the third is exhortatorie and laudatorie, as by the course
of the words and the matter may be gathered: so then, it is apparent, that this
is, and may be called Epistola mixta: the reasons why, are manifest, and need
no declaration.

THe From the acknowledgement and confessing of benefits received, he falls
orde^ly to his petition: which is a very good and (...) way toward the
atteinment of his purpose* for in showing his own tha^kfulnesse, he wins
further f^uour and well liking.
great benefits which you have bestowed upon M. M. and the greater good will
which you have testified unto me, require infinite thanks at my hands, Right
Honorable Lady. But, sithence your estate is so hautie and high, and my
degree on y^ other side of such inequality, that you may better bestow new
benefits, then I pay old thanks: yet notwithstanding, I rejoice exceedingly,
that this kind of courtesy, is at this present, of your Ladyship to be
craved, wherein your Gentleness is more pressed and ready to give a grant, then
is my labor to ask and desire. My request is, that M, P. may enjoy still the
fruit of your bountiful favor, and furtheraunce, as he has hitherto had
the same in use, to his special advantage. And although, I am well assured, and
know it for a verity, that you will have him in such acceptance and
countenance, as y^ he shall not stand in need of my commendation, sithence he
is of sufficiency by himself, to obtain al things tending to his avail: yet
notwithstanding thus much I crave in his behalf, yea. I crave it with
instancie and earnestnes, even as though the matter perteined to mine own
person, that he may have the benefit of your Ladyshippes favor and
assistaunce, to * Or, he may perceive, and I also understand.
the Queens majesty, whereby he may be persuaded, and I also a^sured, y^ by
the means of this my petitorie Epistle, your old accustomed goodwil, unto him
a long time continued is by y^ putting too of a new trial of favor, not
diminished, but increased. Wherefore, you must be as careful, as circumspect,
and as dilligent as may be, even to the uttermost, that both the By the
enumeration o^ these (...) circumstances he mo ueth and com mendeth.
goodly gifts of your wit and knowledge, the learned precepts of your
teacher, the passing examples of N. your brother, and the footesteppes of your
most worthy Father which you tred and follow, should move and stir you
up to the embracing of learning, to the purchasing of praise, and to the
attayning of Nobleness. I do not occupy my pen to write in this order, as
though I should seem to Which is so far in you to be ^ound, that your for
wardnesse is wonderful, and to be con tinued should want no in couragement.
withdraw you from lingering, but rather in this your forward running to give
you encouragement: and that I might be thought not so much to take upon me the
office of one that exhorts, as to discharge the duty of one y^ rejoices,
albeit my letter has that notable verse of Ovid for a president and example.

Who so exhortes you that to do,
Which you to do intend,
Whiles he exhortes, the words he speaks
His own deeds do commend.
I fear I am to tedious. Thus much does only remain, and rest behind, that
it would please you to write back again, if it be but in three words, by this
young Gentleman my good friend and well wiler: your letter shall be unto me most
cer taine testimonies and undoubted assurances, both of your increase of
knowledge in the latin tongue, and also of the favor and goodwill which you
bear me. Commend me (I pray you) to that worthy Gentleman Gentlemen with
whom he was well acquainted and familiar.
T. S. and Win. if his name be not out of my memory: the sweetness of his
manners, and the delightsomnesse of his ^ehauiours, have taken more deep root
in my remembrance, then can by any force be pluckte up and loosed.

M. R. Aschame, to M. F. Alane.
THE ARGUMENT.
A wo^thie and learned epistle, deserving to be read, and to be borne in
remembrance, written by M. R Aschame, to a Gentleman of his acquaintance:
wherein first he (...), that there be three things, wherein the life and
estate of man consists: to which three (after he has spoken his mind
accordingly, as he thought good upon circumstances) he joins two more, no
less necessary, then the three first, which he declared. The occasion of
writing this Epistle, was a book which he made and sent to M. F. Alane. The
specialties whereof the whole letter (from the beginning to the ending) does
treat, are these: Beauty, Richesse, Dignity, Learning, and Freendeshippe. In
this Epistle, he shows fine invention, proper disposition, and sweet
eloquence.

THere be three things (my F. Alene) which throughout the whole course and
trade of man's life, are of exceeding great force, and with a certain majesty
bear general rule and dominion: Three specialties whe^upon this whole Epistle
runs.
Favor, Money, and Hon^ur. On favor attends pleasure: from money proceeds
profit: and to honor pertains an high degree of dignity: for of these
three things the ignorant people of the ancient world in consideration of
their advantage: or else, learned Poets many hundred years ago, through their
wisdom, and knowledge, immagined to be three several Gods, who had the
bestowing of these sundry benefits. For, they made Venus gives beauty:
Plut^s gi^es (...): Jupiter gives honor
Venus Lady and Queen of beauty and favor: they made Plutus Lord and King of
Riches and money: and they made Jupiter Emperor of honor and majesty:
afterward, in tract of time and pr^cesse of years, to the self same things,
yea, in the very schools of Philosophers, the name and title of the best and
chiefest Good was assigned: and by the opinion of al wise men it was assented
unto, that in these three, very great force, virtue, and effectual working
did consist. Wherefore (my F. Alane) sithence I know it well, that Or, that
you have a singular and special regard. etc.
you are a notable and earnest beholder of comeliness and favor: sithe^ce it
is my desire, you should abound in wealth and richesse: sithence I am of
this judgment touching you, that you are bred and borne to the possessing of
worship and dignity: I was so much the more willing and toward, to offer
you Some book which he had written, and bestowed upon the Gentle man to who^ he
wrote, as a gift of his good will, and a token of kindness.
this book: by the use and service whereof, you, (to whom I bear a singular
and special goodwill,) shall enjoy to your full contentment, all the three
things within named, most happily, most blessedly. For, you shall view and
behold, in this book, as it were in a bright glass, without spot, and
blemishe, sundry beautiful, famous, and comely shapes, not such stately,
proud, and disdainefull pieces as we see daily, but such as be chosen,
picked, and sorted out for the nonce, such I say as are not vnworthi^ the
majesty of an Emperor: these you may behold freely, without controllement,
without hinderaunce, with safety, without danger, without mistrust, without
grudging, without jealousy, without suspicion, without wantonness. etc. Here
you shall see to the delight of your heart, and pleasure of your eye, the
countenaunces of virgins and matrones, excelling Venus her self, in beauty
and amiablenesse: braw^ing mothers, threatening stepdames, rigorous hus^ands,
angry Men that go a wooi to one woman, betwi^ whom commonly, there is
emulation and hatred.
riuals, shall not stop you from the sight of this so passing a pageant and
spectacle. Walls, doors, bars, boults, locks. etc. shall not be able to keep
you out, or forbid you entrance. Here, you shall have provided for your
ready possession, of richesse great plenty: not the pearls, not the jewels,
not the millians of mines, which A King of Lydia and Son to Halias: this man
in the vain conceit of his riches (which were in deed unmeasurable) called
himself the flower of felicity, o^ the pearl of prosperous estate.
Croesus gathered together: but the abundant treasure of every city and
town, yea of the world universal, for your enriching: in so*much that what
soever the frugalitie and thriftinesse of good and well disposed people, have
provided in time of peace, and tranquillity: or the force of the mighty and
violent gotten in time of war and bloodshed: or the lawless l^st of tyrants
wroung for their own lucre, by extortion and iniuri^* here you have it ^eadie
purchased, ready prepared: and therefore you may take full, right, and quiet
possession. Now, touching h^nour and dignity: what more perfect patterns and
more tr^e examples can you have, either, fit to be followed, or worthy the
wondering, or deserving to be praised, then those of the Caesar's and the
Augustes, most virtuous and victorious Nobles. And to the intent (my F. Alane)
you may plainly see and perceive, that I mean no deceit, but good faith and
just dealing, that I mock you not with words of vanity, but that I give you
such ornaments as are true in deed and not counterfecte: lo, these
beautiful shapes, and amiable favors, are of this right kind and property,
that they blind not the mind at any time with painted pretenses, shows,
shadows, and foolish allurementes, outward gayness and bravery: but ^ll the
heart always, with true delight, with perfect pleasantness, with such joy as
is not idle in operation and working: This clause is to be referred to that
which goes (...), where (...) speak^th (...) (...) and (...) fa (...), and
not to that which follows, (though the o ue^ ^wartnes of the words seem to
offer such sen^) where he talks of plea^ure and delight,
not being deceiuable of nature, not varriable in time, not withering through
the heat of the sun, not consuming by the soaking of sickness: but
continuing v^chaungeable, constant, undiminished, safe, and sound for ever and
world without end. These rich^sse, which I bestow upon you, shall neither
work mine impouerishment, in giving* neither shall they tend to your harm
and am^oyaunce, in taking: and as I part from them, without any loss or
damage to my self procured: so on the other side, they shall of you, without
labor be possessed, without fear be preserved, and without envy used. As for
the pathway, which is decyphered and set forth in this book, it shall lead you
directly, to honor and dignity, it shall make you a ready entrance to an
estate of worthiness, you shall pass at pleasure without combersomenesse, and
in sa^etie void of danger: that you may (by and through the benefit of that
book,) enjoy the most happy and right blessed degree of dignity, which is
of Cic^ro, in the beginning of his Orator highly commended, but of himself
for all his praising, never obtained. Unto the three principal commodities,
which I have forecited, two other, of no little value and ve^tue, are anne^ed:
namely, * In the be ginning of his epistle he named three ne cess^rie things
belonging to man's life, whereunto he ioyne^h other two: learning and
^reendeship. etc.
Learning, and Freendshippe: the worthiness of the one, is in this book
discovered: the other, by and through the mutual recourse of hearty
kindness, and unfeigned goodwill, not vntestified. And what part or portion
belonging to learning, is there (I pray you) of more excellency, of more
importance, and of more pleasaunt^esse, then a cunningly compiled, and a
learnedly con^eyed history, lively representing to the mind and judgment of
the reader, such matters of policy, touching the civil estate: such valiant
acts, (I say) and noble deeds of arms, as have by most renouned Kings, and
passing puisa^nt Emperors, not only been adventured, but also
accomplished^ot only attempted, but also finished: not only stoutly and
lustily taken in hand, but also gallantly and graciously br^ught to
perfourmaunce. Or, which being ref^rred: or, which perteining: or, belonging.
etc.
Which having relation altogether, to the lea^ing of humanity, and* civil
behauiours, it will not one^ unto you, whose mind (...) wholly addicted, and
(...) uen to that trade of life, be pleasant and delectable i^perusing: but in
practicing also, it will be fruitful and profitable. Touching the
freendeshippe, wherein we be joined together, I A signification of his wa
rynes^e and circum^pection.
will speak so sparingly, that my meaning in a few woord^s may be delivered:
leafte, whi^es I gi^ing an evident proof of the towardnes of my will* in
set^ing out your deserved praise and commendation, might seem by the way,
through want of aduisement, to commit some offense, worthy of blame and
^eprehension. For such persons, whose wills are at agreement* whose de^ires
draw both under one yoke, and whose vows and couenantes also, in some
points, are leuelled and di^ected to one mark, can not but deserve
commendation, can ^ot but (...) reprehension. Now, to have the benevolence and
favor, of all It should seem* that when he i^dited this Epis tle, his
continuance was in* the Princes Court.
in this gallant Court, it is a thing wherein I do rejoice: and to have the
goodwill and well liking, of a certain number selected and several, it is a
thing, whereof I reap passing pleasure: but to be in freendeshippe, credit,
and countenance with you, oh, it is a thing of me most heartily wished, and
principally desired. For this kindness toward me conceived: this bounty
of yours, which to my profit and benefit, has never been but appliable: I
have by so many and so sundry ways, seen put in proof and trial: I have
thereof had so often assuraunces, that Worde^ of considence, wherein whiles ^e
makes de claration of his own affec tion, he consir meth to himself his
friends kindness.
there is none, of whom I make more account, in whom I have faster affiaunce,
or upon who^ I ^are further presume and persuade my mind with promises, then
you only and alone, both for mine own avail, and also in the behalf of my
friends and alleies. And for so much as many, (and not so many in number, as
strong and effectual in virtue) be the linckes of love and good will, which
knitte us together, yet none (in mine opinion and judgment) is in deed of
more certainty and induraunce, or more pleasant, joyful, and acceptable to
us both, as the use and ^ecourfe of that favor and furtheraunce, which a
Gentleman of no less courtesy then authority, has to either o^ us most
largely and liberally testified, and thereby bound^ both of us jointly, in
most assured dutifulness, in ^onsideration of his goodness, to be declared
and discharged. Wherefore to draw to an end: if His artificial conclusion
containing a recapitulation of the forecited circumstances, in bre uitie.
beauty, void of vain allurementes: if richesse, free from clogging
carfulness: if dignity, wherein lurkes no danger: i^ learning, which is
never without the company of pleasure and profit: if freendshippe be of you
so regarded, that thereof you make due reckoning: if all the forecited
circumstances be of you not dissalowed, be loved, be liked, be desired and
followed, then am I in good hope and confidence, that my purpose and pains, in
presenting unto you this my book, shall not be blamed, sha^ not be rebuked.
The This is his usual and accustomed order of ending.
most mighty and gracious God, be your preserver and keeper, prolong your
life in health and prosperity, and grant of his goodness, that the wishes
and wills of either of us, may soon b^ satisfied.

Fare you well.
A letter, or supplication, of M. R. Aschame, which he made and wrote, in the
behalf of the prisoners in Ludgate, at the coming of king Philippe into
England.
THE ARGUMENT.
A supplication invented and written by one, in the name, and for the behoof
of many, (for I may better call it by the name of a supplication, then of an
Epistle, although it have a room among the rest of the letters whereof he was
the Author) to King Philippe when he was arrived and abiding in England:
wherein after complaint made of their misery and wretchedness, which endured
imprisonment in Ludgate, he reckons up certain particular causes among an
infinite number incident to such whose trade and occupying is in merchandise,
which brought them into such perplexities of poverty: uses allowable excuses
for the avoiding of ill suspicion, and the defense of honesty and plain
dealing: sets down the total sum of the debt, the parci^litie and
bountifulness of their creditours, and the number of prisoners. Lastly, after
supplication made to King Philippe for discharge and deliverance, he
concludes with a prayer to God for his prosperity. etc.

AMong This his Pro eme or beginning, was drawn from occasions offe red, as
from the t^me then present. etc.
so many goodly sightes and shows in this City wherewith your eyes be
pleased: among so many joyful greetinges: wherewith your ears be delighted:
have a regard to the voice and groaning lamentation of such as be poor and
distressed, on whom to take pity and compassion, your heart (as we are in
hope) will be moved: the voice is a voice of joy and gladness: but the grienous
mourning bewrays misery and wretchedness. For, we do all rejoice even with
all our hearts, at the coming in of your Majesty into this Realm, which was
of many much wished and greatly desired: again, we specially (as we must
needs) mournefully lament our own misery, and fall a groaning, through the
lotte of unluckiness, wherewith we are grieved. For, miserable men are we, and
swallowed up (as you see and perceive) in misery it self. But because this
our present miseri, has had issue from the frowardnes of The frowardness of
Fortune, and not their own fault, the cause of (...) distress.
fortune, and not from any heinous osfence of us committed: because we are
cast into this comfortless calamity, not so much through our own fault, as
the injury of other, and their enforced wrong, therefore with more boldness
of spirit and confidence, we make supplication to your majesty's goodness,
sythence we cannot personally appear, nor come within the presence of your
highness: whereupon with a lamenting voice, and in writing witnessing the woe
of our wret^hednesse (which we can only do at this time, and in this place)
we call upon your exceeding ^lemencie, to be comforted: and to your gracious
goodness we make our moan, to be delivered. This He means L^dgate.
place (most prudent Prince) is not a prison or gaile to receive villans,
thieves, and such ill disposed people: but it is in deed, according as it is
named, ye prison for such persons as poverty and distress has attainted:
within the walls whereof though we be now kept and enclosed, yet have we not
been thrust in of others, but of our own will and accord have therein taken up
our lodging: which we have done to this intent and purpose, An honest ^xcuse
for the ^uoyding of suspicion.
not that in so shifting, the smart of punishment might be avoided: but that by
and thorough hope of better luck hereafter, we might be relieved: for luck
only and alone, has laid us up in this lamentable lodge. We are citizens of
London, who in times past, have lived in sufficient abundaunce and plenty of
all necessaries, in worship also, credit, and countenance, among men of the
same calling and condition: and I trust, our life has ^eene so orderly and
honestly lead among our neighbors and acquaintance, that the same is not to be
reprehe^ded: but now ( ^ ^e^thesis including an (...) of such casualti^s, as
make men (whensoeu^r they chance,) to have a shrewd fall, and greatly to (...).
such are the ouertwhart chances incident to the trade of merchants, such is
the often change of our english coin, such are the sundry robberies of
French rouers, committed on sea, such are the losses, shipwrackes and sinkings
of goods through the storms and tempests of the outrageous and swelling
waves, such are the great vsuries and exactions of creditours, such is the
vnsaithfulnes and deceitfulnes of debtors not deserving to be trusted) through
ill hap we are tumbled into this mis^rie, owing unto others such large sums
of of money, y^ except we be discharged of the payment of y^ same, and be set
at liberty, through y^ benefit of your heavenly help, and singular goodness,
we are like to lie and rot, in filthy, loathsome, and co^fortlesse
imprisonment. And A defense grounded upon witn^sle, not to be neg lected.
y^ we have not through our own default, and inordinate usage, run into this
danger of being in debt to other men: but y^ either the tempestuous and stormy
sea, or the spoil and violence of enemies, or the fraud and deceitful dealing
of such, to y^ trial of whose credit we have been content to stand, has driven
us into this extremity, we are able to bring no worse witnesses, then y^ same
men, to whom we be indebted: who, perfectly knowing and thoroughly
understanding, y^ our fleeing to this place for present refuge and succor,
issued not from a desire and meaning to do others wrong and injury, but from a
mere mischance and il luck, Occupiers in d^unger of much los^e and many
mischances.
common to such as occupy merchandise, and have intercourse of traffic, and
calling to remembrance the estate of man's life, how frail it is, how brickle,
how uncertain and variable, show themselves favorable thereupon unto us, and
bountiful, that they are content to take two thousand pound in full payment The
sum of the debt, and the number of the prisonners.
for ten thousand pound, and a greater sum, which we be ing The sum of the
debt, and the number of the prisonners.
thirty in number, owe them upon good assurances, and to give us a clear
discharge of y^ overplus. Wherefore (most worthy prince) in consideration of
your (...) ^ending wholly to per^sions: where in he plays the part o^ ^
suppliant,
special bounty: of your most blessed coming and entrance into this relme,
and this royal city: of the great hope and confidence, which not one man
particularly, but all people throughout England generally, conceive and have of
the issue of your body: we beseech your majesty, that it would please you to
take compassion upon us, in this our lamentable cas^, most wretched and
succourlesse: and by the sweet and comfortable trial of your most gracious
liberality, The end of hi^ supplication ma^e in the behalf of the prisone^
of (...),
restore us again to our perfect estate and liberty. The Lord God almighty
and most merciful, so incline and turn your maies^ies heart to pity, for the
(...) and avail of us poor prisoners in distress, y^ we may with the
prophetical prince and princely Prophet David, first to God omnipotent, then to
your highness, sound this sacred sentence The end of hi^ supplication ma^e in
the behalf of the (...) of (...),
Propter voce^ and gemitu^ pauperu^ nunc exurgam, di^ dominus: at the voice and
mourning complaint of the poor and co^sort less, I will arise says the Lord.
Wherefore, such hope as we ought to have, in this so happy a day: or in you
so blessed and gracious a Prince, we are bold to build upon: promising and
persuading our selves in heart, that the thing which with such earnes^nes is
desired, shall in semblable manner be obtained.

The He concludes with prai er for the prosperous estate of king Philip: the
date of this supplication may be soon learned, by just account of the years,
beginning at the year. 1554
Lord God grant you a long life, many children, a prosperous Reign in this
Realm of England, Power and Dominion over the world universal, and also
preserve your highness in perpetual happiness. Out of bonds and
imprisonment, the 18. of Aug. 1554
FINIS.
Thus far out of Master Gualter Haddon, and Master Roger Aschame: with
whose Epistles we will end this our Panoplie.
Imprinted at London, for Ralphe Newberie.

Anno Domini. 1576.


