THE BLOODY BROTHER. A Tragedy.

By B. I. F.

LONDON, Printed by R. Bishop, for Thomas Allott, and John Crook, and are to be
sold in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Greyhound 1639.

The drinking Song, to the second Act.
Drink to day and drown all sorrow,
You shall perhaps not do it to morrow.
Best while you have it use your breath,
There is no drinking after death.
Wine works the heart up, wakes the wi^,
There is no cure against age but it.
It helps the headache, cough and tissick,
And is for all diseases Physic.
Then let us swill boys for our health,
Who drinks well, loves the common wealth.
And he that will to bed go sober,
Falls with the leaf still in October.
Finis.
THE BLOODY BROTHER.
Act I. Scene I.
Enter Gisbert and Baldwin. THe brothers then are met? Gis. They are, sir.

Bald. It Is thought, they may be reconciled.

Gis. It Is rather wished, for such, whose reason does direct their thoughts
without self flattery^ dare not hope it, Baldwin.

The fires of Love, which the dead Duke believed
His equal care of both would have united,
Ambition has divided: and there are
Too many on both parts, that know they cannot
Or rise to wealth or honor, their maine ends,
Unless the tempest of the Princes fury
Make troubled seas, and those seas yield fit billows
In their bad arts to give way to a calm,
Which yiedling rest and good, prove their ruin,
And in the shipwreck of their hopes and fortunes,
The Dukedom might be saved, had it but ten
That stood affected to the general good,
With that confirmed zeal which brave Aubrey does.

Gis. He is indeed the perfect character
Of a good man, and so his actions speak him.

Bald. But did you observe the many doubts, and c^ution^
The brothers stood upon before they met?

Gis. I did; and yet, that ever brother should
Stand on more nice terms, than sworn enemies
After a war proclaimed, would with a stranger
Wrong the reporters credit; they saluted
At distance; and so strong was the suspicion
Each had of other, that before they durst
Embrace, they were by several servants searched,
As doubting concealed weapons, antidotes
Taken openly by both, fearing the room
Appointed for the enter-view was poisoned,
The chaires, and cushions, with like care survay'd;
And in a word in every circumstance
So jealous on both parts, that it is more
Than to be feared, Concord can never join
Minds so divided.

Bald. Yet our best endeavors
Should not be wanting, Gisbert.

Gis. Neither shall they. Ent. Grandpree and Verdon
But what are these?

Bald. They are without my knowledge;
But by their Manners, and Behaviors,
They should express themselves.

Grand. Since we serve Rol^o
The Elder brother, we^le be Rollians,
Who will maintain us, l^ds, as brave as Romans;
You stand for him?

Ver. I do.

Grand. Why, then observe
How much the business, your so longed for business,
By men that are named from their swords concerns you.
Lechery, our common friend, so long kept under,
With whips, and beating fatal hemps, shall rise,
And bawdery, in a French-hood plead, before her
Virginity shall be catted.

Ver. Excellent!

Grand. And Hell but grant, the quarrel that is between
The Princes may continue, and the business
That Is of the sword, t'outlast three suits in Law,
And we will make Atturnies lansprisadoes,
And our brave gown-men practisers of back-sword;
The pewter of all Sergeants maces shall
Be melted, and turned into common flaggons,
In which it shall be lawful to carouse
To their most lousy fortunes.

Bald. Here Is a Statesman.

Grand. A creditor shall not^ dare, but by petition,
To make demand of any dept; and that
Only once every leap-yeere, in which, if
The debtor may be won for a French crown
To pay a Saulz, he shall be registered
His benefactor.

Ver. The Chancellor hears you.

Grand. Fear not, I now dare speak as loud as he,
And will be heard, and have all I speak, Law;
Have you no eyes? there is a reverence due,
From children of the Gown, to men of Action:
How Is this?

Grand. Even so; the times, the times are changed
All business is not now preferrd in parchment,
Nor shall a grant pass that wants this broad seal;
This seal do you see? your gravity once laid
My head and heels together in the dungeon,
For cracking a scall'd officers crown, for which
A time is come for vengeance, and expect it;
For know, you have not full three hours to live.

Gis. Yes, somewhat longer.

Gran. To what end?

Gis. To hang you; think on that Ruffian.

Gran. For you, schoolmaster,
You have a pretty daughter; let me see,
Near three a clock, (by which time I much fear,
I shall be^yrd with kil^ing some five hundred)
Provide a bath, and her to entertain me,
And that shall be your ransom.

Bald. Impudent Rascal. Enter to them Trevi^e and Duprete.

Gis. More of the crew.

Gran. What are you? Rollians?

Tree. No; this for Rollo, and all such as serve him;
We stand for Otto.

Gran. You seem men of fashion,
And therefore I Will deal fairly, you shall have
The honor this day to be chronicled
The first men killed by Grandpree; you see this sword^
A pretty foolish toy, my valor's servant,
And I may boldly say a gentleman,
It having made when it was Charlemaignes,
Three thousand knights; this sir, shall cut your throat,
And do you all fair service else.

Tree. I kiss your hands for the good offer; here is another too, the servant of
your servant^ shall be proud to be scoured in your sweet gutts; till when pray
you command me.


Gran. Your Idolater, ^ir. Exeunt: manent Gisb. and Bald.

Gis. That e're such should hold the names of men,
Or Justice be held cruelty, when it labors
To pluck such weeds up!

Bald. Yet they are protected, and by the great ones.

Gis. Not the good ones, Baldwin.

Enter to them Aubrey. Aub. Is this a time to be spent thus by such
As are the principal ministers of the State?
When they that are the h^ads, have filld the Court
With factions, a weak woman only left
To s^ay their bloody hands? can her weak arms
Alone divert the dangers ready now
^o fall upon the Commonwealth, and bury
The honors of it, leaving not the name
Of what it was. Oh Gisbert, the fair trialls
And frequent proofs which our late master made,
Both of your love and faith, gave him assurance,
To choose you at his death a Guardian; nay,
A father to his sons; and that great trust
How ill do you discharge? I must be plain,
That, at the best, y' are a sad looker on
Of those bad practices you should prevent^
And where is the use of your Philosophy
In this so needful a time? be not secure;
For, Baldwin, be assured, since that the Princes
When they were young, and apt for any form,
Were given to your instruction, and grave ordering;
'Twill be expected that they should be good,
Or their bad manners will b' imputed yours.

Bald. 'Twas not in one, my Lord, to alter nature,

Gis. Nor can my counsels work on them that will ^o.
Vouchsafe me hearing.

Aub. Do these answers sort,
Or with your place, or persons, or your years;
Can Gi^bert being the pillar of the Laws,
See them trod under foot, or forced to serve
The Princes unjust ends; and with a frown
Be silenced from exclaiming on the abuse;
Or Baldwin only weep the desperate madness
Of his seduced pupills? see their minds,
Which with good arts he labored to build up
Examples of succeeding Times, o'returnd
By undermining parasites; no one precept
Leading to any Art, or great, or good,
But is forced from their memory, in whose room
Black counsels are received, and their retirements,
And secret conference producing only
Devilish designs, a man would shame to father;
But I talk when I should do, and chide others
For that I now offend in: See It confirmed,
Now do, or never speak more.

Gis. We are yours.

Enter Rollo, Latorch, Trevile, Grandpree, Otto, Verdon, and Duprete. Roll. You
shall know whom I am.

Ot. I do, my equal.

Roll. Thy Prince^ give way, -- were we alone, I Would force thee,
In thy best blood, to write thy self my subject,
And glad I would receive it.

Aub. Sir.

Gis. Dear Lord.

Ot. Thy subject?

Roll. Yes, nor shall tame patience hold me
A minute longer, only half my self;
My birth gave me this Dukedom, and my sword
Shall change it to the common grave of all
That tread upon her bosom, ere I part with
A piece of earth, or title that is mine.

Ot. It needs not, and I would scorn to receive,
Though offered, what I want not: therefore know
From me, though not delivered in great words,
Eyes red with rage, poor pride, and threatened action:
Our father at his death, then, when no accent,
Were thou a son, could fall from him in vain,
Made us Coheires^ our part of Land and Honors
Of equal weight; and to see this confirmed,
The oaths of these are yet upon record,
Who though they should forsake me, and call down
The plagues of perjury on their sinful heads,
I would not leave my self.

Tree. Nor will we see the Will of the dead Duke infringed.

Lat. Nor I the elder robbed of what is his right.

Grand. Nor you?
Let me take place, I say, I will not see it;
My sword is sharpest.

Aub. Peace you tinder-boxes,
That only carry matter to make a flame
Which will consume you.

Roll. You are troublesome, To Baldwi^^
This is no time for arguments, my Title
Needs not your schoole-defences, but my sword,
With which the Gordian of your Sophistry
Being cut, shall show the Imposture. For your laws, To Gisbert.
It is in me to change them when I please,
I being above them; Gisbert would you have me protect them
Let them now stretch their extremest rigor,
And seize upon that traitor; and your tongue
Make him appear first dangerous, then odious;
And after, under the pretense of safety,
For the sick State, the Lands and Peoples quiet,
Cut off his head: and I Will give up my sword,
And fight with them at a more certain weapon
To kill, and with authority.

Gis. Sir, I grant the Laws are useful weapons, but found ou^
T'assure the Innocent, not to oppress.

Roll. Then you conclude him Innocent?

Gis. The Power your father gave him, must not prove a Crime,

Aub. Nor should you so receive it.

Bald. To which purpose,
All that dare challenge any part in goodness,
Will become suppliants to you.

Roll. They have none
That dare move me in this; hence, I defy you,
Be of his party, bring it to your laws,
And thou thy double heart, thou popular fool,
Your moral rules of Justice and her balance;
I stand on mine own guard.

Ot. Which thy injustice
Will make thy enemies; by the memory
Of him, whose better part now suffers for thee,
Whose reverend ashes with an impious hand
Thou throw'st out to contempt, in thy repining
At his so Just decree; thou art unworthy
Of what his last Will, not thy merits, gave thee,
That art so swoln^ within, with all those mischiefs
That e're made up a Tyrant, that thy breast,
The prison of thy purposes, cannot hold them,
But that they break forth, and in thy ow^e words
Discover, what a monster they must serve
That shall acknowledge thee.

Roll. He o^fers his sword at Otto. the fa^^ion joining, Aubrey between severs
the brothers.
Thou shall not live to be so happy.

Aub. Nor your miseries begin in murder,
Duty, allegiance, and all respects of what you are, forsake me:
Do you stare on? is this a Theater?
Or shall these kill themselves, like to mad fencers,
To make you sport? keep them asunder, or
By heaven I Will charge on all.

Grand. Keep the peace.
I am for you, my lord, and if you will have me,
I Will act the Constables part.

Aub. Live I to see this?
Will you do that your enemies dare not wish,
And cherish in your selves those furies, which
Hell would cast out? Do, I am ready^ kill me,
And these, that would fall willing sacrifices
To any power that would re^tore your reason,
And make you men again, which now you are not^

Roll. These are your bucklers boy.

Ot. My hindrances;
And were I not confirmed, my Justice in
The taking of thy life, could not weigh down
The wrong, in shedding the least drop of blood
Of these whose goodness only now protects thee,
Thou should feel I in act would prove my self
What thou in words do labor to appear.

Roll. Hear this, and talk again? I Will break through all^
But I will reach thy heart.

Ot. It Is bettes guarded.

Enter Sophia. Soph. Make way, or I will force it, who are those^
My sons? my shames; turn all your swords on me,
And make this wretched body but one wound,
So this unnatural quarrel find a grave
In the unhappy womb that brought you forth:
Dare you remember that you had a mother,
Or look on these gray hairs, made so with tears,
For both your goods, and not with age; an^ yet
Stand doubtful to obey her? from me you had
Life, nerves, and faculties, to use these weapons;
And dare you raise them against her, to whom
You owe the means of being what you are?

Ot. All peace is meant to you.

Soph. Why is this war, then?
As if your arms could be advanced, and I
Not set upon the rack? your blood is mine,
Your dangers mine, your goodness I should share in^
I must be branded with those impious marks
You stamp on your own foreheads and on mine,
If you go on thus: for my good name therefore,
Though all respects of honor in your selves,
Be in your fury choackt, throw down your swords;
Your duty should beswifter than my tongue;
And join your hands while they be innocent;
You have heat of blood, and youth apt to Ambition,
To plead an easy pardon for what is past:
But all the ills beyond this hour committed,
From gods or men must hope for no excuse,

Gis. Can you hear this unmoved,
No syllable of this so pious charm, but should have power
To frustrate all the juggling deceits,
With which the devil blinds you.

Ot. I begin to melt, I know not how.

Roll. Mother, I Will leave you;
And sir, be thankful for the time you live,
Till we meeet next (which shall be soon and sudden)
To her persuasion for you.

Soph. O yet, stay,
And rather than part thus, vouchsafe me hearing
As enemies; how is my soul divided?
My love to both, is equal, as my wishes;
But are returned by neither; my grieved heart,
Hold yer a little longer, and then break.
I kneel to both, and will speak so, but this
Takes from me the authority of a mothers power;
And therefore, like my self, Otto, to thee,
(And yet observe, son, how thy mothers tears
Outstrip her forward words, to make way for'em.)
Thou art the younger, Otto, yet be now
The first example of obedience to me,
And grow the elder in my love.

Ot. The means to be so happy?

Soph. This; yield up thy sword,
And let thy piety give thy mother strength
To take that from thee which no enemies force
Could e're dispoyle thee of: why do thou tremble,
And with a fearful eye fixed on thy brother,
Observ'st his ready sword, as bent against thee?
I am thy armor, and will be pierced through,
Ten thousand times, before I will give way
To any peril may arrive at thee;
And therefore fear not.

Ot. It Is not for my self,
But for you, mother; you are now engaged
In more that lies in your unquestioned virtue;
For, since you have disarmed me of defense,
Should I fall now, though by his hand, the world
May say it was your practice.

Soph. All worlds perish,
Before my piety turn treasons parent,
Take it again, and stand upon your guard,
And while your brother is, continue armed;
And yet, this fear is needless, for I know,
My Rollo, though he dares as much as man,
So tender of his yet untainted valor,
So noble, that he dares do nothing basely.
You doubt him; he fears you; I doubt and fear
Both; for others safety, and not mine own.
Know yet, my sons, when of necessity
You must deceive, or be deceived; it is better
To suffer treason, than to act the traitor;
And in a war like this, in which the glory
Is his that is overcome: consider then
What it is for which you strive: is it the dukedom?
Or the command of these so ready subjects?
Desire of wealth? or whatsoever else
Fires your ambition? This still desperate madness,
To kill the people which you would be lords of;
With fire, and sword, to lay that country waste
Whose rule you seek for: to consume the treasures,
Which are the sinews of your government,
In cherishing the factions that destroy it:
Far, far be this from you: make it not questiond
Whether you have intrest in that dukedom,
Whose ruin both contend for.

Ot. I desire but to enjoy my own, which I will keep.

Roll. And rather than posterity shall have cause
To say I ruined all, devide the dukedom,
I will accept the moytie.

Ot. I embrace it.

Soph. Devide me first, or tear me limb by limb,
And let them find as many several graves
As there are villages in Normandy:
And it is less sin than thus to weaken it.
To hear it mentiond does already make me
Envy my dead lord, and almost blaspheme
Those powers that heard my prayer for fruitfullnesse,
And did not with my first birth close my womb:
To me alone my second blessing proves
My first of misery, for if that heaven
Which gave me Rollo, there had stayed his bounty,
And Otto, my dear Otto, never had been,
Or being, had not been so worth my love,
The stream of my affection had run constant
Iu one fair current, all my hopes had been
Laid up in one; and fruitful Normandy
In this division had not lost her gloryes:
For as it is now, it is a fair diamond,
Which being preserved entire, exceeds all value,
But cut in pieces (though these pieces are
Set in fine gold by the best work-mans cunning)
Parts with all estimation: So this Dukedom,
As it is yet whole, the neighboring Kings may covet,
But cannot compass; which divided, will
Become the spoil of every barbarous foe
That will invade it.

Gis. How this works in both!

Bal. Prince Rollos eyes have lost their fire.

Gis. And anger, that but now wholly possessed
Good Otto, has given place to pity.

Aub. End not thus Madam, but perfect what is so well begun.

Soph. I see in both, fair signs of reconcilement,
Make them sure proofs they are so: the Fates offer
To your free choice, either to live Examples
Of piety, or wickedness: if the later
Blinds so your understanding, that you cannot
Pierce through her painted outside, and discover
That she is all deformity within,
Boldly transcend all presidents of mischief,
And let the last, and the worst end of tyrannies,
The murder of a mother, but begin
The stain of blood you after are to heighten:
But if that virtue, and her sure rewards,
Can win you to accept her for your guide,
To lead you up to heaven, and there fix you
The fairest Stars in the bright Sphere of Honor;
Make me the parent of an hundred sons,
All brought into the world with joy, not sorrow,
And every one a father to his country,
In being now made mother of your concord.

Roll. Such, and so good, loud fame for ever speak you.

Bal. I, now they meet like Brothers. The Brothers cast away their swords and
embrace.

Gis. My hearts joy flows through my eyes.

Aub. May never woman's tongue
Hereafter be accused, for this ones Goodness.

Ot. If we contend, from this hour, it shall be
How to overcome in brotherly affection.

Roll. Otto is Rollo now, and Rollo, Otto,
Or as they have one mind, rather one name:
From this atonement let our lives begin,
Be all the rest forgotten.

Aub. Spoke like Rollo.

Soph. And to the honor of this reconcilement,
We all this night will at a public Feast
With choice wines drown our late fears, and with music
Welcome our comforts.

Bald. Sure and certain ones. Exeunt.

Manent Grandpree, Verdon, Trevile, and Duprete. Gran. Did ever such a hopeful
business end t^us?

Ver. It Is fatal to us all, and yet you Grandpree,
Have the least cause to fear.

Gran. Why; what is my hope?

Ver. The certainty that you have to be hang'd^
You know the Chancellours promise.

Gran. Plague upon you.

Ver. What think you of a Bath and a Lords daughter
To entertain you?

Gran. Those desires are off.
Frail thoughts, all friends, no Rollians now, nor Ottoes^
The several court^sies of our swords and servants
Defer to after consequence; let us make use
Of this nights freedom, a short Parliament to us,
In which it will be lawful to walk freely.
Nay, to our drink we shall have meat too, that is
No usual business to the men o'th'sword.
Drink deep with me to night, we shall to morrow
Or whip, or hang the merryer.

Tree. Lead the way then. Exeunt.

Act II. Scene I.
Enter La^orch and Rollo. Why should this trouble you?

Roll. It does, and must do till I find ease.

Lat. Consider then, and quickly;
And like a wise man, take the current with you,
Which once turned head, will sink you; blessed occasion
Offers her self in thousand safeties to you;
Time standing still to point you out your purpose,
And resolution (the true child of Virtue)
Ready to execute: what dull cold weakness
Has crept into your bosom, whose mere thoughts
Like tempests, plowing up the sailing Forests,
Even with their swing were wont to shake down hazards.
What is it, your mothers tears?

Roll. Pry thee be patient.

Lat. Her hands held up? her prayers, or her curses?
Oh power of paper dropped through by a woman!
Take heed the ^ouldiers see it not; it is miserable,
In Rollo below miserable; take heed your friends,
The sinews of your cause, the strength you stir by,
Take heed, I say, they find it not: take heed
Your own repentance (like a passing bell)
Too late, and too loud, tell the world you are perished:
What noble spirit, eager of advancement,
Whose employment is his plough; what sword whose sharpness
Waits but the arm to weild it; or what hope,
After the world has blown abroad this weakness,
Will move again, or make a wish for Rollo?

Roll. Are we not friends again by each oath ratified,
Our tongues the Heralds to our hearts?

Lat. Poor hearts then.

Roll. Our worthier friends.

Lat. No friends sir, to your hono^r;
Friends to your fall: where is your understanding,
The noble vessel that your full soul sayld in,
Ribb'd round with honors; where is that? it is ruind,
The tempest of a woman's sighs has sunk it.
Friendship, take heed sir, is a smiling harlot
That when she kisses, kills, a soderd friendship
Peec'd out with promises; O painted ruin!

Roll. Latorch, he is my brother.

Lat. The more doubted;
For hatred hatched at home is a tame Tiger,
May fawn and sport but never leaves his nature;
The jarres of brothers, two such mighty ones,
Is like a small stone thrown into a river,
The breach scarce heard, but view the beaten current,
And you shall see a thousand angry rings
Rise in his face, still swelling and still growing;
So jarres circling distrusts, distrusts breed dangers,
And dangers death, the greatest extreme shadow,
Till nothing bound 'hem but the shore their graves;
There is no manly wisdom, nor no safety
In leaning to this league, this peec'd patch friendship;
This reard up reconcilement on a billow,
Which as it tumbles, totters down your fortune;
Is It not your own you reach at? Law and Nature
Ushering the way before you; is not he
Borne and bequeathd your subject?

Roll. Ha.

Lat. What fool would give a storm leave to disturb his peace^
When he may shut the casement? can that man
Has won so much upon your pity,
And drawn so high, that like an ominous Comet,
He darkens all your light; can this touched Lion
(Though now he licks and locks up his fell paws,
Craftily huming, like a catt to cozen you)
But when ambition whetts him, and time fitts him,
Leap to his prey, and seizd once, suck your heart out?
Do you make it conscience?

Roll. Conscience Latorch, what is that?

Lat. A fear they tie up fools in, Natures coward,
Pauling the blood, and chilling the full spirit
With apprehension of mere clouds and shadows.

Roll. I know no conscience, nor I fear no shadows.

Lat. Or if you did; if there were conscience,
If the free soul could suffer such a curb
To the fiery mind, such puddles to put it out;
Must it needs like a rank Vine, run up rudely,
And twine about the top of all our happiness
Honor and rule, and there sit shaking of us?

Roll. It shall not, nor it must not; I am satisfied,
And once more am my self again:
My mothers tears and womanish cold prayers,
Farewell, I have forgot you; if there be conscience,
Let it not come betwixt a crown and me,
Which is my hope of bliss, and I believe it:
Otto, our friendship thus I blow to air,
A buble for a boy to play withal;
And all the vows my weakness made, like this,
Like this poor heartlesse rush, I rend in pieces:

Lat. Now you go right, sir, now your eyes are open.

Roll. My fathers last petition's dead as he is,
And all the promises I closd his eyes with,
In the same grave I bury.

Lat. Now y' are a man, sir.

Roll. Otto, thou shewst my winding sheet before me,
Which ere I put it on, like heavens blessed fire
In my descent I Will make it blush in blood;
A Crown, A Crown, Oh sacred Rule, now fire me;
Nor shall the pity of thy youth, false brother,
Although a thousand Virgins kneel before me,
And every droping eye a court of mercy,
The same blood with me, nor the reverence
Due to my mothers blessed womb that bred us,
Redeem thee from my doubts: thou art a wolf here,
Fed with my fears, and I must cut thee from me:
A Crown, A Crown; Oh sacred Rule, now fire me:
No safety else.

Lat. But be not too much stird, Sir, nor to high
In your execution: swallowing waters
Run deep and silent, till they are satisfied,
And smile in thousand Curles, to guild their craft;
Let your sword sleep, and let my two edgd wit work
This happy feast, the full joy of your friendships
Shall be his last.

Roll. How my Latorch?

Lat. Why thus, sir;
I Will presently go dive into the Officers
That minister at Table^ gold and goodness,
With promise upon promise, and time necessary,
I Will pour into them.

Roll. Can thou do it neatly?

Lat. Let me alone, and such a bait it shall be,
Shall take off all suspicion.

Roll. Go, and prosper.

Lat. Walk in then, and your smoothest face put on sir. Exeunt.

Act II. Scene II.
Enter the Master Cook, Butler, Pantler, Yeoman of the Cellar, with a Jack of
Beer and a Dish. Coo. A Hot day, a hot day, vengeance hot day boyes^
Give me some drink, this fire's a plaguey fretter^
Body of me, I Am dry still; give me the Jack boy;
This wooden Skiffe holds nothing.

Pant. And faith master, what brave new meats? for here will be old eating.

Coo. Old and young, boy, let 'em all eat, I have it;
I have ballasse for their bellies, if they eat a gods name,
Let them have ten tire of teeth a piece, I care not;

But. But what new rare munition?

Coo. Pish, a thousand;
I Will make you piggs speak French at table, and a fat swan
Come sailing out of England with a challenge;
I Will make you a dish of calves-feet dance the Canaries,
And a consort of crammed capons fiddle to 'hem;
A calves head speak an Oracle, and a dozen of Larks
Rise from the dish, and sing all supper time;
It Is nothing boys: I have framed a fortification
Out of Rye paste, which is impregnable,
And against that, for two long hours together,
Two dozen of marrow-bones shall play continually:
For fish, I Will make you a standing lake of white broth,
And pikes come ploughing up the plums before them;
Arion, like a Dolphin, playing Lachrymae,
And brave king Herring with his oil and onyon
Crowned with a Limon pill, his way prepared
With his strong Guard of Pilchers.

Pant. I marry master.

Coo. All these are nothing: I Will make you a stubble Goose
Turn of the toe thrice, do a cross point presently,
And sit down again, and cry come eat me:
These are for mirth. Now sir, for matter of mourning,
I Will bring you in the Lady Loyne of Veale,
With the long love she bore the Prince of Orange.

All. Thou boy, thou.

Coo. I have a trick for thee too,
And a rare trick, and I have done it for thee.

Yeo. What Is that good master?

Coo. It Is a sacrifice.
A full Vine bending, like an Arch, and under
The blown god Bacchus, sitting on a Hogshead,
His Altar Beer: before that, a plumpe Vintner
Kneeling, and offering incense to his deity,
Which shall be only this, red Sprats and Pilchers.

But. This when the Table's drawn, to draw the Wine on.

Coo. Thou have it right, and then comes thy Song, Butler.

Pant. This will be admirable.

Yeo. Oh sir, most admirable.

Coo. If you will have the pasty speak, it is in my power,
I have fire enough to work it; come, stand close,
And now rehearse the Song, We may be perfect,
The drinking Song, and say I were the Brothers.
They sing. Well have you borne your selves; a red Dear Pie, Boys,
And that no lean one, I bequeath your virtues;
What friends have thou to day? no citizens?

Pant. Yes father, the old Crew.

Coo. By the mass true wenches:
Sir, set by a chine of Beef, and a hot Pasty,
And let the Joll of Sturgeon be corrected:
And do you mark sir, stalk me to a Pheasant,
And see if you can shoot her in the Sellar.

Pant. God a mercy Lad, send me thy roaring bottles,
And with such Nectar I will see 'em filld^
That all thou speak shall be pure Helicon.
Enter Latorche. Monsieur Latorche? what news with him? Save you.

Lat. Save you Master, save you gentlemen,
You are casting for this preparation;
This joyful supper for the royal Brothers:
I Am glad I have met you fitly, for to your charge
My bountiful brave Butler, I must deliver
A Bevie of young Lasses, that must look on
This nights solemnity, and see the two Dukes,
Or I shall lose my credit; you have Stowage?

But. For such freight I Will find room, and be your servant.

Coo. Bring them, they shall not starve here I Will send'em victuals
Shall work you a good turn, though it be tend a yes hence, sir.

Lat. God-a-mercy noble Master.

Coo. Nay, I Will do it.

Yeo. And wine they shall not want, let them drink like Ducks.

Lat. What misery it is that minds so royal,
And such most honest bounties, as yours are,
Should be confind thus to uncertainties.

But. I, were the State once settled, then we had places.

Yeo. Then we could show our selves, and help our friends, sir.

Coo. I, then there were some savor in it, where now
We live between two stools, every hour ready
To tumble on our noses; and for ought we know yet,
For all this Supper, ready to fa^t the next day.

Lat. I would feign speak unto you out of pity,
Out of the love I bear you, out of honesty,
For your own goods; nay, for the general blessing.

Coo. And we would as feign hear you, pray go forward.

Lat Dare you but think to make your selves up certainties
Your places, and your credits ten times doubled,
The Princes favor, Rollos.

But. A sweet Gentleman.

Yeo. I, and as bountious, if he had his right too.

Coo. By the mass, a Royal gentleman, indeed Boys,
He`de make the chinmeyes smoke.

Lat. He would do`t friends,
And you too, if he had his right, true Courtiers;
What could you want then? dare you?

Coo. Pray you be short sir.

Lat. And this my soul upon it, I dare assure you,
If you but dare your parts.

Coo. Dare not me Monsieur:
For I that fear nor fire, nor water, sir,
Dare do enough, a man would think.

Yeo. Beleev't, sir,
But make this good upon us you have promised,
You shall not find us flinchers.

Lat. Then I Will be sudden.

Pant. What may this mean? and whither would he drive us?

Lat. And first, for what you must do, because all danger
Shall be apparently tied up and mussell'd,
The matter seeming mighty: there is your pardons.

Pant. Pardons? Is It come to that, gods defend us.

Lat. And here is five hundred Crowns in bountious earnest,
And now behold the matter.

But. What are these, sir?

Yeo. And of what nature? to what use?

Lat. I imagine.

Coo. Will they kill Rats? they eat my pyes abominably^
Or work upon a woman cold as Christmas:
I have an old Jade sticks upon my fingers,
May I taste them?

Lat. Is your will made?
And have you said your prayers? for they will pay you:
And now to come up to you, for your knowledge,
And for the good you never shall repent you
If you be wisemen now.

Coo. Wise as you will, sir.

Lat. These must be put then into the several meats
Young Otto loves, by you into his wine, sir,
Into his bread by you, Into his linen.
Now if you desire, you have found the means
To make you, and if you dare not, you have
Found your ruin; resolve me ere you go.

But. You Will keep your faith with us.

Lat. May I no more see light else

Coo. Why it is done then?

But. It Is done.

Pant. It Is done which shall be undone.

Lat. About it then, farewell, you are all of one mind.

Coo. All?
All: All: All.

Lat, Why then all happy. Exit.

But. What did we promise him?

Yeo. Do you ask that now?

But. I would be glad to know what it is.

Pan. I Will tell you.
It is to be all villanes, knaves, and traitors.

Coo. Fine wholesome titles.

Pan. But if you dare, go forward.

Co^. We may be hanged, drawn, and quartered.

Pan. Very true, sir.

Coo. What a goodly swing I shall give the gallows? yet I think too, this may
be done, and yet we may be rewarded, not with a rope, but with a royal
master: and yet we may be hanged too.


Yeo. Say it were done; who is it done for? is it not for Rollo?
And for his right?

Coo. And yet we may be hanged too.

But. Or say he take it, say we be discovered?
Is not the fame man bound to still protect us?
Are we not his?

But. Sure, he will never fail us.

Coo. If he do, friends, we shall find that will hold us;
And yet me thinks, this prologue to our purpose,
These crowns should promise more: it is easily done,
As easy as a man would roast an egg,
If that be all; for look you, gentlemen,
Here stand my broths, my finger slips a little,
Down drops a dose, I stir him with my ladle,
And there is a dish for a Duke: ^lla Podrid^.
Here stands a baked meat, he wan^^ a little seasoning,
A foolish mistake; my Spice-box, gentlemen,
And put in some of this, the matter ^ ended;
Dredge you a dish of plovers, there is the Art on it.

Yeo. Or as I fill my wine.

Coo. It Is very true, sir.
Bl^ssing it with your hand, thus quick and neatly first, it is past
And done once, it is as easy
For him to thank us for it, and reward us.

Pan. But it is a^ damnd sin.

Coo. O, never fear that.
The fire's my play-fellow, and now I am resolvd, boys.

But. Why then, have with you.

Yeo. The same for me.

Pan. For me too.

Coo. And now no more our worships, but our lordships.

Pan. Not this year, on my knowledge, I Will unlord you.

Exeunt. Act II. Scene III.
Enter Servant, and Sewer. PErfume the room round, and prepare the table,
Gentlemen officers, wait in your places.
Sew. Make room there,
Room for the Dukes meat. Gentlemen, be bare there,
Clear all the entrance: Guard, put by those gapers,
And gentlemen-ushers, see the gallery clear,
The Dukes are coming on.

Hoboys a banquet. Enter Sophia, between Rollo and Otto, Aubrey, Latorche,
Gisbert, Baldwin, Attendants, Hamond, Matilda, Edith. Ser. It Is certainly
informd.

Ot^ Reward the fellow, and look you mainly to it.

Ser. My life for yours, sir.

Soph. Now am I straight^ my lords, and young again,
My long since blasted hopes shoot out in blossoms,
The fruits of everlasting love appearing;
Oh! my blessed boys, the honor of my years,
Of all my cares, the bounteous fair rewarders.
Oh! let me thus embrace you, thus for ever
Within a mothers love lock up your friendships:
And my sweet sons, once more with mutual twinings,
As one chaste bed begot you, make one body:
Blessings from heaven in thousand showers fall on you:

Aub. Oh! woman's goodness never to be equaled,
May the most sinful creatures of thy sex
But kneeling at thy monument, rise saints.

Soph. Sit down my worthy sons; my lords. your places.
I, now me thinks (the table's nobly furnish;
Now the meat nourishes; the wine gives spirit;
And all the room stuck with a general pleasure,
Shows like the peaceful bows of happiness.

Aub. Long may it last, and from a heart filled with it,
Full as my cup: I give it round, my lords.

Bald. And may that stubborn heart be drunk with sorrow
Refuses it; men dying now, should take it;
Shake off their miseries, and sleep in peace.

Roll. You are sad, my noble brother.

Ot. No, indeed, sir.

Roph. No sadness my son this day.

Roll. Pray you eat.
Something is here you have loved; taste of this dish
It will prepare your stomach.

Ot. Thank you brother: I am not now disposed to eat.

Roll. Or that.
You put us out of heart man, come, these baked meats
Were ever your best diet.

Ot. None, I thank you.

Soph. Are you well, noble child?

Ot. Yes, gracious mother.

Roll. Give him a cup of wine, then, pledge the health,
drink it to me, I Will give it to my mother.

Soph. Do, my best ehilde.

Ot. I must not, my best mother,
Indeed I dare not: for of late, my body
Has been much weakened by excess of diet;
The promise of a fever hanging on me.
And even now ready, if not by abstinence

Roll. And will you keep it in this general freedom;
A little health preferrd before our friendship.

Ot. I pray you excuse me, sir.

Roll. Excuse your self sir,
Come it is your fear, and not your favor brother,
And you have done me a most worthy kindness
My Royal mother, and you noble Lords;
Here, for it now concerns me to speak boldly;
What faith can be expected from his vows,
From his dissembling smiles, what fruit of friendship
From all his dull embraces, what blessed issue,
When he shall brand me here for base suspicion,
He takes me for a poysoner.

Sop. Gods defend it son.

Roll. For a foul knave, a villain, and so fears me.

Ot. I could say something too.

Sop. You must not so sir,
Without your great forgetfulness of virtue;
This is your brother, and your honored brother.

Roll. If he please so.

^^p. One noble father, with as noble thoughts,
^^got your minds and bodies: one care rockt you^
and one truth to you both was ever sacred;
Now fie my Otto, whither flies your goodness,
Because the right hand has the power of cutting,
Shall the left presently cry out it is maimed?
They are one my child, one power, and one performance,
And joined together thus, one love, one body.

Aub. I do beseech your grace, take to your thoughts
More certain counselors than doubts or fears,
They strangle nature, and disperse themselves
(If once believed) into such fogges and errors
That the bright truth her self can never se^er:
Your brother is a royal gentleman
Full of himself, honor, and honesty,
And take heed sir, how nature bent to goodness,
(So straight a Cedar to himself) uprightness
Be wrested from his true use, prove not dangerous

Roll. Nay my good brother knownes I am too patient.

Lat. Why should your Grace think him a poysoner
Has he^ no more respect to piety!
And but he has by oath ty'de up his fury
Who durst but think that thought.

Aub. Away thou firebrand.

Lat. If men of his sort, of his power, and place
The eldest son in honor to this Dukedom.

Bald. For shame contain thy tongue, thy poisonous tongue
That with her burning venom will infect all,
And once more blow a wild fire through the dukedom.

Gis. Latorche, if thou be'st honest, or a man,
Contain thy self.

Aub. Go too, no more, by heaven
You Will find you have played the fool else, not a word more.

Sop. Prithee sweet son.

Roll. Let him alone sweet mother, and my Lords
To make you understand how much I honor
This sacred peace, and next my innocence
And to avoid all further difference
Discourse may draw on to a way of danger
I quit my place, and take my leave for this night,
Wishing a general joy may dwell among you.

Aub. Shall we wait on your grace?

Roll. I dare not break you, Latorche.

Exit. Rollo and Latorch^. Ot. Oh mother that your tenderness had eyes,
Discerning eyes, what would this man appear then,
The tale of Synon when he took upon him
To ruin Troy; with what a cloud of cunning
He hid his heart, nothing appearing outward,
But came like innocence, and dropping pity,
Sighs that would sink a Navy, and had tales
Able to take the ears of Saints, belief too,
And what did all these? blew the fire to Illium,
Hi^ crafty art (but more refined by study)
My brother has put on: oh I could tell you
But for the reverence I bear to nature,
Things that would make your honest blood run backward.

Sop. You dare tell me?

Ot. Yes, in your private closet
Where I will presently attend you; rise
I am a little troubled, but 'twill off.

Sop. Is this the joy I looked for?

Ot. All will mend,
Be not disturbed dear mother, I Will not fail you.

Exit. Sop. and Otto. Bald. I do not like this.

Aub. That is still in our powers,
But how to make it so that we may like it.

Bald. Beyond us ever; Latorche me thought was bu^ie,
That fellow, if not looked to narrowly will do a sudden mischief.

Aub. Hell look to him,
For if there may be a devil above all, yet
that rogue will make him; keep you up this night,
And so will I, for much I fear a danger.

Bald. I will, and in my watches use my prayers. Exeunt.

Act. 3. Scaene. I.
Enter Sophia, Otto, Matillda, Edith. Ot. You wonder Madam, that for all the
shows
My brother Rollo makes of hearty love
And free possession of the Dukedom twixt us;
I notwithstanding should stand still suspiscious,
As if beneath those veyles, he did convey
Intents and practices of hate, and treason?

Sop. It breeds indeed my wonder.

Ot. Which makes mine,
Since it is so safe and broad a beaten way,
Beneath the name of friendship to betray.

Sop. Though in remote and further of affections,
These falsehoods are so common, yet in him
They cannot so force nature;

Ot. The more near
The bands of truth bind, the more often they sever,
Being better cloakes to cover falsehood over.

Sop. It cannot be, that fruits the tree so blasting
Can grow in nature; take heed gentle son
Least some subbornd suggester of these treasons,
Believed in him by you, provoked the rather
His tender envies, to such foul atempts;
Or that your too much love to rule alone
Breed not in him this Jealous pas^ion;
Th^re is not any ill we might not bear
Were not our good held at a price too dear?

Ot. So apt is treachery to be excused,
That innocence is still aloud abused,
The fate of virtue even her friends perverts,
To plead for vice often times against their hearts,
Heavens blessing is her curse, which she must bear
That she may never love.

Sop. Alas, my son, nor fate, nor heaven it self,
Can or would wrest my whole care of your good
To any least securenesse in your ill:
What I urge issues from my curious fear;
Least you should make your means to escape your snare,
Doubt of sincerenesse is the only mean
Not to insence it, but corrupt it clean.

Ot. I rest as far from wrong of sincerenesse,
As he flies from the practice, trust me Madam,
I know by their confessions, he subborn'd,
What I should eat, drink, touch, or only have scented,
This evening feast was poisoned, but I fear
This open violence more, that treacherous odds
Which he in his insa^iate thirst of rule
Is like to excute.

Sop. Believe it Sonne^
If still his stomach be so foul to feed
On such gross objects, and that thirst to rule
The state alone be yet unquench'd in him,
Poisons and such close treasons ask more time
Than can suffice his fiery spirits have:
And were there in him such desire to hide
So false a practice, there would likewise rest
Conscience and fear in him'of open force,
And therefore close nor open you need fear.

Mat. Good Madam, stand not so inclined to trust
What proves his tendrest thoughts to doubt it just,
Who knows not the unbounded flood and sea,
In which my brother Rolloes appetites
Alter and rage with every puff and breath,
His swelling blood exhales, and therefore hear,
What gives my temperate bro^her cause to use
His readiest circumspection, and consult
For remedy against all his wicked purposes;
If he arm, arm, if he strew mines of treason,
Meet him with countermines, it is justice st^ll
(For goodness sake) t'encounter ill with ill.

Sop. Avert from us such jnstice, equal heaven,
And all such cause of justice.

Ot. Past all doubt
(For all the sacred privilege of night)
This is no time for us to sleep or rest in;
Who knows not all things holy are prevented
With ends of all impiety, all but
Lust, gain, ambition.

Enter Rollo armed, and Latorche. Roll. Perish all the world
Ere I but loose one foot of possible Empire,
Be slights and color used by slaves and wretches
I am exempt by birth from both these curbes,
And since above them in all justice, since
I sit above in power, where power is given,
Is all the right supposed of earth and heaven.

Lat. Prove both sir, see the traitor.

Ot. He comes armed, see Mother, now your c^nfidence.

Sop. What rage affects this monster?

Roll. Give me way or perish.

Sop. Make thy way viper, if thou thus affect it.

Ot. This is a treason like thee.

Roll. Let her go.

Sop. Embrace me, wear me as thy shield, my son;
And through my breast let his rude weapon run,
To thy lives innoscence.

Ot. Play not two parts,
Treacher and coward both; but yield a sword,
And let thy arming thee be odds enough
Against my naked bosom.

Roll. Loose his hold.

Mat. Forbear base murderer.

Roll. Forsake our mother.

Sop. Mother, do thou name me, and put'st off nature thus?

Roll. Forsake her traitor.
Or by the spouse of nature through hers,
This leads unto thy heart.

Ot. Hold.

Sop. Hold me still.

Ot. For twenty hearts and lives I will not hazard
One drop of blood in yours.

Sop. Oh thou art lost then.

Ot. Protect my innocence, heaven.

Sop. Call out murder.

Mat. Be murdered all, but save him.

Ed. Murder, murther^

Roll. Cannot I reach you yet.

Ot. No fiend.

Roll. Latorche, rescue, I Am down.

Lat. Up then, your sword cooles sir,
Ply it in the flame, and work your ends out.

Roll. Ha, have at you there sir.

Enter Aubrey. Aub. Author of prodigies, what sightes are these?

Ot. Oh give me a weapon, Aubrey.

Sop. Oh part'em, part'em.

Aub. For heavens sake no more.

Ot. No more resist his fury, no rage can
Add to his mischief done. Dies.

Sop. Take spirit my Otto,
Heaven will not see thee dye thus.

Mat. He is dead, and nothing lives but death of every goodness.

Sop. Oh he has slain his brother, curse him heaven.

Roll. Curse and be cursed, it is the fruit of cursing^
Latorche, take off here, bring too, of that blood
To color ore my shirt, then raise the Court
And give it out how he atempted us
In our bed naked, shall the name of brother
Forbid us to enlarge our state and powers?
Or place affects of blood above our reason?
That tells us all things good against another,
Are good in the same line against a brother. Exit.

Enter Gisbert, Balldwin. Gis. What affairs inform these outcries?

Aub. See and grieve.

Gi^. Prince Otto slain I

Ball. Oh execrable slaughter I
What hand has author'd it?

Aub. Your Scholars, Baldwin.

Bald. Unjustly urged, Lord Aubrey, as if I,
For being his Schoolmaster, must own this doctrine,
You are his Counselors, did you advise him
To this foul parracide?

Gis. If rule affect this license, who would live
To worse, than dye in force of his obedience?

Bald. Heavens cold and lingering spirit to punish sin,
And humane blood so fiery to commit it,
One so outgoes the other, it will never
Be turned to fit obedience.

Aub. Burst it then
With his full swing given, where it brooks no bound,
Complaints of it are vain; and all that rests
To be our refuge (since our powers are strengthlesse)
Is to conform our wills to suffer freely,
What with our murmurs we can never master;
Ladies, be pleased with what heavens pleasure suffers,
Erect your princely countenances and spirits,
And to redress the mischiefs now resistlesse,
Sooth it in show, rather than curse or cross it;
Which all amends, and vow to it your best,
But till you may perform it, let it rest.

Gis. Those temporizings are too dull and servile,
To breath the free air of a manly soul,
Which shall in me expire in execrations,
Before, for any life I sooth a m^rtherer.

Bald. Pour lives before him, till his own be dry
Of all lives services and human comforts:
None left that looks at heaven is half so base
To do those black and hellish actions grace.

Enter Rollo, Lat. Ham, and guard. Roll. Haste Latorche
And raise the City as the Court is raised
Proclaiming the abhorred conspiracy
In plot against my life.

Lat. I haste my Lord. Exit.

Roll. You there that mourn upon the justly slain,
Arise and leave it if you love your lives,
And hear from me what (kept by you) may save you.

Mat. What will the Butcher do? I will not stir.

Roll. Stir, and unforc't stir, or stir never more:
Command her, you grave Beldame, that know better
My deadly resolutions, since I drew them
From the infective fountain of your own,
Or if you have forgot, this fiery prompter
Shall fix the fresh impression on your heart.

Sop. Rise daughter, serve his will in what we may
Least what we may not he enforce the rather,
Is this all you command us?

Roll. This addition only admitted, that when I endeavor
To quit me of this slaughter you persume not
To cross me with a syllable for your souls;
Murmr, nor think against it, but weigh well,
It will not help your ill, but help to more,
And that my hand wrought thus far to my will,
Will check at nothing till his circle fill.

Mat. Fill it, so I consent not, but who soothes it
Consents, and who consents to tyranny, does it.

Roll. False traytresse die then with him.

Aub. Are you mad, to offer at more blood, and make your self
More horrid to your people? I Will proclaim,
It is not as your instrument will publish.

Roll. Do, and take that along with you -- so nimble,
Resign my sword, and dare not for thy soul
To offer what thou insolently threatnest;
One word, proclaiming cross to what Latorch
Has in Commission^ and intends to publish.

Aub. Well sir, not for your threats, but for your good,
Since more hurt to you would more hurt your country,
And that you must make virtue of the need
That now compells you, I Will consent as far
As silence argues to your will proclaimed:
And since no more sons of your Princely father
Survives to rule but you, and that I wish
You should rule like your father, with the love
And zeal of all your subjects; this foul slaughter
That now you have committed made ashamed
With that fair blessing, that in place of plagues,
Heaven^ies our me^^ing disposition, which
Take here your sword, which now use like a Prince,
And no more like a Tyrant.

Roll. This sounds well, live and be gracious with us.

Gis. and Bal. Oh Lord Aubrey.

Mat. He flatters thus?

Sop. He temporizes fitly.

Roll. Wonder invades me^ do you two think much,
That he thus wisely, and with need consents
To what I author for your Countries good?
You being my Tutor, you my Chancellor.

Gis. Your Chancellor, is not not your Flatterer ^ir.

Bal. Nor, Is it your Tutors part to shield such doctrine?

Roll. Sir, first know you^
In praise of your pure Oratorie that raise you.
That when the people, who I know by this
Are raised out of their rests, and hastening hithe^
To witness what is done here, are arrived
With^^^ Latorch, that you extemp^r^
Shall fashion an Oration to acquit
And justify this forced fact of mine;
Or for the proud refusal lose your head.

Gis. I fashion an Oration to acquit you?
Sir, know you then, that it is a thing less easy
To excuse a parracide than to commit it.

Roll. I do not wish you sir, to excuse me,
But to accuse my brother, as the cause
Of his own slaughter by attempting mine.

Gis. Not for the world, I should power blood on blood^
It were another murder to accuse
Him that fell innocent.

Roll. Away with him, hence, hail him straight to execution

Aub. Far fly such rigor your amendfull hand.

Roll. He perishes with him that speaks for him^
^uard do thy office on him, on your lives-paine.

Gis. Tyrant, twill has^e thy own death.

Roll. Let it wing it,
Ne threatens me; Villains t^^re him piece, meal (...).

Guard. Avaunt sir.

Ham. Force him hence.

Roll. Dispatch him Captain,
And bring me instant word he i^ dispatched.
And how his re^^ike takes it.

Ham. I Will not fail sir.

Roll. Captain, besides remember this in chief;
That being executed you deny
To all his friends the rits of funeral,
And cast his carkase out to dogs and ^oules.

Ham. It Is done my Lord.

Roll. Upon your life not fail.

Bal. What impious daring is there here of heaven?

Roll. Sir now prepare your self against the people,
Make here their entry to discharge the Oration,
He has denied my will.

Bal. For fear of death? ha, ha, ha,

Roll. Is death rediculous with you?
Works misery of age this, or thy judgement^

Bal. Judgment false tyrant.

Roll. You Will make no Oration then?

Bal. Not to excuse, but aggravate thy murder if thou will;
which I will so enforce, I Will make thee wreake it
(With hate of what thou win'st by it) on thy self,
With such another justly merited murder.

Roll. I Will answer you anon.

Enter Lat^rch. Lat. The citizens are hasting sir in heape^s, all full resolved
By my persuasions of your brothers Treason^:

Roll. Honest Latorch.

Enter H^^ond. Ha. See sir, here is Gisberts head.

Roll. Good speed; wast with a sword?

Ha. An axe fir.

Roll. An axe, it was vildely done, I would have had
My own fine Headsman done it with a sword:
Go, take this dotard here, and take his head
Off with a sword.

Ha. Your School^master^

Roll. Even he.

Bal. For teaching thee no better; it is the best
Of all thy damned justices; away
Captain, I Will follow.

Ed. Oh stay there Duke, and in the midst of all thy blood and fury,
Hear a poor maids petitions, here a daughter,
The only daughter of a wretched father^
Oh stay your haste as you shall need this mercy.

Roll. Away with this fond woman.

Ed. You most hear me,
If there be any spoke of pity^ in you,
If sweet humanity and mercy rule you;
I do confess you are a Prince, your anger
As great as you, your execution greater.

Roll. Away with him.

Ed. Oh Captain, by thy manhood
By her soft soul that bear thee, I do confess sir,
Your doom of justice on your foes most righteous;
Good noble Prince look on the^^

Roll. Take her from me.

Ed. A curse upon his life that hinders me;
May fathers blessing never fall upon him,
May heaven never hear his prayers: I beseech you,
Oh sir, these few tears beseech you; these chaste hands woo you
Th^^ never yet were heaved but to things holy,
Things like your self, you are a God above us;
Be as a God then, full of saving mercy;
Mercy, oh mercy, for his sake mercy;
That when your stout heart weapes shall give you pity;
Here I must grow.

Ral. By heaven I Will strike thee woman.

Ed. Most willingly, let all thy anger seek me,
All the most studied torments, so this good man,
This old man, and this innocent escape thee.

Roll. Carry him away, I say.

Ed. Now blessing on thee, oh sweet pity,
I see it in thy eyes. I charge you soldiers
Even by the Princes power, release my father;
The Prince is merciful, why do you hold him?
He is old, why do you hurt him? speak, oh speak sir;
Speak, as you are a man; a man's life hangs sir,
A friends life, and a foster life upon you:
It Is but a word, but mercy, quickly spoke sir;
Oh speak Prince, speak.

Roll. Will no man here obey me?
Have I no rule yet? as I live he dies
That does not execute my will, and suddenly.

Bal. All that thou can do, takes but one short hour from me.

Roll. Hew off her hands.

Ham. Lady hold off.

Ed. No hew'm,
Hew off my innocent hands as he commands you,
Exit Guard, Count Bald. They Will hang the faster on for deaths convulsion;
Thou seed of rocks, will nothing move thee then:
Are all my tears lost? all my righteous prayers
Drowned in thy drunken wrath? I stand thus then
Thus boldly, bloody Tyrant,
And to thy face in heavens high name defy thee;
And may sweet mercy when thy soul sighs for it,
When under thy black mischi^^es thy flesh trembles,
When neither strength, nor youth, nor friends, nor gold
Can stay one hour, when thy most wretched conscience
Waked from her dream of death like fire shall melt thee,
When all thy mothers tears, thy brothers wounds,
Thy peoples fears and curses, and my loss,
My aged fathers loss shall stand before thee.

Roll. Save him I say, run, save him, save her father
Fly and redeem his head.

Exit Latorch. Ed. May then that pity,
That comfort thou expect'st from heaven, that mercy
Be locked up from thee, fly thee, howling find thee,
Despair, oh my sweet father, storms of terrors,
Blood till thou burst again.

Roll. Oh fair sweet anger.

Enter Latorch and Hamond with a (...). Lat. I am two late sir, it was dispatched
before^
And his head is hear.

Roll. And my heart there; go bury him.
Give him fair rites of funeral, decent honour^.

Ed. Will thou not take me monster? heighest heaven
Give him a punishment fit for his mischief.

Lat. I fear thy prayer is heard, and he rewarded^
Lady have patience, it was unhappy speed;
Blame not the Duke, it was not his fault, but fates,
He sent, you know to stay it, and commanded
In care of you, the heavy object hence
Soon as it came? have better thoughts of him.

Enter Citizens. Cit. 1. Where Is this young Traitor?

Lat. Noble citizens^ here;
Any here the wounds he gave your sovereign Lord.

Cit. 1. This Prince of force must be
Beloved of heaven, whom heaven has thus preserved.

Cit. 2. And if he be beloved of heaven, you know,
He must be just, and all his actions so.

Roll. Concluded like an Oracle, oh how great
A grace of heaven is a wise ^^^^zen?
For heaven it is makes them wise, as 't makes me just,
As it preserves me, as I now survive
By his strong hand to keep you all alive;
Your wives, your children, goods and lands kept yours,
That had been else preyes to his tyranous power,
That would have preyed on me, in bed a^saulted me
In sacred time of peace; my mother here,
My sister, this just Lord, and all had felt
The curtian gulf of this conspiracy,
Of which my Tutor and my Chancellor,
Two of the gravest and most counted honest
In all my Dukedom) were the monstrous head^;
Oh trust no honest men for their sakes ever
My politic Citizens, but those that breathe
The names of Cutthroats, usurers an Tyrants;
Oh those believe (...), for the ^oule mouthed world
Can give no better terms to ^imple goodness:
Even m^ it dares blaspheme, and thinks me tyrannou^
For saving my own life, sought by my brother:
Yet those that sought his life before by poison
(Though my own servants, hoping to please me)
I Will lead to death fort, which your eyes shall see.

Cit. 1. Why, what a Prince is here?

Cit. 2. How just?

Cit. 3. How gentle?

Roll. Well, now my dearest subjects; or much rather
My nerves, my spirits, or my vital blood;
Turn to your needful rest, and settled peace,
Fix in this root of steel, from whence it sprung
In heavens great help and blessing: but ere sleep
Bind in his sweet oblivion your dull senses,
The name and verme of heavens King; advance
For yours, in ^hiefe for my deliverance.

Cit. Heaven and his King save our most pious sovereign.

Exit Citizens. Roll. Thanks my good people: mother and kind sister,
And you my noble kinsmen, things borne thus,
Shall make you all command what ever I
Enjoy in this my absolute Empery,
Take in the body of my princely brother;
For whose death, since his fate no other way,
Would give my eldest birth his supreme right;
We Will mourn the cruel influence it bears,
And wash his sepulcher with kindly tears.

Aub. If this game end thus, heavens will rule the se^.
What we have yielded to, we could not let.

Exit ^^nes, Praet^r, Latorch, and Edith Lat. Good Lady rise, and raise your
spirits withal,
More high than they are humbled; you have cause,
As much as ever honored happiest Lady;
And when your ears are freer to take in
Your most amendfull and unmatched fortunes,
I Will make you drown a hundred helpelesse deaths
In sea of one life powered into your bosom;
With which shall flow into your arms, the ri^hes,
The pleasures, honors, and the rule^ o^ P^in^^^;
Which though death stop your ea^es, me thinks should ope'm
Assay to forget death.

Ed. Oh slaughtered father.

Lat. Taste of what cannot be redressed, and bless
The fate that yet you curse so; sin^e for that
You spoke so movingly, and your sweet eyes
With so much grace filled, that you set on fire
The Dukes affection, whom you now may rule
As he rules all his Dukedom, is it not sweet?
Does it not shine away your sorrows clouds^
Sweet Lady, take wi^e heart, and hear, and tell me^

Ed. I hear no word you speak.

Lat. Prepare to hear then,
And be not barred up from your self, nor add
To your ill fortune with your far worse judgement^
Make me your servant to attend with all joys
Your sad estate, till they both bless and speak it:
See how they will bow to you, make me wait, command m^
To watch out every minute, for the stay
Your modest sorrow fancies, raise your graces,
And do my hopes the honor of your motion,
To all the offered heights that now attend you:
Oh how your touches ravish? how the Duke
Is slain already with your flames embraced?
I will both serve and vi^ite you, and often.

Ed. I am not fit sir.

Lat. Time will make you Lady.

Exeunt. Act III. Scene II.
Enter the Guard, 3 or 4 boys, then the Shreriffe, Cook, Yeoman of the
Cellar, Butler, Pantler to execution. Guard 1. COme bring in these fellows, on,
away with them.

Guard 2. Make room before there, room for the prisoners^

Boy 1. Let Us run before boys, we shall have no places else^

Boy 2. Are these the youths?

Cook These are the youths you look for,
And, pray my honest friends, be not so hasty,
There will be nothing done till we come, I assure you.

Boy 3. Here Is a wise hanging, are there no more?

But. Do you hear sir? you may come in for your share if you please.

Coo. My friend, if you be unprovided of a hanging,
You look like a good fellow, I can afford you
A reasonable peny-worth.

Boy 2. Before, before boys, here is enough to make us sport.

Yeo. Pox take you,
Do you call this sport? are these your recreations?
Must we be hanged to make you mirth?

Coo. Do you hear sir?
You custard pate, we go to it for high treason,
An honorable fault: thy foolish father
Was hanged for stealing sheep.

Boys Away, away boys.

Coo. Do you see how that sneaking rogue looks now?
You, chip, Pantler, you peaching rogue, that provided us these
necklaces: you poor rogue, you costive rogue you.

Pant. Pray, pray, fellows.

Coo. Pray for thy crusty soul? where is your reward now,
Goodman Manchet, for your fine discovery?
I do beseech you sir, where are your dollars?
Draw with your fellows, and be hanged.

Yeo. He must now.
For now he shall be hanged first, that is his comfort,
A place too good for thee, thou meal mouthed rascal.

Coo. Hang handsomely for shame, come leave your praying
You peaking knave, and die like a good courtier;
Die honestly, and like a man; no preaching,
With I beseech you take example by me,
I lived a lewd man, good people; pox ont:
Die me as if thou had dined, say grace, and God be with you,

Guard. Come, will you forward?

Cook. Good Mr Sheriff, your leave to, this hasty work
Was nere done well: give us so much time as but to sing
Our own Ballads, for we will trust no man,
Nor no tune but our own; it was done in Ale too,
And therefore cannot be refused in justice.
Your penny pot Poets are such pelting thieves,
They ever hang men twice; we have it here sir,
And so much every merchant of our voyage,
Hele make a sweet return else of his credit.

Yeo. One fit of our own mirth and then we are for you.

Gu^r. Make haste then, dispatch.

Yeo. There Is day enough, sir.

Coo. Come boys, sing cheerfully, we shall nere sing yonger^
We have chosen a loud tune too, because it should like well.
The Song
Come, Fortune's a whore, I care not who tell her,
Would offer to strangle a page of the Cellar,
That should by his oath, to any man's thinking,
And place, have had a defense for his drinking;
But thus she does still, when she pleases to palter,
In stead of his wages, she gives him a halter.
Three merry boys, and three merry boys, and three merry boys are we,
As ever did sing in a hempen string, under the gallow-tree.
2
But I that was so lusty,
And ever kept my bottles,
That neither they were musty,
And seldom less than pottles,
For me to be thus stopped now,
With hemp in stead of cork sir,
And from the gallows lopt now,
Shows that there is a fork sir,
In death, and this the token,
Man may be two ways killed,
Or like the bottle, broken,
Or like the wine, be spilled.
Three merry boys, etc
3
Oh yet but look on the master Cook, the glory of the kitchen,
In sowing whose fate at so lofty a rate, no Tailor ere had stitching^
For though he makes the man, the Cook yet makes the dishes;
The which no Tailor can, wherein I have my wishes,
That I who at so many a feast have pleased so many tasters,
Should now my self come to be dressed, a dish for you my masters^
Three merry boys, etc.

Coo. There Is a few coppies for you; now farewell friends:
And good Mr Sheriff, let me not be printed
With a brass pot on my head.

But. March fair, march fair, before good Captain Pantler.

4
Pant. Oh man or beast, or you at least,
That wear or brow or antler,
Prick up your ears, unto the tears
Of me poor Paul the Pantler,
That thus am clipped because I chipt
The cursed crust of Treason
With loyal knife: Oh doleful strife,
To hang thus without reason.
Act IV. Scene I.
Enter Aubrey and Latorch. LAtorch, I have waited here to speak with you,
And you must hearken: Set not forth your legs
Of haste, nor put yonr face of business on;
An honester affair than this I urge too,
You will not easily think on; and twill be
Reward to entertain it: It Is your fortune
To have our Masters ^are above the rest
Of us that follow him, but that no man envies:
For I have well con^^dered, truth sometimes
May be conveyed in by the same conduits
That falsehood is: These courses that he takes,
Cannot but end in ruin; Empire got
By blood and violence, must so be held;
And how unsafe that is, he first will prove,
That toyling still to remove enemies,
Makes him self more; it is not now a Brother
A faithful Counselor of estate or two,
That are his danger, they are far dispatched
It is a multitude that begin to fear,
And think what began there, must end in them,
For all the fine Oration that was made 'em;
And they are not an easy monster quelld.
Princes may pick their suffering Nobles out;
And one by one employ 'em to the block; but when they once grow formidable to
their clownes, and cobblers, ware then, guard themselves; if thou durst tell him
this, Lotorche, the service would not discredit the good name you hold with
men, besides the profit to your master, and the public.

Lat. I conceive not so, sir.
They are ayrie fears; and why should I object them unto his fancy?
Wound what is yet ^ound? your counsels color no^,
With reason of state, where all that's necessary still is just?
The actions of the prince, while they succeed,
Should be made good, and glorified; not questiond,
Men do but show their ill affections, that --

Aub. What? speak out.

Lat. Do murmr against their masters.

Aub. Is this to me?

Lat. It is to whosoever mislikes of the Dukes courses

Aub. I, is it so? at your stateward, sir?

Lat. I Am sworn to hear nothing may prejudice the prince.

Aub. Why do you? or have you, ha?

Lat, I cannot tell, men's hearts show in their words sometims.

Aub. I everthought thee
Knave of the chamber, art thou the spy too?

Lat. A watchman for the state, and one that is known
Sir, to be rightly affected.

Aub. Baud of the state;
No less than of thy masters lusts. I now
See nothing can redeem thee; do thou mention
Affection, or a heart that never had any?
Know not to love or hate, but by the state,
As thy prince does`t before thee? that do never
Wear thy own face, but putt'st on his, and gather'st^
Baits for his ^ares: liv'st wholly at his beck,
And e're thou dare utter a thought's thine own,
Must expect his; crep'st forth and wad'st into him
As if thou were to pass a foord, there proving
Yet if thy tongue may stop on safely, or no:
Then bring'st his virtue asleep, and stayst the wheel
Both of his reason, and judgment, that they move no^.
Whit'st over all his vices; and at last
Do draw a cloud of words before his eyes,
Till he can neither see thee, nor himself?
Wretch; I dare give him honest counsels, I;
And love him while I tell him truth: old Aubrey
Dares go the straightest way, which still`s the shortest,
Walk on the thorns thou scatter'st, Parasite,
And tread 'em into nothing: and if thou
Then lett'st a look fall, of the least dislike,
I Will rip thy crown up with my sword at height,
And pluck thy skin over thy face: in sight
Of him thou flatter'st; unto thee I speak it,
Slave, against whom all laws, should now conspire,
And every creature that has sense, be armd,
As against the common enemy of mankind;
That sleepst within thy masters ear, and whisp'erst
It Is better for him to be feared, than lovd:
Bidst him trust no man's freindship, spare no blood,
That may secure him; it is no cruelty
That has a spacious end; for soverainty
Break all the laws of kind; if it succeed
An honest, noble, and prayse-worthy deed;
While he that takes thy poisons in, shall feel
Their virulent workings in a point of time,
When no repentance can bring aid, but all
His spirits shall melt, with what his conscience burnd
And dying in flatterers arms, shall fall unmournd.
There Is matter for you now.

Lat. My lord, this makes not, for loving of my master.

Aub. Loving? no.
They hate ill Princes most that make them so.

Enter Rollo, Hamand, Allan, Guard. Roll. I Will hear no more.

Ham. Alas, it is for my brorher. I beseech your highness.

Roll, How, a brother? had not I one my self? did title
Move me when it was fit that he should dye? away.

All. Brother, loose no word more, leave my good cause
T`upbraid the tyrant, I`me glad, ^`me fallen,
Now in those times that willd some great example
TO assure men we can die for honesty.

Roll. Sir, you are brave; pray that you hold your neck
As bravely forth anon unto your headsman.

All. Would he would strike as bravely, and thou by.
Rollo, it would make thee quake to see me die.

Aub. What Is his offense?

Ham. For giving Gisbert burial; who was sometimes his master,

All. Yes: lord Aubery.
My gratitude, and humanity, are my crimes.

Roll. Why bear you him not hence?

Aub. My lord (stay soldiers)
I do beseech your highness, do not loose
Such men for so slight causes. This is one
Has still been faithful to you, a tryde soul
In all your fathers battles; I have seen him
Bestride a friend, against a score of foes,
And look, he looks as he would kill his hundred
For you, sir, were you in some danger.

All. Till he killd his brother, his chancellor, then his
Master, to which he can add naught to equal Nero,
But killing of his mother.

Aub. Peace, brave fool;
Thou valiant ass, here is his brother too, sir,
A captain of your guard, has servd you long,
With the most noble witness of his truth
Markd in his face, and every part about him,
That turns not from an enemy. But view him,
Oh do not grieve him sir, if you do mean
That he shall hold his place: it is not safe
To tempt such spirits, and let them wear their swords,
You Will make your guards your terrors by these Acts
And throw more hearts of from you then you hold:
And I must tell you sir, (with my old freedom
And my old faith to boot) you have not livd so
But that your state will need such men, such hands
Of which here is one, shall in an hour of trial
Do you more certain service with a stroke,
Than the whole bundle of your flatterers
With all the unsavory unction of their tongues^

Roll. Peace, talker.

Aub, One that loves you yet, my lord.
And would not see you pull on your own ruines^
Mercy becomes a Prince, and guards him best,
Awe and affrights are never ties of Love;
And when men begin to fear the Prince, they hate him.

Roll. Am I the Prince, or you?

Aub. My Lord I hope I have not utterd ought should urge that question.


Roll. Then practice your obedience, see him dead.

Aub. My Lord,

Roll. I Will hear no more.

Aub. I Am sorry then; there is no small despair, sir, of their safety, whose
ears are blockt up against truth; come Captain.


Ham. I thank you, sir.

Aub. For what? for seeing thy brother dye a man, and honest?
Live thou so Captain, I will I assure thee,
Although I die for it too: come -- Exeunt all but Rollo and Lator

Roll. Now Latorche, what do you think?

Lat. That Aubreys speech and manners sound somewhat of the boldest

Roll. It Is his custom.

Lat. It may be so, and yet be worth a fear.

Roll. If we thought so, it should be worth his life, and quickly too.

Lat. I dare not, sir, be author
Of what I would be, it is so dangerous;
But with your highness favor and your license.

Roll. He talks, it is true; he is licensed: leave him,
We now are Duke alone, Latorche, securd;
Nothing left standing to obscure our prospect,
We look right forth, beside, and round about us,
And see it ours with pleasure: only one
Wished joy there wants, to make us to possess it,
And that is Edith, Edith, she that got me
In blood and tears, in such an opposite minute,
As had I not once set all the flames
And shaft of Love shot in me (his whole armory)
I should have thought him as far off as death.

Lat. My Lord, expect a while, your happiness
Is nearer than you think it, yet her griefs
Are green and fresh; your vigilant Latorche
Has not been idle: I have leave already
To visit her, and send to her^

Roll. My life.

Lat. And if I find not out as speedy ways
And proper instruments to work and bring her
To your fruition; that she be not watched
Tame to your Highness wish, say you have no servant
Is capable of such a trust about you,
Or worthy to be secretary of your pleasure.

Roll. Oh my Latorche, what shall I render thee
For all thy travailes, care and love?

Lat. Sir, one suit, which I will ever importune, till you grant me^

Roll. About your Mathematitians?

Lat. Yes to have
The Scheme of your nativity judged by them,
I hav't already erected; Oh my Lord,
You do not know the labor of my fears,
My doubts for you are such as cannot hope
Any security, but from the Stars;
Who, being rightly asked, can tell man more
Than all power else, there being no power beyond them

Roll. All thy petitions still are care of us,
Ask for thy self.

Lat. What more can concern me, than this?

Roll. Well, rise true honest man, and go then,
We Will study our selves a means how to reward thee.

Lat. Your grace is now inspired; now, now your Highness
Begins to live, from this hour count your joys:
But, Sir, I must have warrants, with blanks figurd,
To put in names, such as I like.

Roll. You shall.

Lat. They dare not else offer, Sir, at your figure^
Oh I shall bring you wonders; there is a Friar
Rusee, an admirable man, another
A gentleman, and then Lafiske,
The mirror of his time; 'twas he that set it^
But there is one Norbret, (him I never saw)
Has made a mirror, a mere Looking-glass,
In show you`ld think it no other; the form ovall,
As I am given to understand by letter,
Which renders you such shapes, and those so differing,
And some that will be questioned and give answers;
Then has he set it in a frame, that wrought
Unto the revolutions of the Stars,
And so compact by due proportions
Unto their harmony, does move alone
A true automaton; thus Dedalus Statues,
Or Vulcans Tools --

Roll. Do thou believe this?

Lat. Sir? why, what should stay my faith, or turn my sense?
He has been about it above twenty years,
Three sevens, the powerful, and the perfect numbers;
And Art and Time, Sir, can produce such things.
What do I read there of Hiarbas banquet?
The great Gymnosophist, that had his Butlers
And carvers of pure gold waiting at table?
The images of Mercury, too, that spoke?
The wooden door that flew? a snake of brass
That hist? and birds of silver that did sing?
All those new done by the Mathematics,
Without which there`s no science, nor no truth.

Roll. You are in your sphere, Latorch: and rather
Than I Will contend w'yee for it, I Will believe it.
You Have won upon me that I wish to see
My fate before me now, what ere it be.

Lat. And I Will endeavor, you shall know with speed,
For which I should have one of trust go with me,
If you please, Hamond, that I may by him
Send you my first dispatches; after I
Shall bring you more, and as they come still more,

Roll. Take your way,
Choose your own means, and be it prosperous to us.

Exeunt. ACT. IV. SCAE. II.
Enter Ru^ee, de Bube, la Fiske, Norbert, Pippeau. Rus. Come, bear up Sirs, we
shall have better days,
My Almanac tells me.

Bub. What is that? your rumpe?

Rus. It never itch'd in vain yet, slide la Fiske
Throw off thy ^luggish face, I cannot abide
To see thee took like a poor Jade in the pound,
That saw no meat these three days.

Fiske. Slight, to me
It seems thirteen days since I saw any.

Rus. How?

Fis. I cannot remember that I ever saw
Or meat or money, you may talk of both
To open a man's stomach or his purse,
But feed'em still with air.

Bub. Friar, I fear
You do not say your Office well a days.

Nor. Pox, he feeds
With leachery, and lives upon the exchange
Of his two Eggs and Puddings with the market women.

Rus. And what do you Sir, with the Advocats wife,
Whom you persuade, upon your Doctorall bed,
To take the Mathematical trance so often?

Fis. Come, we are stark naught all, bad's the bost of us,
Four of the seven deadly spots we are;
Besides our Lechery, we are envious,
And most, most gluttonous when we have it thus,
Most covetous now we want it; then our Boy
He is a fifth spot, sloth and he undoes us.

Bub. It Is true, the child was wont to be industrious,
And now and then sent to a Merchants wife
Sick of the husband, or a swearing Butler
That mist of his Bowls, a crying Maid
Had lost a silver spoon; the Curry come
Somtims was wanting; there was something gotten^
But now --

Pip. What now? Did not I yester-morning
Bring you in a Cardecu there from the Pesant,
Whosse (...) I had driven aside, and hid, that you
Might conjure for him? and then last night,
Six Souz from the Cooks wife, you shared among you
To set a figure for the (...) I stole,
It is not at home yet; these things, my Masters,
In a hard time, they would be thought on, you
Talk of your lands and Castles in the air,
Of your twelve houses there: but it is I
That bring you in your rents for'em, it is Pippe^^
That is your bird-call.

Nor. Faith he does w^ll,
And cuts through the Elements for us, I must needs say
In a fine dextrous line.

Fis. But not as he did
At first, then he would sail with any wind
Int' every Creek and Corner.

Pip. I was light then,
New built and rigged when I came to you, Gentlemen,
But now with often and far ventring for you
Here be leakes Spr^^^ and whole Plancks wanting see you;
If you will new sheat^ me^ ^^^ine, yet I am for you
To any bog or sleights, where ere you will send me,
For as, (...) whe^^ can this ragged Bark
Put in for any service; less it be
O'th Isle of Rogues, and there turn Pyrate for you.

Nor. Faith he says reason, Friar, you must leave
Your neat crispe Gla^^et^ and fall to your Syder
A while; and you la Fiske, your larded Capons,
And Turkeys for a time^ and take a good
Clean Tripe in your way; de Bube too must content him with
wholesome two Souz'd pe^itoes, no more Crown ordinaries, till
we have clothed our Infant.

Bub. So you will keep
Your own good motions, Doctor, your dear self.

Fis. Yes, for we all do know the Latitude
Of your Concupiscence.

Rus. Here about your belly.

Bub. You Will pick a bottle open or a whimsey,
As soon as the best of us.

Fis. And dip your wrists bands,
(For Cuffs you have none) as comely in the sauce the Bell rings.
As any Courtyer -- hark, the Bell, who is there

Rus. Good luck I do conjure thee; Boy look out.

Pip. They are Gallants, Courtiers, one of them is Exit and enter again. To
Nor^ret.
Of the Dukes bedchamber.

Rus. Latorche, down,
On with your gown, there is a new suite arrived,
Did I not tell you, Sons of hunger? Crowns,
Crowns are coming toward you, wine and wenches
You shall have once again, and Fiddlers:
Into your studyes close; each lay his ear
To his door, and as you hear me to prepare you
So come, and put me on that visard only.

Enter Latorche, Hamond. Lat. You Will not be far hence Captain, when the
Business is done you shall receive present dispatch.

Him. I Will walk Sir, in the Cloister. Exit.

Rus. Monsieur Latorche; my son
The Stars are happy still that guide you hither.

Lat. I Am glad to hear their Secretary say so,
My learned Father Russ^, where is la Fiske,
Monsieur de Bube, how do they?

Rus. At their studyes,
They are the Secretaries of the Stars, Sir,
Still at their books, they will not be pulled off,
They stick like cupping glasses; if ever men
Spoke with the tongue of destiny, it is they.

Lat. For loves sake let us salute em.

Rus. Boy, go see,
Tell them who is here, say, that their friends do challenge
Some portion of their time, this is our minutes;
Pray'em they will spare it: they are the Sun and Moon
Of knowledge; pity two such noble lights
Should live obscured here in an University,
Whose beams were fit, to illumine any Court
Of Christendome^

Enter la Fiske, de Bube and Pippeau. Lat. The Duke will shortly know 'em.

Fis. Well, look upon the Astrolabe; you will find it
Four Almucanturies at least.

Bub. It is so.

Rus. Still, of their learned stuff, they care for nothing,
But how to know, as negligent of their bodies
In diet, or else, especially in their cloths,
As if they had no change.

Pip. They have so little
As well may free them from the name of shifters.

Fis. Monsieur Latorche?

Lat. How is it, learned Gentlemen, with both your virtues?

Bub. A most happy hour, when we see you, sir.

Lat. When you hear me then
It will be happier; the Duke greets you both
Thus, and though you may touch no money, Father,
Yet you may take it.

Rus. It Is his highness bounty,
But yet to me, and these that have put off
The world, superfluous.

Fis. We have heard of late of his highness good success.

Bub. And gratulate it.

Lat. Indeed he has escaped a strange Conspiracy,
Thanks to his Stars; which Stars be prays by me,
You would again consul^, and make a Judgment
On what you lately erected for my love.

Rus. Oh, Sir, we dare not.

Fis. For our lives.

Bub. It is the Princes Scheame.

Lat. T'incounter with that fear,
Here Is to assure you, his Signet, write your names,
And be secured all three.

Bub. We must entreat some time, sir,

Lat. I must then entreat it, be as present as you can.

Fis. Have you the Scheame here?

Lat. Yes.

Rus. I would you had sir another Warrant.

Dat. What would that do?

Rus. Marry we have a Doctor sir, that in this business
Would not perform the second part.

Lat, Not him that you writ to me of?

Rus. The very same.

Lat. I should have made it, sir, my suite to see him,
Here is a Warrant Father, I conceived
That he had solely applied himself to Magic.

Rus. And to their studies too sir, in this field,
He was initiated, but we shall hardly
Draw him from his chair.

Lat. Tell him he shall have gold.

Fis. Oh, such a syllable would make him to forswear
Ever to breath in your sight.

Lat. How then?

Fis. Sir, he if you do please to give him any thing,
Must have't conveyed under a paper.

Rus. Or left behind some book in his study.

Bub. Or in some old wall.

Fis. Where his Familiars may tell him of it, and that pleases him, Sir.

Bub. Or else I Will go and assay him.

Lat. Take gold with you.

Rus. That will not be amiss; give it the Boy, Sir,
He knows his holes, and how to bait his Spirits.

Pip. We must lay in several places, Sir.

Rus. That Is true, that if one come not the other may hit.

Lat. Well, go then, is he so learned, Gentlemen.

Fis. The very top of our profession; mouth of the fates,
Pray Heaven his Spirits be in a good humor to take.
They Will fling the gold about the house else.

Bub. I, and beat the Friar if he go not well
Furnished with holy water.

Fis. Sir, you must observe him.

Bub. Not cross him in a word, for then he is gone.

Fis. If he do come, which is hazard, yet
Mass he is here, this is speed.

Enter Norbert, Russe, Pippeau. Nor. Where is our Scheme,
Let Us see, dispatch, nay fumbling now, who is this?

Rus. Chief Gentleman of the Dukes Chamber, Doctor.

Nor. Oh, let him be, good even to him, he is a Courtyer,
I Will spare his Complement, tell him, what is here?
The geniture Nocturnall, Longitude
At forty nine and ten minutes? How are the Cardines?

Fis. Libra in twenty four forty four minutes,
And Capricorn.

Nor. I see in, see the Planets,
Where, how are they disposed? the Sun and Mercury,
Mars with the Dragons tail in the third house,
And pars Fortune in the Imo Coeli,
Then Jupiter in the twelve, the Cacodemon.

Bub. And Venus in the second Inferna Porta.

Nor. I see it, peace, then Saturn in the Fifth,
Luna in the Seventh, and much of Scorpio,
Then Mars his Gaudium, rising in th`ascendent,
And joined with Libra too, the house of Venus,
And Iuniu Coeli, Mars his exaltation
In the seventh house, Aries being his natural house
And where he is now seated, and all these show him
To be the Almuter.

Rus. Yes, he is Lord of the Geniture,
Whether you examine in by Ptolomeys way,
Or Messethales, Lael, or Alkindus.

Fi^. No other Planet has so many dignities
Either by himselfe^ or in regard of the Cuspes.

Nor. Why hold your tongue then if you know it; Venus
The Lady of the Horoscope, being Libra
The other part, Mars rules: So that the geniture,
Being Nocturnall, Luna is the highest,
None else being in sufficient dignity,
She being in Aries in the Seventh house,
Where Sol exalted, 'is the Alchoroden.

Bub. Yes, for you see he has his Termine
In the degrees where she is, and enjoyes
By that, six dignities.

Fis. Which are clearly more
Than any else that view her in the Scheame.

Nor. Why I saw this, and could have told you too.
That he beholds her with a Trine aspect
Here out of Sagitary, almost partly,
And how that Mars out of the selfsame house,
(But another Sign) here by a Platique aspect
Looks at the Hilege, with a Quartile ruling
The house where the Sun is; all this could I
Have told you, but that you will outrun me, and more,
That this same Quartile aspect to the Lady of life,
Here in the seventh, promises some danger,
Cauda Draconis being so near Mars,
And Caput Algell in the house of Death.

Lat. How Sir? I pray you clear that.

Nor. What is the question first?

Rus. Of the Dukes life, what dangers threaten him?

Nor. Apparent, and those sudden, when the Hyley
Or Alchorodon by direction come
To a Quartile opposition of the place
Where Mars is in the Geniture (which is now
At hand) or else oppose to Mars himself; expect it.

Lat. But they may be prevented.

Nor. Wisdom only
That rules the Stars, may do it; for Mars being
Lord of the Geniture in Capricorn,
Is, if you mark it, now a Sextile here,
With Venus Lady of the Horoscope.
So she being in her Exilium, which is Scorpio,
And Mars his Gaudium, is ore ruled by him,
And clear debilitated five degrees
Beneath her ordinary power, so
That, at the most she can but mittigate.

Lat. You cannot name the persons bring this danger?

Nor. No, that the Stars tell us not, they name no man,
That is a work, sir, of another place.

Rus. Tell him whom you suspect, and he will guess shrewdly.

Lat. Sir, we do fear one Aubrey; if 'twere he
I should be glad; for we should soon prevent him.

Fis. I know him, the Dukes kinsman, a tall man?
Lay hold often Norbret.

Nor. Let me pause a little,
Is he not near of kin unto the Duke?

Lat. Yes reverend Sir.

Lat. Fart for your reverence, keep it till then; and somewhat high of statutre?

Lat. He is so.

Nor. How old is he?

Fis. About seven and fifty.

Nor. His head and beard inclining to be gray.

Lat. Right, Sir.

Fis. And fat?

Nor. He is somewhat corpulent, is he not?

Lat. You speak the man, sir.

Nor. Well, look to him, farewell. Exit Norb.

Lat. Oh, it is Aubrey; gentlemen, I pray you,
Let me receive this under all your hands.

Rus. Why, he will show you him in his Magic glass
If you entreat him, and but gratify
A Spirit or two more.

Lat. He shall eat gold
If he will have it, so shall you all; there is that
Amongst you first, let me have this to send
The Duke in the mean time; and then what sights
You please to show; I Will have you so rewarded
As never Artists wete, you shall to Court
Along with me, and there wait your fortunes.

Bub. We have a pretty part often in our pockets;
Boy we will all be new, you shall along to. Exeunt.

ACT. IIII. SCAE. III.
Enter Sophia, Matilda, Edith. Mat. Good Madam hear the suit that Edith urges^
With such submisse beseeches; nor remain
So strictly bound to sorrow for your son,
That nothing else, though never so befitting,
Obtaines your ears, o^ ^^servation.

Sop. What would she say? I hear.

Edith. My suit is, Madam,
That you would please to think as well of Justice
Due to your sons revenge, as of more wrong added
To both your selves for it, in only grieving.
Th'undaunted power of Princes, should not be
Confined in deedlesse cold calamity;
Anger, the Twinne of sorrow, in your wrongs
Should not be smothered, when his right of birth
Claims the air as well, and force of coming forth.

Sop. Sorrow is due already, Anger never
Should be conceived but where it may be borne
In some fact fit t'employ his active flame,
That else consumes who bears it, and abides
Like a false star that quenches as it glides.

Ed. I have such means t'employ it as your wish
Can think no better, easier, or securer;
And such as but th'honors I intend
To your partakings; I alone could end:
But your parts in all dues to crying blood
For vengeance in the shedder, are much greater^
And therefore should work your hands to his slaughter,
For your consent to which, it were infinite wrong
To your severe and most partial Justice,
To move you to forget so false a son,
As with a mothers duty made you curse him.

Mat. Edith, he is forgot, for any son
Borne of my mother, or to me a brother.
For should we still perform our rights to him
We should partake his wrongs, and as foul be
In blood and damned paricide as he.
And therefore tell the happy means that heaven
Puts in thy hand, for all our longed for freedom
From so abhorred and impious a monster.

Sop. Tell what she will, I Will lend nor hand nor ear
To whatsoever heaven puts in her power.

Exit Sophia. Mat. How strange she is to what she chiefly wishes?
Sweet Edith be not any thought the more
Discouraged in thy purpose, but assured
Her heart and prayers are thine; and that we two
Shall be enough to all we wish to do.

Ed. Madam, my self alone, I make no doubt
Shall be afforded power enough from heaven
To end the murderer: all I wish of you,
Is but some richer ornaments and Jewels
Than I am able to provide my self,
To help out the defects of my poor beauty;
That yet has been enough, as now it is,
To make his fancy mad with my desire?
But you know, Madam, women never can,
Be too fair to torment an amorous man;
And this man's torments I would heighten still,
Till at their highest he be fit to kill.

Mat. Thou shall have all my Jewels and my mothers,
And thou shall paint too, that his bloods desire
May make him perish in a painted fire;
Have thou been with him yet?

Ed. Been with him? no;
I set that hour back to haste more his longing^
But I have promised to his instruments,
The admittance of a visit at our house,
Where yet I would receive him with all luster
My sorrow would give leave to, to remove
Suspicion of my purpose.

Mat. Thou shall have
All I can add, sweet wench, in Jewels, tyres^
I Will be my self thy dresser, nor may I
Serve my own love with a contracted husband
More sweetly, nor more amply than may thou
Thy forward will with his bewitched affections:
Affects thou any personal aid of mine
My noblest Edith?

Ed. Naught but your kind prayers
For full effect and speed of my affair.

Mat. They are thine, my Edith, as for me, my own;
For thou well know, if blood shed of the best
Should cool and be forgotten, who would fear
To shed blood still? or where (alas) were then
The endless love we owe to worthy men?

Ed. Love of the worthiest ever bless your highness. Exeunt.

ACT. V. SCAE. I.
Enter Rollo with a glass, Aubrey, and servants. Roll. I never studied my
glass till now,
It is exceeding well; now leave me; cozen,
How takes your eye the object?

Aub. I have learned
So much sir of the Courtier, as to say
Your person does become your habit;
But being called unto it by a noble war,
Would grace an armor better.

Roll. You are still
For that great Art of which you are the master;
Yet, I must tell you, that to the encounters
We often attempt, armed only thus, we bring
As troubled blood, fears mixed with flattring hopes,
The danger in the service to as great
As when we are to charge quite through and through
The body of an Army.

Aub. I Will not argue
How you may rank the dangers, but will die in it,
The ends which they arrive at, are as distant
In every circumstance, as far as honor
Is from shame and repentance.

Roll. You are sower?

Aub I would speak my free thoughts, yet not appear so;
Nor am I so ambitious of the title
Of one that dares talk any thing that was
Against the torrent of his own opinion,
That I affect to speak ought may offend you:
And therefore gracious Sir, ^e pleased to think
My manners or discretion have informed me
That I was borne, in all good ends, to serve you;
And not to check at what concerns me not:
I look not with sore eyes on your rich outside,
Nor wrack my thoughts to find out to what purpose
It Is now employed; I wish it may be good,
And that, I hope, offends not for a subject
Toward his Prince in things indifferent;
To use the austerenesse of a Censuring Cato
Is arrogance, not freedom.

Roll. I commend
This temper in you, and will cherish it,
Ent. Hamond with leters. They come from Rome, Latorch employed you?

Ham. True Sir.

Roll. I must not now be troubled with a thought
Of any new design; good Aubrey read 'em,
And as they shall direct you, use my power,
Or to reply or execute,

Aub. I will sir.

Roll. And Captain, bring a squadron of our guard
To the house that late was Baldwins, and there wait me.

Ham. I shall.

Roll. Some two hours hence.

Ham. With my best care.

Roll. Inspire me Love, and be thy diety
Or scorned or feared, as now thou favour^st me. Exit Rollo.

Ham. My stay to do my duty, may be wrongs
Your Lordships privacy.

Aub. Captain, your love
Is ever welcome; I entreat your patience
While I peruse these.

Ham. I attend your pleasure.

Aub. How Is this, a plot on me?

Ham. What is contained
In th'letters that I brought, that thus transports him?

Aub. To be wrought on by Rogues, and have my head
Brought to the axe by knaves that cheat for bread?
The Creatures of a parasite, a slave;
I find you hear Latorch, not wonder at it;
But that this honest Captain should be made
His instrument, afflicts me; I Will make trial
Whether his will or weakness made him do it.
Captain you saw the Duke when he commanded
I should do what these letters did direct me,
And I presume you think I Will not neglect
For fear or favor, to remove all dangers
How near soever that man can be to me
From whom they should have birth.

Ham. It is confirmed.

Aub. Nor would you Captain, I believe, refuse,
Or for respect of thankfulness, or hopes,
To use your sword with fullest confidence
Where he shall bid you strike.

Ham. I never have done.

Aub. Nor will I think.

Ham. I hope it is not questioned.

Aub. The means to have it so, is now proposed you^
Draw, so, it is well, and next cut off my head.

Ham. What means your Lordship?

Aub. It Is sir the Dukes pleasure:
My innocence has made me dangerous,
And I must be removed, and you the man
Must act his will.

Ham. I Will be a traitor first, before I serve it thus.

Aub. It must be done,
And that you may not doubt it, there is your warran^
But as you read, remember Hamond, that
I never wronged one of your brave profession;
And, though it be not manly, I must grieve
That man of whose love I was most ambitious
Could find no object of his hate but me?

Ham. It is no time to talk now, honored Sir,
Be pleased to hear thy servant, I am wronged,
And cannot, being now to serve the Duke,
Stay to express the manner how; but if
I do not suddenly give you strong proofs,
Your life is dearer to me than my own,
May I live base, and dye so: Sir your pardon. Exit Hamond.

Aub. I am both ways ruined, both ways marked for slaughter
On every side, about, behind, before me,
My certain fate is fixed: were I a knave now,
I could avoid this: had my actions
But mere relations to their own ends, I could s^ape now:
Oh honesty! thou elder child of virtue,
Thou seed of heaven, why to acquire thy goodness
Should malice and distrust stick thorns before us,
And make us swim unto thee, hung with hazards?
But heaven is got by suffering, not disputing^
Say he knew this before hand, where am I then?
Or say he does not know it, where is my Loyalty?
I know his nature, troubled as the Sea,
And as the Sea devouring when he is vexed,
And I know Princes are their own expounders.
Am I afraid of death? of dying nobly?
Of d^ing in mine innocence uprightly?
Have I met death in all his forms, and fears,
Now on the points of swords, now pitched on lances?
In fires, and storms of arrows, battles, breaches,
And shall I now shrink from him, when he courts me
Smiling and full of Sanctity? I Will meet him;
My loyal hand and heart shall give this to him,
And though it bear beyond what Poets feign
A punishment, duery shall meet that pain;
And my most constant heart to do him good,
Shall check at neither pale affright, nor blood.

Enter Messenger. Messen. The Duchess presently would crave your presence,

Aubrey. I come; and Aubrey now resolve to keep
Thy honor living, though thy body sleep. Exit.

ACT. V. SCAE. II.
Enter Edith, a Boy, and a Banquet set out. Edith. Now for a Fathers murder,
and thy ruin,
All chastity shall suffer if he reign;
Thou blessed soul, look down, and steel thy daughter,
Look on the sacrifice she comes to send thee,
And through the bloody cloud behold my piety,
Take from my cold heart fear, from my sex pity,
And as I wipe theses tears off, shed for thee,
So all remembrance may I loose of mercy;
Give me a woman's anger bent to blood,
The wildness of the winds to drown his prayers,
Storm like may my destruction fall upon him,
My rage like roving billows as they rise,
Powered on his soul to sink it, give me flattery,
(For yet my constant soul near knew dissembling.
Flattery the food o^ ^ooles, that I may, rock him
And lull him in the Down of his desires;
That in the height of all his hopes and wishes,
His heaven forgot, and all his lusts upon him,
My hand, like thunder from a could, may seize him.
I hear him come, go boy, and entertain him.

Enter Rollo. Song.
Take, Oh take those lips away
that so swetly were forsworn,
And those eyes, like break of day,
lights that do misleade the Morn,
But my kisses being again,
Seals of love, though sealed in vain.
Hide, Oh hide those hills of Snow,
which thy frozen blossom bears,
On whose tops the Pincks that grow
are of those that April wears.
But first set my poor heart free,
bound in those Joy chains by thee.
Roll. What bright star, taking beauties form upon her,
In all the happy luster of heavens glory,
Has dropped down from the Sky to comfort me?
Wonder of Nature, let it not profane thee
My rude hand touch thy beauty, nor this kiss;
The gentle sacrifice of love and service
Be offered to the honor of thy sweetness

Edith. My gracious Lord, no diety dwells here,
Nor nothing of that virtue, but obedience,
The servant to your will affects no flattery.

Rollo. Can it be flattery to swear those eyes
Are loves eternal lamps he fires all hearts with?
That tongue the smart string to his bow? those sighs
The deadly shafts he sends into our souls?
Oh, look upon me with thy spring of beauty.

Ed. Your grace is full of game.

Rollo. By heaven, my Edith,
Thy mother fed on Roses when she bred thee.

Ed. And thine on brambles that have pricked her heart out.

Rollo. The sweetness of the Arabian wind still blowing
Upon the treasures of perfumes and spices,
In all their pride and pleasures call thee Mistress.

Ed. Will It please you sit sir?

Roll. So you please sit by me.
Fair gentle maid, there is no speaking to thee,
The excellency that appears upon thee
Ties up my tongue: pray speak to me.

Ed. Of what sir?

Roll. Of any thing, any thing is excellent^
Will you take my directions? speak of love then;
Speak of thy fair self Edith; and while thou speak,
Let me, thus languishing, give up my self wen^h.

Ed. H'as a strange cunning tongue, why do you sigh sir?
How masterly he turns himself to catch me?

Roll. The way to Paradise, my gentle maid,
Is hard and crooked, scarce Repentance finding,
With all her holy helps, the door to enter.
Give me thy hand, what do thou feel?

Ed. Your tears sir.
You weep extremely; strengthen me now justice,
Why are these sorrows sir?

Roll. Thou't never love me
If I should tell thee, yet there is no way left
Ever to purchase this blessed Paradise,
But swimming thither in these tears.

Ed. I stagger.

Roll. Are they not drops of blood?

Ed. No.

Roll. They Are for blood then
For guiltless blood, and they must drop, my Edith,
They must thus drop, ^ll I have drowned my mischiefs.

Ed. If this be true, I have no strength to touch him.

Roll. I prithee look upon me, turn not from me;
Alas I do confess I Am made of mischief,
Begot with all man's miseries upon me;
But see my sorrows, made, and do not thou,
Whose only sweetest sacrifice is softness,
Whose true condition, tenderness of nature.

Ed. My anger melts, Oh, I shall lose my justice.

Roll. Do not thou learn to kill with cruelty,
As I have done to murder with thy eyes,
(Those blessed eyes) as I have done with malice,
When thou have wounded me to death with scorn,
(As I deserve it Lady) for my true love,
When thou have laden me with earth for ever,
Take heed my sorrows, and the stings I suffer;
Take heed my nightly dreams of death and horror
Pursue thee not: no time shall tell thy griefs then,
Nor shall an hour of joy add to thy beauties.
Look not upon one as I killed thy father,
As I was smeared in blood, do not thou hate me,
But thus in whiteness of my washed repentance,
In my hearts tears and truth of love to Edith,
In my fair life hereafter.

Ed. He will fool me.

Roll. Oh with thine angel eyes behold and close me,
Of heaven we call for mercy and obtain it;
To Justice for our right on earth and have it;
Of thee I beg for love, save me, and give it.

Ed. Now heaven thy help, or I am gone for ever,
His tongue has turned me into melting pity.

Enter Hamond and Guard. Ham. Keep the doors safe, and upon pain of death
Let no man enter till I give the word.

Guard. We shall sir. Exeunt.

Ham. Here he is in all his pleasure; I have my wish

Roll. How now? why do thou stare so?

Ed. A help, I hope.

Roll. What do thou here? who sent thee?

Ham. My brother, and the base malicious Office
Thou made me do to Aubrey, pray.

Roll. Pray?

Ham. Pray; pray if thou can pray, I shall kill thy soul else,
Pray suddenly.

Roll. Thou can not be so traiterous.

Ham. It is a Justice; stay Lady;
For I perceive your end; a woman's hand
Must not rob me of vengeance.

Ed. It Is my glory.

Ham. It Is mine, stay, and share with me; by the gods, Rollo,
There is no way to save thy life.

Roll. No?

Ham. No, it is so monstrous, no repentance cures it.

Roll. Why then thou shall kill her first, and what this blood
Will cast upon thy cursed head.

Ham. Poor Guard sir.

Ed. Spare not brave Captain.

Roll. Fear, or the devil has thee.

Ham. Such fear sir as you gave your honored mother,
When your most virtuous brother, shield like, held her;
Such I Will give you, put her away.

Roll. I will not, I will not die so tamely.

Ham. Murtherous villain, will thou draw seas of blood upon thee.

Ed. Fear not, kill him good Captain, any way dispatch
Him, my body's honored with that sword that through me,
Sends his black soul to hell: Oh, but for one hand.

Ham. Shake him off bravely.

Ed. He Is too strong, strike him.

Ham. Oh, am I with you Sir? now keep you from him,
What ha^s he got a knife.

Ed. Look to him Captain, for now he will be mischievous.

Ham. Do you smile Sir?
Does it so tickle you? have at you once more.

Ed. Oh bravely thrust; take heed he come not in Sir;
To him again, you give him too much r^spite.

Roll. Yet will you save my life, and I Will forgive thee.
And give the all^ all honors, all advancements,
Call thee my friend.

Ed. Strike, strike, and hear him not,
His tongue will tempt a Saint.

Roll. Oh, for my souls sake.

Ed. Save nothing of him.

Ham. Now for your farewell,
Are you so warry? take you that.

Roll. Thou, that too;
Oh thou have killed me basely, basely, basely. Dies.

Ed. The just reward of murder falls upon thee.
How do you Sir? has he not hurt you?

Ham. No, I feel not any thing.

Aub. I charge you let us pass. within.

Guard. You cannot yet sir.

Aub. I Will make way then.

Guar. We are sworn to our Captain, and till he give the word.

Enter Sophia, Matilda, Aubrey, Lords and attendants. Ham. Now let them in
there.

Sop. Oh, here he lies,
Sorrow on sorrow seeks me, Oh, in his blood he lies,

Aub. Had you spoke sooner
This might have been prevented;
Take the Duchess,
And lead her off, this is no sight for her eyes

Mat. Oh, bravely done wench.

Ed. There stands the noble doer.

Mat. My honor ever seek thee for thy justice,
Oh 'twas a deed of high and brave adventure,
A justice even for h^^^en ^o envy at,
Farewell my sorrows, and my tears take truee,
My (...) Oh bloody Brother,
Till this hour never beauteous; till thy life,
Like a full sacrifice for all thy mis^^^efes,
Flowed fro(...) ri^ers, never righteous:
Oh how my eyes (...) wish then joys how?
My longing heart even leaping out for lightness,
But dye thy black sins with thee. I forgive thee.

Aub. Who did this deed?

Ham. I, and I Will answer it. Dies.

Edi. He faints, oh that same cursed knife has killed him.

Aub. How?

Ed. He snatched it from my hand, for whom I bore it,
And as they grapell'd.

Aub. Justice is ever equal,
Had it not been on him, thou had died too honest.
Did you know of his death?

Ed. Yes, and rejoice in it.

Aub. I Am sorry for your youth then; though the strictness
Of Law shall not fall on you, that of life
Must presently, go to a Cloister, carry her,
And there for ever lead your life in penitence.

Ed. Best Father to my soul, I give you thanks, sir,
And now my fair revenges have their ends,
My vows shall be my kin, my prayers my friends. Exit.

Enter Latorche, and Iuglers. Lat. Stay there, I Will step in and prepare the
Duke,

Nor. We shall have brave rewards?

Fis. That is without question.

Lat. By this time where is my huffing friend Lord Aubrey?
Where Is that good Gentleman? oh, I could laugh now,
And burst my self with mere imagination;
A wise man, and a valiant man, a just man;
To suffer himself be juggl'd out of the world,
By a number of poor Gipseys? farewell Swash-buckler,
For I know thy mouth is cold enough by this time;
A hundred of ye I can shave as neatly,
And nere draw blood in show: now shall my honor,
My power and virtue walk alone: my pleasure
Observed by all, all knees bend to my worship,
All suits to me as Saint of all their fortunes,
Preferred and crowded too, what full place of credit,
And what place now? your Lordship? no, it is common,
But that I Will think to morrow on, now for my business.

Aub. Whose there?

Lat. Dead, my Master dead? Aubrey alive too?

Guard. Litorche, Sir.

Aub. Seize his body.

Lat. My Master dead?

Aub. And you within this half hour;
Prepare your self good devil, you must to it,
Millions of gold shall not redeem thy mischief,
Behold the Justice of thy practice, villain;
The mass of murders thou have drawn upon us:
Behold thy doctrine; you look now for reward, sir,
To be advanced, I'em sure, for all your labors?
And you shall have it, make his gallows higher
By ten foot at the least, and then advance him.

Lat. Mercy, mercy.

Aub. It Is too late fool,
Such as you meant for me, away with him. He is led out.
What gaping knaves are these, bring'em in fellows,
Now, what are you?

Nor. Mathematitians if it please your Lordship.

Aub. And you drew a figure?

Fis. We have drawn many.

Aub. For the Duke, I mean; sir Latorches knaves you are.

Nor. We know the Gentleman.

Aub. What did he promise you?

Nor. We are paid already.

Aub. But I will see you better paid, go whip them.

Nor. We do beseech your Lordship, we were hyr'd.

Aub. I know you were, and you shall have your hyre;
Whip'em extremely, whip that Doctor there,
Till he record himself a Rogue.

Nor. I am one, Sir.

Aub. Whip him for being one, and when they are whip't,
Lead'em to the gallows to see their patron hanged;
Away with them. They are lead out.

Nor. Ah, good my Lord.

Aub. Now to mine own right, Gentlemen.

Lord 1. You have the next indeed, we all confess it,
And here stand ready to invest you with it.

Lord 2. Which to make stronger to you, and the surer,
Then blood or mischiefs dare infringe again,
Behold this Lady, Sir, this noble Lady,
Full of the blood as you are, of that neerenesse,
How blessed would it be?

Aub. I apprehend you, and so the fair Matilda dare a^cept
Me her ever constant servant.

Mat. In all pureness,
In all humility of heart and services,
To the most noble Aubrey, I submit me.

Aub. Then this is our first tie, now to our business.

Lord 1. We are ready all to put the honor on you, Sir.

Aub. These sad rights must be done first, take up the bodies,
This, as he was a Prince, so Princely funeral
Shall wait upon him: on this honest Captain,
The decency of arms; a tear for him too.
So, sadly on, and as we view his blood,
May his Example in our Rule raise good.

FINIS.

