A strange and terrible Wunder wrought very late in the parish Church of
Bongay, a Town of no great distance from the city of Norwich, namely the
fourth of this August, in ye year of our Lord 1577. in a great tempest of
violent rain, lightning, and thunder, the like whereof has been seldom seen.

With the appeerance of an horrible shaped thing, sensibly perceived of the
people then and there assembled.

Drawn into a plain method according to the written copye. by Abraham Fleming.



The Preface to the Reader.
AMong men it is grown in custom, to have forwarni^gs of afterclaps, as
beacons built upon hills, which then are set on fire when danger is imminent
and at hand: Alarm belles serving to the same purpose, and other inventions of
men proceedi^g and provided of policy, to prevent or else to prepare against
that which is perilous. Every man can arm himself, when hazard is at hand to
save him and his as he is able: for the preserving of temporal things, Jesus
how painful and venterous we be: and no sooner shall a premonishment be
given, but we are furnished I warrant you to the proof. God warns us by
signs from heaven, by fiery apparaunces in the air most terrible, by
wonders wrought on earth, strange and vnusiall, by exinundations of waters
beyond their appointed limits, by the remoui^g of senseless trees from the
natural place where they were planted, by the great power which the Prince of
darkness through Gods permission and sufferaunce bath recovered, by many late
most misserable murders not to be named, much less to be committed among
Christians, by insurrections full of danger and detestable treason on this
side the seas, by tumults and vprores between Princes of foreign nations, and
what should I say more? by the trump of his sweet and heavenly Gospel, sounded
unto us out of the mouth of his messengers. But we will not be warned, we
will tumble still upon the bed of wantonness, and drink our selves drunck
with the wine of sensuality, that whiles we lie wallowing in the sinck of our
Sodomiticall si^ne, we may be consumed with a Sodomiticall or a Babylonicall
destruction.

God open the eyes of our hearts, that we may see in what VVildernesses, among
what wild Beasts and devouring Serpents we do wander: and give us minds
mollified and made soft, that at his works we may fear and be astonished.

The occasion that I have wrote this warning (which I would to God I had the
grace to follow) was a wonder lately wrought in Norfolk, and so lately
wrought, that the terror of the same is at this instant fresh in memory. A
Spectacle no doubt of Gods judgment, which as the fire of our iniquities has
kindled, so by none other means then by the tears of repentance it may be
quenched. The order of the thing as I received the sa^e I have committed to
paper, for the present view and perusing of those that are disposed. It is
grounded upon truth, and therefore not only worthy the writing and
publishing, but also the hearing and considering.

The report of a strange and wonderful Spectacle.
SUnday, being the fourth of this August, in ye year of our Lord 1577. to the
amasing and singular astonishment of the present beholders, and absent hearers,
at a certain town called Bongay, not past ten miles distant from the City
of Norwiche, there fell from heaven an exceeding great and terrible tempest;
sodein and violent, between nine of the clock in the morning and ten of the
day aforsaid.

This tempest took beginning with a rain, which fell with a wonderful force and
with no less violence then abundance, which made the storm so much the more
extreme and terrible.

This tempest was not simply of rain, but also of lightning and thunder, the
flashing of the one whereof was so rare, and vehement, and the roaring noise of
the other so forceable and violent, that it made not only people perplexed in
mind and at their wits end, but ministered such strange and unaccustomed cause
of fear to be conceived, that dumb creatures with ye horror of that which
fortuned, were exceedingly disquieted, and senseless things void of all life
and feeling, shook and trembled.

There were assembled at the same season, to hear divine service and common
prayer, according to order, in the parish church of the said town of Bongay,
the people therabouts inhabiting, who were witnesses of the straungenes, the
rareness and sodenesse of the storm, consisting of rain violently falling,
fearful flashes of lightning, and terrible cracks of thu^der, which came with
such unwonted force and power, that to the perceiving of the people, at the
time and in the place above named, assembled, the Church did as it were quake
and staggar, which struck into the hearts of those that were present, such a
sore and sudden fear, that they were in a manner robbed of their right wits.

Immediately heerupo^, there appeered in a most horrible similitude and
likeness to the congregation then and there present, a dog as they might
discern it, of a black color: at the sight whereof, together with the fearful
flashes of fire which then were seen, moved such admiration in the minds of
the assembly, that they thought doomes day was already come.

This black dog, or the devil in such a likeness (God he knows al who
works all) running all along down the body of the Church with great
swiftness, and incredible haste, among the people, in a visible fourm and
shape, passed between two persons, as they were kneeling upon their knees, and
occupied in prayer as it seemed, wrung the necks of them both at one instant
clean backward, in so much that even at a moment where they kneeled, they
stra^gely dyed.

This is a wonderful example of Gods wrath, no dout to terifie us, that we
might fear him for his justice, or puling back our footsteps from the paths
of sin, to love him for his mercy.

To our matter again. There was at ye same time another wonder wrought: for the
same black dog, still continuing and remaining in one and the self same shape,
passing by an other man of the congregation in the Church, gave him such a
gripe on the back, that therwithall he was presently drawn together and shrunk
up, as it were a piece of lether scorched in a hot fire: or as the mouth of a
purse or bag, drawn together with a string. The man, albeit he was in so
strange a taking, dyed not, but as it is thought is yet alive: which thing is
marvelous in the eyes of men, and offers much matter of amasing the mind.

Moreover, and beside this, the Clark of the said Church being occupied in
cleansing of the gutter of the Church, with a violent clap of thunder was
smitten down, and beside his fall had no further harm: unto whom being all
amassed this strange shape, whereof we have before spoken, appeared, howbeit he
escaped without danger: which might paraduenture seem to sound against truth,
and to be a thing incredible: but, let us leave thus or thus to judge, and cry
out with the Prophet.

O Domine! etc. O Lord, how wonderful art thou in thy woorks!

At the time that these things in this order happened, the Rector, or Curate of
the Church, being partaker of the peoples perplexity, seeing what was seen,
and done, comforted the people, and exhorted them to prayer, whose counsel, in
such extreme distress they followed, and prayed to God as they were assemled
together.

Now for the verifying of this report, (which to so^e will seem absurd, although
the sensiblenesse of the thing it self confirms it to be a truth) as
testimonies and witnesses of the force which rested in this strange shaped
thing, there are remaining in the stones of the Church, and likewise in the
Church door which are meruelously re^ten and torn, ye marks as it were of his
claws or talans. Beside, that all the wires, the wheels, and other things
belonging to the Clock, were wrung in sunder, and broken in pieces.

And (which I should have told you in the beginning of this report, if I had
regarded the observing of order) at the time that this tempest lasted, and
while these storms endured, ye whole Church was so darkened, yea with such a
palpable darkness, that one person could not perceive another, neither yet
might discern any light at all, though it were leser the^ the least, but only
when ye great flashing of fire and lightning appeered.

These things are not lightly with silence to be over passed, but precisely and
thoroughly to be considered.

On the self same day, in like manner, into the parish church of another town
called Blibery, not above seven miles distant from Bongay above said, the like
thing entered, in the same shape and similitude, where placing him self upon a
maine balke or beam, whereon sometime ye Rood did stand, suddenly he gave a
swinge down through ye Church, and there also, as before, slew two men and a
lad, and burned the hand of another person that was there among the rest of the
company, of whom diverse were blasted.

This mischief thus wrought, he flew with wonderful force to no little fear of
the assembly, out of the Church in a hideous and hellish likeness.

These things are reported to be true, yea, by the mouths of them that were
eye witnesses of the same, and therefore dare with so much the more boldness
verify what soever is reported.

Let us pray unto GOD, as it is the duty of Christians, to woork all things to
the best, to turn our flintie hearts into fleshie hearts, that we may feel the
fire of Gods mercy, and flee from the scourge of his justice.

A necessary Prayer.
O GOD which have promised to be a shield to such as flee to thee for succoure
in their necessities, and with thy wings to over shadow the^ that they feel not
the scorching heat of afflictions and miseries: we beseech thee, that although
we, through the infinite and unmeasurable sins which we commit, provoke thee
to smite us with the Iron rod of thy wrath and judgment: yet that it would
please thee to remember that we are but frail flesh, subject to sin, and to
too prone to offend: that it would please thee to cast thy gracious countenance
upon us, and to stretch out thy siluered scepter of peace unto us, that being
restored into thy favor, from which our offenses have separated us, we may
shroud our selves under the shield of thy safegarde against all manner of
anoyances whatsoever, through Christ Jesus our only savior and redeemer, in
whose name, as he has taught us, we say and pray. Ab omni malo libera nos
Domine: Deliver us from all evil, good Lord. Amen.

Tibi laus honor and gloria, in aeuum.

Amen.
Imprinted at London by Frauncis Godly dwelling at the west end of Paul's.


