FLORIO His first Fruits: which yield familiar speech, merry Proverbs,
witty Sentences, and golden sayings. Also a perfect Induction to the Italian,
and English tongues, as in the Table appears. The like heretofore, never by
any man published.

Imprinted at the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas Dawson, for Thomas
Woodcocke.

NON VI SED VIRTUTE



blazon or coat of arms of Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y
PENSE



ALL ILLMO. ETECCMO. Sr. il Sr. Roberto Dudleo, Nobil Conte di Licestra, Degno
Barone di Denbigh, Cavaljere del Nobil Ordine de la Garatjera, Gran Scudjero,
et Consegljere de la Serenessima Regina D' Inghilterra, Signor suo Benignissimo.
ILlmo Sr mio, conoscendo che si come il chjaro Sole coiraggi svoi (regolamente
girando,) rende splendore a tutto il circojto de la terra. Cosi S. E. con la
sua grande Liberalita, Virtu, e Cortesia porge luce a tutta la Nobilta di
nostra etade. Le qval cose considerate da me, Ossermo Sr mio, mi hanno mosso ad
Intitolar qvesta mia piccjola opera a la Benignita de la S. Cleme^tia, la qval
conosco esser vero refugio, e recapito di chi, co^ tutto l'intrinsico del cuore
vi ama, e desidera. Massime per essere io uscito de le viscere di chi v' e
stato fedel, e divoto Vassallo, e per consegvente essendo io restato Sucessore
de la medesima servitu, e divotione: vorrei pjacendo cosi alla E. V. esser nel
numero de qvelli che con perfetto amore vi servono. E percjo Sr. mio tirato
dala bvona v^lonta, non ho voluto mancare con il mio debil' ingegno, di
compjucer a certi Gentil' hvomini mjei amici, ch' ogni gjorno mi stimulavano di
darli in luce alcuni motti, o vogliamo dir Proverby, con certo parlar
familiare: a modo di Dialogo, da poter imparar tanto la Lingva Italiana, qvanto
la Inglese, e che tutte dua le Natione pottessero alqvanto prevalersene. Longo
stetti sospeso manzi che to volessi farlo. Ma alla fine lo feci: ma ben
giudico, e ne son certo che molti ci saranno che vorran tassar, e bjasimar
detta opera: Forse pju per ignoranzia, che altrimenti. Qvesto lo dico, and lo
posso affermare, che simil' Lingve ree son sempre pju pronte per dir mal, che
been: e non si curano bjasimar l' altrui fatiche, essendo simili a la Vipera,
che si pasce co 'l suo proprio veleno; cosi son qvesti. Ma non importa. Perch
mi confido in qvelli che con maturo giudicjo considereranno la bvona volunta
del operatore di essa: e forse la troveranno degna di esser letta, e notata,
non havendo io studjato pju che tanto. Adunqve Signore mio, non men Gjusto che
Virtvoso, il qvalsete un chjaro Sole fra molte Stelle, e unica Rosa tra le
Spine, io non dubito ponto come S. E. abbja visto 'l mio bvon animo, e
conoscjuto il corso del mio intento, che ella agradira l' opera, e non
rigvadera al piccjol dono: Ma si been al bvon animo del povero Donatore (che e
grandissimo) e considerereto che si come in piccjol Mappa si contjene la gran
fabrica di tutto 'l mondo: et in piccjol circojto la effigje del pju gran
Cesare. Cosi in qvesta piccola operetta e compresa la vera figura, et effigje
del mio bvon volere. Sarete dunqve S. mio contento, concederemi il suo favore,
e luce (contra la invidja, e tenebre di coloro che per la oscurit a delle lor
mente si sforzano scurar le fatiche altrui) Con speranza che la Bonta S. non si
sdegnera di adempir qvesto mio desiderio. Accjo he io, e altri studiosi
inteletti, alettati da qvesta S. Benignitas' ingegnino con pju lodevol studio
di produr in luce altri pju soavi frutti, e di utilita maggiore, in tanto
bascjando con la bocca del animo, la virtuosa mano della, Sua non may a
bastanza lodata S. prego nostro Signor Iddio, per ogni sua Gloria, Felicita, e
Contento, e che lei tenghi la mia Servitu nella sua Memoria, 'nella qual vorrei
che vivesse tanto, qvanto ne la mia viveranno le sue rare, e alte Virtu. All
qvale per sempre, etin tutto per tutto mi Dedico, Dispono, et Offerisco.

Di S. Illma S. per sempre Divoto, and Humilissimo Servidore, Giovanni Florio.
Di Londra a di. 10. Agosto. 1578.
To the Right excellent, and Honorable Lord, the Lord ROBERT DVDLEY, Earl of
Leycester, Baron of Denbigh, Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter,
Master of the Queens Majesty's horses, and one of her Graces most Honorable
privy Counsel, John Florio wishes all Godly Felicity, continuance of
health, increase of Honor, and Graces eternal.
RIght Honorable, when (at the earnest request of diverse Gentilmen my entire
friends,) I had for there recreation, and private exercise, drawn out
certain common questions, and ordinary aunsweres together with diverse
Proverbs, Sentences, and Golden sayings, used as well in Italian as English,
and therwithall collected, and translated out of sundry the best Italian
authors, with certain necessary rules for Englishmen to attain to the
perfection of the Italian tongue, and for Italians to learn the pronountiation
of our English. They would needs, (though sore against my will) have it put
forth in Print, but I (Right Honorable) considering the great, and manifold
inconveniences he hasardes himself unto, that commits any thing to the open
vewe of all men, having no worthy Mecoenas to defend him against the malignant,
ready backebiters, along while I rested as confused, and troubled in mind, not
knowing whom to find sufficient, to defend me from such inconveniences. At
last calling to remembrance, the Nobleness of your Honors mind, I chose you
(although presumptuously done of me) as a sufficient rampire to shield me from
the battery of such venomous tongues. For knowing by experience your continual
delight in setting forth of good letters, and earnest zeal in maintaining of
languages, I did as it were persuade with my self that few or none would
attempt, (remembering your Honor) to set, or whet their carping tongues against
it, although my great presumption do partly merit it. Yet at the last I
encouraged my self in your Honors name to send this little pamphlet abroad,
hoping that your Honor will not only with courteous acceptance behold this
foolish, and fond attempt of mine, with your bodily eyes, but also consider of
it with your inward eye of discretion, and not weigh the gift given by the
giuers heart, though too base a gift to come to your Honors hand, too rude a
work for you to read, and too too unripe, sower, and unsavory fruits for
your Honor to take a taste of, yet notwithstanding such as they be I give them
to you, as a token and zealous affection, and duetifull love I bear unto your
Honor, whom I know to be the only furtherer, maintayner, and supporter of all
well disposed minds toward any kind of study, yet (right Honorable)
consider, that little, or (to say truth,) none at all is the learning I have,
and small is the seed, plant and grafe whence these, altogether wild, and
unsavory fruits do spring, the which though so they be, are not altogether
to be rejected, and utterly refused. For the baseness and sowernesse of these,
will serve to set out the pleasant and delectable taste of other men's fruits,
for as by the bad is the good known, so by the sower is the sweet the better
discerned, and by the darkness of the night may a man judge the brightness
of the day, in so much that I wholly persuade with my self that lightly your
Honor will pardon my attempt, and fond presumption, in being bold under your
honors patronage to shield me with defense against such carping, blustering,
and malignious tongues, which not only do perillously shake at, yea, and
endeavor mainely to beat down, and confute not only all kind of blossoms,
and young budded fruits, but also those, which are already come to growth and
perfection. Wherefore knowing as before, I said, your Honors great good will
in aduau^cing al kind of good letters: And seeing by experience the nipping,
and taunting scoffs of the raging sect of I heoninus, altogether set, and bent
against the publishing of the same: As also using to prevent one contrary by
another (that is) to prevent I say those lewd and viperous carpers, by the
shadow of your Honors most Clement, Benign, and therwithal well favoring and
affectionated mind, both unto me, and all other the well meanours, in setting
forth of such things which be for the common commodity of all: (not only)
this our common wealth, but also of other foreign nations. I thought it good
to houer (I say) and submit me under yours Honors refuge, who of that your so
high renowned Clemency, refuse not, or abject to shield your humble
suppliantes in such good causes, who are loath to stand openly in the caueling
reproaches of the foresaid taunting brood: As also they being loath to stand, to
the displeasure of ill willers, for yelding forth their good wills. Which if
they had not such good furtherers: surely they would never employ their labors
to the profit, and commodity of their country: but should seem to be, as
salt without savor, and as fire without heat. Which in deed I do think to
have bin the only cause why learning heretofore, has bin so obscured, and
kept in dens, and altogether without any such direct or plain path thereto,
as now at this day (God be thanked therefore) it is. And thus deditating,
disposing, and yelding these my simple first fruits unto your Honors Noble
protection, in hope of the gentle acceptance thereof, I commit your Honor to
the tuition of the Almighty, who maintain and keep your Honor in most
prosperous and happy estate, deliver, and defend you from all worldly cares,
and earthly troubles, and bring you after this transitory life, into the place
of eternal joy and felicity.

Your Honors most humble and bounden, during life to command. I. F.

A tutti i Gentilhvomini Inglesi che si di lettano de la lingva Italiana,
Salute e pace in Christo.
CArmi mjei Signori, qvantunqve che molti per l'adjetro habbino cerco, (con
longo tempo, e gra^ fatica) di demostrar la vera e grande Eccelentia de la
lingva Italiana (veramente degna di esser da ciascadun amata.) Io credo, e sono
persvaso, che a pochi sia dato qvel dono, and qvella gratia di farlo,
compiutamente come merita. Perose in tutto non ho compjuto il vostro desiderio,
io spero che leggjermente mi perdonerete, non rigvarda^do alla mia basezza. Ma
al mio bvon volere, il qvale estato, e saramentre che vivo, pronto a servirvi
in ogni cosa che io possa: tutta via esort ando tutti qvelli che si dilettano
de la Nobillingva Italiana, a perseverar constantemente in essa, e cercar
diligentemente, con il tempo, and con la fatica, di condur la vostra navicella
in porto salvo, con superar tutte le onde contrarje a essa, e non straccarsi,
and restar per strada, come fanno molti hoggidi, che comincjano, e vogliono far
il bravo, che e, che non e, indue, o tree di sono lenti, e strachi, and se hanno
due parole di spagnivolo, tree di franzese, e qvantro di Italiano pensano d'aver
assai. Ma io vi prego che tutta via vogliate perseverare in essa,
arricordandovi che molte sono le comodita che ne rjescono a qvelli che la hanno
perfettamente, voi troverete qvi in qvesta operetta delle belle sentenze,
gentili proverbij, varij detti, con certe domande con le loro risposte,
necessary, e profittevole, per il gentil scolare di essa con certe regole a
modo di Gramatica con le qvali in breve tempo potete imparar la lingva
benissimo. M ricordatevi se ho errato di perdonarmi perch no^ e la mia
professione, and qvel ch'io ho fatto, lo feci solamente in principjo per
compjacer a vno amico mio privato perch s'io hauessi saputo che doveva venir
in stampa arei tenuto altro modo, ma ora non ci e rimedjo pero pregovi a
pardonarmi. Ecosicesso di pju darvi fasti dio humilmente bacjandovi le mani, vi
lascjo con Dio il qval da mal vi gvardi Restate sani, V. per Sempre.

G. F.

Unto the friendly, courteous, and indifferent Reader.
MOst courteous Reader, at the request of sundry my friends: I here present to
thee my first fruits, although not altogether ripe: The which I pray thee to
accept in good and friendly part, and weigh my good will. It is done very
simply and that is because I have no learning, I have kept no order because I
did not think it should have come to light: As for the pronou^cing of it, with
little labor may thou attain to the perfection of it. Therefore remember my
good will which if I see it be well accepted I ask no more, if it be not, I am
the more sorry, if you profit any thing by it, I promise thee a better, and
that shortly, if not here I end, and so committing thee to God, I bid thee
farewell. From his lodging in Woster place.

Thine to command. I. F.

A tutti i Gentilhvomini, e Mercanti Italjani, che si dilettano de la lingva
Inglese, ogni Felicita, e Gratia da Dio.
CArmi mjei Signori molar volte per ladjetro sono stato preegto, da molti di
voi, a darui qvalche tegole per imparar a pronuntiar la lingva Inglese, longo
tempo stetti inanzi che io lo volessi fare, ma pur alla fine essendo qvasi
forzato da qvalcun di voi (ma certo contra la volunta) lo feci, e qvi lo havete
in stampa, e pero vi prego accettarlo in bvona part, e vi suplico vogljate
(con la vostra cortesia) aiutar a defendemri da certe ling ve invidjose, e da
certi nasuti che may non fanno altro che divisar qvalche qverela contra color
che cercano di mandar qvalcosa in luce per il profitto, e beneficjo del cortese
scolare. Io so che alcuni diranno qvesto, alcuni qvello, alcuni been, alcuni
male, alcuni peggio, pochi diranno been, e manco mi scuseranno. Ma pure mi
sottometto a la vostra solita cortesia, qvantunqve io ne sia indegno. E che
vogljate accettare la mia bona volonta, la qvale sempre e stata, e sara pronta
a servirvi in ogni cosa che io possa, e se del tutto non vi compjaccio
perdonatemi, perch (come credo sappjate) non e la mja professione, essendo io
povero artefice. So been che alcuni dir anno come pvo scriver costui bvon
Italiano? and non e nato in Italia? a qvelli rispondo che considerano been i
fatti svoi, alcuni altri diranno, come e possibile che costui sappja dar regole
and non e dotto? a qvelli non so che dire perch dicono la verita. Pure voi che
mi sete amici, credo che leggjermente mi perdonerete, tuttavia supli candovi
vogljate accettar qvesti mjei primi frutti, e qvantunqve non siano del tutto
maturi, gia non sono essi senza qvalche bvon tasto, qvicon pvoca fatica potete
imparar a parlar Inglese, a parlar con hvomo, con donna, con Mercante, con
Signore, o con ogni altra sort di Gente, ci troverete molti belli proverby
Italiani, e Inglesi, gentili detti, belli motti, belle sentenze tolte da
diversibvoni Autori, non solamente profittevole, ma anche dilettevole. Se vedo
che li accettjate volentjeri, non desidero altro. Del resto poi totalmente son
vostro. Restate con Dio, il qval da mal vi gvards, e djavi longa sanita. Vi
bacjo le mani, and in tutto mi sottometto al servitio vostro. Valete, e
Gaudete. Vostro per sempre.

G. F.

I. P. al Eccmo Conte di Licestra.
SE di qvelle Virtu che posson fore,
I nomi nostri a forza trar di Let,
Nobilissimo Signor impreso havete
Con maraviglia altrui si been il core.
Qval pju degno di voi d' eterno honor,
Produsse il ceppo onde ch' uscito sete:
O qval dentro ha pju belle, e cast mete,
Chjude hoggi pju di voi se ne valor.
Taccja la casta, e bella Roma altera,
Di tant' homin' illustri, almi, e fecondi:
Che si trovorno gia: che fu molti anni.
Se al cjel volar con pju famosi vanni,
Hoggi per voi la Bella Londra spera:
O DVDELEO fra gl' almi, e giocondi.
Piers H. Gent. in commendation of the Author.
YOu gallant Brutes, whose travails far abroad
can testify your strange desire of news:
Cast Ankor here, for lo in English road,
there rides the Language, that so many choose.
Small cost may serve, no hazard to your health,
here may you win, without expense of wealth.
Florioes first Fruits, can teach you first to learn,
And next by time, the profit to discern.
R. H. Gent. in commendation of the Authors well employed time.
BYcorned FAVNVS seemed very strange,
to those that knew not his deformed case.
Byformed IANVS wrought a woondrous change,
in those which saw not his transfourmed face.
Bilingued FLORIO claims the like good will,
Of those which hear his rare reformed skill.
If it were strange, one self same neck should bear
two sundry heads, and faces more then one:
It was as strange, one self same head should wear
two sundry horns, where Nature grafted none.
And is more strange, to see one self same face,
Two sundry tongues, and speeches to embrace.
The tree was framed according to the fruit,
an English Stock, but an Italian Plant.
The double graft did take a double root,
for each of them supplies the others want.
And to content the doubts of either mind,
His tree has budded fruits of either kind.
John Cowland in commendation of the Author.
Look what you lack, pluck, take, and taste in time,
the tree, the bough, the branch, and al,
With little labor each may scale, and clyme:
then take your choice, the pleasure is not small.
One man, one tree, two sundry fruits, two sundry men
Does plant, does pay, and profit most: what would you then?
Your cost is small, then deem your labor least,
your gain is great, then pass not of your pain:
It Is gratis given, and welcome to this feast,
digest it well, and gratis yield again.
The Graffer FLORIO then may flourish free,
and be enforst, more plants to graft for thee.
Steven Gosson in praise of the Book.
Small is the seed, whence Cedar trees do spring:
yet they in height do reach up to the Skies.
From slender root (which is a woondrous thing)
sometimes we see the boystrous Oak to rise.
From little Fountains, mighty streams have past,
which have encountered with the Seas at last,
FLORIO in this has sowed his simple grain,
his graft does yield the blossoms of delight:
The fruit is good, it counteruailes the pain,
if skilful Readers have the same in sight.
Though seed, and root, and Fountains head be small,
the pleasant crop deserves praise of al.
R. Wilson in praise of Florio his first Fruits.
THe pleasant fruits that FLORIO frankly yeeldes,
unseen till now, save in Italian soil:
May quickly flourish in our English fields,
if in this work we take but easy toil.
He sets, he sowes, he plants, he proynes with pain,
the seeds, and Cienes far fet from foreign lands:
And geues us (idle) both the stock and grain,
even his first fruits the joy of laboring hands.
We give him naught, if we can not devise
to give him thanks, that may him well suffice.
Ri. Collines in praise of Florio his first Fruits.
A Country man of ours, I warrant you, his deeds declare him so:
True to his Prince, right gaineful to his friend, not hurtful to his fo.
One golden piece, all that he has, his wit, his will. his tender toil.
His elder pain, and gain (good man) he gratis geues unto his soil.
FLORIO, Good Season, was thy friend, wel*spiedst thou happy time to water
First fruits, and full fruits, ripe and good, good cheap, so may thou
term the matter.
By Art an ease, but look, and learn: how live? if this thou deem a
labor.
O Flos, fresh spring, thou flower from whence, often comes so sweet a savor.
If that thy list be good, or speech to learn, Italian, herein look.
If thou would speak Italian true, my friend, use this, none other book.
What would thou more, this Volume done,
Approues none such to be begone.
John B. in commendation of his Friend I. F.
YOu English Gentlemen that crave,
the fine Italian tongue to know:
And you Italians that would have,
a Rule the English speech to show:
Give FLORIO thanks, whose first fruits teach,
How you the ground of both may reach.
Ri. T. in praise of Florio his Labor.
IF we at home, by Florios pains may win,
to know the things, that travails great would ask:
By openyng that, which heretofore has bin
a dangerous journey, and a fearful task.
Why then each Reader that his Book do see,
Give Florio thanks, that took such pains for thee.
T. C. in commendation of Florio, and his first Fruits.
NO Labor wantes deserved meede,
no taken toil is void of gain:
No ground so batren, but the seed,
and somewhat more will yield for pain.
For pain? why then should FLORIO fear,
To reap the gain, he merits hear.
Which gain, is only good report,
and honor due for taken toil.
Which grant him will the wiser sort,
for whom he tylles this fertile soil.
And settes the slips in English land,
Of Tuscane tongue, to spring and stand.
As for the rest, if they requite
his labor ill, what may he say?
I have this done for their delight,
and they for pain disdain me pay.
Ma non importa, since it is so,
I Will please the best, the rest shall go:
Bent to content.
The same in French.
QVivoudra voir and auoir
La Science, e le scauoir
De la Langue Italienne
FLORIO l'ha escrit
Pour nostre gran deduit
A insi come il auienne.
Donques en sa Louange
Faisons nous verse estrange
Et en Langue estrange ausi.
Pour son gran Labeur pris
Il en aura le pris
Lebien de son envy.
To iours Ie espoyre.
I. H. in praise of Florio.
For profit Gardners plant, the husbandman for gain
Does til the earth, hoping the seed shall counteruaile his pain.
Our Florio does not so, his travail yet does pass
The Gardners, or the Husbandmans, or toylings of the Ass.
For when the byrd, the fish, the foul, ioyied in their quiet rest,
In Closet close was his delight, no sleep his eyes oppressed.
On craggi Rocks, and stony plottes, well may he think his seed
Is sown, if that no worthy thanks we yield him for his meede.
Tavola de tutti gli Capitoli, che in qvesta opera si contengono. A Table of
all the chapters that in this work are contained.
ITaliano parlar familiare. cap. 1. folio. 1. English familiar speech. chap.
1. fol. 1. A parlar con donzella. cap. 2. folio. 1. To speak with a da^sel.
chap. 2. fol. 1. Parlar familiare co^ huomo ouero con donna, cap. 3. folio. 2
Familiar speech with man or woman chap. 3. fol. 2. Parlar familiare. cap. 4
fol. 3. Familiar speech. chap. 4. fol. 3. Altro parlar familiare co^ huomo, o
con donna. cap 5. fol. 4. Other familiar speech with man or woman. chap. 5.
fol. 4. Altro parlar familiare. cap 6. folio. 5. Other familiar talk. chap. 6.
fol. 5. A parlar con un Gentilhvomo. cap. 7. fol. 6. To speak with a
Gentleman. chap 7. fol. 6. A parlar con vna Gent. Idonna. cap. 8. fol. 7. To
speak with a Gentlewoman. chap. 8. fol. 7. A parlar con mercante. cap 9. fol.
7. To speak with a merchant. chap. 9. fol 7. A parlar con donna, cap. 10. fol.
8. To speak with a woman. chap. 9. fol. 8. A parlar con seruitore. cap. 11.
fol. 9. To speak to a servant. cha. 11. fol. 9. Parlar familiare. cap. 12.
fol. 10. Familiar speech. cha. 12. fol. 10 Parlar familiare. cap. 13. fol. 10.
Familiar talk. chap. 13. fol. 10. Parlar amoroso. cap. 14. fol. 12. Amarous
talk. cha. 14. fol. 12. A parlar Dinghilterra. cap. 15. fol. 14. To speak of
England. cha. 15. fol. 14. Parlar familiare. cap. 16. fol. 19. Familiar talk.
chap. 16 fol. 19 A parlar albujo. cap. 17. fol. 20. To talk in the dark.
chap. 17. fol. 20. Diverse sentenze divine et profane. cap. 18. fol. 21. Diverse
sentences divine and profane, chap. 18. fol. 21. Tree cento belli Prouebij. cap.
19. fol. 27. Three hundredth fine proverbs. chap. 19. fol. 27. Belli detti.
cap. 20. fol. 35. Fine sayings. chap. 20. fol. 35. Belle domande. cap. 21. fol.
36. Pretty demands. cha. 21. fol. 36. Discorsi sopra pace, guerra, inuidia, et
superbia. ca. 22. fol. 38. Discourses upon peace, war, envy, and pride. cha.
22. fo. 38 Li abusi del mondo. cap. 23. fol. 40. The abuses of the world. cha.
23. fol 40. Discorsi sopra Belezza, Nobilita, poverta, e preghjera necessaria,
qvali sono i beni di Fortuna. cap. 24. fol. 41. Discourses upon beauty, nobili
tie poverty, a necessary prayer, and which be the goods of Fortune cha. 24.
fol. 41. Di Ira, con certi belli detti di Ariosto, and di aliripoeti, and che
cosa e patientia, and adulatione. cap. 25. fol. 42. Of wrath, with certain
fine sayings of Ariosto. and other Poets, and what patience, and flattery is
chap. 25. fol 42. Ragionamenti sopra Fortuna, and che cosa sia Foriuna, cap.
26. fol. 46. Reasonynges upon Fortune and what Fortune is, cha. 26 fol. 46.
Ragionamenti sopra dottrina, et Filosofia, et che cosa siano scrittori and
qval^ il profitto di leggere et imparare scientie, con certi discorsi in laud
de scrittori, and Filososi. cap. 27. fo. 49. Resonings upon learning, and
Philosophy, and what writers are, and what the profit of reading, and
learning of Science is, with certain discourses in praise of Writers and
Philosophers. ca. 27. fo. 49 Ragionamenti sopra Diligentia, Humanita,
Clementia, Temperantia, and sobrieta, cap. 28. fol. 63 Reasoninges upon
Diligence, Humanity, Clemency, Temperance, and Sobriety chap. 28. fo. 63
Ragionamenti sopra Silentio, and Liberalita, and in laud di Eta. cap. 29. fol.
66. Reasonings upon Silence, and Liberality, and in praise of age. chap. 29.
fo. 66 De li costumi de certe genti. cap. 30. fol. 70. Of the manners of
certain Nations. chap. 30. fo. 70 Discorsi sopra Musica and Amor. cap. 31.
fol. 70. Discourses upon Music and Love. chap. 31. fo. 70 Discorso sopra
libidine, and la sua forza. cap. 32. fol. 71. A discourse upon Lust, and the
force thereof. cha. 32. fo. 71 Ragionamenti sopra virtu, con le sue siglie, che
cosa e il fine di Gverra, quale sono bone opere, qvatordeci bone Regole, con
altri diversi discorsi. ca. 33. fo. 72. Reasonings upon Virtue, with her
daughters, what is the end of war, which be good works, fourteen good rules,
with diverse other discourses. chap. 33. fo. 72 L' opinione di Marco Aurclio,
and Ovidio, sopra amore, and che cosa e. ca. 34. fo. 75. The opinion of Marcus
Aurerelius and Ovid, upon Love, and what it is cha. 34. fo. 75 Diversita de gli
hvomini. ca. 35. fo. 76. The diversities of men. cha. 35 fo. 76 Certi belli,
dotti, and galanti detti, tolti da Antonio Gvevara, scritti da lui, sopra
diverse occasion ca. 26. fo. 77 Certain fine, learned, and galla^t sayings,
taken from Antonio Gueuara, written by him, upon diverse occasions. chapter 36. fo.
77. Parole di Plutarco, scritte da lui, a Traiano Imperatore, con diversi altri
detti di Antonio Gvevara. ca. 37. fo. 82 Words written by Plutarch, to the
Emper. Traiane, with diverse sayeinges of Antonio Gueuara. chap. 37. fo. 82
Discorso del detto Autore sopra Belta. ca. 38. fo. 84 A discourse of the said
author upon Beauty, cha. 39. fo. 84 Certi belli brevi detti, and belle sen
tenze del detto autore. degne da esser notate. cap. 39 fo. 89 Certain fine
brief sayings, and fine sayings of the said author, worthy to be noted,
chap. 39. fo. 89 Breve discorso in laud di Henrico ottavo, Re di Inghilterra,
ca. 40. fo. 92 A brief discourse, in praise of Henry the eight, king of
England. cha. 40. fo. 92 Belli discorsidi Antonio Gvevara sopra diverse
occasion. ca. 41 fo. 93 Fine Discourses of Antonio Gueuara, upon diverse
occasions. chap. 41. fo 93 Discorsi del detto autore, circa capitant and
soldati del nostro tempo, and mostra come bisognerebbe scegliere i Giudici. ca.
42 fo. 97 Discourses of the said author concerning Captains and soldiers of
our time, and shows how Judges should be chosen. ca. 42. fo 97 Nomi di tutti
i membri che apertengono all' hvomo, de i Parenti, i giornt de la settimana con
le stagioni de l' anno, come si debbe numerare, con un certo breve Vocabulario.
ca. 43. fo. 100. Names of all the members aperteinyng to man, of al parents of
the days of the week, of the seasons of the year, how one shall number,
with a certain brief Vocabularie. chap. 43. fo. 100 Certe preghjere, come il
Padre nostro, and il Credo, con altre. and certe Regole Inglese. ca. 44 fol.
103. Certain prayers, as the Pater noster, and the Creed, with others, and
certain English Rules. chap. 44. fo. 103.


Necessary Rules, as it were a Grammar, very profitable for all such as
delight in the Italian tongue, gathered, collected, translated, and augmented
by Florio, out of diverse sundry the best Italian Authors, and Poets, the like
never published before, wherewith a man may in very short space, and with little
help, attain unto the perfection of writing, reading, pronouncing, and
speaking of the Italian tongue.

GEntle Reader, for such faults which have escaped the Authors naughty pen,
the Compositors wavering hand, the Correctors daseling eye, and the Printers
press, we desire thee courtously to amend: for surely the Author writes
scarce good English, and a ragged hand withal, and the Compositor understands
no Italian. Wherefore, standing at thy courtesy, we are persuaded thou will
lightly pardon us both. Farewell.

Tavola de gli errori Italiani, nella present opera, Il primo numero significa
Fol. Il secondo, la Linea.
Fol. 1. Lin. 22. Per Servo, leggi Servitore: fo. 1. li. 23. per degno, degna:
fo. 2. li. 2. per gardino, giardino: fo. 3. li. 23. per serrata, serrata cosi:
fo. 4. li. 31. per val, vagliono: fo. 4. li. 35. per voi, voi le: fo. 7. li. 7.
per eno, ono: fo. li. 5. per ci, si: fo. detto. li. 9. per ci, si: fo. ^ li.
16. per catille, cattiue: fo. 10. li. 14. per qvesto, qvello. fo. 14. li. 4 per
noie, voiv': fo. 14. li. 23. per seqvitano, segvitano. fo. 14. li. 7. per voi,
svoi: fo. 15. li. 20. per ci, ecci: fo. 24. li. 24. per fibia, subia: fo. 25
li. 16. per uua, una fo. 28. li. 28. per chi ven vive, chi ben vives fo. 44.
li. 7, per nartir, martyr: fo. 44. li. 19. per pare, parer: fo. 45. li. 3 per
semianze, sembianze. fo. 46. li. 11. per al chiesa, alla chjesa: fo. 49. li.
28. per proaerbio, proverbio: fo. 49. li. 21. per prifitto, profitto: so. 51.
li. 11. per strnieai, stranjeri: fo. 52. li. 10. per. Iiliade, Iliade: fo. 53.
li. 3. per historij, Historici: fo. 53. li. 19. per altre style, alto style:
fo. 56. li. 27. per capus, caput: fo. 63. li. 7. per si puo dichiamar, si puo
chiamar: fo. 64. li. 16. per cattini, cattivi: fo. 64. li. 24. per chiavirmi,
chjarirmi: fo. 68. li. 24. per vo, uno: fo. 68. li. 22. per auanza, avanzar:
fo. 74. li. 2. per sugestiune, sugestione: fo. 78. li. 10 per per ui, per lui:
fo. 81. li. 23. per ponderoso, poderoso: fo. 84. li. 26 per questione, domanda:
fo. 91. li. 32. per pudenti, prudenti: fo. 94. li. 22. per ricutto, ricetto:
fo. 97. li. 1. per darsi, fidarsi.

Cortese Lettore, se per sort trvovi altri errori, ti pregliamo che a tuo modo
gli vogli corregger, e alqvanto vogli scusar il Stampatore, perch lui non sa
ne parlar, ne intender Italiano, e percjo merita perdono. vale.

Italiano Parlar familiare. Ca. 1. English familiare speech. ca. 1.
DIo vi dia il bon giorno. GOd give you good morrow. E a voi anchora sign, mio
And to you also, my lord. Dio vi salui signore. God save you sir. Dio vi salui
madonna. God save you mistress. Bentrouato caro fratello. Well met dear
brother. Come valla con voi? How does it with you? E come state? And how do
you? Been al comando vostro, io vi ri gratio. Well, at your commandment, I do
thank you. Dio vi dia la bona sera. God give you good even. Cosi anchora a
voi. And also to you. Dove sete stato hoggi? Where have you been this day? Io
sono stato a spasso. I have been abroad. E dove volete andare? And whither will
you go? Dove piace a voi. Where it please you, Dove anderemo noi? Where shall
we go? Avna comedia, al Toro, ouero in qualche altro luogho. To a play at the
Bull, or else to some other place. Vi piacciono le Comedy a voi? Do Comedies
like you well? Signor, si la festa. Yea sir, on holy days. Mi piacciono anche a
me, ma i predicators non le vogliono acconsentire. They please me also well, but
the preachers will not allow them. Perch, sapetelo? Wherefore, know you it:
Dicono, che non sono bone. They say, they are not good. E perch si vsano? And
wherefore are they used? Perch ogniuno si diletta in esse. Because every man
delites in the^. Io credo che si faccia di molte furfanterie a queste Comedy,
che credete voi? I believe there is much knauerie used at those Comedies: what
think you? Cosi credo anche io. So believe I also. Vi piace accettar vna
quarta di vino in casa di un amico mio? Will it please you to accept a quart of
wine at a friends house of mine? Signor no, io viringratio con tutto il mio
core. No sir, I thank you with all my heart. Io ho visto vna bella gentildonna,
vna bella figlia, vergine, giouine, ouero massara, meschina fantesca, and delle
belle done. I have seen a fair gentlewoman, a fair daughter, virgin,
maiden, or else maid servant, and many other fair women. Dove le hauete viste?
Where have you seen them: Fuora ne le campi. Out in the fields.


A parlar con donzella. Cap. 2. To speak with a damsel. Cha. 2.
BElla figlia, volete che io vi ami? Fair maid, will you that I love you: Io
non vi posso tenir che voi non amate, se volete amare. I cannot hold you that
you love not, if you will love. Io vi ho amato, vi amo, vi amero. I have loved
you, I love you, and will love you. Io vi ho odiato, vi odio, vi odiero. I have
hated you, I hate you, and will hate you. Che causa vi ho io dato? what occasion
have I given you? Io non so, ma non posso amare. I know not, but I cannot
love. Io vorria che il vi piacesse di accettar mi per vostro seruo. I would it
would please you to accept me for your servant. Io non son degno di tenir
simile seruitore. I am not worthy to keep such a servant. Volete dun che
accettar mi per marito? Will you then accept me for your husband: Io non
posso, se ben potessi, non voglio, e volendo non posso anche. I cannot, and
although I could, I will not, and if I would, I can not neither. Io non vi so
intendere. I can not understand you. Come non mi intendete? How can you not
understand me Voi parlate si dotta mente. You speak so learnedly. Vog liamo
andar a un gardino a cogliere de fiori? Shall we go into a garden to gather some
flowers: Io sono contento, se vi piace. I am content, if it please you.
Debbiamo andare neli campi? Shall we go walk into the fields? Il tempo e
troppo caldo. The weather is too hot. Noi anderemo ne lombra. We will go into
the field. Andiamo al Teatro a veder la Comedia, e se vi piace andar meco, io
saro alagro de la vostra compagnia. Let us go to the Theater to see a Comedy,
and if it please you to go with me, I will be glad of your company. Io andero
con voi volentieri. I will go with you willingly.


Parlar familiare con huomo ouero condonna. Ca. 3. Familiare speech with man
or woman. Chap. 3.
DIo sia con voi signore. GOd save you sir: or else, God be with you. Il simile
desidero di voi. The like I wish to you. Mi racomando a sua signoria. I
commend me unto your lordship. Quando ciriuederemo? When shall we see one
another? Quando che piace voi. when it pleases you. Quando viene il signor da
la corte: when will your lord come from the Court: Domani se piace a Dio. To
morrow, if it please God. Quando anda lui alla Corte: when went he to the Court:
La settimana passata. The last week. Chi ando con lui? who went with him: Due
de miei compagni. Two of my fellows. Io ho visto vna bella giouine, voglio
andare a darli de la musica con i Violoni, o Luitti subito che io ho desinato.
I have seen a fair damsel, I will go and make her some music with Violes,
or else Lute, as soon as I have dyned. Volete che io vi facci compagnia? will you
that I keep you company? Volentieri, e vi daro due, o tree quarte di vino.
Gladly and I will give you two or three quartes of wine. Io voglio andar con
voi. I will go with you. Io voglio saper da lei, se li piace venire a cena
meco: io saro alegro dela sua compagnia. I will know of her if she will please
to come and sup with me, I will be glad of her company. Flla mi par molto
cortese. Me thinks she is very courteous. Veramente lei e molto gallante.
Verily she is very gallant. Che vi pare di quelle due done che passano la
insieme? What do you think of the^ two women that go there together? Le mi
piacciono benissimo. They please me very well. Loro sono tree mi pare. Me thinks
they are three. Cosi mi pare a me. So me thinks too. Vna di loro e maritata.
One of them is married. E cosi certo. It is so certain. Io vorrei che io ne
hauessi la simile, e che fusse mia. I would I had the like, and that she were
mine. Cosi vorrei anche io. So would I also. Orsu io voglio andare acaminare in
Scepa a co^prar mi qualcosa well I will go and walk in Cheap to buy something. E
che cosa volete comprare? And what will you buy? Io voglio comprare un capello,
un paro di calzette bianche. I will buy a hat, a pair of white Stockens. Et io
voglio comprarmi un paro di Pantofole e Scarpine. And I will buy me a pair of
Pantofles and Pumpes. Ditemi che vi pare di questa spada, e questo pugnale, e
egli bono Tell me, how like you this sword and this daggar, is he good? El mi
pare bonissimo, io vorei hauerne la simile per un scudo. Me thinks it is very
good, I would I had the like for a crown. Questi guanti sono been profumati?
These Gloves, are they well parfumed? Si certo, chi li ha profumati? Yea
certainly: who has parfumed them? Un inglese che si chiama B. An English man
that is called B. Le mie post sono un bon color. My garters are a good
color. Cosi sono le mie calzette. And so are my stockens also. Cosi sono
certo, dove le hauete comprate. So they are: where bought you them? In Scepa,
mi costano dieci sold. In Cheap, they cost me ten shillings. Mi par bon
mercato. Me thinks it is good cheap. E a me mi par caro. And me thinks it is
dear. Io voglio caualcar in paese. I will ride into the country. Quanto volete
tardar la? How long will you tarry there? Io voglio tardar un mese. I will tarry a
month. Che volete far tanto? what will you do so long? Io voglio veder amaza
qualche Ceruo, se io posso, inanzi che io vitorni alla citta. I will see the
killyng of some Buck, if I can, before I return to the city. Ce ne grande
abondantia la? Is there great plenty? Signor si grandissima. Yea sir, very
great. Hauete vot cauallo? Have you a Horse? Signor no, ma ne voglio comprare
vno, ouero fittarne vno. No sir, but I will buy one, or else I will hyre one.
Quanto pagarete il giorno? what shall you pay a day? Non so, ma credo un soldo.
I know not, but I believe a shilling.


Parlar familiare. Cap. 4. Familiare speech. Chap. 4.
VOi sete stato longo tempo in paese. YOu have tarried long in the country. Io
non ho potuto ritornar piu presto. I could not come sooner. Mi piace di
vederui sano. It pleases me to see you meery. Io viringratio di bon core. I
thank God with all my heart. Come sta vostro padre, vostra madre, vostro
fratello, vostra sorella, e tutti li vostri parenti? How does your father,
your mother, your brother, your sister, and all your parents? Tutti stanno
been gratie a Dio. They al do well, thanked be god. Mi piace certo come sta
vostra moglie con vostri figlioli. It pleases me certes, but how does your
wife, and your children? Loro sono stati maladi e quasi morti, ma adesso sono
miglioradi, rendo gratie a Dio. They have been sick, and almost dead, but now
they are amended, I thank God for it. Cosi facendo, fate been. So doing, you do
well. Vi piace desinar meco? will it please you dine with me? Signor no, vi
ringratio. No sir, I thank you. Dove desinate? where dine you? Io desino con
il mio patron. I will dine with my master. Volete venir a cenar meco questa
sera? haremo un Insalata. will you sup with me this night? we will have a salet.
Si, ma la mia camera e tanto lontana, e le port sono serrata a bon hora, che
se io vengo, non potro entrare. Yea, but my chamber is so far, and the gates
are shut so soon, that if I come, I shall not get in. Voi dormirete meco,
hauerete un bon letto, e un netto paro de Lenzuola, venite mi prego. You shall
lie with me, you shall have a good bed, and a pair of clean sheets, I pray you
come Viringratio tanto come se io tardassi. I thank you as much as though I
did. Io voglio andar a casa. I will go home. Mi par che voi sete malato. Me
thinks you are sick. Certo io non sono molto been. Certainly I am not very
well. Che cosa vi mancha? what thing do you lack? Latesta mi duole. My head
aketh. Andate in letto. Then go to bed. Cofivoglio fare. So I will do. Do
matina io voglio venire da voi. To morrow morning I will come to you. Venite, voi
sarete il ben venuto. Come, and you shall be welcome Io voglio far colatione con
voi. I will break my fast with you. Not haueremo un par de Salsize. we will have
a pair of Sasages. Le mi piacciono benissimo. They please me very well. Cosi
anchora a me. And also to me. Ma bisogna hauer del vino. But we must have some
wine. Noi ne haueremo se ce ne in Londra. we will have some, if there be any in
London. Io voglio andar a metter mi vna camisia bianca, perch io sudo forte,
fa gran caldo. I will go and put me on a clean shert, because I sweat very
much: it is very hot. Domani se piace a Dio, voglio portar il mio miglior
giupone, le mie miglior calze, la mia miglior cappa, and la piu bella. To morrow
if it please God, I will wear my best Doblet, and my best Hose, and my best
Cloak, and the fairest. E dove volete andar poi? And where will you go then?
Voglio andar dove vi piace. I will go where it please you. E voglio far quel che
volete. And I will do what you will. Io voglio comprar un par de guanti. I will
buy a pair of Gloves. Cosi voglio fare anche io. And so will I do. Mostra mi
un par de guanti. Show me a pair of gloves. Li volete profumati, ono? will you
have the^ perfu^ed, orno? Li voglio profumati. I will have them perfumed. Eccone
qui un bon paro. Behold here is a good pair. Quanto pagaro per essi? How much
shall I pay for them? Mi darete mezo scudo. You shall give me half a crown. E
troppo certo. It is too much certain. Non certo signore. Not so sir. Ve ne
voglio dare due soldi. I will give you two shillings. E troppo poco signore. It
is too little sir. E assai certo. It is yenough certain. Orsu pigliate li. well
take them. Ecco i tuoi danari. Behold here is thy money. Viringratio signore. I
thank you sir.


Parlar familiare con homo, o condonna, Cap. 5. Familiar speech with man or
woman. Chap. 5.
DOnde venite signor mio? FRom whence come you sir Io vengo da la Corte. I come
from the Court. Come stala maesta de la Regina, con tutti i Gentilhuomint,
Gentildonne a la Corte? How does the queens majesty with all the Gentlemen
and Gentlewomen of the Court Loro stanno benissimo. They do very well. Mi piace
certo. It pleases me well certain. Quando si remove la Corte? When remoueth
the Court Non si sa. It is not known. Si dice la settimana prossima. It is
said the next week. Ci sara progresso? Shall there be a Progress? Non si sa
anchora. It is not known yet Io voglio esser in paese, se cene. I will be in
the country, if there be any. Cosi voglio anche io. And so will I. Si dice che
ce ne sara vno. It is said there will be one. Io lo voglio saper breuemente. I
will know it shortly. Ma come lo saperete? But how will you know it? Io lo sapero
benissimo. I will know it very well. Io voglio parlar a quella donna. I will
speak to that woman. Madonna, io vi amo cordialmente, to voria che io fosse
vostro marito, io vi ameria e seruiria fedelmente. Madame, I love you heartily,
I would I were your husband, I would love you, and serve you faithfully. Io
sono molto obligato a voi per il vostro bon volere. I am very much bound to
you for your good will. Io viringratio per la vostra cortesia. I thank you for
your courtesy. Ma non sapete come dice il prouerbio? But know you not what
the prouer be says? Non certo: come dice? No truly: how says it? Chi tardi
arriua, mal allog gia. Who comes late, lodges il. Come, dunche to ariuo
tardi. Why then I arrive late. Si certo a dirui la verita. Yea certain, to tell
you truly. Dunche voi sete promessa. Why then you are promised. Signor si
longo tempo fa. Yea sir, long ago. E a chi? ditemi di gratia. And to who^? I
pray you tell me. A un homo. Unto a man. Io so ben che non e donna. I know it is
not a woman. Ma come si chi ama? But how is he called? voi non lo conoscete.
You know him not. voi non lo sapete. You know not that. Si chiama messer C. He
is called C. Io lo cognosco been, and e mio grande amico. I know him well, and
he is my great friend. Dunche a me bisogna hauer patientia. Then I must have
patience. Quanto vidaro a far mi un paro di camisie bianche. what shall I give
you to make me a couple of white shertes? De che telale volete hauere? Of what
cloth will you have the^ De la piu fina che sia. Of the finest that is. voi mi
darete venti soldi. You shall give me. 20. shillings. Adio Signora, e troppo
certo. God be with you madame, it is too much certain. Ascoltate signor mio,
voi mi darete quindeci soldi. Hark here sir, you shall give me fiftiene
shillings. Non val tanto. It is not worth so much. Certo la tela e molto cara.
Truly cloth is very dear. Io vi daro dodeci soldi. I will give you twelve
shillings. Io sono contenta, domani venite per esse, voi hauerete. I am
co^te^t, to morrow come for them, and you shall have the^. Volete hauer caparra?
will you have earnest? Signor si se vi piace. Yea sir, if it please you. Quanto
volete hauere? How much will you have? Date mi un soldo. Give me a shilling.
Eccolo qui pigliatelo. Behold it here, take it. Volete far mi anchora due belli
fazoletti lauorati con seta cremesina? Will you also make me two saire
handkerchiefes, wrought with Crimosen silk? Quanto volete voi spendere? How
much will you spend? Io voglio spendere il manco che io posso. I will spend the
least that I can. Et io al contrario voglio hauere il piu che to posso. And I
contrariwise will have the most that I can. Orsu dite mi quanto vi daro? Well,
tell me, what shall I give you? Voi mi darete dieci soldi. You shall give me ten
shillings. Voi li hauerete. You shall have them. Miracomando a S. S. I commend
me unto your lordsh. Resto vostra signor mio. I rest yours my lord. Restate in
pace. Rest you in peace. E voi anchora. And you also. Quando vireuedero? When
shall I see you again? Domani nel Cambio. To morrow in the Exchange. A che hora?
At what a clock? A vndeci. At eleven. Hauete gran facende la? Have you great
business there? Non troppo grande. Not very great. Io verro la certo. I will
come certain. Io vi aspetterro la. I will tarry for you there. Non manchate. Do
not fail.


Altroparlar familiare. Cap. 6. Other familiare talk. Chap. 6.
SApete se la Posta e venuta? Know you if the Post be come? Io non so
veramente. I know not certainly. Come faro a saperlo? How shall I do to know it?
Domandate in Borsa. Ask in the exchange. A chi domandaro? To whom shall I ask?
A qualche mercante. Ask of some merchant. Volete far mi un piacere? Will you do
me a pleasure? Volentieri se io posso. Gladly if I can. Venite a desinar meco.
Come and dine with me. Quando? When? Domani. To morrow. Viringratio, Io verro:
Che bona cera hauero io? I thank you, I will come: what good cheer shall I
have? Voi hauerete un pezo di carne boina alesso, e un Capon arosto. You shall
have a peese of beef sodden, and a Capon roasted. Certo questo mi piace. Certes
this likes me well. Io portero un fiasco di vino. I will bring a bottel of wine.
Hauete ne che sia bono? Have you any that is good? Signor si bonissimo. Yea
sir, very good. Orsu aspettate mi, io veniro, se io non moro questa notte. Well
tarry for me, I will come, if I die not this night. Come fate conto di morir cosi
subitana mente? What, do you make account to die so suddenly? Che so io? vedo
tal volta che lhuomo compone e Dio dispone. What know I? I see sometimes that
man does purpose, and God does dispose. Veramente voi dite il vero. Verily you
say true. Pero e bono sempre a ricor darsi di Iddio, et pregarlo di continuo
che ci voglia conceder de la sua gratia. Therefore it is always good to
remember God, and pray him continually, that he will grant us of his grace.
Beat colui che lo sa fare. Happy is he that can do it. Io credo che ce ne
pochi. I believe there are few. Cosi credo anche io. So believe I also. Io vedo
certe person bizarre, che fanno il brano hoggi, domani sono poueri, altri
fanno conto inanzi lhoste, vogliono fare, dire, che e che no e sono morti. I
see certain foolish people, that brag it out to day, and to morrow are poor,
others make their account before the host, they will do, they will face, and by
and by they are dead. De questine vedemo lesperientia giornalmente. Of these
we see the experience daily. Quelli verisicano il prouerbio. These verify the
proverb. Che prouerbio volete dire? What proverb will you say? Quel prouerbio
che dice, Chi troppo abraccia, poco stringe. The proverb that says, Who
imbraceth much, little closes. Certo questo e bono. Certis this is a good one.
Ma sapete come dicea quel altro? But know you how the other said? Come dice
lui, viprego? How says he, I pray you? Lui dice, che e sempre bono per vno
hauer due cord per il suo archo, accio che se vna sirompe, lui ne habbia un
altra presta. He says, it is always good for one to have two stringes to his
bow, to the end, that if one break, he may have an other ready. Certo colui
la intend. Certainly he understands it. E prouerbio anticho. It is an old
proverb. Chi pensate che habbia fatto questi prouerby? Who think you have
made these proverbs? Io credo qualche Poeta. I believe some poets.


A parlar con un Gentilhuomo. Chap. 7. To speak with a Gentleman. Cha. 7.
BEn trouato sig nor mio. Well met my lord. Come sta v. S? How does your
lordship* Benissimo al comando vostro, e pronto per seruir vi in ogni cosa che
io possa. Very well, at the commandment of you, and ready to serve you in any
thing that I may. Veramente to vi ringratio, il simile fate conto di me. Verily
I yield you thanks, make the like account of me. Orsu signor mio, io vado per
questa strada, e voi. Well my lord, I go through this street, and you. Sig
nor no, me ne vado per questa altra, volete comandar mi qualche cosa, e no? No
sir, I go through this other, will you command me any thing, or not? Signor no,
ma mi farete grande apiacere, se volete venire a desinar meco. No sir, but you
shall do me a great pleasure, if you will come and dine with me. Non hoggi
signor, ma vna altra volta ci goderemo. Not to day sir, but another time we will
be merry together. Quando vi piace io saro pronto. When it please you, I am
ready. Mi racomando donche a V. S. Then I commend me unto your lordship.
Andate, che Dio vi compagni. Go, and God accompany you. A riuederci un altra
volta. We will see one another again another time.


A parlar con vna Gentildonna. Cap. 8. To speak with a Gentlewoman. Chap. 8.
BOn giorno quella bella signora. GOod morrow fair Gentlewoman. Ben trouato
quel bell giouine. Well met fair young man. Dove andate cosi tardi? Whither go
you so late? Io me ne vado a casa mia. I go home to my house. A che fare? And
what to do? A fare certe facende. To do certain business. Volete che io vi
facci compagnia? Will you that I keep you company? Signor no, io ho un
seruitore che mi aspetta. No sir, I have a servant that tarieth for me. Ma
dove e? But where is he? Lui va inanzi. He goes before. Quello e vostro
seruitore? Is he your servant? Signor ci. Yea sir. Quanto tempo e stato con
voi? How long has he ben with you? Non longo tempo: perch domandate,
conoscete lo? Not long time: wherefore do you ask, do you know him? Signora
ci, lui e mio Cugino, e mio patriotto. Yea madam, he is my cousin and my
countreyman. Io voria che il vi piacesse di esser mio amico e compagno in
questa giornata. I would it would please you to be my friend and compagnion in
this my journey. Volentieri signor, ma dove volete voi andare? Gladly sir, but
where will you go? Io faccio pensiere di andare fino a Venetia. I make account
to go to Venice. Che volete far la? What will you do there? Voglio veder la
citta, se la e cosi bella come si dice. I will see the city, if it be so fair
as it is said. Vederete vna bella, ricca, sumtuosa, forte, citta ben fornita,
adorna di belle done, populosa di ogni gente, abundante, e copiosa di tutte le
bone cose. You shall see a fair city, rich, sumptuous, strong, well furnished,
adorned with fair women, populated of many people, abundant, and plentiful of
al good things. Veramente io credo che voi la laudate troppo. Verily I believe
that you praise it too much. Anzinon son bastante a laudarla assai, come
merita. Nay rather I am not able to praise it enough as it deserves.


A parlar con mercante. Cap. 9. To speak with a merchant. chap. 9.
Dio visalui signor mio. God save you my lord. Il simile desidero di voi. The
like I wish of you. E longo tempo che io non vi ho visto. It is long time
since I have seen you. Cosi credo anche io perch io sono stato in Francia,
Italia, Spagna, Alemagna, piu di otto mesi. So believe I also, for because I
have been in France, Italy, Spain, Germany, more then eight months. E che
hauete fatto la? And what have you done there? Io ho visto, toccato, sentito
molte cose strane, e speso i miei danari. I have seen, felt, heard many
strange things, and spent my money. Ditemi di gratia, le done, sono belle la,
o no? Tell me of courtesy, women, are they fair there, or not? Vi diro, ce ne
di ogni sort, come in questo paese, ce ne di belle, brutte, bone, cattille,
cortese, e discortese, giouine, e vechie, e pur sono tutte done. I will tell
you, there is of al sorts, as is in this country, there be fair, foul, good,
and bad, courteous, and discourteous, young and old, and yet they be al women.
Io non sono ben disposto: Io voglio andare a dormire. I am not well disposed, I
will go sleep. Io voglio caualcare il mio cauallo bianco. I will go ride my
white horse. Io voglio ballare, saltare, danzare, giocare. I will daunse, leap,
skyppe, play. Che gioco sapete giocare? What game can you play? Io so giocare a
le Carte, a li Dadi, al Tauoliere, a gli Scaki, et io so lottare. I can play at
Cards, at Dyse, at Tables, at Cestes, I can wrestle. Io voglio caminare ne li
campi fino che sia hora di cenare. I will walk in the fields until it be
supper time. E voglio comprare un par di fazoletti. I will buy a pair of
handkerchiefes. Io voglio andar a ve der giocare di Poma, e forse giocare anche
io, volete giocare due o tree partite meco? I will go see some play at Tenise,
and perhaps play also: will you play two or three settes with me? Signor io non
so giocare, se io sapessi, io giocaria. Sir, I can not play, if I could, I
would play.


A parlar con donna. Cap. 10. To speak with a woman. Cha. 10.
CArissima signora come state? Well-beloved Lady how do you? Io sto been pronto
per seruir vi. I do well ready for to serve you. Certo signora vi rendo mill
gratie, io so che sete cortese. Certis lady, I render you a thou sand thanks,
I know you are courteous. Voi sete pronto per dar mi la baia You are ready to
mock me. Non certo signora, perdonatemi. Not so madam, pardon me. Non mi
hauete offeso. You have not offended me. Ne ancho cercero di farlo. Neither will
I seek to do it. Ma ditemi di gratia signora, volete che io vi ami? But tell
me of courtesy madam, will you that I love you? Io non posso tenerui che non mi
amate, ma io non sono degna da essere amata. I cannot hold you that you love me
not, but I am not worthy to be beloved. Perch dite cosi? Wherefore say you so?
Perch e il vero. Because it is true. Perdonate mi, voi errate. Pardon me, you
err. Io credo di no. I believe not. Prego Dio che sia cosi. I pray God it be
so. Io quanto a me may non fui sugetra a amore, ne anche cerco di essere. As
for me, I was never subject unto love, neither seek I to be.


A parlar con seruitore. Cap. 11. To speak to a servant. Chap. 11.
BOn compagno, dove andate? GOod fellow, whither go you? Io vado a far
colatione. I go to break my fast. Non hauete anchora fatto colatione, e si e
cosi tardi? Have you not yet broke your fast, and it is so late? Che tardi? che
hora e? How late? what is it a clock? E passato vndeci. It is past eleven.
Signor no, perdonate mi. Not so sir, pardon me. Il signor, dove e, in paese?
Your lord, where is he, in the country? Signor no, lui e a la Corte. No sir,
he is at the court. Quando ando lui alla Corte? When went he to the Court?
Hieri sera alo tardi. Yester night very late. E che fa la tanto spesso? What
does he so often there? Io non so: credo che va a far lamor a qualche
Gentildonna, o Signora. I know not: I believe he goes to woo some
Gentlewoma^, or else Lady. Vostro signore, non e maritato? Your lord, is he not
married? Signor no, lui e vedouo. No sir, he is a widower. Quanto tempo estato?
How long has he been so? Quasi due anni. Almost two years. Oime fratello, io
mi sento male. Alas brother, I feel me self ill. Ma che male hauete? But
what ill have you? Mi duol la testa. My head aches. Non hauete la febre? Have
you not the ague? Signor si, la hebbi hieri. Yes sir, I had it yester day.
Lasiateme tastar vi il polso. Let me feel your pulses. Eccolo qui tastatelo.
Behold it here, feel it. Certo io credo che voi sete inamorato in qualche
donna. Certis I believe that you are in love with some woman. Signor no certo,
al present. Not so sir certis, at this time. Ne anche sete stato? Neither have
you been? Non vi dico cosi. I do not tell you so. Vi mettete qualche dubbio. You
put in some doubt. Io vi dico la verita. I do tell you the truth. Dio voglia che
sia cosi. I pray God it be so. Pur che non sia peggio. So it be no worse. Io
non desidero cosi. I do not desire it so. Ne anche io. Neither I also. Signore,
ditemi di gratia, che profession e la vostra? Sir, I pray you tell me, what is
your profession? Io sono Musico, mio padre fu homo di Leg, mio fratello e
mecanicho. I am a Musition, my father is a man of Law, my brother is a
handycraftesman. Ditemi vi prego, dove vi par meglio habitar, in Italia, o in
Ingilterra? I pray you tell me, where does it seem you best to dwell, in Italy,
or in England. E bono habitar per tutto, se la borsa e pesante: ma a chi non ha
danari, non ha credito, se non di bastonade. It is good to dwell euerywhere, if
the purse be weighty, but who has no money, has no credit, but of blows or
stripes Che vi par de la gente di Ingilterra, sono amoreuoli? What do you
think of the people of England, are they loving? Io vi diro la verita, la
Nobilta e molto cortese, ma la plebe e tanto piu discortese, e specialmente
verso i Forastieri, la qual cosa mi dispiace. I will tell you the truth, the
Nobility is very courteous, but the commons are discorteous, and especially
toward strangers, the which thing does displease me Ascolta fratello, che fai
tu? Hearken brother, what do you? Perch mi domandate? Wherefore do you ask me?
Perch io vorei sapere. Because I would know. Adunche voi non lo saperete,
perch colui che cerca lalrui facende da tutti li sauij e tenuto matto. Then
you shall not know, for because he that seeks to know other men's affairs, of
all wise men is counted a fool. Certo tu mi hai colto. Now truly you have hit
me. PerdonAtemi, vi dico il vero. Pardon me, I tell you the truth. Cosi mi pare.
So me thinks. Ma pur ditemi dove andate? But yet tell me, whither go you?
Adesso io vado in Borsa. Now I go to the Exchange. Che volete far la? What will
you do there? Comprare qualche cosa. I will go buy something. Che cosa? What
thing? Io voglio comprare un Capello, vna Baretta, vna Cintura, un Giupone di
Tafettado, Veluto, Grossograno, Raso, Mocagliado, Ciambelotto bianco, rosso,
verde, giallo, turkino, bigio, e negro. I will buy a Hat, a Cappe, a Girdle, a
Doblet of Tafeta, Velvet, Grograyne, Satin, Makadowe, Chambelot, white, read,
green, yalowe, blewe, russet, and black.


Parlar familiare. Cap. 12. Familiare speech. Chap. 12.
Chi sent, vede, et tace, puo sempre viuere in pace. Who hears, sees, and
holds his peace, may always live in peace Ma chi fa il contrario, sempre viuera
in affanni. But who does the contrary, shall always live in care. Mi par che voi
parlate per esperientia. Me thinks that you speak by experience. Perch dite
voi cosi? Wherefore say you so? Orsu che faremo tutto hoggi, per passar il
tempo? Well what shall we do this day, to pass the time away? Quello che vi par
meglio. That that seems you best. Andiamo fuora neli campi. Let us go into the
fields. A che fare? And what to do? A tirar darcho, e voi. To shoot in a
bow, and you. Io non ho ne arco, ne frezze. I have neither bow, nor arowes.
Hauete voi un archebuso? Have you never a Piece? Signor si, ma non ho poluere.
Yes sir, but I have no poulder. Compratene, e andiamo fori a amazare qualche
vcello, ouero qualche Coniglio. Buy some then, and let us go forth, and kyl
some birds, or else some conyes. Il tempo e troppo caldo. The weather is too
hot. Andiamo dunche domatina, Then let us go in the morning. Ma dove vi trouero
io? But where shall I find you? Dove che vi piaco. Where you please. Signor mio
vi prego che vi piaccia di far mi tanto favor come di donarmi un Cerua. My
lord, I pray you that it will please you to show me so much favor, as to give
me a bucke. Volentieri signor mio, quando la volete hauere? With all my heart
sir, when will you have it? Quando che vi piace a voi. When it please you.
Signor mio, io vi faccio un dono di questo Leuriero. My lord, I make you a
present of this Greyhound. Veramente io vi ringratio, e in ricompensa di
questo, vi dono questa spada, la qual portate per amor mio. Verily sir I thank
you, and in recompense of it, I give you this sword, the which bear you for
my sake. Piu per forza che per amor, la accetto, ma pur vi ringratio. More for
force then for love, I accept it, but yet I thank you. Di gratia non vsate
tante cerimonie vi prego. Of courtesy use not so many ceremonies, I pray you.
Signor, la Posta e venuta hoggi di Fiandra. Sir, the Post is come this day out
of Flaunders. E che noue ha portato? and what news has he brought Non dicono
altro senon che li Spagnioli tengono la briglia a li Fiamenghi. They say naught
else, but that the Spaniardes hold the bridle to the Flemings.


Parlar familiare Cap. 13. Familiare talk. Chap. 13.
BEn trouati signori miei. Well met my sirs. Ben venuto signor B. Welcome sir B.
Ditemi signorei, hauete seniuto qualche nouelle? Tell me sirs, have you heard
any news? Signor no, se non che ogni di si fanno soldadi. No sir, but every
day there are soldiers pressed. E per che fare? And what to do? Per andar in
Holandia. For to go into Holland. Contra chi? Against whom? Contra il Duca di
Alua. Against the Duke of Alua. Vanno per mare, o per terra? Do they go by sea,
or by land? Alcuni per mare, alcuni per terra. Some go by sea, and some go by
land. Quanto tempo staranno? How long will they stay? Certamente io non so.
Certainly I know not. E chi lo sa dunche? And who knows it then? La Regina et
il conseglio. The queen and the counsel. Quando ci sara un parlamento? When
will there be a parliament? Si dice dopoi Pasqua, circa de la Pent ecoste. It is
said after Easter, about Whitsontide. Dite mi per cortesia, che vi pare di
questo regno? Tell me of courtesy, what think you of this Realm? Ie vi diro la
verita, el mi par un bon Regno, e molto abundante di ogni bona cosa. I will tell
you the truth, me thinks it is a good Realm, and very plentiful of all good
things. Che vipar de la Regina? What think you of the queen? Quanto a la
Regina, a diruela scietta, nessuna lingua non e bastante a laudarla assai, le i
e in liberalita, magnificentia, cortesia, virtu, prudentia, belleza,
nobilitate, and in dotrina, gentileza, sapientia, vnica al mondo, adorna di
tutte quelle bone virtu, che si appartengono a Regina: lei piu tosto, si puo
dir celeste, che ^erestre: lei e dotta, sauia, gentile, cortese, nobile,
prudente, liberale, bella, amoreuole, virtuosa: lei e galante, misericordiosa:
lei non e altiera, superba, auara, crudele, aspra, furiosa, ignobile, ma come
vi ho detto inanzi: ella e degna di posseder ogni gran cosa: lei e lultimo
refugio, recapito, presidio di tutte le bandite virtu. As for the queen, to
tell you the plain truth, no tongue is sufficient to praise her yenough, for
she is in liberality, magnificence, courtesy, virtue, prudence, beauty,
nobility, and in doctrine, gentilitie, wisdom, one only in the world,
adorned with all those good virtues, that appertain unto a queen: she may
rather be called celestial, then terrestrial: she is learned, wise, gentle,
courteous, noble, prudent, liberal, fair, loving, virtuous: she is gallant,
merciful: she is not hau tie, proud, covetous, cruel, eger, furious,
unnoble, but as I have told you before, she is woorthye for to enjoy any
great thing: she is the last refuge, defense, and bulwark of al banished
virtues. Certo voi mi dite vna gran cosa, quasi da non credere. Certainly you
tell me a greathing, almost not to be believed. Io non vi posso ne dir, ne
esprimere, ne quasi pensare, le grande virtu con che lei e adorna. I can not
neither tell, neither express, neither almost think the great virtues
wherewith she is adorned. Tien ella gran Corte? Does she keep a great Court?
Certo grandissima e pomposa. Certis very great, and sumptuous. Amela i
stranieri? Does she love strangers? Adiruila verita, ellali ama quasi troppo.
To tell you the truth, she loves them almost too well. Parlela assai lingue?
Does she speak many languages Lei parla otto lingue. She speaks eight
languages. Lei parla Greco, Latino, Italiano, Franzese, Spagniolo, Scozese,
Fiamengo, e Inglese: tutte queste lingue parla benissimo, and eloquenteme^te
She speaks Greek, Latin, Italian, French, Spanish, Scottish, Flemish, and
English: al these tongues she speaks very well, and eloquent. Certo voi mi
fate restar quasi attonito, a sentir vi laudarla tanto. Certis you make me rest
almost astonished to hear you praise her so much. P iu che io la laudo, piu la
merita. The more I praise her, the more she deserves. (...), mi racomando
(...) qual cosa, sono vos^^. Well my lord, I commend me unto you, if I can do
any thing for you, I am yours. Io me ne (...) e con Dio. I go, rest you with
God. Oh Gentildonna, dove andate? O gentlewoma^, whither go you Io vado alla
scola. I go to the scoole. Dove, e con chi? Where, and with whom? Con vno
Franzese. With a Frenchman. E che imparate voi? And what do you learn? Io
imparo a leggere, scriuere, cucire, sonare di Spinetta. I learn to read,
write, sow, play upon the virginalles. Sapete sonare been? Can you play well?
Signor, si qualche poco. Yea sir, a little. Quanto pagate la settimana? What pay
you the week? Io pago un soldo il mese. I pay a shillyng a month. Mi par
troppo. Me thinks it is too much. Cosi mi pare a me. So me thinks too. Ma non
cie rimedio, se non patientia. But there is no remedy, but patience. E vna
bella cosa a essere patiente, e constante. It is a fair thing to be pacient
and constant. Vostro padre, dove e lui? Your father, where is he? Lui e andato
fora in paese, a la sua possessione. He is gone forth into the country to a
farm of his. E che cosa fa lui la? And what does he there? Lui e andato a far
bona cera con li soi visini. He is gone to make good chere with his neighbors.
Quanto tempo stara la? How long will he stay? Circa due mesi. About two
months. Quando ritornera? When will he come again? Credo domani matina. I
believe to morrow morning. Caualca lui, o valo a piede? Does he ride, or go on
foot? Lui caualca. He rides. Quanti seruitori ha lui? How many servants has
he? Lui ne ha quatro. He has four.


Parlar amoroso. Cap. 14. Amorous talk. Chap. 14.
O Caro amico, io ti prego, che tu mi voglia aiutare. OH my dear friend, I
pray thee that thou wylt help me. Volentieri, ma che aiuto volete hauere? che
cosa vi mancha? Gladly, but what help will you have? what lack you? O caro
fratello, io sono inamorato con vna donna, la qualle e tanto crudele, che non
mi vuol ne vedere, ne sentire: la qual cosa mi fa quasi morire. Oh dear
brother, I am in love with a woman, the which is so cruel, that she will neither
see me, neither hear me, the which thing makes me almost die. Oime fratello,
volete lasciarui vincerda amor il quale e se non un putto orbo, e non vede?
Alas brother, will you let love vanquish you, the which is but a boy, blind, and
sees not? Oime se been lui e un putto, lui ha gran posanza, se ben lui e orbo
lui vede. Alas, for all that he is but a boy, he has great strength, for all
that he is blind, he sees. Ma come puo star questa cosa? But how can this
thing be? Domandate a coloro che ne ha no fatto pruoua. Ask of them that have
made proof of it. Io non ne cognosco nossuno. I know none of them. Io sono vno
de essi. I am one of them. Non e possibile. It is not possible. Cosi non fusse.
So were it not. Io non lo credo. I believe it not. Etroppo vero lui mha Ferito
con piu di mill stralt, ma non ha ferito lei, che se hauesse, io ne sarei
molto alegro, and alegrissimo. It is too true, he has wounded me with more
then a thousand shaftes, but he has not wounded her, for if he had, I were
glad, and very glad. Voi non lo sapete. Yo know it not. Io lo so troppo certo.
I know it too certain. Parlate a lei. Speak unto her. Lei non mi vuol
sentire. She will not hear me. Scriueteli vna lettera. Write a letter unto
her. Let non sa leggere. She can not read. Fateli parlare a qualcuno. Cause
sombody to speak to her. Io non ho nessuno che mi sia fedele, come si richiede.
I have none that is faithful unto me, as need requires. E chi' e ella,
vergine, o donna? And what is she, a maid, or a wife? Lei e vergine, figliola
di un mercante di questa citta cosi famosa e grande. She is a maid, daughter
unto a merchant of this city, so famous and great. Accarezate la, fateli
qualche dono, o a lei, o a suo padre. Cherish her, and make her some present,
or else to her father. Io non lo cognosco. I know him not. Imparate a
cagnoscerlo. Learn to know him. Hauete may parlato a lei. Have you ever spoken
to her? Signor ci, ma lei non mi vuol sentire, io la amo, lei mi odia, io la
seguo, lei mi fugge, io la adoro, lei mi dispreza, io la prego, lei si chiude
le orechie, che faro io misero me? Yea sir, but she will not hear me I love
her, she hates me, I follow her, she flees from me, I worship her, she abhorres
me, I pray her, she closes her ears, what shall I do, poor wretch? Non
disperate. Do not despair. E che faro dunche? What shall I do then? Amatela di
continuo. Love her continually. Cosi faccio, ho fatto, e faro. So I do, have
done, and will do. Seguite lessempio di Ouidio. Follow the example of Ovid. Che
cosa e quello? And what is that? Siate constante. Be constant. Io sono
constante, e leale, e sempre saro fino a morte, e anche doppo morte, se fusse
possibile, come'non e, ma tutto non vale, a quello che io ho visto, e vedo vi
prego, datemi qualche bon conseglio. I am constant, loyal, and always will be
until death, and also after death, if it were possible, as it is not, but al
preuayleth not, as far as I have seen, and see, I pray you give me some
good counsel. Assaltatela. Assault her. Lei e donna. She is a woman. E voi
sete homo. And you are a man. Tanto piu presto la vincerete. So much the sooner
shall you overcome her. Ma non mi conuiene. But it becomes me not. Perch non
vi conuiene? Wherefore does it become you? Perch la Leg lo defend. Be^cause
the Law forbids it. Che Leg. Whot Law? La Leg Diddio, and le Leggide
glihuomini. The Law of God, and the Law of man. Rompete le Leggi. Break the
Laws. Io meriterei morte. I should deserve death. Che morte piu dolce, che
morire per amore? What death more sweet, then die for love? Si morendo in
gratia a lei, morirei volentieri, ma altri menti non voglio. Yea, dying in her
favor, I would dye gladly, but otherwise I will not. Fate di necessita virtu.
Make of necessity, virtue. Che volete che io facci? What will you that I do?
Pascere con speranza. Feed on hope. Speranza mi tien viuo. Hope holds me
alive. Non sap ete che il tempo diuoratore di ogni cosa? con tempo e con un
gozzo di aqua, penetra la pietra, viua cosi forse il vostro co^tinuo amar la
fara diuentar quello core di Tigre compasione vole. Know ye not, that time the
deuourer of al things, with time and a drop of water does pierce the flint
stone: so perhaps also your continual loving of her, will make her heart of
Tiger, to become mercyful. Potria essere, ma non lo credo. It may be, but I
believe it not. Forse voi sete troppo pouero. Perhaps you are too poor. Io
sono sirico come lei. I am as rich as she. Come lo sapete? How know you that?
Io lo so, e ne son certo. I know it, and am certain of it. Lhuomo spesse volte
si tien certo di qualche cosa, e resta ingannato. Man oftentimes holds himself
sure of something, and then rests deceived. Ma non e cosi con me. But it is
not so with me. Forse voi e ingannate. Perhaps you are deceived. Imitate il
prouerbio. Imitate the proverb. Che prouerbio e quello? What proverb is that?
Prouerbio che si vsa spesso. A proverb that is used often. Di gratia
recitatelo. I pray you rehearse it. Con il tempo, e con la paglia, le Nespole
si matura: Oueramente questaltro, Chi va pian, va san. with time and with
straw, Medlers are made ripe: or else this other, Who goes softly, goes well.
Non ne sapete altri? Know you no more? Ogniuno tira laqua al suo molino, cosi
fate voi. Every man draws water to him self, and so do you. Ma non sapete
voi, come ogniuno cerca il suo profitto? But know you not how every man
seeks his own profit? Natura ci insegna cosi. Nature teaches us so. Ma Dio
ci insegna a amar il nostro prossimo, come noi medisimi, e non esser auari. But
god teaches us to love our neighbors as our selves, and not to be so covetous.
Si, ma pochi sequitano la Leggi de Iddio. Yea, but few follow the laws of God.
Ce ne sono de li altri che praticano vna noua Alchimia. There are others that
practice a new kind of Alchimistie. Come volete voi dire? How is that, that
you say? Diroui come Alcuni fanno. I will tell you how some do. Come ditemi, vi
prego? How, I pray you? tell me. Imprestar e may non rendere assai promettere, e
poco attendere, ben quadagnar, e poco spendere, fara presto lhuomo richo. To
borowe, and never give again: to promise much, and attend little: to get well,
and spend little, will quickly make a man rich. Questo e un bello prouerbio. This
is a fine proverb. Ve ne voglio dire due altri belli. I will tell you two other
sinc ones Cosi facendo, mi farete apiacere. So doing, you shall do me a
pleasure. Chi cerca spesso ingannar altrui, opresso resta and ingannato lui.
Who often seeks others to deceive, does rest oppressed and deceived him self.
Quello e bello e vero. That is a fine one, and true. Christo lascio ne li
precetti, voi non far altrui, quel che perte non vuoi, Christ left in his
precepts, Do not to others, that thou wylt not have done to thy self. Anche
questo e bellissimo. Also this is very fine.


Aparlar Dinghilterra. Cap. 15. To speak of England. Chap. 15.
DItemi vi prego, come vi piace la Citta di Londra? Tell me, I pray you, how
like you the City of London? E ella mi piace benissimo. It likes me very well.
Sete state fori in paese? Have you not ben in the country Io sono stato fino a
Dover. I have been at Dover. Non piu lontano? And no further? Signor no, ma se
piace a Dio, questa state prossima voglio veder tutto il paese. No sir, but if
it please God, the next Summer I will see all the country. Voi vederete un bello
paese, fruttifero, bon air, abundante di vetouaglia, copioso di belle done,
che sono amoreuole, circondato intorno con il mare. You shall see a fair
country, fruitful, good air, plentiful of victualles, full of fair women,
that are loving, and environed with the sea. Che beuanda si been in
Inghilterra, vino, ono? What drink do they drink in England, wine, or no?
Signor no, si been birra, over ala, fatta di grano. No sir, they drink beer,
or else aale, made of corn. Quale e meglio? sapetelo? Which is best? know ye
that? A me mi par meglio la birra. To me beer seems best. Non ci e vino la?
Is there no wine there? Signor si, in abondantia. Yes sir, and great plenty.
Donde viene, di Francia? Whence comes it, out of France? Ce ne viene di
Francia, di Spagna, di Candia. There comes some from France, some from Spain
and Candie. E che sort di vino hanno? What sorts of wine have they? Loro
hanno vin Chiaretto, vin Rosso, vin Secco, Moscatello, e Maluasia. They have
claret wine, red wine, Sack, Muscadel, and Malmesey. E caro, o bon mercato? Is
it dear, or cheap? Vin Chiaretto, Rosso, and Bianco, si vende per cinque
denari la quarta, il Secco per sei denari, il Moscatello, e Maluasia per otto.
Claret wine, Red, and White, is sold for five pence the quart, and Sack for
six pence, Muscadel, and Malmesey for eight. Non mi par molto caro. It is not
too dear. Signor no, honesta mente. No sir, but indifferent. Che bona
mercantia ci? What good marcha^dise is there Di tutte le sort. Of al sorts.
Ci sono Mercanti assai? Are there many merchants? Signor si in grande
abondantia. Yea sir, great plenty. Dove trafichano? Where do they trafique?
Per tutto il mondo. Throughout all the world. Che Mercantia portano fori? What
merchandise do they carry forth? Il miglior stagno che sia al mondo, si troua
in Inghilterra, la miglior Lana, i miglior Drappi, e Carisee, de ogni sort de
mettalli, come Oro, Argento, Piombo, Stagno, Rame, Ottone, Ferro, Aciale, e
Bronzo, and il miglior Zafrano che sia al mondo, gran quantita di Corrame, e
boni grani, gran quantita di Legna, e di bestiami, come Caualli, Boui, Vache,
Pecore, belle Chinee, poche Capre, non ci e Lupi, ne Orsi, Leoni, ne Serpi, se
ce ne ci sono portati, non ci e Olio, ne Specie, ci sono portate. The best
Tynne that is in the world, is found in England, the best Wool, the best
Clothes, and Carsies, of al sorts of mettalles, as Gold, Silver, Lead, Tynne,
Copper, Brass, Iron, Steel, and Brass, and the best Safron that is in the
world, great quantity of Leather, good grain, great quantity of wood, and of
beasts, as Horses, oxen, Kyen, Sheep, fair Maares, few Goats, there be no
wolves, neither bears, lions, neither serpents, if there be any, they be
brought, there is no oil, spice, but what is brought Ci sono Mercanti
stranieri? Are there any merchant strangers? Assai assaissimi. Many, and very
many. Hanno loro gran liberta? Have they great liberty? Grandissima, portano,
transportano, nessuno li dice niente, la Regina li ama. Very great, they carry
and recary, no body says any thing to them, the queen loves the^. Che
Religione hanno? What Religion have they? Sono tutti protestanti. They are al
Protestants. Ci sono Imbassadori? Are there any Imbassadours? Ci e un
Imbassadore del Re di Portugallo, vnaltro del Re di Francia. There is an
Imbassadour of the king of Portugal, another of the king of France. Stanno la
di continuo? Do they continue there? Signor si, e hanno belle case. Yea sir,
and have fair houses. Ci e luogho dove i mercanti si ragunano giornalmente. Is
there a place where marcha^ts do meet daily? Signor si, un bello luogho che e
stato fatto dinuouo da un Caualiero, il qual si chiama il Cambio reale. Yea
sir, a fair place, that was made newly by a knight, the which is called, The
Royal Exchange. I marcanti sono amoreuoli? The Marcha^ts, are they loving? Cosi
la, alcuni sono, ma pochi. So, so, some are, but few. Che spasso si vsa la
festa? sapetelo? What pastime use they on holy days? Di ogni sort de
passatempi, come Comedy, Tragedy, saltare, ballare, giuochi di Skrimia,
caccie de Orsi, tirare di archo, correre, tirare di Archebuso, caminare neli
campi, andar in Batelli su laqua. Of al sorts of pastyme, as Comedies,
Tragedies, leaping, daunsing, plays of defense, baiting of Bears, shooting in
bows, running, shooting in Gonnes, walking in the fields, going in boats
upon the water. Ecci bella aqua intorno Londra? Is there ever a fair water
about London? Signor si bellissima, e grande. Yea sir, a fair one, and great.
Porta gran vasselli? Does it carry great vessels? E nauigabile, piena di ogni
sort de pesce, con molti belli palazi intorno, da tutte le band, belle ville,
e castel^i, la Regina li tiene quasi sempre la corte intorno. It is to sail
upon, and is full of al sorts of fish, with many Palases about it on al sides,
fair Towns and Castles, the queen holds her Court almost always about it.
Come si chiama la riuiera? How is the river called? E chiamata la Tamisa. It is
called the Thames. Va nel mare? Does it go into the sea? Signor si. Yea sir. I
stranieri dove vanno a la Chiesa, nongia a la Inglese? The strangers, where go
they to church? not to the English? No, in Franze si vanno a la chiesa
Franzese, i Fiamenghi a la Fiamengha, Italiani a la Italiana, ogni vno ha la
sua chiesa, con bon ordine. No, for Frenchmen go to the French church, and the
Flemings to the Flemish, the Italians to the Italian, every one has a church
with good order. Il viuere e bon mercato? Is living good cheap there? Qualche
volta e caro: qualche volta bon mercate. Sometimes it is dear, sometimes it is
good cheap. Ci e grande abondantia di pane, carne, oua, formagio, butiro,
pesce salato, e frescho vccelami gran quantita. Is there great plenty of
bread, flesh, eggs, cheese, butter, fish salt and fresh, fowls great
quantity. Ci sono molti scolari? Are there many scollars? Signor si
assaissimi. Yea sir, very many. Quante Vniuer sita ci sono? How many
universities be there Ce ne sono due. There are two. Vi e homini dotti? Is
there any learned men? Assai e sono in gran credito, massimamente gli homini de
la Leg quadagnano been. Many, and are in great credit, especially the men of
Law, they get very well. Ho inteso che ci e gran numero de malfattori, come
ladri, assassimi, e corsali. I have heard that there is a great number of
malefactors, as thieves, robbers, and pirates. Ce ne assai, e pur ogni di se ne
apiacca gran numero. There is many, and yet daily there is a great number
hanged. Non hanno altra morte? Have they no other death? Signor no, senon li
traditori li quali sono squartati. No sir, but only the traitors, the which
are quartered. Voi mi dite vna gran cosa: ci sono assai traditori? You tell me a
great thing: are there many traitors? Signor no, perch la Regina li castiga
tanto been, che non hanno ardire nessuno. No sir, because the queen does
punish them so well, that they dare do nothing. Io prego Dio che non ce ne sia.
I pray God that there be none. Cosi faccio anche io. So do I also. Io prego Dio
che salui la Regina, and li dia longa vita e prospera, e rompa tutti i disegni
di tutti li soi inimici. I pray God that he save the queen, and give her a
long and prosperous life, and break all the devises of al her enemies. Cosi
debbe pregar ogni fedel sugetto. So ought every faithful subject to pray. La
gente vanno been vestiti? Go the people well apparelled? Benissimo, e con gran
pompa. Very well, and with great pomp. Un mecanicho vuol esser mercante, un
mercante vuol esser Gentilhomo, il Gentilhomo vuol esser Conte, il Conte, Duca,
il Duca, Re, tanto che ogni vno cerca di super ar laltro in superbia. A
ha^dycrafts man will be a merchant, a marcha^t will be a gentleman, a gentleman
will be a Lord a Lord, a Duke, a Duke a King: so that every one seeks to
overcome another in pride. E marauiglia che la Regina non ci troua rimedio. It
is marvel that the queen fin death not some remedy for it. Lei e tanto
compassioneuole, che lassia fare a cia scaduno, quello che piu li piace: la
libidine, and cupidita sono praticate assai. She is so pitiful, that she
lets every one to do what he pleases most: lust and covetousness are
practiced very much. Io prego Dio, che non ci voglia castigar secondo i nostri
meriti, ma piu tosto secondo la sua grande misericordia. I pray God he will not
punish us after our deserts, but rather after his great mercy. Che Magistrati
hanno? What Magistrates have they? Boni, giusti, e seueri. Good, just, and
severe. A che modo gli scegliono? After what sort choose they the^? Io vi diro,
ci sono venti quatro Aldermani, and di quelli ogni anno si fa un, che si chiama
Me Lord Mairo, il qual per vno anno, ha piena autorita di castigare, punire,
perdonare, far morire, lui representa la maesta de la Regina dentro la citta,
se lui viene a morte, se ne fa vno altro fori de li venti quatro. Ce ne poi de
gli altri, come i Seriui, Aldermani, e Conestabili, Sargenti, e certi Dottori,
homini di Leg, i quali quadagnano tutto il mondo nele lor mani. I will tell
you, there are four and twenty Aldermen, and of the^ every year is there
chosen one, that is called my Lord Mayor, the which for one year has full
authority to chastise punish, pardon, and put to death, he represents the
queens majesty within the city, if he die, there is another made out of the
four and twenty. There are besides them others, as the Sheriffs, Aldermen,
Constables and Serieantes, and certain Doctors, men of Law, the which get all the world into their hands. Le done, come vanno vestite? The women, how go
they apparelled? Benissimo, e superbamente. Very well, and proudly. Vederete vna
donna moglie di un mercante, vestita cosi sumtuosamente, che parera vna
Contessa, vna moglie di un Calzolaio, che parera vna Gentildonna. You shall see
a woman wife unto a merchant, cladde so sumptuously, that she will seem a
Lady, a wife of a Shoemaker, that will seem a Gentlewoman. La Regina, vien ella
spesso a la citta, o no? The queen, comes she often to the city, or not?
Rare volte, rarissime. Seldom times, yea very seldom Perch, lo sapete?
Wherefore, do you know it? Perch Londra e quasi sempre amorbata da la peste, e
ce ne more assai, e la Regina teme molto. Because London is almost always
infected with the plage, and there dye many, and the queen fears much. Ma
non sta gia lontano da la citta? But she does not lie far from the city? Non
troppo lontano, circa cinque, otto, e dieci, e qualche volta, venti miglia. Not
very far, about five, eight, or ten, and sometimes twentine miles. De che
longeza e un miglio Inglese, sapetelo? Of what length is an English mile, do
you know? Giusto come un Italiano. Just as an Italian. I Nobili habitano nela
citta? The nobles, dwell they in the city Signor si, dinuerno, ma lestate sono
fori in paese, all loro possessioni. Yea sir, in winter, but in somer they are
abroad in the country, at their Farms. I Mercanti, hanno belle case? The
merchants, have they fair houses? Belle, e massimamente i Aldermani hanno
case, che pensareste che sono case da log giar un Re. Fair, and chiefly the
Aldermen have houses, that you would think them able to lodge a king. Che arm
portano? What weapons bear they? Alcuni Spada e pugnale, alcuni spada e
bucler. Some sword and daggar, some sword and buckler. Che arma e quel bucler?
What weapon is that buckler? Vna arma da vilano, e non da Gentilhomo. A
clownish dastardly weapon, and not for a Gentleman. Perch la portano? Wherefore
do they bear them? Perch ci sono vsi. Because they are used to them. Gli
Inglesi, vanno per il mondo? Englishmen, go they through the world? Alcuni, ma
pochi. Yea some, but few. Che sono, Gentilhomini, ouero mercanti. What are
they, Gentlemen, or else merchants? Di ogni sort. Of al sorts. E dove vanno?
And whither go they? A veder il mondo. To see the world. Ci sono boni Maestri
di Scrimia? Are there good Masters of Fense? Signor si bonissimi, ma sono
rari, superbi, e altieri. Yea sir, very good, but they are rare, proud, and
hauty. Sono in gran credito? Are they in great credit? Cosila, honestamente.
So, so, indifferent. Ci sono boni ballarini? Are there good daunsers? Alcuni,
ma sono pochi. Some, but they are rare. Ballanno benissimo? Do they daunse very
well? Signor si, e quadagnano been, e anche benissimo. Yea sir, and get well, yea
very well. La Regina, tien Musici? Has the queen Musitions? Signor si, assai,
ma sono quasi tutti Italiani. Yea sir many, but they are almost al Italians.
Amelga gli Italiani? Does she love Italians? Signor si, benissimo. Yea sir,
very well. Si dilettela di parlar con loro? Delights she to speak with the^?
Signor si, e parla elegantissimamente. Yea sir, and she speaks very
eloquently. Le done de quello paese, sono belle, o brutte? The women of that
country, are they fair, or foul? Ce ne di tutte le sort, belle, brutte,
bone, catine, cast, e impudiche, done da been, anche puttane, e pur sono
tutte done: lhuomo non sa di chi fidarsi. There is of al sorts, fair, foul,
good, naught, chaste, and unchaste, honest women, and also Whoores, and yet are
all women: a man can not tell whom to trust. Perch, non ci e rimedio. Wherefore,
is there no remedy? Ci e ben rimedio, se le se cognosce, ma a dirui la verita,
se ella e pouera, e castigata, se ella e richa e bella, e honorata, le leg
sono tutte corrotte. There is remedy, if they be known, but to tell the truth,
if she be poor, she is punished, if she be rich and fair, she is honored,
and laws are al corrupted. Il danaro regge ogni cosa. Money rules al things.
Che si guardano been, Iddio li castighera. Let them take heed, God will punish
them. Sia fatta la volonta di Iddio. Gods will be done. Cosi dico anche io. So
say I also. Ma dal detto al fatto ci e un grande tratto. But from the said unto
the deed there is a great throw. Questo prouerbio e vero and vsato. This
proverb is true, and used. Ogni di si vsa in Inghilterra. It is used daily in
England. Cosi non si vsasse. So were it not used. Orsu signor mio, volete
caminare Well my sir, will you walk? Ma dove camineremo? But whither shall we
walk? Dove che vi piace. Whither it pleases you. Andiamo alla corte. Let us
go to the Court. A che fare? And what to do? A parlare con il Conte D. To
speak with the Lord D. Lui e andato a la caccia. He is gone on hunting. Signor
no, lui e malato. No sir, he is sick. Quello mi dispiace molto. That
displeases me much. Come lo sapete? How know you that? Io lo so certo, perch
heri io fui la alla corte. I know it certain, because yesterday I was at the
Court. E che facesti la? And what did you there? Io parlai con il Secretario di
sua maesta. I spoke with the Secretary of her majesty. Andasti per aqua, o per
terra? Went you by water, or by land? Andai per terra. I went by water. Io
voglio andar per aqua. I will go by water. Andiamo per terra. Let us go by land.
Io non posso. I can not. Perch non potete? Wherefore can you not? Perch io
sono stracco. Because I am weery. Anderemo pian piano. We will go softly. Laqua
e molto calma. The water is very calm. Volete tardar la? Will you stay there?
Circa due o tree hoar. About two or three hours. Io vi faro compagnia. I will
keep you company. Di gratia vi prego. Of courtesy I pray you. Io sono
contento. I am content. Entriamo in questo batello. Let us go into this boat.
Mi par troppo piccolo. Me thinks it is too little. E grande assai. It is byg
yenough. Signor no, perdonatemi. Not so sir, pardon me.


Parlar familiare. Cap. 16. Familiar talk. Chap. 16.
QVando si part la Posta? WHen departs the Post? Si dice domani. It is said
to morrow. Siatene certo? Are you sure? Non gia io. Not I. Come lo sapete? How
know you that? Lo ho sentuto dire. I have heard it said. E a chi? And of whom?
Da un Scriuante. Of a Scriuener. Dove lhauete visto? Where have you seen him?
In Borsa. In the Exchange. Haueteli parlato? Have you spoken with him? Tree o
quatro volte. Three or four times. E dove va? And whither goes he? Vain
Auuersa, e Brugia. He goes to Antwerp and Bruges. E quando ritornera? And when
will he return? Non si sa. It is not known. Chi lo sa? Who knows it? I
mercanti. The merchants. I mercanti mandano via la Posta? Do merchants send
the Post away? Signor si sempre. Yea sir always. Hauete visto il mio
seruitore? Have you seen my servant? Non hoggi, lo vidds hieri. Not to day, I
saw him yesterday Dove lo vedesti? Where saw you him? Lo viddi in san Paulo. I
saw him in Paul's. Vogliamo andar a cercarlo? Shall we go to seek him? Dove lo
cercheremo? Where shall we seek him? Per tutta Londra. Throughout al London.
Non lo troueremo. We shall not find him. Forse che si. Perhaps yes. Prouiamo.
Let us prove. Andiamo. Let us go. Io sono contento. I am content. Anderemo
prima a san Paulo. Let us go first to Paul's. E che faremo la? And what shall we
do there? Compreremo qualche bello libro dinuouo, dicono che e stato stampato
un libro di nouo. We will buy some fine book, and new, they say that there is
printed a new book. E chi lo dice? And who says it? Ogniuno. Every man. Io
credo che sia vna bugia. I believe it be a lie. Potria esser, ma non lo credo.
It may be, but I believe it not. Se voi non volete credere, a nessuno chi
credera a voi? If you will believe no man, who shall believe you? Io voglio
comprare de le poma. I will buy some apples. Quante ne volete hauere? How many
will you have? Per due denari. Two penny worth. Voi ne hauerete venti. You shall
have twenty. Io ne voglio trenta. I will have thirty. Pigliateli contateli. Take
them, and tell them. Dameli, ecco i tuoi denari. give me the^, and here is thy
money Tornami un grosso. Give ma a groate again. Io non lo ho. I have it not.
Come faremo? How shall we do? Io andero a Scambiarlo. I will go and change it.
Datemi sei denari. Give me six pence. Eccolo qui, da me un grosso. Here it is,
give me a groate. Miracomando signor mio. I commend me to you my lord. Io resto
tutto vostro. I rest al yours. Cosi anchora io. And also I. Sarete voi qui
domani? Will you be here to morrow? Si se piace a Dio. Yea, if it please God.
Anchora io saro qui. And I also will be here. Di che mestiero e vostro padre? Of
what occupation is your father? Lui e Orcfice. He is a Goldsmyth. E lo richo?
lo sai tu? Is he rich? know thou? Richo, richissimo. He is rich, and very
rich. Elo vechio, o giouine? Is he old, or young? Circa de quaranta anni. About
forty years. Tua madre e viua? Is thy mother alive? Signor no, e morta. No
sir, she is dead. Quando morse? When dyed she? Lanno passato. The last year.
De che malatia morse? Of what sickness dyed she? Lei morse de la peste. She
dyed of the plague. Certo mi dispiace. Certainly it displeases me. Ella era
donna da been. She was an honest woman. Cosi era certo. So she was certain.
Quanti fratelli sete? How many brethren are you? Noi siamo quatro. We are
four. Quante sorelle? How many sisters? Elle sono cinque. They are five. Sono
tutte viue? Are they al alive? Signor no, senon tree. No sir, but three. Le
altre sono morte. The other are dead. Sono maritate? Are they married? Senon
vna. None but one. Dove stanno, e con chi? Where dwell they, and with who? Vna
sta con un Gentilhomo. One dwells with a gentleman. Elaltra dove sta? And
where dwells the other? Ella sta fori in paese, con mia sorella. She dwells
forth in the country with my sister. Sei tu may stato fori de Inghilterra?
Have thou been out of England? Signor no, ma ci voglio ire. No sir, but I will
go. Ma quando? But when? Quando piace a Dio. When it pleases God. Sai tu
parlar Italiano? Can thou speak Italian? Io non parlo senon Inglese. I
speak but English. Imp ira minchion che tu sei. Learn fool as thou art. Io
vorei imparare se io potessi, ma io non posso. I would learn if I could, but I
can not.


A parlar al buio. Cap. 17. To talk in the dark. Chap. 17.
HO la, chi vala. HO, ho, who goes there? Io sono vostro amico. I am your
friend. Come e il vostro nome? What is your name: Io son chiamato A. I am
called A. Voi sete il ben trouato. You are well met. Cosi sete anchora voi. And
so be you also. Perdonatemi, che no^ vi conscea. Pardon me, for I knew you not.
Io ve lo credo certo. I believe you certis. Dove sete stato cosi tardi? Where
have you been so late? Io sono stato a cena fori con un mio amico. I have been
forth at supper with a friend of mine. Perch hauete tardato tanto? Why have
you tarried so long. Perch cramo tutti amici, io non ho potuto partir piu
presto Because we were al friends, could not part sooner. Dove andate adesso?
Whither go you now? Io vado a casa mia. I go home to my house. Mi par la porta
e serata, dunche come faro io? Me thinks the gate is shut, how shall I do then?
Dormirete meco, se vi piace. You shall lie with me, if you please. Io
viringratio mill volte. I thank you a thousand times. Certo mi par molto
buio. Me thinks it is very dark. Cosi mi pare a me certo. So me thinks
certes. Hauete trouato la guardia? Have you found the watch? Signor no anchora.
Not yet sir. Io me ne marauiglio. I marvel of it. Cosi fo anchora io. So do I
also. Che hora pensate che sia? What a clock is it, think you? Io credo che
sia dodeci. I believe it be twelve. Non son tante anchora. It is not so much
yet. Hanno sonato gia. It is stroke already. Le hauete sentute? Have you heard
it? Si quasi meza horafa. Yea sir, half an hour ago. Orsu entriamo in casa.
Well, let us go into the house. Entrate voi prima. Enter you first. Perdonatemi
io non voglio. Pardon me, I will not. Orsu, che acade tante ceremony. Well, what
need so many ceremonies? Apri la porta seruitore. Open the door servant. Io
son qui signor. I am here sir. E stato qui nessuno a domandar di me? Has any
body been here to ask for me? Non che to sapia signore. Not that I know sir.
E chi lo sa dunche? Who knows it then? Dove sei tu stato? Where have thou
ben? Io sono stato fuora. I have been forth. Orsu, porta vna candela. Well
bring a candle. Signore, volete beuere? Sir, will you drink? Vna coppa di vino.
A cup of wine. Signor no, io vi ringratio. No sir, I thank you. Orsu, andate
in letto. Well, go ye to bed. Io me ne vado signor. I go sir. Dio vi dia la bona
notte. God give you good night. Cosi faccia anchora a v i. So do he unto you.
Domani che faremo? What shall we do to morrow? Penseremo questa notte. We will
think this night. Se vi mancha qualcosa chiamate il seruitore. If you lack
any thing sir, call the servant. A che hora leuate voi la matina, ditemi. What
time rise you sir in the morning? tell me. Io leuo a set hoar. I rise at six a
clock. E bona hora certo. It is a good hour certes. Signor si. Yea sir.


Sentenze divine et profane. Cap. 18. Sentences divine and profane. Chap. 18.
BOn giorno signor G. GOod morrow sir G. Et a voi mill anni di alegrezza. And
unto you a thousand years of joy. Veramente voi sete il ben trouato cosi a bon
hora. Truly you are well met so early. Cosi sete anchora voi certo. And so be
you certis. Che cosa faremo hggi? What shall we do to day? Che vi par meglio che
noi facciamo per passar via questo longo giorno? What think you best that we
do to pass away this long day? Andiamo a caminar sino al mio giardino. Let us
go walk unto my garden. Caminiamo, io sono cont ento. Walk we, I am content.
Io voglio aprire la porta. I will open the door. Hauete voi le chiaue? Have you
the keys? Io le ho qui. I have them here. Veramente voi hauete qui un bell
giardino. Truly you have here a fair garden. Adesso che siamo qui, che cosa
faremo? Now we are here, what shall we do? Quello che piace a voi. What you
please. E tutto vno a me. It is al one to me. Da poi che voi mi fate quello
honor, che io habbi a diuisar qualche disporto, con che noi possiamo passar
via questa matina, sino che sia hora di desinare, mi pare che faremo been a
assettarsi qui sotto lombra de questi arbori frondosi, e cominciar a recitar
qualche belle Sentenze, qualche belli prouerby, e gentili motti, fatti da
qualche gentil poeta, e che comunemente si vsano ne la lingua Italiana, e cosi
passeremo via questo gran caldo, che vi pare a voi? Since you do me that
honor, that I must devise some sport that we may pass away this morning,
until it be time to go to dynner, me thinks we shall do well to sit down here
under the shadow of these budded trees, and begin to rehearse some sine
Sentences, fine proverbs, and gentle sayeinges, made by some gentle Poet, and
that commonly are ysed in the Italian language, and so we will pass away this
great heat: what think you? Veramente io ne sono molto contento, e mi farete
un grandissimo piacere, perch mi diletto grandemente di simile cose. Truly I
am very well content, and you shall do me a very great pleasure, for I am
delighted greatly with such things. Adunche noi comincieremo a recitar certe
sentenze scritte tanto da diuini propheti come da Dottori profani: sete voi
contento. Then we will begin to rehearse certain Sentences, written as well
by divine prophets, as by profane doctors, are you content? Io sono
contentissimo. I am very well content. Cominciate quando che piu vi piace.
Begin when most you list or please. Io cominciero con certe Sentenze scritte
da Salomone, e da Jesus figliol di Sirach: to comincio. I will begin with
certain sentences written by Solomon, and by Jesus the son of Sirach: I
begin. Sei cose ci sono che Iddio ha in odio, and la settima lui ha in
abominatione, cie e: Ochi alti, la lingua bugiarda, le mani che spargeno il
sangue, i piedi veloci per correre a far male, il cuore che macchina iniquita,
il testimonio falso, e colui che met contentione fra fratelli. There be six
things which god hates, and the seventh he abhors, and they be these:
Lusting eyes, a false tongue, hands embrued with blood, feet swift to commyt
evil, a heart that imagines wickedness, false witnesses, and he that sows
debate among brethren. Io voria che queste cose non si vsassino. I would to God
these things were not used. Ci sono tree cose che may sono satisfatte, and la
quarta non dice may satis, Vna donna che non e temperata, la terra non e may
sciutta, Inferno non e may satisfatto, and il fuoco non ha may legna assai.
There be three things never satisfied, and the fourth never says ho, A woman
that is intemperate, the earth that is dry, Hell is never satisfied, and the
fire has never wood yenough. Certo questo e vero. Certis that is very true. Ci
sono tree cose che non si possono sapere, and la quarta nessuno puo intendere, I
passi de vna Aquila volante nel air, la via de un Serpente passando vna Rocca,
la via duna naue sopra il mare, e la vita de un giouine passata ne la sua
giouentu. There be three things that can not be known, and the fourth no man
is able to understand, The steps of an Eagle fleeing in the air, the way of a
Serpent over a Rock, the path of a ship in the sea, and the life of a young
man led in his youth. Per tree cose la terra spesse volte e slagellata, and la
quarta e intolerabile, quando che v seruitore e fatto signore sopra i beni del
suo signore, un pazo cibato con delicateze, un giouine dato a la
concupiscentia, and vna seruente fatta herede de la sua signora. For three
things the earth is oftentimes plagued, and the fourth is intolerable, A
servant made lord over his masters goods, a fool pampered with delicate
meats, a young man addicted to concupiscence, and a damsel made heir unto her
mistress. Questo sivede spesso. This is often seen. Tree cose piacciono a Dio,
and anche a gli huomim, Concordia fra frtelli, amicitia fra vicini, accordo fra
il marito and moglie. Three things please both god and man, Concord between
brethren, amity between neighbors, agreement between wan and wife. Tree cose
dispiacciono a Dio, and a gli huomini, Un homo pouero superbo, un homo ricco
bugiardo, and un homo vechio inamorato. Three things displease God and man, A
poor man proud, a rich man a liar, and an old man in love. Due cose dice
Sirach, mi scorucciano, and la terza mi dispiace, Quando che homini sauij sono
disprezati, quando che esperti soldati sono in pouerta, quando che un homo
declina da la virtu al vitio. Two things, says Sirach, makes me angry, and the
third does displease me, When wise men are despised, when expert soldiers are
in poverty, when a man declineth from virtue to vice. E cosi io finisco con
queste, tolte dale Scritture: adesso ne voglio recitar alcune, tolte da diuersi
Autori profani. And thus I end with these, taken out of the Scriptures: now I
will say some, taken from sundry profane authors. Mi ralegra il core, di
sentire simile cose. It gladdes my heart to hear such things. A ire cose non
manca may come^datione, cio e a bon vino quando vien beuuto, vna bona sentenza,
quando vien detta, and un bon homo in aduersia. Three things never want
commendations, Good wine when it is drunken, a wise Sentence when it is spoken,
and a good man in adversity. Due cose non possono patir equalita, cioe amor,
and principalita. Two things can suffer no equality, that is, Love and
principality. Non e mat bono per vno a far sretta a quatro luoghi, a vna
zuffa, a vna compagnia de ebriachij, o a vna festa and non esser inuitato, and
a parlar con un matto. It is not good to make have unto four places, Unto a
Fraye, unto a drunken company, unto a feast vnbydden, and unto talk with a
fool. Quatro cose danno noia ala vista di tutti gli huomini, cioc lacrime,
fumo, vento, and la peggior de tutte, e a veder i suoi amici suenturati, and i
suoi inimici selici. Four things hurt the sight of al men, that is, Tears,
smoke, wind, and the woorst of al, to see his friend unlucky, and his enemies
happy. Non cercar a mouer quesie quatro cose, un homicido, un homo a chi piace
cicalare, vna comune Cortesana, and un cauallo che corre volontariame^te in un
luogho pericoloso. Seek not to move these four things, A murderer, a man
that loves to talk, a common Courtesan, and a horse that runs willyngly into
a dan gerous place. Non ti sidar troppo di quatro cose, cioe, di un can
forastiero, un caual sconosciuto, vna donna parlatrice, and nel piu prosondo
luogho di vnariuera Trust not to much four things, that is, A strange dog,
an unknown horse, a talkatiue woman, and the deepest place of a river. Non ti
scorucciar con tree cose, con la verita, con bon conseglio, and con il gallo che
canta lamattina. Be not angry with three things, With the truth, with good
counsel, and with the cock that croweth in a morning. Tree sort de huomini
sempre mancano ingegno, colui che si sida in bugie, colui che non sa vincer la
sua ira, e colui che mangia assai, and non faniente. Three sorts of men do
always want wit, He that trusts lies, he that can not convince his wrath,
and he that eats much, and does nothing. Tree sort de huomini non vedono
niente, l orbo senza ochij, un pazo senza discretione, and colui che si diletta
in piaceri mondani, senza paura di morte. Three sorts of men see nothing,
The blind without eyes, a fool without discretion, and he that delights in
worldly pleasure, without fear of death. Tree sort de huomini sono sempre
sordi, colui che sempre sent boni detti, e non semenda, colui che sidiletta di
scandalizar ogniuno, and colui che desidera di sentir i secreti di tutti gli
huomini. Three kinds of men be always deaf, he that daily hears good
sayings, and mendeth not, he that is given to slander every man, and he that is
desirous to hear the secrets of al men. De quelli ce ne assai. Of those there
are a great many. Quatro vie ci sono, che nessuno puo star fermo sopra, sopra
luoghi bagnati, sopra il giaccio, sopra gloria and ambitione, sopra la belta di
vna donna. Four ways there be, that no man can stand sure on, Upon moist
places, upon yse, upon glory and ambition, upon the beauty of a woman. Un
detto verissimo. A true saying. Sei cose ci sono, che non si possono may
ascondere, la rogna in mano, la toss a un banchetto, vna fibia in un sacco;
vna putana a un balcone, pouerta in superbia, and alegreza ne la libidine. Six
things can never hide them selves, A scabbe in a hand, a cough at a feast, an
awle in a bag, a strumpette in a wyndowe, pouertye in pride, and wantonness
in lust. Tree cose a nessuno efetto, A tenir aqua in un tamiso, a corvere dietro
vcelli nel air, a piangerdietro i morti. Three things to none effect, To
hold water in a Sieue, to run after fowls in the air, and weep after dead
men. Un homo non si doueria may vantar di tree cose, di bon vino, de la beleza
de la sua moglie, and de le sue richezze. A man ought not to brag of three
things, Of good wine, of the beauty of his wife, nor of his riches. Tieni le
tuo orechie da li secreti de altri huomini, i tuoi ochij da gli altrui
scriture, le tue mani da gli altrui borse. Keep thine ears from other men's
secrets, thine eyes from other men's writings, thine hands from other men's
purses Molti fanno queste cose. Many do these things. Sei cose sono sempre
mutabile, Il favor de prencipi, il amor di donna, il corso de dadi, il far
caccia a vcelli, il tempo, and la primauera de i fiori. Six things are
always mutable, the favor of princes, the love of a woman, the chance of
dise, hunting of fowls, the time and spring of flowers. Quatro cose necessary
in vna casa un camino, un gatto, vna gallina, and vna bona donna. Four things
necessary in a house, A chimney, a Catte, a Hen, and also a good wife.
Queste otto cose si vedeno rare volte, Vna bella figlia senza inamorato, vna
gran fiera senza ladri, un vsurario senze denari, un giouine senza alegrezza,
un granaio senza sorzi, vna testa tegnosa senza pedochi, un becco senza barba,
un homo sonnolente adorno di sapientia and dottrina. These eight things are
rare times seen, A fair maiden without a lover, a great Fair without
thieves, an old usurer without money, a young man without joy, an old barn
without Mice, a scald head without Lice, an old goat without a beard, a
sleepyng man with learning and sapience Colui che cerca di trouar queste cose,
perde il suo te^po, un porco grasso fra Giudei, verita in ipocriti, feed in un
adulatore, sobrieta in un ebriaco, danari con un prodigo, sapientia con un
matto, richeze in un maestro di scuola, sile^tio in vna donna, virtu in vna
compagnia cattiua. He that seeks after these things, loses his time, A
fat hog among Jews, truth among hypocrites, faith in a flaterer,
soberness in a drunkard, money with a prodigal, wisdom in a fool, great
riches in a scoolmaister, silence in a woman, virtue in evil company. Cinque
sort di person dicono la verita spesseuolte, un infant, un ebrio, un pazo,
un scandalizatore, and colui che dorme. Five kinds of persons do commonly tell
true, a child, a drunkard, a fool, a slanderer, and he that sleeps. Tree
cose l'huomo non deue prestare, La sua donna, il suo cauallo, le sue arm.
Three things a man ought not to lend, His wife, his horse, his arms. Tree cose
apartengono a un Conseliere, Scientia, beneuolentia, and liberta in parlar.
Three things pertain unto a Counselor, Science, benevolence, liberty in
speech. Quatro cose doueriano sempre esser in casa, Il polaio, la gatta, il
camino, and la bona moglie. Four things ought always to be at home, The
hens nest, the chimney, the cat, and the good wife. Queste cose si accordano
insieme, Un taglia borsa con vna borsa piena di denari, un corridore con vua
strada piana, bona compagnia and alegreza, un Asino and un Molinaio, un host
and un ghiettone, vna bella donna con belle vestimenta, vna donna ostinata con
un bastone, figlioli disobedienti con vna scoriada, un ladro con vna forca, un
bon scolar con i suoi libri, Quaresima and pescatori. These things agree well
together, A cutpurse and a purse full of money, a runner and a plain way,
good fellowship and mirth, an Ass and a Myller, an host and a glutton, a fair
woman and gorgeous apparel, an obstinate woman and a good cudgel, disobedient
children and a whippe, a thief and a gybet, a good scollar and his books,
Lent and Fishmongers. Queste otto cose non si accordano may, Un codardo con la
guerra, un piccol cauallo con un homo pesante, un homo che ha sete con un
piccol potto, un cacciatore con un can pigro, cani e gatti in cucina, un
giardinier con vna capra, un gran datio and un pouero merca^te, un homo vechio
con vna donna giouine, These eight things never agree together, A cowarde and
the war, a little horse and a heavy man, a man thirstye and a little pot, a
good hunter, and a sluggishe dog, dogs and cattes in a kitchen, a gardener
and a goat, a great custom and a poor marcha^t, an ancient man and a young
woman. Cinque cose che non sono necessary in vna republica, Un falso Giudice
in Concistorio, un mer^ante ingannatore nel mercato, un Prete auaro in vna
Chiesa, vna bella donna in Bordello, and adulatori ne le corte de prencepi.
Five things not needful in a common Wealth, A false Judge in the
Consistorye, a deceitful merchant in a market, a covetous priest in a Church,
a fair whore in the Stews, and flaterers in princes Courts. Tree sort de
huomini che sono da esser tenuti pazzi, Un fedel amante di done, un
misericordioso soldato, and un bell giuocatore. Three sorts of men that are to
be counted fools, A faithful lover of maidens, a mercyful soldier, and a fair
gamester. Set cose che non sono profitabile in vna cosa, vna gallina senza
oui, vna Troia senza porcellini, vna vacca senza latte, vna figliola che va
intorno la notte, un figliolo giuocatore, vna donna che spend priuatamente,
vna massara grauida. Seven things that are unprofitable in a house, An Hen
without eggs, a Sow without pigs, a cow without milk, a daughter that
wandreth abroad in the night, a son a gamester, a wife privily spending, a
maydseruanr with child. Quatro cose corompono tutte le sentenze, Doni grassi,
odio, fauore, and paura. Four things do corrupt al iudmentes, Fat gifts,
hatred, favor, and fear. Quatro cose amazano un huomo inanzi il suo tempo,
Vna bella donna, vna casa che non e quiet, mangiar and beuer smisuratamente,
and un air corotto. Four things kyl a man before his time, A fair wife, an
unquiet household, vumeasurable eating and drinking, and a corrupt air.
Quatro sort de huomini trouano amici, Il liberale, il gentile, il potente over
richo, and color a chi legierme^te si puo parlare Four sorts of men get
frinds, the liberal, the gentle, the mighty or rich, and they who may easily
be spoken unto. Made quelli ce ne pochi. But of those there are few. Non ci
sara may grido in quella casa, dove che il patron e orbo, and la patrona
sorda. There never shall be chiding in that house, where the man is blind, and
the wife deaf. Questo mi fa quasiridere. This makes me almost laugh. Quatro
fatti che tiranni vsano, distruggere li boni, odiare li poueri, inalzar li
maligni, annullare virtu. Four deeds commonly used of tyrants, to destroy the
good, hate the poor, advance the wicked, and abolish virtue. Certo so mi
volete credere, io staria giorno e notte a sentir simi le sente^ze, voi mi
hauete molto relagrato il core, ma io mi marauiglio forte come voi potiate
tenir a mente tutte queste sentenze, io non il potria fare per gran qui
derdone. Certis if you will believe me, I could stay night and day, to hear
such sentences, you have much rejoiced my heart, I marvel much, how you
can hold in memory al those sentences, I could not do it for a great
reward. Signor io vi diro, io le ho letto spesso, and cosi gli tengo a mente,
perch quando l'uomo vuol tenir vna cosa a mente, leggila spesso. Sir, I will
tell you, I have readde them often, and so I keep them in memory, for when a
man will keep a thing in memory, let him read it often. Dunche io voglio
imparare far cosi, ma voi hauete parlato tanto, che credo che debbiate hauer
sete, volete beuere vna taza di birra, ouero un bichier di vino, o vna coppa di
ala, perch il tempo e molto caldo? Then I will learn to do so, but you have
talked so much, that I believe you are thirsty, will you drink a bowl of
beer, or else a glass of wine, or else a cup of aale, for the weather is very
hot. Signore, io vi diro la verita, mi sa bon la birra, mi sa bon l'ala, ma mi
sa meglio il vino, perch come dice Plinio, il vino (ogni volta, che si vsa
moderatamente) e vna cosa ordinata da Dio, il vino amorza la sete, viuisica i
spiriti, conforta il cuore, aguzza l'ingegno, alegra l'animo dolente, fa bona
memoria, amaza humori catiui, fa bon sangue, ma al contrario, beuendone troppo
ne vengono, molti inconuenienti: pero, se vi piace, datemi pur un bichier di
vino, perch mi sa bono, and anche ho gran sete, hauendo parlato tanto come ho
io, and come habiamo beuuto un tratto, noi comincieremo a recitar certi prouer
by, che comunemente si vsano tanto in Italia, come in Inghiliterra, fino che
sia hora di desinare, c cosi passeremo via il tempo, che vi pare a voi? Sir, I
will tell you the truth, I love beer, I love aale, but I love a cup of wine
best of all: for, as Pliny says (wine so it be moderately used, is a thing
ordained of good, the wine does quench the thirst, revive the spirits, comfort
the heart, sharpen the wit, gladdeth adoleful mind, makes a good memory,
kills ill humors, makes good blod, but contrariwise drinking too much of it,
ensue many inconveniences: wherefore if it please you, give me a glass of
wine, for it likes me well, and I am very thirsty, having talked so much as I
have, and as we have drunk a draft, we will begin to rehearse certain
proverbs that commonly are used as well in Italy, as in England, until it be
time to go to dinner, and so we will pass away the time, what think you Certo
per la vostra cortesia cosi vsata verso di me, io per sempre vi resto
seruitore, obligandomi tutto per tutto a seruir vi in ogni cosa che io possa:
pero comandatemi da ogni hora Certis for your courtesy so used toward me, I
always rest your servant, binding me self al in all, to serve you in all
things that I may: wherefore command me at al hours. Deh signor, che accade
simil parole tra noi, che siamo amici? cominciate pure i vostri prouerbij
quando che vi piace, che io vi ascoltero attentiuamente. Hey sir, what need
such words betwixt us that are friends? begin you your proverbs when you
please best, and I will hearken attentively. Ma guardate di non dormire. But
take heed ye sleep not. Signor no, non dubitate, cominciate pure. No sir,
doubt not, begin, begin. Noi comincieremo con quelli che sivsano in Italia,
e cosi sequiremo in ordine. We will begin with those that are used in Italy,
and so we will follow in order. Fate come vi piace. Do as you please. Ma
auuertite prima, che un prouerbio Italiano a dirlo in Inglese, non puo hauer
quella gratia, come ha in Italiano, e anche un prouerbio Inglese, a dirlo in
Italiano, non ha quella gratia, come ha nel suo natural linguaggio. But mark
first, that an Italian proverb, to say it in English, can not have that grace,
as it has in Italian, and also an English proverb, to say it in Italian, can
not have that grace as it has in their natural language. Quello no^ importa,
pur che habbi qualche senso con se, non puo senon dare vno certo diletto al
ascoltatore. That skylleth not, so that it have some sense with it, it can not
but yield a certain delight unto the hearer.


Prouerbii. Cap. 19. Proverbs. Chap. 19.
ORsu, io comincio. Well I begin. Ama Dio, and non falire: fa pur been, and
lassa dire: che non may potrai falire. Love God, and fail not: Do thou well,
and let be said: so shall thou never fail. Certo bon principio. Certis a good
beginning. Al Medico and Auocato, non tener il ver celato. From the Phisitio^
and Attorney, keep not the truth hidden. Aspettar, e non venire: star nel
letto, e non dormire: seruire, e non gradire, son ^re cose da morire. To tarry
for a thing that comes not: to lie a bed, and sleep not: to serve well, and
not be accepted, be three things to die A caual donato, non guardar in bocca
Look not a given horse in the mouth. Assai sa, chi non sa, se tacer sa. He
knows much, that knows not, if he ca^ hold his peace Ama chi ti ama. Love
them that love thee. A qual si voglia dolor, rimedia la patientia. Unto what
grief so ever it be, patience does remedy. Assai presto si fa, quel che, si
fa been. That thing is quickly done, that is done well. A tutto e rimedio,
ecetto che alla morte. Unto al is remedy, except unto death. A bon
intenditore, meza parola basta. Unto a good understander, half a word is
sufficient. A caualli magri, sempre vanno le mosche. Unto the lean horses,
always resort the Flies. Alegreza di cuore, fa bella peladura di viso. The
gladness of the heart, causes a fair color in the face. Al mal mortal, ne
Medico, ne medicina val. Unto a deadly disease, neither Physician nor physic
will serve All noze, e alla morte, si cognoscono li amici. At marriages and
burials, frinds and kinrede is known. Amor di putana, e vin di fiasco, la sera
e buono, la matina e guaste. The love of a whore, and the wine of a bottle at
night is good, in the morning naught. Asino punto bisogna che trotti. A pricked
horse must neds trot. Aspetta luogho e tempo, a far vendetto: che non si face
may ben in fretta. Tarry for time and place, to be revenged, for it can never be
done well in have. Assai ben balla, a chi fortuna sona. He daunseth well, unto
whom fortune pipeth. Assai guadagna, chi fortuna perde. He gets much, that
loses fortune. Aue morta, non fa mele. A dead Be, will make no honey. A vno a
vno, si fanno li fusi. By one and by one, spindles are made. Certo tuttiboni.
Certis al good. Belle parole, e catiui fatti, inganano i saui, and i matti.
Fair words, and ill deeds, deceive both wise and fools. Ben faremo, ben
diremo, mal va la barca senza remo. We will do well and say well, but il goes the
boat without an ore. Bandiera vechia, honor di capitano. An old Ensign is the
honor of a captain. Chi cerca spesso inganar altrui, opresso resta, and
inganato lui. Who often seeks others to deceive, does rest oppressed and
deceived him self. Christo lasio neli precetti suoi, Non far altrui, quel che
per te non vuoi. Christ left in his precepts, Do not to others, that thou will
not have done to thee self. Chi ben siede, mal pensa. Who sits well,
thinks ill. Chi lascia la via vechia, per la nuoua, spesse volte inganato si
ritroua. Who leaves an old way for a new, oftentimes does find him self
deceived. Chi non vuol durar fatica in que sto mondo, non nasca. Who will not
suffer labor in this world, let not him be borne. Chi mi fa meglio che non
sole, tradito m'ha, o tradir mi vole. Who does unto me better then he is wont,
he has betrayed me, or else will betray me. Chi sta ne l'aqua fino ala gola, ben
e ostinato, se merce non crida. Who stands in the water up to the chyn, he is
very obstinate, if for mercy he do not cry. Chi fa quelche non debbe, gli
auuien quelche non creed. Who does that he ought not, chanseth him he thinks
not. Chi ha tempo, ha vita. Who has time, has life. Chi e reo, e non e
tenuto, puo far il mal, e non e creduto. Who is gylty, and is not accounted may
do evil, and is not suspected Chi ven viue, ben more. Who lives well, dies
well. Con art, e con inganno, si viue mezo l'anno, con inganno, e con art, si
viue l'altra part. With art and with deceit, half the year we live: with
deceit and with art, we live the other part. Chi la dura, la vince. Who
suffers, does overcome. Chi troppo abraccia, nulla stringe. Who too much
imbraceth, nothing closes. Chi semina virtu, racoglie fama, and vera fama
supera la morte. Who sows virtue, reapeth fame, and true fame overcomes
death. Cane che baia, non suol nocer. A barking dog hurts not. Cane vechio
non baia in darno. An old dog barketh not in vain. Caual corrente sepoltura
aperta. A runnyng horse, is an open grave. Cera, tela, e fustagno, bella
botega, poco guadagno. Wax, lynnen cloth, and fustian, a fair shop, and little
gain. Chi compra caro, e toglie a credenza, consum'il corpo, e perde la
semenza. Who buyeth dear, and takes of credit, consumes the body, and
loses the seed. Chi di paglia fuoco fa, molto fumo, e altro non ha. Who
makes a fire of straw, has much smoke, and naught else. Chi duo Lepricazia, vno
perde, l'altro lasia. Who hunteth two hares, loses the one, and leaves the
other. Chi e in difetto, e in suspetto. Who is faulty, is suspected. Chi ha
buona Lancia, la pruoui nel muro. Who has a good spear, let him prove it
against a wall. Chi ha tempo, non aspetti tempo. Who has time, let not him tarry
for time. Chi tempo ha, e tempo aspetta, tempo perde. Who has time, and
tarieth for time, loses time. Chi non fa, non falla, chi falla, s'amenda. He
that makes not, marreth not, who marreth, amendeth. Chi fa male, odia il lume.
Who does evil, hates light. Chi non ha cuore, habbia gambe. Who has not a
heart, let him have legs. Chi non ha moglie, spesso la batte. Who has not a
wife, often beats her. Chi non ha figlioli, been gli pasce. Who has no
children, feeds them well. Chi non ha seruito, non sa comandare. Who has not
served, can not command. Chi non nau^ga, non sa che sia il timor di Dio. Who
fails not, knows not what the fear of God is. Chi non puo batter il
cauallo, batta la sella. Who can not beat the horse, let him beat the saddle.
Chi non robba, non fa robba. Who steals not makes no robe Chi nuoce altrui,
nuoce se stesso. Who hurts others, hurts him self. Chi seru' al comune,
seru' a nessuno. Who serves the commons, serves no body. Chi serve le putane,
il tempo perde. Who serves whoores, loses time. Chi tardi ariua, mal'
allogia. Who comes late, lodges ill. Chi ti vede di giorno, non ti cerchera
di notte. Who sees thee in the day time, will not seek thee in the night. Chi
tutto vuol, di rabbia muore. Who al will have, through fransie dies. Chi va
dormir con i cani, si leua con i pulici. Who sleeps with dogs, shall rise
with fleas. Chi va in letto senza cena, tutta la notte si dimena. Who goes to
bed supperlesse, shall turn and toss al night. Chi va and ritorna, fa bon
viaggio. He that goes, and returns, makes a good voyage. Chi viue in corte,
muore in pagliaro. He that lives in the court, dies in a straw bed. Chi vuol
dir mal d'altrui, prima si pensi di lui. Who will say ill of others, first let
him think on him self. Corbi con corbi, non cauano may gli ochi. One Crow will
never pull out an other Crows eyes. Colui che vien vltimo, serra la porta. He
that comes last, let him shut the door. Che colpa n'ha la gatta, se la
massara e matta. What fault has the Cat, if the maid be mad. Chi mi ama, me
ama il mio cane. Who loves me, loves my hound. Cercari fatti d'ltrui, e tempo
person. To seek other men's doings, is time lost. Dal ditto al fatto, vi e un
gran tratto. Between doing and saying there is great space. Del ocha, mangiane
poca. Eat little of a Goose. Di senno e pieno ogni testa. Every head is full of
brains. Dolce parole rompono l'ira. Pleasant words appease wrath. Duro con
duro no^ fece may buon muro. Hard with hard never made good wall. Dopo
tempesta, vien bell tempo. After storms come fair weather. Dove ci e nulla, il
Re perde il suo dritto. Where nothing is, the king loses his right. E bella
cosa pigliar due colombi con vna faua. It is a pretty thing to catch two Doves
with one bean. El ben guadagnare, fa il bell spendere. A good getting, makes a
good spending. El dir mal d'altrui, e il quinto elemento. To speak ill of
others, is the fifth element. El sine fa il tutto. The end makes al. El mal
vien per libra, e va via per oncie. The ill comes by pounds, and goes away
by ounces. El mal va dietro al been, and il been al male. The bad follows the
good, and good follows the bad. El pasciuto, non creed al di giuno. He that is
fed, believes not the fasting. El pesce grande, mangia il piccolo. The great
fish eats the little. El pesce guasta l'aqua, and la carne la concia. The
fish marreth the water, and flesh does dress it. El promette mari e monti. He
promises seas and mountains El promettere, e la viglia del dare The eve to
give, is to promise. El primo capitolo de matti, si e tenersi sauio. The first
chapter of fools, is to count them selves wise. El sparagno, e il primo
guadagno. The first gain or profit, is to spare. El vino al sapore, el pane
al calore. Wine by the savor, and bread by the heat. Esperientia e qualche
volta pericolosa. Experience sometimes is perilous. E bon batter il ferro
quando che l'e caldo. It is good to strike the iron when it is hot. Donato e
morto, ristoro sta male. Geuyng is dead, and restoring is ill at ease. Dalle
cose passate, si giudicano le present. By things passed, things present are
judged. Chi muta stato, muta condition. Who changes state, changes
conditions. Fame e la miglior salsa. Hunger is the best sauce. Fug gi quel
piacer present, che ti da dolor futuro. Flee that present pleasure, that
brings afterward sorrow. Fammi Indouino, and io ti faro richo. Make me a
Diuiner, and I will make thee rich. Far ben, non e inganno, buttar via il suo,
non e guadagno. To do well is no deceit, to cast away his own, is no gain.
Febraio curto, pegior de tutti. February the short, is woorst of al. Frati
osseruanti sparagnano il suo, e mangiono quel d'altrui. Obseruant Friars spare
their own, and eat that which is other men's. Fallando si impara. Missing one
does learn. Da tree cose signor liberaci, Da vna borsa voda, da un catiuo
vicino, e da vna catiua donna. From three things good lord deliver us, from an
empty purse, from ill neighbors, and from an ill woman. Gatto guantato non piglia
sorzi. A Cat gloued, catches no mise. Grand amore, gran dolor. Great love,
great sorrow. Dolce viuanda bisogna hauer salsa brusca. Sweet meat must have
sour sauce. Grand e grossa mi faccia Dio, che bianca e rossa mi faro io. Great
and gross God make me, white and red I Will make me self. Gran naui, gran
pensieri. Great ships, great thoughts. Chi si vuol dar fastidio tutta la sua
vita. Who will trouble him self all days of his life. Marita si un donna, over
compra vnan tue. Let him mary a woman, or buy him a ship. Homo condannato, e
mezo degolato. A man condemned, is half beheaded. Guardateui d'aceto, and da
vino dolce, and da la cholera a'un homo pacifico. Beware of vinegar and sweet
wine, and of the anger of a peaceable man. Homo da consini, ouero le ladro,
ouero assasino. A coasting man, either he is a thief, or a murderer. Homo
peloso, o che l'e matto, over venturoso. A heary man, either he is a fool or
else fortunate. Homo rosso, e femina barbata, tree miglia de lontan la saluta. If
thou meet a red man, and a bearded woman, greet them three mile of. I denari
sanno correre i caualli. Money makes horses run. E bon sempre hauer due
cord per un archo. It is always good to have two stringes to a bow.
Impres^ar e may non rendere, assai prometter, e poco atendere, ben quadagnar, e
poco spendere, sono tree cose da inrichirsi. To borow, and never restore, to
promise much, and fulfill little, to get well, and spend little, be three things
to make one rich. Ne disperarsi per fortuna auersa, che la suarota sempre
ingiro versa. Despair not, though fortune be contrary, for her wheel does
always turn about. Foco e stoppa non s'acorda. Fire and flax agree not. Un
Auoltor non sara may bon sparauiere. A Bitter will never be good hawk. I matti
fanno le feste, e i sauij le godeno. Fools make the banquets, and wise men
enjoy them. Denaro e il principal verbo in questa casa. Money is the chiefest
word in this house. In Cypro e bon mercato di tree cose, Sale, zukaro, e
putane. In Cypres three things be good cheap. Salt Sugar, whoores. In vna
notte nasce un fungo. In one night grows a Mushro^p. Il fine fa tutti equali.
The end makes al men equal. Il secreto e laudabile. The Secrecy is praise
worthy. Il secreto si deue celare. A secret ought to be hydden. Luirobba
Pietro, per pagar san Paulo. He robs Peter, to pay Paul. Lui e pouero come
Job. He is as poor as Job. Impara vna art, and metti la da part, che tempo
vegnera, che la ti bisognera. Learn thou an art, and lay it aside, for time
will come thou shall have need of it. Sell Cielo casca, haueremo quaglie. If the
Skies fall, we shall have Quayles. L'infante brugiato, teme il foco. The burned
child, dreaddeth the fire. Piu presso la chiesa, piu lontano da Dio. The
nearer church, the further from God. Vna pecora rognosa, guasta tutto un
gregge. One scabbed sheep, will mar a whole flock. Non ci e may fumo, senza
fuogo. There is no smoke, without some fire. Quando che il cauallo e rubbato,
serra la porta de la stalla. When the steed is stolen, shut the stable door.
Poche parole bastano fra gli homini sauij. Few words suffice among wise men.
Lui met il carro inanzi al cauallo. He puts the cart before the horse. Lui
ha due faccie sotto vna beretta. He has two faces under one hood. Lui porta
fuoco in vna mano, and aqua in l'altra. He bears fire in one hand, and water
in the other. L'aqua fa male, il vino fa cantare. Th'water hurts, wine makes
one sing. L'aqua va al mare. The water goes to the sea. Odi, vedi, e taci, se
tu vuoi viuere in pace. Hear, see, and hold thy peace, if thou wylt live in
peace. L'ira placata, non rifa l'ofese. Ire that is assuaged, does not renew
the offense. L'innocentia porta seco sua dfensione. Innocence bears her
defense with her. La coda condanna spesso la volpe a morte, per esse troppo
lunga. The tail often condemns the Fox to death, because it is too long. La
mala compagnia e quella, che mena molti alla forca. Il company is that, that
bringes many to the gallows. La mala herba cresce presto. An ill weed grows
apace. La morte de Lupi, e sanita de le pecore. The death of the woolfe, is the
health of the sheep. La notte e Madre de pensieri. The night is the moother of
thoughts. La peggior carne che sia al mondo, e quella de l'huomo. The woorst
flesh in the world, is the flesh of man. Adorna vna simia d'oro, che sempre
sara simia. Bodecke an Ape with gold, and he will be an Ape still. La porta di
dietro, quasta la casa. A posterne door, marreth the house. La robba non e a
chi la fa, ma a chi la good. The ware is not his that gathers it, but his that
enioyes it. La speranza e l'ultima cosa de l'huomo. Hope is the last thing of
a man. Le bone parole ongino, le catiue pongino. Good words annoint a man, the
ill words kyl a man. Le bugie hanno corte legambe. Lies have short legs. Le
lettere sono de li studio si, le richeze de i soleciti, il mondo de
presuntuosi, il paradiso de diuoti. Letters be for students, richesse for the
careful, the world for the presumptuous, paradise for the devout. Lingua
bardella, e che in fretta fauella. That tongue does lie that speaks in have.
L'ochio del patron, ingrassa il cauallo. The eye of the master, fatteneth the
horse. Lombardia e il giardino del mondo. Lombardie is the garden of the world.
Mal anno e mala moglie, non manca may. An ill year and a bad wife is never
wantyng. Matto per natura, e sauio per scritura. A fool by nature, and a wise
man by writing. Medico pieto so fa la piaga tegnosa. A pitiful Physician,
makes a scald wound. Meglio e dar la lana, che la pecora. It is better to give
the fleece, then the sheep. Meglio e esser confessore, che martire. It is
better to be a Confessor, then a Martyr. Meglio e un magro accordo, che vna
grassa sentenza. Better is a lean agreement, the^ a fat sentence. Metti il
matto sul bancho, o gioca di piede, o di canto. Set a fool on a stool, either
he will sing, or play with his foot. Muro bianco carta de matti. A white wall is
a fools paper. Tanto e il mal, che nonmi noce, quanto e il ben, che non mi
gioua. So much is the ill as hurts me not, as the good does not help me.
Barbier giouine, e Medico vechio. A young Barber, and an old Physician. Tutto
quelche luce, non e oro. All that glistreth is not gold. Non e virtu, che
pouerta non guasti. There is no virtue, but poverty will mar it. L'abondaza
delle cose, genera fastidio. The plenty of things does engender care.
L'alegreze di questo mondo duran poco. The joys of this world dure but little.
Tutte le arm di Londra, non armerion la paura. All the weapons of London, will
not arm fear. Poco fa, chi a se non gioua. He does little, that helps not
him self. Quanto piu si ha, tanto piu si desidera. The more a man has, the
more he desires. Tanto e mio, quanto io godo, e do per Dio. So much is mine,
as I enjoy, or else give for Gods sake. Ne femina ne tela non piglia a la
candela. Neither a woman, nor lynnen, choose thou by a candle. Parente con
parente; guai a chi non ha niente. Kinsfolks with kinsfolk, woe to him that
has nothing. La necessita non ha leg. Necessity has no law. La prima part
del pazzo, e di tenersi sauio. The chiefest account of a fool, is to hold him
self wise. L'huomo propone, e Dio dispone. Man does purpose, and God does
dispose. Peccato vechio, penitenza nuoua Old sin, and new penance. Peccato
celato, e mezo perdonato. A hydden fault, is half pardoned. Riguarda il fine.
Mark the end. Ogni estremita e vitio. Every extremity is a vice. Ogni parola
non vuol risposta. Every word requires not an answer. La conscientia serve
per mill testimonij. Conscience serves in stead of a thousand witnesses. La
vera leg e la natura. Nature is the right law. Ogni timidita e vit io. Al
fearfulness is folly. La leg nasce del peccato, and lo gastiga. The law
grows of sin, and does punish it. Pari con pari, been sta and dura. Like
with like does last well. I patti rompono le leggi. Bargains break the law. un
homo val cento, e cento non vagliono vno. One man is worth a hundred, and a
hundred is not worth one. Il sauio non si deue vergognar di mutar proposito. A
wise man ought not to be ashamed to change purpose. La marauiglia e figliola de
lignoranza. Marvel is the daughter of ignorance. I fatti sono maschi, e le
parole femine. Deeds are Males, and words are Females. Il tempo e padre de
la verita, and Pesperientia e madre de le cose. Time is the father of truth,
and experience is the mother of al things. Ne amor, ne signoria, vuol
compagnia. Neither love nor frindship, will have company. Nessuno da quello che
non ha. Non can give that he has not. Ne occhi in lettera, ne mani in ^asca
d'altrui. Neither eyes, nor hands in other men's writings or purses. Null been
senza pene. No weal without woe. Noze e Magistrato, sono del ciel destinato.
Marriages and magistrate, be destinies of heaven. Oglio, Ferro, e sale,
mercantia regale. Oil, iron, and Salt, be royal merchandise. Ogni dieci anni,
l'uno ha bisogno de l'altro. Once in ten years, one man has need of
another. Odio fra gli amici, e soccorso de gli stranieri. Hatred among
friends, is succor unto strangers. Ogni di viene la sera. Every day comes
night. Ogni vcello non cognosce il bon grano. Every bird knows not the good
grain. Ogni ^tristo cane mena la coda. The worst dog waggeth his tail Ogni vno
per se, and il aiauolo per tutti. Every one for him self, and the devil for all. Patisco il male, sperando il been. I suffer the bad, hopyng for the better.
Pesa giusto, e vendi caro. Weigh just, and sell dear. Piu per dolceza, che per
forza. More by lenity, then by force. Poco senno basta, a chi fortuna sona.
Little wit serves, unto whom fortune pypeth. Putti e matti indouinano. Children
and fools tell truth. Qual vita, tal fine. Such a life, such an end. Radigo non
fa pagamento. Forbearance is no payment. Quando la gatta non e in casa, i sorzi
bellano. When the Cat is abroad, the Mise play. Quando l'a ben tonato, e forza
che pioui. When it has well thundered, it must needs rain. Ragione deue esser
in conseglio. Reason ought to be in the counsel. Se vuoi venir meco, porta
teco. If thou will go with me, bring with thee. Si danno been gli officij, ma
non si da discretione. Offices are given, but not discretion. Sofri il male, e
aspetta il been. Suffer the bad, and tarry for the good. Ce de gli huomini che
vogliono l'uouo e la gallina. There be many that will have both the egg and the
hen. Sopra Dio non e Signore, sopra negro non e color, sopra sal non e sapore.
Over God there is no Lord, over black there is no color, over salt there is
no savor. Amor vince ogni cosa. Love conquereth al. Speranza conforta l'huomo.
Hope comfort a man. Taglia la coda al cane, e sempre resta cane. Cut of a
dogs tail, and he will be a dog still. Tal biasma altrui, che se stesso
condanna. Some in blamyng of others, condemn them selves. Trista quella Musa,
che non sa trouar scusa. Il is that Muse, that can not find a scuse. Triste
quelle case, oue le galline cantano, and il Gallo tace. They are sorry houses,
where the Hens crow, and the cock holds his peace. Tristo colui, che da
esempio altrui. Wretched is he, that gives example to others. Trotto D'asino,
foco di paglia, and amor di donna, poco durano. The trot of an Ass, the fire
of straw, and the love of a woman lasts little. Troppo sperar inganna. Too
much hoping, deceives. Tu la poi slongare, ma non scampare. Well may thou
prolong it, but not escape it. Tutti tirano l'aqua al suo molino. Every one
draw water to their Myl. Vegliar a la luna, e dormir al sole, non fa ne
profitto, ne honor. To watch in the Moon, and sleep in the Snnne, is
neither profit nor honor. Viue chi vince. Who lives, vanquisheth. Venetia,
chi non ti vede, non ti pretia, ma chi ti vede, ben gli costa. Venise, woo
sees thee not, praises thee not, but who sees thee, it costeth him well.
Vesti caldo, mangia poco, beui assai, che viuerai. Cloathe warm, eat little,
drink well, so shall thou live. Viui con viui, e morti con morti. Quick with
the quick, and dead with the dead. Volonta fa mercato, and denari pagano. Will
makes the market, but money makes payment. Vna man laua l'altra, and tutte
due lauano il viso. One hand washes another, and both wash the face. La vita
passa, e la morte viene. Life does pass, and death does come. Un bell morire,
tutta vna vita honora. A gallant death, does honor a whole life. Che dove non
han pasco ne ricetto, in sin le Fury abandonano i luoghi. For where no food
nor receptacle is, even the Furies abandon the places. E tempo person, a metter
aqua nel mare. It is time lost, to put water into the sea. Chi dorme, non
piglia pesce. Who sleeps, catches no fish. Si puol cacciar chiodo con
chiodo. One nail is driven out with an other. Un vcello in gabbia, ne val due
del bosco, and pure si e meglio esser vcello di campagna, che vcello di gabbia.
One byrd in the hand, is worth two in the forest, and yet it is better to be a
bird of the field, then a byrd of the cage. L'orbo mangia molte mosce. The
blind eats many a Fly. Chi cerca, troua. Who seeks, fyndeth. Troppo di vna
cosa, non val niente. Too much of one thing, is naught. Lui e come un stizon
di fuoco, al'uma altri, and sibrucia se stesso. He is like a brand af fire,
kyndeleth others, and burns him self. Chi laua la testa a un Asino, perde il
sapon, and la fatica. Who washes an Asses head, loses both labor and soap.
Ama mi poco, and ama mi logo. Love me little, and love me long Presto maturo,
presto marzo. Soon ripe, soon rotten. Soi entia non e peso. Cunnyng is no
burden. Tal patron, tal seruitore. Like master, like man. Tal e l'arbore, tal
e il frutto. Such as the tree is, such is the fruit. Gua da been inanzi che tu
salei. Look well ere thou leap. L'hauiss^ io saputo, vien troppo tardi. Had
I wyste, comes too late. Meglio e hauer mezzo un pane, che non ne hauer
niente. It is better to have half a loaf, then no bread at al. Assai aqua
corre per il Molino, che il Molinaro non ne sa. Much water runs by the myl,
that the miller knows not of. Veramente che io sono molto stracco, e quasi non
posso parlar piu, and e anche tempo di andar a desinare, io non me ne ricordo
de piu. Truly I am weery, and almost I can not speak no more, and also it is
time to go to dynner, I remember me of no more. Io mi e marauiglio come ne
potete hauer tanti in memoria, certo che voi mi fate restar attonito, a
sentirne tanti, e tutti hanno bon senso, chi gli considera been. I marueyle
how you can have so many in memory, certis you make me rest astonyed, to
hear so many, and all have good sense, who so considers them well.


Belli detti. Cap. 20. Fine sayeinges. Chap. 20.
CHe hora e, sapetelo? WHat a clock is it, know ye? Non e senon dieci. It is
but ten. Non e piu? Is it no more? Signor no certo. No sir certain. Dunche che
cosa faremo fino a dodeci? io ho parlato tanto, che sono stracco, dite qualcosa
voi per passar via il tempo. Then what shall we do until it be twelve? I have
talked so much tkat I am weery, say you something to pass away the time.
Veramente io non sono dotto, and si ho letto tanto poco, che ho quasi paura a
cominciar a parlare. Truly I am not learned, and I have read so little, that I
am almost afraid to begin to speak. Io so been, che voi sapete recitar de
belli detti. I know well that you can rehearse some fine sayings. Dapoi che voi
s^te cosi importuno, io cominciero, ma auertite, se io erro, perdonatemi vi
prego. Since that you are so importune, I will begin, but beware if I err, I
pray you pardon me. A chi non osende, legiermente si perdona, cominciate pure.
Who offends not, lightly is pardoned, begin when you list. La piu bella cosa
che adorna un prencipe, si e fedelta. The fairest thing to adorn a Prince, is
loyalty. Veramente e vero. Verily this is true. In un Clerico humilita. In a
Clerk humility. Cosi dice il Philosopho. So says the Philosopher. In un
prelato sapientia. In a Prelate wisdom. Si ma non bisogna che la sapientia si
abusi. Yea, but wisdom must not be abused. In un Caualiere, valor. In a
knight manhood. De quelli ce ne pochi. There be few of those. In un ricco,
liberalita. In a rich man, liberality. Se hauesti detto auaritia, quello si
haueresti trouato, perch piu tosto vederete volar i pesci, che veder un ricco
homo liberale. If you had said avarice, that you should have fonnd, for you
shall sooner see the fish fly, then a rich man liberal. In un dotto,
eloquentia. In a learned man, eloquence. Ogni vno sa parlar eloquenteme^te, per
suo vantaggio hoggi di. Every one can speak eloquently for his advantage,
now adays. In un mercante tener promessa sempre. In a merchant to keep his
promise always. Si, ma voi eccetiate i tanti bankarotti, che ci sono. Yea, but
you except so many bankroutes as there are. In un seruitore, obedientia verso
il suo signore. In a servant, obedience toward his master. Un seruitor fedele,
e un gran tesoro, ma se ne troua pochi. A faithful servant is a great treasure,
but there are few found. Anche in vna bella donna, sta been obedientia verso il
suo marito. Also in a fair woman, beseems obedience toward her husband. Di
gratia ditemi, come si chiama vna bona donna in Latino I pray you tell me, how
do you call a good woman in Latin? Sapete come dice Plato? Trouatela, che gli
daro nome, ma a diruila verita, non si puo dar nome a cosa che non fu, may non
e, e credo anche, may non sara in questo mondo. Know you what Plato says, find
her, and I Will give her a name, but to tell you the truth, there ca^ no name be
given to a thing that never was, is not, and I believe, will never be in this
world Anche in vna donna, castita. Also in a woman, chastity. Plato dice, Vna
donna che e casta, porta con lei vna grande dotta. Plato says, that a woman
that is chaste, does bring with her a great dowry. In vino bon sapore. In wine
a good smell. Questo si mi piace. Yea, that likes me. Mi piace anche a me. It
pleases me also. In panno bon color. In cloth good color. Si, ma rare volte
si troua quello, L'altro di mi comprai un Mantello di panno nero, and il color
e di gia smarito, certo i Tentori sono molto falsi hoggi di. Yea, but seldom
times is that found, the other day I bought me a cloak of black cloth, and
the color is already stained, certis Dyers are very false now adays. Signor,
vi diro, non incolpate i Tentori, perch loro fanno secondo che sono comandati
dal Drapiere. Sir, I will tell you, blame not the Dyers, for they do as they are
commanded by the Drapers. Perdonatemi, se vi tocco sete, voi forse Tentor e
Pardon me, if I touch you, perhaps you are a Dyer. Forse chio sono, forse di
no. Perhaps I am, perhaps I am not Che causa hauete di scusarli? What cause
have you to scuse them? Perch io gli amo. Because I love them. Che causa
hauete di amar li? What cause have you to love them? Causa non ho gia di
amarli, ogni cosa ben considerata, piu tosto ho causa di bisimali, and del
tutto maledirli, ma faccio al contrario, perch io li amo. Cause have I none to
love the^, al things well considered, rather I have cause to blame them, and
altogether to curse them, but I do contrary, for I love them. Perch hauete
causa di far cosi, ditemi di gratia? What cause have you to do so, tell me of
courtesy? Perch ho seruito, and non ho agradiato, sono stato pasciuto con
speranza, ho creduto belle parole, le quale sono senon vento: pero io persuado,
amonisco, and esorto tutti i giouani a may non creder belle parole, perch
sarrano trattati come sono io. I maestri hoggi di promettono montagne, and
danno piccole pietre, promettono oro, and danno seccia, promettono assai, and
poi non fanno niente. Because I have served, and my service has not ben
accepted, I have be^ fed with hope, I have believed fair words, which are but
wind wherefore I persuade admonish, and exhort al young men, never to believe
fair words, for if they do, they will be deceived as I was. Masters now adays
will promise mountains, and will give little stones, they will promise gold, and
give dross, they will promise much, and do little. Cosi e stato fatto dene. So
has it ben done to me. Ma che rimedio ci e, senon pacentia per forza. But what
remedy is there, but patience perforce? Veramente voi dite il vero, maestri
sono molto discortesi, and auari hoggi di, non si ricordano che loro sono stato
seruitori, perch se se ne aricordassero, fare, bono piuconto de i loro
seruitori, che non fanno, ma gli seruitori bisognano metter la loro speranzain
Dio, and non fidarsi di nessuno maestro. Verily you say true, masters and
patrons are very discurteous, and covetous now adays, they do not remember
that they have been servants, for if they did remember it, they would make more
account of their servants then they do, but servants must put their hope and
trust in God, and not trust ever a master. Non li biasimate tutti, ce ne sono
de buoni. Blame them not al, for there are some good. Credo che ce ne sia
qualche buono, ma sono molto rari. I believe that there be some good but they are
very rare. Cosi credo anche io. So believe I.


Belle domande. Cap. 21. Pretty demaundes. Chap. 21.
ADesso io vi voglio dire certe belle domande, con le loro risposte. NOw will I
tell you certain fine demands, with their answeares. Certo io vi do troppo
fastidio. Certis I trouble you too much. Non dite cosi signore. Say not so sir.
Orsu, ditcmi quale e la piu vechia cosa che sia. Well, tell me which is the
oldest thing that is. Veramente io non so, ditemelo per cortesia. Truly I know
not, I pray you tell me. Iddio e la piu vechia cosa. God is the oldest thing. Ma
come lo prouate? But how prove you that? Perch lui e sempre stato, e may hebbe
principio. Because he has always ben, and never had beginning. Certo e
verissimo. Certis it is very true. Quale e la piu bella cosa che sia? What is
the fairest thing that is? Io credo il mondo, perch e opera di Dio. I believe
it is the world, because it is the handy work of God. Verame^te voi hauete
indouinato Truly you have ghest aright. Quale e la piu gran cosa che sia. What
is the greatest thing that is? Io credo, luogho. I think, place. Come lo
sapete? How know you that? Io lo so, and lo prouero. I know it, and can prove
it. Prouatelo, vi prego. Prove it, I pray you. Perch luogho comprehend ogni
altra cosa che sia al mondo, in se. Because place comprehends in it, every
other thing that is in the world. Certo voi dite la verita. Certis you say
true. Quale e la piu profitabile cosa? What is the profitablest thing? Quello
saria bono a sapere, io non lo so, ditemelo. That were good to be known, I
know it not, tell it me. Speranza e la piu profitabil cosa. Hope is the
profitablest thing. Io non la so intendere, ne anche lo posso credere. I can
not understand it, neither can I believe it. Io ve ne diro la ragione, Quando
che ogni cosa e persa, et che no^ ci e niente, speranza resta sempre con
l'huomo. I will tell you the reason, When al things are lost, and that there is
nothing, yet hope rests always with man. Ma alcuni sperano sempre, and pure
sempre sono poueri. But some do hope always, and yet are ever poor. Ma se
been sono poueri de beni mondani, con speranza, timore di Dio, e con vita
virtuosa, l'huomo puo profittare. But for all they are poor of worldly goods,
with hope, and the fear of God, and with a virtuous life, a man may profit. E
che cosa profitera con questa speranza? And what shall he profit with this
hope? Aquistara vita eterna. He shall gain life everlasting. Pure, che sia
cosi. So that it be so. Non dubitate. Doubt not. Quale e la miglior cosa, che
sia al mondo? What is the best thing that is in the world? Io credo virtu,
perch senza virtu, non si puo far niente, che sia bono. I believe virtue, for
without virtue, nothing can be done, that is good. Voi non hauete errato, ma
ditemi, quale e la piu veloce cosa che sia? You have not erred: but tell me,
what is the swiftest thing that is? La piu veloce cosa che sia, credo sia
l'animo de l'huomo, perch in un momento straccare tutto il mondo intorno, hora
e qua, hora e la, adesso in un luogho, adesso in un altro. The swiftest thing
that is, I believe it be the mind of man, for in a moment he runs all the
world about, now he is here, and now he is there, now in one place, now in an
other. Certo voi dite il vero. Certis you say true. Quale e la piu libera cosa
che sia? Which is the freest thing that is? Io credo, pensiere. I believe,
thought. Cosi e certo. So it is certain. Qual cosa e la piu forte? What thing
is strongest? Necessita, over destino, perch vince ogni altro accidente.
Necessity, or else destiny, for it overcomes al accidents. Qual e la piu
facile cosa? What is the easiest thing? A dar conseglio a altri. To give
counsel to others. Qual cosa piu difficile? What thing more difficult? A
cognoscer se stesso. A man to know him self. Qual e la piu sauia? What is the
wisest thing? Tempo, perch attiene tutte cose, con industria la figliola di
tem po: non e cosi? Time, for it attaineth al things, with industry the
daughter of time: is it not so? Certo io mi marauiglio, come sapete questo,
perch prociede da vna grande capacita di animo. Certis I marueyle how you
know this, for it proceeds of a great capacity of mind. Ma ditemi anchora
vna cosa, che io vi voglio domandare, se potete: Qual e la piu pesante cosa?
But yet tell me also one thing that I will ask you, if you can, What is the
heauyest thing? Questo velo so dire per esperientia, perch l'ho prouato, la
piu grieve cosa che sia, credo che sia, e un Etcetera, perch se la vi piglia
per strada, non potete portar la lontano un passo piu. That I can tell you by
experience, for I have proved it, the heauiest thing that is, as I believe, is
one Etcetera, for if it take you by the way, you can not carry it far, one
foot more. Certo voi hauete colto il chiodo su la testa. Certis you have hit
the nailc on the head. Quale e la piu forte cosa de queste tree, o vino, o vna
donna, ouero la verita? ditemi di gratia. Which of these three things is
strongest, either wine, or women, or else the truth? of courtesy tell me. A dirui
la verita, secondo il mio basso parere, non essendo dotdo, la verita mi pare,
la piu forte. To tell you the truth, after my foolish opinion, and not being
learned, Truth, me thinks, is strongest. Cosi credo anche io, perch le altre
due si possono vincer legiermente. So think I also, because the other two may
lightly be overcome. Evero signor mio. It is true sir.


Di pace, guerra, inuidia, and superbia. Chap. 22. Of Peace, War, Envy, and
Pride. Chap. 22.
IO me hauena quasi scordato vna domanda, de la qual vorrei che mi risoluesti,
se potete. I Had almost forgot to ask you a question, of the which I would
have you to resolve me, if you can. Volentieri, se io posso. Gladly, if I can.
Voi vedete che pace per tutto il mondo, e quasi estinta, e che nessuno non la
vuol abracciare semplicemente. Alcuni cercano di essere pacefici, ma pure non
possono, io vorei saper la causa, over saper quali sono li nimici di pace, and
quanti sono, accio che io possa imparare a viuer in pace, and non accostarmi a
suoi nimici, conoscendo li. You see that peace throughout all the world, is
almost extinguished, that no body will embrace it simply. Some seek to live in
peace, and yet can not, I would know the cause, or else know which be the
enemies of peace, and how many there are, to the end, I may learn to live in
peace and not approach me unto her enemies, knowing them. Io ve lo diro piu
breuemente che io posso, quanto a me io credo che i nimici che pace ha, sono
questi. I will tell you as briefly as I can, as for me, I believe that the
enemies that peace has, are these. Quali sono essi, vi prego? Which be they, I
pray you? Il piu grande inimico che pace habbia, si e guerra, con tutti i suoi
ministri, poi odio, auaritia, sdegno, ira, ambitione, arogantia, superstuita
and superbia, con tutte le sue figlie. The greatest enemy that peace has, is
war, with all her mimisters, as hate, avarice, disdain, ire, ambition,
arrogancy, superfluity, and pride, with all her daughters. Quale sono le
figlie de superbia, quel mostro? Which be the daughters of Pride, that
monster? Sono altre tante, e queste sono: Troppo liberta, vana gloria,
adulatione, irreuerentia, heresia, disobedientia, hypocrisia, gran vanti,
ostinatione, discordia, tyrannia, con inuidia quella Furia infernale, come
dicono i Poeti, and e anche vero. They are thus many, and these are they:
Liberty, waineglory, flattery, irreverence, heresy, disobedience, hypocrisy,
great boastes, obstinacy, discord, tyranny, with envy that infernal Fury,
as Poets say, and it is also true. Mipar che vi ho sentito dire, che la
guerra ha figlie anche: quali sono d'esse? Me thinks I heard you say, that
war has daughters also: which be they? Le figlie di guerra sono queste, come
Fame, ruina, flagello, foco, ferro, distruttione, and desolatione, doueua dire,
spargimento di sangue, queste tutte sono aiutatrici a la guerra: ma quella
inuidia e quasi causa di tutto, perch inuidia si vede sempre essere la prima
disturbatrice d'una republica, l'ultima destruttione de tutti i boni stati, il
principio di tutti i dolori, il fine di tutti i piaceri, causa di tutti i mali,
dolori, pianti, stridi: pero pregliamo Iddio, che per la sua gratia, ci voglia
conceder questa nestra Regina longo tempo, and che voglia mantener la nel suo
fauore, and che noi consideriamo le gran misery che a tempi passati questo
Regno ha patito, and anche verificato il prouerbio di quel nostro Philosopho,
che dice, che di pace vien prosperita, prosperita porta abondantia, abondantia
portarichezze, and le richezze, concupiseentia: con^ cupiscentia portasdegno,
sdegno, guerra: guerra, pouerta: pouerta, humilita: humilita, pace: pace,
prosperita: and cosi il mondo va intorno. Et noi qui in Inghilterra, siamo in
colmo di tutti questi piaceri, Iddio lungamente ce li voglia concedere, and far
che quelle Fury infernali, non habbino luogho, ne i loro nidi ne cuori
Inglesi: dite, Amen. The daughters of war, be these, Famine, ruin, plague,
fire, sword, destruction, desolation, I should have said, shedding of blood,
al these be ayders unto war: but envy is almost cause of al, for envy is
always the first distut ber of al commonweals, the last destruction of all
good Estates, the beginning of all sorrows, the end of all pleasures, the
cause of all griefs, plaintes, shrickes, and sorrows: Wherefore let us pray
to God, that for his mercy he will grant this our Queen a long continuance,
and that he will maynteyne her in his favor, and let us consider the great
miseries that this Realm heretofore has suffered, and also verified the
proverb of that our Philosopher, that says, that of peace comes
prosperity, prosperity brings plenty, ple^tie brings riches: riches
lust: lust, contempt: contempt breeds war: of war comes poverty: of
poverty, humility: of humility, peace: of peace, prosperity: and so the world
goes about. And we here in England are on the top of al these plea sures, god
grant us them long, and work so in us, that those infernal Furies have no
places nor nestes in the hearts of English me^, say you, Amen. Che Fury volete
dire? io non vi so intendere. What Furies do you mean? I can not understand
you. Io dico Aletto, Tessiphone, and Megera, le quale si dicono habitar
nel'inferno, and gouernano i tree afetti de l'huomo, ma credo che anche la loro
continual sedia, sia ne cuori de molti huomini. I say, Alecto, Tesiphon, and
Megera, which are said to dwell in hell, and govern the three affectes of man,
but I believe also, that their chiefest seat be in the hearts of many men. Che
afetti sono quelli? What affectes be those? Cupidita, ira, and libidine, che
hoggi sono in reputatione, cosi non fusseno, perch io vedo ogniuno piglia
piacere in questo mondo, che non e che un diletteuole Laberinto pieno di vanita
and follia. Covetousness, wrath, and lust, that now adays are in great
reputation, so were they not, for I see every man takes pleasure in this
world, which is but a delectable laborinth, full of vanity and folly. Quale
sono quelle false felicita, in che cosiste il voler de l'huomo? What be those
false felicities, in which consists the will of man? Sono queste, Signoria,
richeze, honor, and fama, con mondano piacere. These are they, Lordship,
riches, honor, and fame, with worldly pleasure. Certo voi dite il vero. Certis
you say true.


Li abusi del mondo. Cap. 23. The abuses of the world. Cap. 23.
CI sono anche certi abusi, che hoggi di si vsano molto, and per li quali, il
mondo e quasi corotto. THere are also certain abuses that now adays are used
much, for which the world is almost corupted De quelli principali, ce ne sono
dodeci. Of those principally there are twelve. Sapete recitarli? Can you
rehearse them? Io non so, vedro. I can not tell, I will see. Fate mi tanto
piacere. Do me so much pleasure. Io credo di hauer scordato qualcosa. I believe
I have forgot some of them. Prouate. Prove. L'huomo sauio senza bone opere,
come doueria essere: I vechi senza Religione: I giouini senza obedientia: I
richi non sono liberali: I poueri sono superbi: Done douerebono essere chaste,
ma ce ne sono poche: I gran Stati sono senza virtu: Christiani querelano
giornalmente insieme: Pastori and prelati sono pegri and sonnolenti, con la
panza piena, la qual cosa dispiace a Dio, Prencipi non sono giusti: Il popolo
senza disciplina: et le Republiche che vanno ala rouersa, con il capo in gia. A
wise man without good works, as he should be: old men without Religion: young
men without obedience: rich men are not liberal: the poor are proud: women
ought to be chaste, but there are few: great Estates without virtue:
Christians daily quarellyng together: Pastors and Prelates are slothful and
sleepie, with their panches full, the which displeases God: Princes are not
just: the people without discipline: and commonweals go al backward, with
their heads downward. Queste sono cose che non apertengono a noi, ma a Dio a
rimediar ci, and al popolo a pregar Dio, che ci voglij dar rimedio. These be
things that appertain not unto us, but unto God, to remedy it; and the people
to pray God to send some remedy for it. Quasi in ogni regno si praticano
questi abusi, senon in Inghilterra, perch la, gratie a Dio siano rese, i gran
stati sono vertuosi, sono senza querele, i pastori in segnano et predicano, la
Prencipessa e giusta, e sauia, la Republica e ben governata: del resto, poi
ogniuno esamini la sua conscientia. Almost in every Realm these abuses are
practiced, save only in England, for there, thanks be given to God, great
Estates are virtuous, and are without quarrels, Pastors do teach and preach,
the Princess is just and wise, the common weal is well ruled, for the rest,
let every one examine his own conscience.


Dibelezza nobi. lita, pouerta, preghiera necessaria, quali sono i beni di
Fortuna. Cap. 24. Of beauty, nobililitie, poverty, a necessary prayer, and
which be the goods of Fortune. Chap. 24.
ORsu, non parliamo piu di simil cose, ma ditemi un poco di gratia, se mi
sapete dire, che cosa sia beleza. Well, speak we no more of such things, but
tell me of courtesy, if you can tell me, what thing beauty is. Io non so, ma vi
diro been le opinioni di certi Philosophi: Socrate dice, che belezza e vna
tirannide di bre^e tempo: Plato dice, e un priuile gio di natura: Teophrasto
dice, e un secreto inga^no: Teocrito, un deletteuole danno: Carmeade gli dice
un solitario Regno: Domitio dice, che non ci e niente piu accettabile: dice
Aristotle, che belezza non si puo comendar, quanto e degna: Homero aferma, che
e un dono glorioso di natura: et Ouidio la chiama, vna certa gratia di Dio:
tolete quale che vi piace. I cannot tell, but I will tell you the opinions of
certain Philosophers: Socrates says, beauty is a tyranny of a short space:
Plato says, it is a privilege of nature: Theophrastus says, it is a secret
deceit: Theocritus, a delectable damage: Carmeades calls it a solitary
kingdom: Domitius says that there is nothing more acceptable: Aristotle
says, that beauty can not be commended so much as it is worthy: Homer
affirms, that it is a glorious gift of nature: and Ovid calls it a certain
grace of God: take which you please: Equal pensate voi che sia? And which
think you it is? Io credo e son certo, che non e senon un don di Dio. I
believe, that it is but a gift of God. Ogni minichion lo saperbbe dire, che
vien da Dio? Chi non lo sa? Every fool could say, that it comes from God:
Who knows not that? Non vi scorucciate. Be not angry. Signor no, perdonat
emi, anzi vi diro vna bella domanda, che fu domandata da vno, Fu vno che
domando a Diogine, qual fusse il piu nobile del monde? rispose lui, Colui che
sa disprezar richezze, gloria, piacere, and poi vita, and vincer le cose
contrary a queste, cioe, Pouerta, Infamia, Dolor, and Morte, and sofrile, con
un cuor inuincibile. No sir, pardon me, nay rather, I will tell you a pretty
demand, that was asked of one, There was one that asked Diogenes which was the
noblest man in the world: he answered, He that can despise riches, glory, and
then life, and also overcome the contraries to these, that is, Poverty,
Infamy, Sorrow, and death, and suffer them with an invincible heart. Veramente
bell detto. Truly a gallant saying. Io vi so dire, se nessuno non potesse
essere nobile, senza far queste impresse, che ci sarebbono pochi Nobili, ma se
se ne trouasse vno che lo sapesse fare, quello si, si potria dir vero nobile. I
can tell you, if none were Nobles, but those that could atchieue these
enterprises, there would be few Nobles: but if you could find one that could
do it, verily he might be called Noble in deed. Ditemi, di gratia, che cosa e
pouerta, sapetelo? Tell me of courtesy, what is Poverty, know you? Certo io ve
lo so dire per esperientia, and non per fama, come fanno molti, Pouerta non e
altro che vna candela, con il lume de la quale si discopre molte misery, a le
quale l'huomo e sotto posto. Yea certis, I can tell that by experience, and not
by fame, as many do, Poverty is naught else but a candle, with the which light,
we discover many miseries, unto which, man is subject. Orsu, volete insegmarmi
qualche preghiera, per dir la matina? Well, will you teach me some prayer, to
say in the morning? Dite come dico io la matina. Say as I say, in the morning.
Come dite voi? How do you say? Io dico, O Iesis, libera me da un bankarotto,
and da un C^tadino che e stato pouero, and adesso e richo: libera me da la
conscientia de preti, da le droghe de speciali, and da i. etc. de Notarij, and
da colui che sent due Mess il giorno: libera me Signor da vna borsa vuoda, da
vna cattiua donna, da un inuidioso vicino, da un boccale vuoto, quando io ho
sere, and da tutti coloro che giurano per la loro conscientia, Amen: facosi
farai, come fo io. I say, O Jesus, deliver me from a bankrout, and from a
citizen that has been poor, and now is rich: deliver me from the consciences
of priests, and Poticary drugs, and from the Scri ueners. etc. and from him
that hears two Masses in a day, good Lord deliver me from an empty purse,
from a wicked woman, from an envious neighbor, from an empty pot, when I am
thirsty, and from al them that swear by their conscience, Amen. Then shall you
do o as I do. Questa e bona regola. This is a good rule. Ditemi anche di
gratia, quante sort de beni possiede l'huomo? Tell me of courtesy, how many
sorts of goods does man possess? Tree sort, cioe, i beni di Fortuna, i beni
d'el corpo, et i beni del'animo. Three sorts, the goods of fortune, the goods
of the body, and the goods of the mind. Quali sono i beni di Fortuna? which be
the goods of fortune? I beni di fortuna sono, richezze, and signorie. The
goods of Fortune are, Riches, and lordship. Quali sono i beni del corpo? Which
be they of the body? Sanita, and bella completione. Health, and a good
complexion. Quali sono del'animo? Which be they of the mind? Virtu,
intelletto, and ingegno, neli quali consiste tutta la felicita de l'huomo.
Virtue, wisdom, and understanding, in the which consists all the felicity of
man. Che cosa e ira? ditemelo. What is wrath? tell me.


Di lia* con certi belli dotti di Ariosto, and di altri Poeti, and che cosa e
patientia, and adulatione. Cap. 25. Of wrath, with certain fine sayings of
Ariosto, and other Poets, and what patience, and slattery is. Chap. 25.
I Ra e vna certa perturbatiotione d'un crudel and dishonesto animo, la causa
di ogni discordia, la compagna di calamita, vna confusione di richezze, and e
il principio di ogni destrutione, ruina, fastidio, e confusione. E anche
Petrarcha lo proua, dove dice, par lando d'ira: I Re is a certain perturbation
of a cruel and dishonest mind, the cause of al discord, a compagnion of
calamity, a confusion of riches, the beginning of al destruction, rnine, care,
and confusion. Also Petrarcha proves it, where he says, speaking of anger:
Ira e brieue furor, and chi n'ol frena,
E furor longho, che'l suo possessore:
Spesso a vergogna, and tal'hor mena a morte.
Anger is a fury short, and unto him a fury long,
That lets her the bridle have who now and then among,
The angry man to shame she brings and sometimes unto death.
Et Ariosto sopra questo dice: And Ariosto says upon this:
Quando vincer dal'impetto and dal'ira,
Si lascia la ragion, ne si difende,
Et che'l cieco furor si auanzi i^a:
O mano, O lingua, che gli amici ofende,
Se ben di po^ si^piange, and sospira:
Non e per questa che le'rror s'amende.
When reason by rage and anger is suffered
Vanquished to be, and is not defended,
And that blind fury rules the ire of man:
O hand, O tongue, that friends has offended,
Although that afterward he weep and sigh:
Yet for all this, the fault is not amended,
Certo questo e un bell detto, and dotto, lo scrisse Ariosto? Certis this is a
brave saying, and learned, did Ariosto write it? Signor si, potete leggerlo ne
la sua opera, che si chiamo, Orlando furioso, al Canto trentesimo. Yea sir, you
may read it in his work that is called, Orlando furioso, at the thirtye
song. La prima volta che il libro mi vtene all mani, voglio vedere se e vero.
The first time that the book comes to my hands, I will see if it be true. Fra
gli Italiani, ci sono stati molti Pecti: non hauete qualche bell detro? Among
the Italians there have been many good Poets, have you any brave sayings? Io vi
voglio dire d'un bello detto, scritto da Alciato, quel nobil, and dotto poeta.
I will tell you of a brave saying, written by Alciato that noble and learned
Poet. Pochi anni sono, che in Milano Citta famosa in Lombardia, per li richi
mercanti che ci sono, venne la peste, and infetto molti gioueni Gentil huomini,
and lascio i vechi, tanto che i gioueni moriuano, and ivechij si inamorauano:
sopra qual caso, il nostro Alciato scrisse questi versi: Not many years ago,
in Milan a famous city in Lombardie, through the rich merchants that are
there, came a plague and infected many young Gentlemen, and old men lived, so
that the youth dyed, and old men fell in love: upon which case, our Poet Alciato
wrote these verses.
Albergarono insieme amor and morte,
Et la mattina desti.
Nel partirsi amendue per dura sort,
Congiar li strali, onde ferrendo amore,
I gioueni moriano miseri and mesti.
Et la morte impiagando a mezzo il cuore.
I vechij ardouan d'amoroso ardore:
O potente signore,
Ei tu di corpi nostri, empia Regina,
Ritornateui l'armi, accio che moia:
Il vecchio and viua, il giouanetto in gioia.
Both love and death were lodged in one place,
Both in the morning wakte.
At parting both, through fro ward fortunes chance,
They changed darts, and love sore wounding,
The young men wretchedly and sorowfully dyed.
And death with woundyng mydst the heart.
The old men's hearts in love did frye:
O mighty lord,
And of our bodies thou, O wicked Queen,
Your weapons soon return, that he may dye
That Is old, and young may happy live in joy.
Veramente i versi monstrano, che il poeta era di nobile ingegno, e gallante.
Truly the verses show, that the Poet was of a noble wit, and gallant. Cosi era
certo. And so he was certain. Vno altro bell ponto circa amore scritto da
Ariosto. Another fine point, concerning love, written by Ariosto. Io lo
sentirei volentieri. I would gladly hear it. Questo e d'esso. This is it.
Quello che l'huomo vede, amor gli fa inuisibile:
Et l'inuisibile fa veder amore.
That which man sees, love makes invisible:
And th'inuisible love, causes to be seen.
Certo e bello, e vero, Certis it is a good one, and true? Dice il Petrarcha:
Petrarcha says:
La vita fugge, and non s^aresta vna hora,
Et la morte vien dietro, a gran giornate.
Life flees away, and stays not one hour,
And death comes after, iournying apace.
Un bello auuertimento. A brave forewarnying. Un bello detto di Ariosto, circa
gelosia. A fine saying of Ariosto, touching Jealousy.
Che dolce piu, che piu giocondo stato
Saria di quel d'un amoroi so core?
Che viuer piu felice, e piu heat,
Che ritrouarsi in seruitu d'amore?
Se non fosse l'huom sempre stimulato
Da quel sospetto rio, da quel timore:
Da quelmartir, da quella frenesia,
Da quellarabbia, detta gelosia.
Pero, ch'ogni altro amaro, che si pone
Tra questa soauissima dolcezza:
E un augumento, vna perfettione:
Et e un condurre Amoro a piu finezza.
L'acque parer fa saporite, e buone
La sete, e il cibo pel digiun s'apperezza,
Non conosce la pace, e non l'estima
Chiprouato non ha la guerraprima.
O incurabil piaga, che nel petto
D'un amator, si facile s'imprime,
Non men per falso, che per ver sospetto:
Piaga, che l'huom si crudelmente opprime,
Che la ragion gli ofusca, e l'intelletto,
Et lo tra fuor de le semianze prime.
O iniqua Gelosia, cosi a torto
Lieui all'huomo ogni conforto.
What sweeter state, what bliss more iocond
Can be, then for to have an amorous heart?
What life more happy, what life can be more blessed,
Then to be found in servitude to Love?
If man were not continually pricked and egged
Of that suspect, of that fond fear of his:
Of that torme^tyng, and that foolish frenzy,
Of that fond rage, that Ielosie is named.
Yet for all that, al bytternesse that is put
In mydst of this most delectable sweetness:
Is an increasing, and making Love more feign:
And is a way to make Love show more perfect.
Thirst causes waters to taste both sauery and good,
And what food is, by fasting it is known.
None can esteem or know what peace can be,
Unless he proved have, what war is first.
O incurable plague, that so in pensive breast
Of lovers true, so easly printst thee self,
As soon through false, as true suspect.
O plague, that man so cruelly do grieve.
Thou wit and reason clean bereau'st from him,
And clean withdrawest from him al manner liklyhood.
O wicked Jealousy, that abusest man so wrongfully:
Take from man al manner help and comfort.
Veramente quel Ariosto era degno di essere coronato con vna coron a di Alloro,
per la sua rara inuentione. Truly Ariosto was worthy to be crowned with a
crown of Bays, for his rare invention. Lui era cosi certo. He was so certain.
Io vorria che mi dicessi un poco qualche cosa circa patientia, and che cosa e.
I would you would tell me somewhat upon patience, and what it is. Volentieri quel
che io posso, ma io non sono dotto, pero non posso farlo copiucamente come
merita. Gladly, that as I can, but I am not learned, wherefore I can not do it
perfectly, as it deserves.
La pacientia come dicono i poeti e Philosophi, e vna gran virtute: patientia e
la miglior medicina che sia, per un infermo, il piu pretioso impiastro che sia,
per qual si voglia piaga: patientia conforta il dolente: alegrisce il
malenconico, contenta il pouero, guarisce il malado, scema il dolor al aslitto,
contenta i tuoi amici, danoia ai tuoi nimici, gioua a ogniuno, non fa male a
nessuno, et e vna gran cosa a trouar un huomo che sia paciente.

Patience, as Poets say, and Philosophers, is a great virtue: Patience is the
best medicine that is, for a sick man, the most precious plaster that is, for
any wound: patience comfort the sad, gladdeth the mournful, contenteth
the poor, heals the sick, it eases the afflicted, contenteth thy friends,
annoyeth thine enemies, helps all men, hurts no man, it is a great thing
to find one man that is pacicient.

Certo ce ne pochi de quelli. Certis there are few of them. Io vi voglio
anchora dire un bell ponto di Ariosto, circa very amici and adulatori, che
quando l'huomo e in prosperita, non gli puo conoscere l'uno dal'altro: I will
tell you also a brave point of Ariosto, concerning true friends and
flatterers, for when a man is in prosperity, he can not know the one from the
other.
Alcun non puo saper da chi sia amato,
Quando felice in su la ruota siede:
Perch ha i very amici e fin^i al lato,
Che monstran tutti vna medesima feed.
Se poi si cangia in tristo il lieto stato,
Volta la turba adulatrice il piede.
E quel che di cuor ama, riman forte,
Et ama il suo signor doppo la morte.
No man can tell of whom he is beloved,
When happy he does sit upon the wheel:
For that he has both true and fained frinds at elbow.
And al do show one self same faith and love.
But if that fortune lowre, and weal be changed to woe,
The flattryng troops do turn from him aback:
And he that truly loves in heart, will never waver,
But loves his Lord in life, and after death.
Per mia feed, un bell detto, and beato colui che si puo guardar da simil gente.
By my faith, a fine saying, and happy is he that can beware of suchlike
people.
Quando che l'huomo e in prosperita, de gli amici ce ne assai, ma quando che la
Fortuna cambia faccia, al h'ora dice ogniuno, Io eratuo amico, ma hora non sono.

When that a man is in prosperity, of friends there is plenty, but when
Fortune changes her countenance, then every one says, I was thy friend, but
now I am not.

Questo e vero, verissimo. This is true, and very true. Orsu, noi habbiamo
parlato tanto, che credo, che siate stracco, pero se vi par been, finiamo
questi parlamenti, and andiamo a cena, perch e tempo. Well, we have talked a
great while, that I believe you are weery, wherefore if it please you, let us
finish this talk, and let us go to supper, for it is time. Ma dove ceneremo?
But where shall we sup? Ala testa del Cauallo. At the Horse head. E che faremo
dopo cena? ditemi. And what shall we do after supper? tell me. Io voglio andar
in letto. I will go to bed. Et io voglio andar a spasso sul' aqua, and vdir i
Mufici de la Regina, che sono sul' aqua. And I will go upon the water, and hear
the queens Musitio^s, that are upon the water. Orsu, mi racomando a S. S. Well,
I commend unto your L. Bacio le mani humilmente a ella, and li resto seruitore.
I Humbly kiss your hands, and rest your servant. Seruitor di S. S. per senpre.
I Always rest your servant. Miracomando a voi. I commend me unto you. Restate
con Dio. Rest you with God. Bona notte, a Dio. Good night, God be with you.


Ragionamenti sopra Fortuna, and che cosa sia Fortuna. Cap. 26. Reasonyngs up
on Fortune, and what Fortune is. Chap. 26.
SIgnor mio, Dio vi dia longa sanita. MY sir, God give you long health. Et a
voi bon giorno, and bon anno, and la bona Pasqua anche. And unto you a good
day, a good year, and also a good Easter. Dove andate cosi malinconico?
Whither go you so sad? Io vado al chiesa. I go to the Church. E che volete
fare la? And what will you do there? Io voglio pregare Iddio, che mi voglia dar
gratia, and conceder mi il suo santo spirito, di poter passar via questa
transitoria vita, in pace: e quando che piaccia alla sua santa bonta, cauarmene
fora, accio che io possa godere, and possedere quel benedetto luogho, preparato
per i boni, dal prencipio del mondo. I will pray God, that he will give me
grace, and grant me his holy spirit, that I may pass away this transitorye
life, in peace: and when it shall please his holy goodness, take me forth of it,
to the end, I may enjoy and possess that blessed place, prepared for the
good, from the beginning of the world. Dio ne dia la gratia a tutti i boni
Christiani. God grant that grace unto all good Christians. Cosi faccia, se li
piace, ma ditemi di gratia, che vuol dire, che sete cosipensoso? So do he, if
he please* but tell me of courtefie, what means it that you are so sad? Io
non sono pensoso per altro, senon a veder le gran vanita a chel'huomo e
sottoposto, che non e che vna ombra senza corpo, e vedo che ogniuno si tien a
dar piacer present, non ricordandosi del giorno del giuditio, and se alcuno ne
parla, lui ne e beffato. I am not sad for any other thing but only to see the
great vanity that man is subject unto, which is but even a shadow without a
body, and I see that every one geues him sellfe to present pleasure, not
remebryng the day of judgment, and if any speak of it, he is mocked. Certo
voi dite il vero, ogniuuo cerca di darsi piacer present, nessuno pensa a le
pene future che ne riescono. Verily you say true, every one seeks for present
pleasure, none thinks of the pains that follow afterward. Orsu, adesso noi
siamo qui in Chiesa, and il Sermon non si cominciera anchora, che cosa faremo
per passar il tempo, and fugir l'otio? Well, now we are here in the Church,
and the Sermon will not begin yet, what shall we do to pass away the time, and
flee idleness: Ragioniamo di qual cosa. Let us talk of something. E de che
cosa ragioneremo noi? And what shall we talk of? De quello che vi piace. Of
that as pleases you most. Ragioniamo qualcosa di Fortuna. Let us talk
something of Fortune. E che cosa e Fortuna, dite voi? And what is Fortune, say
you? Alcuni Philosophi chiamano Fortuna, La tresoriera del mondo, la qual regge
ogni cosa, come piu li piace, lei gouerna Reami, lei regge prouincie, lei vince
Citta, les opressa Re, lei esalta tyranni: a chi lei piace, lei da vita, a chi
lei piace, lei da morte: a alcuni lei da honor, a alcuni lei da ignominia:
come lei ha esaltato i bassi, come lei ha opressato i superbi molte, e molte
history ne fanno mentione: come lei ha i^pouerito i richi, and inrichito i
poueri: lei regge tutto il monilo, di prencipi lei ha fatto vassali: de
pecorari giardinieri, vaccari, villani, and Skiani, lei ha fatto Re,
Imperatori, and prencipi. Some Philosophers call Fortune the treasurer of the
world, whi che rules every thing as pleases her most, she governs realms,
she rules provinces, she va^quisheth cities, she opresseth kings, she exalts
tyra^ts: to who^ she pleases, she gives life, to who^ she pleases, she
gives death: to some she gives honor, to some shame: how she has exalted
the base, how she has oppressed the proud, many, and many histories make
mention: how she has impouerished the rich, and enriched the poor: she rules
all the world, of Princes she has made vassals: of shepheardes, gardiners,
cow herds, country n^e^, and bondme^, she has made kings, Emperors, and
princes. Come e possibile quello che voi mi dite, che cosi vil gente sijno
diuenuti prencipi, and che prencipi s^ano stato inpoueriti? How is it possible
that you say, that so vile people have become princes, and that princes have
been so impouerished? E vero, et verissimo, et ce ne tan tt, e tanti essempij.
It is true, and very true, and there be many and many examples of it. Di gratia
r^ci^atene alcuno. Of courtesy rehearse some. Molto volentieri, Gordio di
arare la terra, non diuenne egli famoso Re di Frigia? Very gladly, Gordius from
plowing of the earth, became not he a famous king of Frigia? Gige, non fu egli
pecoraro, et poi fu Re in Lidia: Tullio Hostilio, di pouero vaccaro, non
diuenne egli Re in Roma? Ciro Re di Persia, non fu egli notrito di vua cagna?
Romolo cosi famoso, and il primo Re de Romani, non fu egli notrito da vna Lupa?
Iustino tenendo porci non diuenne egli Imperatore: Archilao nato di vna Skiaua,
non diuenne egli Re? si certo: Alessandro figliolo di Priamo re di Troia, non
fu egli notrito and aleuato da vna Orsa? et poi fu cosi famoso, et fu causa di
quella cosi gran guerra trai i Greci, and i Troiani? and poi della destru^
tione et ruina di Trota, per hauer rubbato la moglie di Menelao? meglio sarcbbe
stato, che la Orsa l'auesse diuorato. Al contrario, non vedemo noi, come
Torquinio superbo Re di Roma, and Dionisio re di Sicilia, diuennero cosi
poueri? non habbiamo noi per essempio manifesto, come Nabugodonos^r, di Re,
diuenne cosi pouero, che fu costretto a pascersi di herb? come quel gran
Pompeio, cosi famoso in Roma, no fu egli sepolto ne le sabbie di Aegitto?
Prutia re di Bithinia, non diuenne egli mendico? Pirro cosi famoso Re, non fu
egli vcciso da vna pouera donna in Argo? Siface re di Numidia, non mori egli
captiuo in Roma? Gollia il forte et grande, non fu egli vcciso da David, con
vna pietra, tirata con vna fronda? Giulio Cesare, che fortuna lo lascio vincer
tutto il Mondo, and passar per tante, and tante bataglie, senza esser nociuto,
non soferse ella, che fra il Senato di Roma, ne la sua patria, fra i suoi
amici, lui fusse amazato con venti tree ferite. Alessandro Magno, che similmente
fu vincitor di tut^ to il mondo, non fu egli auelenato dal suo proprio cugino?
Non hauete voi letto di Rodofa, che di puttana commune, diuenne regina di Egit
to? Fortuna, non soferse ella, che Phaeto fusse bruciato, Icaro negato, Acteo
squarciato da i suoi cani? Peritto diuorato da Cerbero? che Belerofon si
rompesse il collo? Non soferse ella, che Agamennone, doppo l'hauer passato
tanti, e tanti pericoli ne le guerre di Troia, et ritornato a casa, sano and
saluo, che lui fusse vcciso da la sua moglie Clitemnestra? et poi che ella
fusse vccisa da suo figlio Oreste? che Semiramis similmente vccise il suo
marito Mino, et poi ella fu vccisa da suo figliolo chiamato Mino? che Agripina
vccise il suo marito Tiberio? et non fu lei anche vccisa da suo proprio
figliolo Nerone? che poi fu Imperator di Roma, et poi fu construtto di amazarsi
se medesimo? Certo che quel sauio Greco, chiamato Pitaco, la intendeua, quando
che ne i tempij di Mitilena lui dipinse vna scala larga, sopra la quale, alcuni
ascendeuano, and aliri descendeuano, significa^do il stato di fortuna. Potete
vedere in questo mo^do, alcuni famelici che si cibano alla tauola di Tantalo,
and may non sono satiolli. Alcuni che sudano per voltar la pietra di Sisifo:
alcuni che si affaticano con il peso di Atla: alcuni che si sforzano per empir
i sechi de le Belide: alcuni che si noiano per voltar la rota di Ixione. O
mondo vano, pieno di miseria, in che non si truoua riposo nessuno. Pero la mia
opinione e, che l'huomo non deueria may cercar fortuna, ma del tutto disprezzar
la, faccia ella come li piace: et in tutto per tutto, metter sine le mani di
Iddio, and content arsine la sua vocatione, ne la quale Iddo lo ha chiamato, et
non cercar di hauer quello de altri desiderar quello del prossimo, and posseder
quello d'altrui, come fanno molti hoggidi. Vedete che nessuno vuol esser
contento, il pouero vuol essere ricco, il ricco vuol esser potente, il potente
vuol esser prencipe, il prencipe Re, il Re temuto, honorato, et anche qualche
volta ad'orato: in tanta superbia e venuto il mondo, che ogniuno cerca di esser
superiore, nessuno vuol esser inferiore. I nostri animi sono cosi ambitiosi, i
nostri pensieri cosi superbi, i nostri cuori cosi inuidiosi, il nostro proceder
cosi fraudolente, il nostro parlar cosi lusingheuole, che l'huomo non sa di chi
sidarsi, e nessuno si vuol contentare di quello che ha, ogniuno cerca fortuna,
ogniuno l'abraccia. Nessuno si ricorda di Iddio: O Dio, le viscere del cuore mi
si sono per crepare, a veder il proceder de alcuni: Io non voglio nominar
nessuno. Gyges, was not he a shepherd, and afterward king of Lidia? Tul lius
Hostilius of a poor cow heard, became not he a king in Rome? Cirus K. of
Persia, was not he nourished of a bytch? Romulus so famous, and the first king
of the Romans, was not he norished by a Woolfe? Justinius, from keeping of
swine, became not he an Emp. Archi laus borne of a bond woman, beca^e not he a
king? yes verily: Alexander, son of Priamus king of Troy was he not norished
and brought up by a Bear? and afterward beeca^e so famous and was cause of
that so great war betwixt the Grecians and the Trojans? and then of the
destruction and ruin of Troy, for having stolen away the wife of Menelaus?
better had it ben that the Bear had devoured him. Contrariwise, do we not
see, how Torquinius the proud king of Rome, and Dionisius king of Cicilie,
became so poor? have not we for example manifest, how that Nabuchodonosor, of
a king, became so poor, that he was constreyned to feed upon herbs? How
that Pompey, so famous in Rome, was not he buried in the sands of Egypt?
Prutias king of Bithmia, became not he a beggar? Pirrhus, so famous, was not
he slain of a poor woman in Argos? Sifax king of Numidia, did not he dye a
captive in Rome? Golias the strong and great, was not he slain by David with a
stone thrown with a Slynge? Julius Caesar, whom Fortune suffered to overcome
all the World, and pass through so many, and so many battayles, and not be
hurt, did not she suffer, that mydst the Senate of Rome, in his native country
amongst his friends, he was slain with. 23. wounds. Alexander the great,
that likewise was vanquisher of all the world, was not he poisoned of his own
proper Coosin? Have you not readde of R^dophe, that of a Common Curtesan,
became a queen of Egypt? Fortune, suffered not she, that Phaeton was burned,
Icarus drowned, Acteon torn of his dogs? Perithius devoured of Cerberus,
that Beleforon brake his own neck? and did not she suffer that Agamemnon,
after he had passed so many, and so many perilles in his wars of Troy, and
returned home whole and sound, that he was slain of his wife Clitemnestra? and
then, that she was slain of her son Orestes? that Semiramis likewise slew
her husband Minos? and then she was slain of her own son called Minos?
Agripina, did not she kyl her husband Tiberius? and was not she also slain by
her own son Nero? that afterward was Emperor of Rome? and after was
constrained to slay himself? Certainly that wise Grecian called Pitacus, did
understand it, when as he in the Temples of Mitilena depaynted a broad
Ladder, upon the which, some did ascend, and other some descend, signifying
the state of Fortune. You may see in this world, how some being hungry, are
feedyng on the table of Tantalus, and never are satisfied. Some, that sweat to
roll the stone of Ssiphus: some do labor with the burden of Atlas: some
that force them selves to fyl the buckettes of Belides: some that annoye the^
selves, to turn the wheel of Ixion. Oh vain world, full of misery, in which
is found no rest at all. Wherefore my opinion is, that man should never seek
after Fortune, but altogether despise her, let her do as she pleases: and
all in all, put him self in the hands of God, and content him self with that
vocation, unto which God has called him, and not to seek to have that which
is others, and desire that which is his neighbors, and possess that is others,
as many do now adays. You see that no state will be content, the poor will
be rich, the rich will be mighty, the myghtie will be a Prince, the Prince a
king, the king feared, honored, and also sometime woorshipped: into such pride
is the world come, that all men seek to be superior, none will be inferior.
Our minds are so ambitious, our thoughts so proud, our hearts so envious,
our proceedings so fraudulent, our speaking so dissemblyng, that a man knows
not whom to trust, and none will be content with that which he has, every one
seek Fortune, all men embrace her. None remembers God: O God, the strings of
my heart are ready to burst, to see the proceedinges of some: I will name no
body. Certo voidite il vero, et verificate il proaerb^o di quel nostro poeta,
che dice: Beato e quel huomo che ha ogni cosa, et no^ possiede nulla, et
possedendo nulla, ha ogni cosa, maresta contento di quel po^ co che ha. Certis
you say true, and you verify the proverb of our Poet, which says: Happy
is that man, that has every thing, and possesses nothing, and possessing
nothing, has every thing but abides content with that as he has. Certo e un
bell detto, si vede a quunti pericoli il ricco e sottoposto, lui may non dorme
quietemente, sempre ha paura di questo e di quest' altro, lui e inuidiato da i
cattiui, disprezzato da i buoni, honorato da gli adulatori, temuto da gli
poueri, per le sue richezze. O gran cosa, ^o per me, diro come diceua quel al
tro, che e meglio dormir in terra senza paura, et esser saluo, che giacer in
letto fornito di oro, et in palazi suntuosi, et hauer paura, et esser in
pericolo di molti. Certis a fine saying, we see unto how many perils the rich
man is subject unto, he never sleeps quietly, he is ever in fear of this,
and that, he is enuyed of the evil, despised of the good, honored of
slatterers, and feared of the poor, only for his richesse. Oh great thing,
as for me, I will say, as the other said, that it is better to sleep upon
the ground without fear, and lie safe, then sleep in beds furnished in
gold, and in sumptuous palaces, and be fearful, and in danger of many.
Veramente voi dite il vero, et mi hauete narrato gran cose. Verily you say
true, and you have told me great things.


Ragionamenti sopra Dotrina, et Filosofia, et che cosa siano Scrittori, and and
qual e il prisitto di leggere et imparare scientie, con certi discorsi in laud
de scrittori, and Filosofi. Cap. 27. Reasonynges upon Learning, and
Philosophy, and what Writers are, and what the profit of readyng, and
learning of Science is, with certain discourses in praise of Writers and
Philosophers. Cha. 27.
BEn trouato signor mio, io sono tornato da voi, per pregar vi, che mi vogliate
dir qualcosa questa matina, voi mi hauete tanto ben conpiaciuto a parlarmi di
Fortuna, che hora sono ritornato da vot per vdirui.

Certo che hora voi mi burlate.

Io non fo certo, credet emi.

E de che cosa volete che io ragioni? io non so quasi de che ragionare, io
vorria che io fusse nel mio paese.

Dunque voi non sete Inglese.

Signor no, io sono Italiano.

Quanto tempo sete stato qui in questo regno?

Io sono stato qui circa un anno.

Come hauete fatto a imparare aparlar Ingle se cosi presto?

Io ho imparato Inglese, leggendo.

Si puo imparare vna lingua leggendo cosi presto?

Signor si, che si puo imparare.

Certo io non lo harei pensato, che vi pare di questa lingua Inglese, ditemi di
gratia.

E un lingua che vi fara been in Inghilterra, ma passate Dover, la non val
niente.

Dunque non e praticata fori in altri paesi?

Signor no, con chi volete che parlino?

Con i mercanti Inglesi.

Imercanti Inglesi quando sono fuori D'inghilcerra, non gli piace a loro
medesimi, et non la parlano.

Ma par cho vi pare de la lmgua? e ella gallante e gentile, o pur al contrario?

Certo se mi volete credere a me, la non mi piace, perch e vna lingua confusa,
repezata da molte altre lingue: lei piglia molte parole dal Latino, and piu dal
Franzese, and piu dal Italiano, and assai piu dal todesco, and anche seen
piglia dal Greco, and dal Britanno, tanto che se sirendesse a ogni lingua le
sue parole, poche ne resterebbono per gli Inglesi, and pure ogni giorno se ne
gli agiunge.

Come e possibile questa cosa?

E vero, et verissimo.

Certo io non lo har ei may creduto.

Fatene l'sperientia, togliete un libro, e leggete, and auuertite been, che non
leggerete quatro parole insieme di viro Inglese.

E che vi pare di questo paese?

Il paese mi piace benissimo.

Che vi pare de la gente? ditemi la vostra opinione.

La gente e qua, come in altri luoghi, ce ne di buona, and di cattiua.

Che vi pare de gli costumi de gli Inglesi? ditemi di gratia.

Io vi diro, alcuni sono been costumati, ma molti male.

Verso chi sono mal costumati?

Verso i Straniedi, and pochi di questi Inglesi si dilettano di far imparar
lingue a i suoi figlioli, la qual cosa mi dispiace. Io quando ariuai in Lo^dra,
no^ sapendo parlar Inglese, scontrai piu di cinque cento person, manzi che io
sasapessi trouar vno, che mi sapesse d^re in Italiano o Franzese, dove che
staua la Posta.

E che cosa voresti che loro facessero? imparare lingue?

Signor si, and aleuare i loro fig lioli been, and insegnarli a leggere,
scriuere, and parlar diverse lingue, and non far come fanno corti de questi
gentilhuomini Inglesi, che io conosco.

E che cosa fanno loro?

Io vedo certi Gentilhuomini, piu tosto villani, a dir la verita, che
cominciano a imparar Italiano, Franzese, and Spagnolo, and come hanno due
parole di Spagnolo, tree parole di Franzess, quatro di Italiano, pensano di
hauer assa^, non vogliono studiar piu.

Pensate che sia possibile che un Inglese, possa imparar la lingua Italiana, et
un Italiano, imparar la lingua Inglese?

Signor si, che e possibile.

In quanto tempo, pensate?

Seco^do che lui e solecito, io ho co nosciuto quelli che ha^no imparato
Italiano in tree mesi.

E che profitto ne riesce a quelli che sanno leggere, scriuere, and parlare
molti linguaggi? io non so.

Come? il profitto che ne riesce, e grandissimo.

Io non lo truouo cosi: io leggo, scriuo, e parlo tree o quatro lingue, and si
non trouo profitto nessuno io.

Io diro come diceua Alfonso Re di Aragona, essendo malato.

E che cosa diceua lui?

Alfonso Re di Aragona essendo malato, in Capua, si diede a leggere le opere di
Tito Liuio, and di Quinto Curtio: and essendo guarito della sua malatia, soleua
dire, che quando lui era malato, no^ trouaua la miglior medicina, che il
leggere Q. Curtio, essendo pensoso, no^ trouaua miglior musica, che il leggere
Tito Liuio: Augusto Cesare non voleua may essere senza Virgilio in mano:
Alessandro magno non poteua riposare senzale Iiliade di Homero ma^zi gli
occhij: Felice si teneua Pompeo, quando haueua Cicerone in seno: alegro era
Scipione, qua^do leggeua Enneo: Giocondo era L'imperator Gratiano, quando
leggeua le Poesy di Ausonio. Certo mi bisogna dire co^ Alfonso, che il leggere
e la miglior medicina per un malato, la miglior musica per un dolente, la
miglior alegreza per un pensoso, il miglior consig lio per un desperato, il
miglior conforto per l' afflitto, la miglior consolatione per un infermo, la
miglior dotrina per un ignorante, la miglior sapientia per un pazzo, i miglior
essortamenti, and le miglior amonitione che siano per i gioueni. Leggendo si
impara molte cose: chi vuol hauer buon consiglio, leggi: chi vuol vedere and
sentir cose strane, leggi: legendo si ha boni auertimenti, leggendo si impara a
conoscere il ben dal male, la virtudal vitio, and si come l'aue piglia di v^a
herba, gomma, d'un'altra cera, d'un'altra il mele, cosi leggendo diuersi libri,
s'impara diverse cose, leggendo Retorica, s'impara a persuadere, leggendo
Dialettica, s'impara a conoscere la ragione dal torto, leggendo Filosophia,
s'impara i secreti di natura, leggendo Teologia, s'impara a che modo l'huomo ha
da gouernarfi, per ottener vita eterna, leggendo history, vederai come tanti e
tanti regni sono stati gouernati: e come dice Cicerone in laud di historia,
Historia dice lui, si e la testimonianza del tempo, la luce de la verita, la
vita di memoria, la gui^ da del tempo, la messagiera di antiquita. Finalmente,
leggendo History, si vede quanto tempo i potenti Imperatori, i grandi Re, le
fa mose republiche, le populate citta habbino fiorito, noi vediamo come il
tempo fugge, et se non fusse per li Scrittori che sono stati, tutte queste cose
non si saperebbono come si sanno, and se non fusse per gli historij, and per
gli scrittori che sono stati, come si saperebbono tante cose? E come dice
Salustio, quando che esorta ogniuno a leggere, and a laudar i Scrittori, dice
lui, che la miglior consolatione per un afflitto, si e il leggere, la miglior
liberta per un prigionero, and il miglior co^forto che sia per vno malinconico,
si e il leggere. Dice oltre de gli scrittori, che coloro che fecero opere
famous, non meritorono si gran fama in farle, come fecero gli scrittori in
scriuerle in altre style: come sarebbe famoso il magno Alessandro, se non
hauesse di lui scritto Q. Curtio? Che sarebbe Vlisse, and Achille, se Homero
non nasceua? che sarebbe Alcibiade, se Xenofonte non lo hauesse agradito? che
Ciro, se Chilo non hauesse fatto mentione di lui ne le sue opere? che Pirro Re
di Albania, se Hermicle non hauesse composto di lui vna Cronica? che sar^bbe
stato il grande Asricano, se no^ erano le Deche di Liuio? che Traiano, se
Plutarco non fusse gli stato cosiamico? che sarebbe di Nerua, and di Antonio
Pio, se non hauesse scritto di loro Focione Greco? che saperessimo noi del
grana ardire di Giulio Cesare, and della grandeza di Pompeto, se Lucano non ne
hauesse scritto? chi saperebbe le vite de i dodeci Cesari, se Suetonio
Tranquillo non ne faceua un libro? che saperesimo noi circale antiquita de gli
Hebrei, se il volentissimo Gioseso no^ ne hauesse lasciato memoria? chi
saperebbe il venire de i Longobardi in Italia, se non ne seriueua Paolo
Diacono? Come saperessimo il venire, and il progresso de Gothi in Spagna, se
non ne parlaua il Curioso Roderico? chi saperebbe gli Andamenti di Aenea, se
Virgilio non hauesse composto di lui? come si saperebbe tanti documenti morali,
con ta^te belle Poesy, con gli inamormenti, and tra^sformatione de gli Dei, se
il dotto Ouidio non hauesse tolto sigran fatica sopra di se? come sarebbe cost
manifesta la vita di Marco Aurelio, et come lui fu marito di Faustina, padre di
Comodo, fratello di Annio Vero, genero di Antonio Pio, Amico di Polione, Zio di
Egesipo, and decimo settimo Imperator di Roma, se Erodiano non lo hauesse
amato, Giulio Capitolino honorato, and Eutropio scritto di lui? Chi saperebbe
le cortesie di Leone a Rugiero? gli amori di Rugiero and Bradama^te? le guerre
di Agramante and Carolo? i Duelli di Rodomonte and Mandricardo? i combattimenti
di Feraw and Rinaldo? le grand'imprese di Guidon Seluaggio? le audacita di
Marfisa? gli inamoramenti di Orlando and Angelica, se il nostro gentil, dotto,
gallante, and degno Poeta Lodouico Ariosto non ne hauesse composto un libro?
Finalmente, come si saperebbe il parto de la vergine, il nascimento di Giesu
Christo nostro Saluatore, la sua passione sotto Pontio, come pati morte su la
Croce, come lui fu sepolto, come lui vesuscito il terzo giorno, come siede alla
destra di Dio padre onnipotente, and come verra di la, a giudicar i viui and i
morti? chi saperebbe come lui hebbe dodcci discipoli? and come vno di essi lo
tradi? qualle furono le opere, and gli atti de gli Apostoli? qual fu la morte
di Giouan ^atista, di san Paulo, di san Pietro, and del traditor Giuda? come
saperessimo in che consiste tutta la nostra salute? come Iddio ci ha creat^,
Giesu Christo ricomperati, and il spirito santo santis^cati? come si
saperebbono queste cose, se gli quatro Euangelisti non ne hauessero scritto
tanto? Dice Salustio, la memoria de gli scrittori durera in eterno, perch ne
tempo puo consumare, ne Fortuna destruggere la loro fama. Come saperessimo noi,
se non fusse per gli Scrittori and Historicij? che Ligurgo fu quello che diede
leg a gli Laccdemonij? come Numa Pompilio honoro i Tempy? come Marco Marcello
pianse la fortuna di coloro che erano stati vinti da lui? come Giulio Cesare
peraono a suoi nimici? come Ottauiano fu amato dai suoi popoli? come Seuero
giouat^a a tutti? come Hettor Troiano era animoso uel guerragiare? come Hercole
Tebano vso le sue forze? come Pirro Re di Albania, su inuentor de tante cose
ingegniose? come Marco Regulo soferse tanti tormenti? come Tito fu padre de gli
Orfani? come Traiano fabrico tanti edificij? and fu tenuto il buono? Adriano il
sauio? Antonio il pietoso? come Semiramis pecco con suo figliolo carnalmente,
and fu poi da lui vccisa? come Tarquinio forzo Lucretia? come Bruto amazzo
Cesare? come Silla sparse tanto sangue? come Catilina tiraneggio spora la sua
patria? Come Giugurto amazzo i proprij fratelli? come Caligula violo le
sorolle? come Nerone vccise la madre? come Heliogaballo rubbo i Tempij? come
Domitiano faceua amazzar la sua gente da ge^te aliena, and lui amazzaua mosche?
come saperessimo noi se non fusse per gli Scrittori? come desiderio di fama
moss Mino a soleuar tante guerre? and Semiramis sua moglie a far tanti
edificiij? Vlisse il Greco a nauig ar tanti mari? Alessandro Magno a andar per
tanti paesi? Hercole Tebano a porre le sue colonne, et dove le pose? Caio
Cesare Romano di far cinquanta due bataglie? Hannibal Cartaginese a far si
cruda guerra contra Romani? Pirro Re di Albania, di venire in Italia? Attilla
Re de gli Hunni a guerreggiare per tutta Europa? Tutte queste cose sapiamo,
merce i Scrittori, che ci hanno amato, and noi non amiamo loro. Come
saperessimo noi, se non susse stato per Scrittori, come Eua fu la prima
peccatrice? Cain il primo micidiale? Abel il primo che mori? Lamec il primo che
hebbe due moglie; Enoc il primo che fondasse citta? Tubalcaim il primo Musico?
Noe il primo che nauigo? Nembroth il primo tiranno? Melchisedec il primo
Sacerdote? Anrafel il primo Re del mondo? Moise il primo Duca? Giulio Cesare il
primo Imperatore? Belo il primo che trouo guerre? Assiria la prima Monarchia?
Cadorlaomor il primo che trouo il fatto di arm? Romolo il primo Re de Romani?
Egineta il primo che fece far moneta? Dario il primo che si fece pagar tributo?
I Scitiani i primi che trouarono archi e freze? Vulcano il primo che trouo
fuoco? Anacarse che trouo Mantise por soppiarlo? Hipocrate il primo medico?
Aesculapio il primo Cirugico? Aristeo il primo che trouo il mele? I Lidiani
furono i primi a tinger lana? quelli de Egitto trouorono l'uso del Lino: quelli
di Frigia a cucire con aghi: quelli di Hetruria i primi a tescere: Dionisio il
primo che trouo vittorie and triumfi: Moise il primo che trouo lettere fra gli
Hebrei? Fidia fu il primo Pittore. De tutte queste cose saressimo ignoranti, se
non fussero stati i Scrittori. Merce a loro, si sa come Jerusalem fu la prima
Citta di tutta Palestina, Roma fu il capo di Italia, and fu chiamata capus
mundi, ma non e cosi, Cartagine fu capo di Africa: Numantia di Spagna:
Argentina di Alemagna: Babylonia di Caldea: Tebe di Egitto: Attenne di Grecia:
Tiro di Fenicia: Cesarea di Cappadocia: Bizantio di Tracia. Alesso sono Londra
di Inghilterra, Parigi di Francia, Venetia di Italia, Augusta di Alemagna,
Constantinopoli di Turchia, Vienna di Austria, Praga di Boemia, Buda di
Vagheria, Lisbonain Portugallo, Siuiglia in Spagna, Edenberga in Scotia,
Duuelina in Irlanda, Anuersa del paese basso, Vrbino di Piemonte, Marocco di
Barberia, so non fusse per gli Historici? come saperessimo noi, qual fu la
ambition di Cesare? la ebrieta di Tiberio? la superbia di Caligula? la crudelta
di Nerone? la vita vitiosa di Heliogaballo? la pieta di Traiano? la inuidia di
Alessadro? la belezza di Narcisso? la sapientia di Salomone? le fortezze di
Hercole, and di Hettore? la auaritia di Ciro? la liberalita di Pompeio? la
amicitia tra Damone and Pitia? la filosofia di Aristotile? la dottrina di
Catone? la eloquentia di Tullio? le richezze di Cresso? la patientia di
Adrasto? la velocita di Atalanta? la vechieza di Nestore? la astutia di Vlisse?
la obedientia di Abraham? la cupidita di Mida? la malitia di Hannibale? la
dissimulati^ ne di Zopiro? la adulatione di Aristrippo? la memoria di
Mitridate, and la constantia di Penclope? Nessa^a di queste cose sarebbono cosi
in bocca ca ogniuno, se non fussero stati i Scrittori? i quali sono degni da
esser honorati. Se non fusse per Scrittori, non ci sarebbe timor di Dio, ne
Leg, ne ordine: ogniuno viuerebbe al suo modo. Leggendo si vede la diuersita
de le cose, la bonta d'una sort, la maluagita del' altra, si impapara a
conoscere il been dal male. Perch come dice il poeta: Non ci e luce senza
tenebre, non ci e virtu senza vitio, non ci e ombra senza corpo, non ci e
comodita senza discomodita. Leggendo si impara a esser eloquente, and essendo
eloquente, molte and innumerabile sono le comodita che ne riescono. Eloquontia
ha sorza di far il codardo coragioso, il tiranno cortese, and misericordioso:
Eloquentia persuade i boni, dissuade i cattiui, conforta l'aflitto, bandisce
paura dal timido, pacifica gli insolenti: e come dice Cicerone, vince citta,
regni, e castelli con la sua forza. Eloquentia in aduersita, si e un solazzo,
in prosperita un ornamento, in giouentu laudabile, in vechieza diletteuole, in
tutti gli stati profitteuole, fa been a tutti, danoia nessuno. Pirro quel gran
Re di Albania soleua dire, che guadagna piu citta, vinceua piu regni con la
eloquentia di Cinea, che non faceua con tutti i suoi eserciti. Guarda se
eloquentia e di gran forza, ecome la potiamo imparare senza lettere? Non e
possibile. Ditemi di gratia, se non fussero stati tanti e tanti Dottori,
Filosofi, et Scrittori, che si hanno afaticato giorno et notte, in studiare per
lasciar memoria di se, and per darci da imparare a noi, come saperessimo noi,
che cosa sia il culto di Dio? Saressimo senza intelletto, come animali brutti:
noi non penseressimo may a Dio per seruirlo, ne de la sua gloria, per obedirlo,
ne de i poueri, per socorerli, ne de la nostra vita, per emendar la: ne de la
nostra conscientia, per illustrar la, ma con l'a^^to de i libri, impariamo a
seruir Dio, impariamo a obedir la sua gloria, impariamo a soccorer i poueri,
(ma pochi lo fanno) impariamo a emendar la nostra vita, and illustrar le nostre
conscientie, per dotrina de i libri: impariamo a saper, come Dio, di terra ci
ha creati alla sua imagine, come Giesu Christo ci hariscossi con il suo
pretioso sangue, sparsi per i nostri peccati: come il spirito santo ci ha
glorificati: come Iddio il padre, Iddio il figliolo, and Iddio lo spirito
santo, sono tree in vno, and vno in tree, and che non ci e altro mezo, ne altra
via per ottener vita eterna, che per esso tree, and per loro vno: a la qual vita
eterna, Iddio per la sua gratia ci voglia condure. Amen.

Certo gran conto habbiamo noi da fare de gli Scrittori antichi, gia non voglio
laudarli tutti, perch ce ne sono molti an che assai, che scriuono piu che il
douere. Perch come ogni cosa e corotta (...) manro da esser (...) ma di quello
ne lasso il (...) a quelli che han^^^^ torita di correggere and c^^^ dare ogni
cosa. Et cosi per quanto ho de tto, and sono per dire, possono comprenderea
Letteri, quanto si debba a gli Histori^i, i quali al mio parere, la sciarono di
se gloria immortale, per quello che scrissero, si come quelli prencipi furono
gloriosi, per quello che fecero, gli studiosi Scrittori hanno poco stimato i
gran trauagli che hanno sofe^to nel leggere, studiare, and scriuere. Non
ostante, sapendo come sempre vi furono, sono, and credo, saranno certi nasuti,
mal costumati, and per dir meglio, inuidiosi, che quando gli Scrittori passano
per le fatiche, loro vanno a spasso, qua^do i Scrittori veggiano, loro dormono:
quando i Scrittori digiunano, loro sono a banketti, and a festeggiare: quando
che gli Scrittori vanno voltando libri, essi si vanno auolgendosine vitij: ma
non ostante questo, essi pure si pongono a giudicare, a guastare, and a dannare
la dotrina aliena: and come se hauessero l' autorita che Platone hebbe in
Grecia, che Salomone hebbe tra gli Hebrei, Licurgo tra gli Lacedemonij,
Prometeo tra gli Egitij, Apolonio tra gli Indiani, and Sccondo tra gli Assirij,
ouero la eloquentia che hebbe Cicerone in Roma. Pochi ne trouerete, credo
nessuno, che sii hoggi di, ne la lingua Latina diligente, ne la Greca ben
esperto, ne la Hebrea dotto, ne la Spagnola ornato, sopra la lingua Italiana
ben fondato, and ne la Fransese curioso, ouero ne lo auolger libri desideroso,
et se qual cuno lo fa e beffato da molti, scerzato da ogniuno, imitato di
pochi, amato da manco, and cercato da nessuno. Trouereti certi nasuti, mal
creati: certi tonazzi, che inanzi che habbino visto un libro, inanzi che
sappino, che cosa sia, and de che trattu, haranno ar dire di de fa marlo.
Vederete certi huomini, non huomini, ma piu tosto bestie (mi vien quasi voglia
di nominar li) che sono tanto larghi nel parlare, and tanto ristretti nel
studiare, che senza arossirsi ardiranno dire, che non ci e libro che essi non
habbino letto, o veduto, guarda che presuntione e questa, ogniuno e dato al
dannar ilibri, pochial comendarli. Vederete tree o quatro in vna compagnia, and
vno pigliera un libro in mano, e cominciera a leggere due o tree parole, dira
vno, gli e troppo prolisso: un altro dira, egli parla fuori di propoposito:
dira vno, gli e oscuro: dira vn'altro, gli e tristo vulgar: dira vno, il tutto
e finto: dira l'altro, gli e curioso: l'altro dira, che gli e malitioso, talche
a dirlo in breuita, la dotrina riman sospetta, and L'autore non va essente di
qualche macula. Certi altri sfacciati ci sono, che senza vergogna haranno
ardire di dire, che non gli resta cosa da vedere, che essi non habbino vista:
si vanteranno, che non ci e cosa da scoprire, che essi non habbino scoperta,
affermeranno che non ci e cosa da leggere, che essi non habbino letta: giurer
ano che non ci e cosa da scriuere, che essi non habbino scritta: altri si
assicurer anno, che non ci e cosa da sapere, che essi non la sappiano. (Ha
gente maligna, nation vituperasa), la qual sei causa che molti e molti che
vorebbono scriuere, ma lo lasciano per questi ta^to inuidiosi. Ditemi di
gratia, i piu gran pre^cipi, che siano sta ti, non hanno essi preso diletto ne
gli Scrittori e Filosofi? Plutarco, non fu egli maestro di Traiano? Alessandro,
non haueua egli Homero per amico, and Aristotole per maestro? Oh nobil detto di
Filippo quel gran Re di Macedonia, and padre di Alessandro Magno, quando che
lui disse, che ringratiaua i suoi Dei, che il suo figliolo Alessandro era nato
mentre che Aristotele viueua, et glie lo diede per tutorc: quel gran Re Dario,
non hebbe egli per suo famigliare, Plotino? Augusto hebbe Pisto, Pompeio hebbe
Plauto, Tito hebbe Plinio, Adriano hebbe Secondo, Antonio hebbe Apolonio,
Teodosio hebbe Claudio, Seuero hebbe ^abato, i ^^lososi al tempo (...) haue^^^^
ta^^ (...) le case de^ preacipi, che gli siglioli de i (...) gli riconoscen^^
per (...), and i loro padci per m^^stri: (pochi hoggi di gli im^tano, and manco
se gli aguaglion^) quanto been facci la Filosofia a gli prencipi and signori,
impariamo di Marco Aureho, il qual su essaltato al Imperio, non per le sue
richeze, ma per la sua dotri^a, non per il suo sangue generoso, ma per la sua
Filososia, non per hauerlo hereditato, ma moritato co^le sue bone opere. Lui fu
Filoso fomolto sauio, Prencipe molto potente, Imperatore molto temuto: lui fu
di giuditio dritto ne la giustitia, grato a gli suoiamici, paciente negli
trauagli, quanto ben sapeua dissimulare con i suoi nimici, quanto seuero
contraitiranni, qua^to pacesico co^ipacefici, quanto amico de sauij, quanto
s'ingegnaua di imitar i semplici, quanto auenturato ne le sue guerre, quanto
benigno ne la pace: lui fu te^perato nel mangiare, moderato nello spendere,
grato a chi lo seruia, paciente verso chi l'offendeua, solecito a conseruar la
pace, fedele a mantener le tregue, fu barone di profondo intelletto, dotto ne
la lingua Greca and Latina, and soprail tutto, quanto alto ne le sue parole,
quanto profondo ne le sue sentenzie, Veramente voi vedete le sue opere imitate
da pochi, and abandonate da molti. Oh quanto sono stato stimati i Filosofi a i
tempi vechij, tante e tante History ne fanno mentione. Vedete come il Filosofo
Brusillo fu stimato da tutto il Senato Romano: O qua^to furono stimati i setti
sanij di Grecia? lo potete leggere: quanto fu stimato Anatarso Filosofo da
Cresso, e manifesto, che mando i suoi Imbassadori di Lidia a Attenne, con molti
tesori a domandarlo and pregarlo, che venisse a vederlo, promettendogli tutto
il gouerno del suo Regno, and si teneua come deforme et sfortunato, perch non
hauena Filosofo per terirli compagnia, and consigliarlo. Falari quel gran
Tiranno sidilettana di huomini dotti, and di Filososia, and non voleua may
esserne senza. Oh eta aurea, quando che dottrina era cercata da lontano and
d'apresso: quando che ingegno era esercitato, politia praticata, and virtu
honorata. Ben disse il vero Tullio, quando che disse, O Filososia la cercat^ice
di tutte le been virtu, and la espelatrice di tutti i vitij, quella republica
si teneua felice, quel regno beato^, quelle Citta in pace, che haueuano boni
Filososi in se, per essaltar virtu and per supressar vitio, per rimunerar i
boni, per castigar i rei, per estimar i dotti, per negleggere i ignoranti.
Pero, la mia opinione e, che si tenga conto de gli Scrittori, and si estimino
le loro buone opere: ma non e cosi, ben lo potiamo speraro, ma non aspettare.

Certo voi mi hauete fatto qui un Sermon longo, che credo che debbiate essere
stracco.

Si certo, che io sono stracco, and piu che io parlo di loro^, piu poss^, piu
che io li laudo, tanto piu m^ritano da esser laudati. H^ggi di pochi si danno
al leggere, and manco al siu^^^re, certo mi rincresce a p^^^arui sopra.

Io credo che molti lo fanno per sparag^ar denari.

Cosi sanno certo.

Io voria che ci fusse simil leg, che se vno aleuasse i suoi figlioli, senza
(...) imparare qualcosa, est ec^almente a leggere, s^riuere, and parlare molte
lingue, che lui fusse decapitato, ouero punito grauemente.

Si ma noi piu tosto potiamo sperar tal cosa, manon aspettarla. O Dio, quando
che io considero le grave Leggi che sono state altri tempi contra gli otiosi. O
Roma triumfante, quando che ogniuno era obligato a imparar qualcosa, and se si
trouaua qualcuno otioso, lui era punito grauemente, tanto lui, quanto i suoi
parenti, al'hora non ci erano tanti assassiname^ti latrocinij, furti, and
homi^idij. E d'onde vengo no queste cose, senon per che la giouentu e aleuata
cosi delicatamente, che quando i loro padrie madri vengono a morte, non sanno
far niente, se hanno qualcosa, lo spendono presto, se non hanno niente, vanno
rubbando, diuentono assasini da strada. Che e il loro fine? prouano se Caneuo e
foot, come ce ne l'esperientia giornalmente, e tutte queste cose si potrebbono
skiuare, se piacesse a padri considerarli sopra qua^do sono gioueni, and non
auezzarli cosi superbamente, and aleuarli cosi otio samente. Che vergogna e,
quella vederete tal Inglese venire in compagnia di Forastieri, non sapcra ne
parlar, ne intendere con loro, ma stara come muto, e cosi-rest a beffato da
loro, and disprezato da tutti, and nessuno fara conto di lui. Che vergogna e
quella? che vituperio per i suoi parents? che perdita per lui? e che cordoglio
pensadoui sopra? dotrina e sapientia, sacci Fortuna quello che li piace, may si
perde, ne aqua la puo guastare, ne fuoco bruciare, se la non ti preuale in un
luoco, ti preualera in un altro, ne anche tempesta puo consumare scientia. O
quanto fu ben detto dal Poeta, quando che vno gli domando dove or ano tutti i
suoitesori, luirispose, Nel mio seno. Dotrina e grieve, and sinon pesa, e
grande, and si non occupa gran luogo, e bella, e pochi la cercano, profiteuole,
and si e abandonata da molti: lei e dolce, e pochi la vogliono tastare: belli
palazi non sono egli sottoposto alla tempesta? belezze di corpo a malatia?
richezze alla Fortuna? chi ha denari, non puo compr ar dotrina leggiermente,
and chi ha dotrina, troua palazi e richezze, fama, gloria, reputatione, e
denari, venghi dove si voglia. Ben la intesero i Filosofi antichi, che se non
poteuano studiare di giorno, studiauano di notte, non faceuano conto di fatica
di veggiare, fusse cosi hoggi, che il mondo anderebbe in altro modo.

Veramente voi dite il vero, ma di gratia ditemi un poco il vostro parere circa
Diligentia, and che cosa e, perch io ho sentito dire, che e vna cosa molto
profitcuole a chila praticha.

Well met my Sir, I am returned unto you, to desire you, that you will tell me
somewhat this morning, you have so well pleased me in talking of Fortune, that I
am returned to you again, to hear you.

Certis now you mock me.

I do not so certis, believe me.

And what will you that I reason of? I know not almost what. to speak of, I
would that I were in my country.

Then you are not an English man?

No sir. I am an Italian.

How long have you been here in this Realm?

I have been here about a year.

How have you done to learn to speak English so soon?

I have learned English by reading.

May a man learn a language so soon, by reading?

Yea sir, a man may learn it.

Certis I would not have thought it: what think you of this English tongue, tell
me, I pray you?

It is a language that will do you good in England, but pass Dover, it is
worth nothing.

Is it not used then in other cou^treyes?

No sir, with whom will you that they speak?

With English merchants.

English marchantes, when they are out of England, it likes them not, and they
do not speak it.

But yet what think you of the speech, is it gallant and gentle, or else
contrary?

Certis if you will believe me, it does not like me at al, because it is a
language confused, bepeesed with many tongues: it takes many words of the
latin, and mo from the French, and mo from the Italian, and many mo from the
Duitch, some also from the Greek, and from the Britain, so that if every
language had his own words again, there would but a few remain for
English men, and yet every day they add.

How is this thing possible?

It is true, and very true.

Certis I would never have thought it.

Make the experience of it, take a book and read, but mark well, and you
shall not read four words together of true English.

And what think you of this country?

The country likes me very well

What think you of the people? tell me your opinion?

The people are here, as they are in other places, there are good and bad.

What think you of the manners of English men? tell me of courtesy.

I will tell you, some are well manered, but many ill.

Toward whom are they ill manered?

Toward Strangers: and few of these English men delight to have their children
learn diverse languages, which thing displeases me. When I arrived first in
London, I could not speak English, and I met above five hundred persons,
before I could find one, that could tell me in Italian, or French, where the
Post dwelt.

And what would you have them do? learn languages:

Yea sir, and bring up their children well, and have them taught to read,
write, and speak diverse languages, and not do, as many of these English
Gentlemen do, that I know.

And what do they?

I see certain Gentlemen rather lownes, to tell the truth, that begin to learn
to spoke Italian, French, and Spanish, and when they have learned two words of
Spanish, three words of French, and four words of Italian, they think they
have yenough, they will study mo more.

Think you it be possible, that an English man may learn the Italian tongue,
and that an Italian may learn the Enghish.

Yea sir, that it is possible.

In what time think you?

Thereafter as he plyeth it, I have known the^ that have learned Italian in
three months.

And what profit comes to those that can read, write, and speak many
languages? I know not.

How? the profit that comes thereof is very great.

I find it not so: I read, write, and speak, three or four tongues, and yet
I find no profit by it.

I will say, as Alfonsus king of Aragon said, being sick.

And what did he say?

Alfonsus king of Aragon, being sick, in Capua, gave him self to read the
works of Titus Linius, and of Quintus Curtius: and being healed of his
sickness, he was wont to say, that when he was sick, he never found better
medicine, then reading Quintus Curtius: being sad, he found no better music,
then in reading of Titus Liuius: Augustus Caesar would never be without Virgil
in his hand: Alexander the Great, could never take rest, unless he had
Homers Iliades before his eyes: Pompey held him self happy, when he had Cicero
in his bosom: glad was Scipio, when he read Enneus: gioconde was the Emperor
Gratian, when he read the Posies of Ausonius. Verily, I must say with Alfonsus,
that readyng is the best medicine for a sick man, the best music for a sad
man, the best mirth for a heavy man, the best counsel for a desperate man, the
best comfort for one afflicted, the best consolation for a diseased man, the
best learning for an ignorant man, the best wisdom for a fool, the best
exhortations, and the best admonitions that are for young men. By readyng, many
things are learned, who will have good counsel, let him read, who will see, and
hear strange things, let him read: by reding, we have good forwarning, by
reading, we learn to know the good from the bad, virtue from vice, and as the
be takes from one herb, gum, from another wax, and from an other honey, so by
reading diverse books, diverse things are learned: by reading Retnorik we learn
to persuade, by reading Logik, we learn to know the right from the wrong, by
reading Philosoyhie, we learn the secrets of nature, by reading D^uinitie, we
learn how a man should govern him self, to attain life everlasting, by
reading histories, you may see how so many and so many kingdo^s have been
governed: and as Cicero says, in praise of history, history, says he, is the
testimony of Time, the light of verity, the life of memory, the guide of time,
the messenger of antiquity. Finally, by reading histories, we see how long time
mighty Emperoures, great kings, famous commonweals, and peopled cities have
flourished, we see how time flees away, and if it were not for Writers that
have been, al these things were not known as they are: and if it were not for
historiographers, and writers that have been, how should so many things be
known? And as Salustius says, when he exhorts every one to read, and to
praise Writers, he says, that the best consolation for one afflicted, is
reading, the best liberty for a prisoner, and the best comfort that is for a
melancholique man, is reading. He says moreover of writers, that those that
did any famous deeds, deserved not so great fame in dooyng them, as did the
Writers in writing them in losty style: how should Alexander the great be so
famous, if Q. Curtius had not written of him? what were Ulysses and Achilles,
if Homer had not ben borne? what were Alcibiades, if Xenophon had not exalted
him? what Cirus, if Chilus had not made mention of him in his works? what
Pirrus king of Albania, if Hermicles had not compiled a Chronicle of him? what
had the great Africa, been if the Decades of Titus Liuius had not ben? what
Traiane, if Plutarch had not ben so frindly unto him? what were Nerua, and
Antonius Pius, if Phocion the Greek had not written of them? How should we
know of the great courage of Julius Caesar, and of the greatness of Pompey, if
Lucanus had not written of the^? who should know the lives of the twelve
Cesars, if Suetonius Tranquillus had not made a book of the^? what should we
know of the antiquities of the Hebrews, if our well willing Joseph had not left
memory of them? who should know the coming of the Longobadies into Italy, if
Paulus Diaconus had not written of it? How should we know the coming and
progress of the Goths into Spain, if the curious Rodericus had not spoken of
them? who should know the paths of Aeneas, if Virgil had not composed of him?
how should the moral documents, with so many fine posies, with the louyngs and
transformations of the gods be known, if our learned Ovid had not taken such
a great labor upon him? how should the life of Marcus Aurelius be so manifest?
and how he was husband to Faustina, father to Comodus, brother to Annius Verus,
son in law to Antonius Pius, friend to Polion, uncle to Egesippus, and the
seventeen Emperor of Rome, if Erodianus had not loved him? Giulius Capitolinus
honored him, and Eutropius written of him? who should know the courtesies of
Leo to Rugiero? the loves of Rugiero and Bradamante? the wars of Agrama^te and
Charles, the co^bats of Rodomonte and Mandricardo? the sightinges of Ferau and
Rinaldo, the great enterprises of Guido^ Seluaggio? the boldness of Marfila?
the amorous toys of Orlando and Angelica, if that our gentle, learned,
gallant, and worthy Poet Lodonico Ariosto had not compyled a book of it:
Finally, how should we know the delivery of the virgin the birth of Jesus
Christ our Saueour, his passion under Pontius, how he suffered death upon the
Cross, how he was buried, how he rose the third day, how he sits on the
right hand of God the father almighty, and how he shall come from thence to
judge the quick and dead? who should know that he had twelve disciples? and
how one of them betrayed him? which were the works and acts of the Apostles?
what was the death of S. John Baptist, of S. Paul, of S. Peter, and of the
traitor Judas? how should we know in what consists al our salvation? how
God has created us, Jesus Christ bought us, and the holy ghost sanctified us?
how should these things be known, if the four Evangelists had not written so
much? Salustius says, the memory of Writers shall last for ever: for neither
time can consume, neither fortune destroy their fame. How should we know, if
it were not for Writers and Historiographers, how Licurgus was he that gave
Laws to the Lacedaemonians? How Numa Pompilius honored the Temples? how
Marcus Marcellus wept at the fortune of those that he had overcome? how Julius
Caesar pardoned his enemies? how Octauianus was beloved of his people? how
Seuerus did help all men? how Hector Troianus was courageous in Martial and
wa^like affairs? How Hercules used his forces? how Pirrhus king of Albania was
inuentor of so many ingenious things? how Marcus Mar cellus suffered so many
torments? how Titus was father to the Orfanes? how Traian framed so many
buildings, and was counted the good? Adrian the wise, Antonius the pitisul? how
Semiraw is sinned fleshly with her own son, and afterward was slain by him?
how Tarquinius forced Lucretia? how Brutus slew Caesar? how Silla shed so
much blood? how Catilina played the tirant over his country? how Iugurth slew
his own brethren? how Caligula violated his sisters? how Nero slew his
mother? how Heliogaballus robbed the Temples? how Domitianus caused his own
people to be slain of strangers, while he was killyng of Flies? how should we
know, if it were not for writers, how desire of fame moved Minos to raise so
many wars? and Semiramis his wise to build so many edifices? Ulysses the
Grecia^ to sail so many seas? Alexander the great to go through so many
countries? Hercules the Theban to set his pyllers, and where he set them? Caius
Caesar the Roman, to make fifty and two battles? Hannibal the Carthaginia^, to
make such sharp wars against the Romans? Pirrhus K. of Albania, to come into
Italy? Atillas king of the Hunnes, to war against al Europe? Al these things
we do know, thanks be unto Writers, that have loved us, but we love not them.
How should we know, if it had not ben for Writers, how Eve was the first
sinner? Cain the first mutherer? Abel the first that dyed? Lamech the first
that had two wives? Enoc the first that founded City? Tubalchaim the first
Musition? Noe the first that sailed? Nembroth the first Tyrant? Melchisedech
the first Priest? Anrafel the first king in the world? Moses the first
Duke? Julius Caesar the first Emperor: Belon the first that found Wars?
Assiria the first Monarchy? Cadorlaomor the first that found the use of
weapons? Romulus the first king of the Romans? Egineta the first that caused
money to be made? Darius the first that caused tribute to be paid? the Scithians
the first that found bows and arowes: Vulcan the first that found fire
Anacharses that found belows to blow it? Hipocrates the first Physician?
Esculapius the first Surgeon? Aristeus the first that found honey? the Lidians
the first to dye wool? those of Egypt found the use of Flax: those of Frigia,
to sow with needles: those of Hetruria, the first to weaue: Dionifius the
first that found victories and trivmphes: Moses the first that found letters
among the Hebrews: Fidias the first Painter. Of al these things should we be
ignorant, if Writers had not ben. Thanks be unto the^, it is knowoen how
Jerusalem was the head city of al Palestina: Rome the head city of Italy, and
was called the head of the world: but it is not so, Car thage the head city of
Africa: Numantia of Spain: Argentina of Germany: Babylon of Chaldea: Thebes of
Egypt: Athens of Greece: Tirus of Fenicia: Cesarea of Cappadocia: Bizancio of
Thrace. Now are London of England, Paris of France, Venice of Italy, Augusta
of Germanic, Constantinople of Turchie, Vienna of Austrige, Prage of Bohemia,
Buda of Hungaria, Lisbona of Portugal, Siuiglia of Spain, Edenborough of
Scotland, Duuelin of Irelande, Andwerpe of the low countries, Vrbino of
Piemount, Marocco of Barbary, if it had not been for Historiographers? how
should we know what the ambition of Caesar was? the dru^kennesse of Tiberius?
the pride of Calicula? the cruelty of Nero? the vicious life of Heliogabalus?
the pity of Traian? the envy of Alexander? the beauty of Narcissus? the
wisdom of Solomon? the forces of Hercules, and Hector? the avarice of Cirus?
the liberality of Pompey? the frindship between Damon and Pithias? the
Philosophy of Aristotle? the learning of Cato? the eloquence of Tullie? the
riches of Cressus? the patience of Adrastus? the swiftness of Atalanta? the
age of Nestor? the policy of Ulysses? the obedience of Abraham? the
covetousness of Midas the craft of Hannibal? the dissembling of Zopirus? the
flattery of Aristippus? the memory of Mithridates? and the constancy of
Penelope? None of these things should so be in the mouth of every man, if
Writers had not ben, which are worthy to be honored. If it were not for
Writers, there should be no fear of God, no Law, nor order: every one would
live after his own manner. By reading we see the diversities of things, the
goodness of one sort, and the badnes of the other, we learn to know the good
from the bad. For as the Poet says, There is no light without darkness, no
virtue without vice, no shadow without a body, no commodity without a
discommoditie. By reading we learn to be eloquent, and being eloquent, many
and innumerable be the commodities that ensue of it. Eloquence has force to
make the coward courageous the tirant courteous and merciful: Eloquence
persuades the good, disswadeth the bad, comforts the afflicted, banisheth
fear from the fearful, pacifieth the insolent: and, as Cicero says,
vanquisheth cities, kingdo^es, and castles with her force. Eloquence in
adversity, is a solace: in prosperity, an ornament: in youth, laudable: in
age, delectable: in all estates profitable: it does good to all men, it
hurts none. Pirrhus that great king of Albania was wont to say, that he
won more cities, overcame more realms with the eloquence of Cineas, then he
did with his great armies. Behold, if eloquence be of great force, and how can
we learn it without letters? It is not possible. Tell me of courtesy, if it
had not been for so many and so many Doctors, Philosophers, and writers, that
have labored so, day and night, in studying for to leave memory of them, and to
give us to learn, how should we know what the worshipping of God is? we
should be without understanding, as brute beasts: we should never think on
God, to serve him: nor of his glory, to obey him: nor on the poor, to succor
them: nor on our life, to amend it, neither on our consciences, to brighten
them, but with the help of books we learn to setue God, we learn to obey
his glory, we learn to succor the poor, (but few do it,) we learn to
amend our lives, and to brighten our consciences, through the doctrine of
books, we learn to know, how God, of earth has created us unto his
likeness, how Jesus Christ has redeemed us with his precious blood, shed
for our sins, how the holy ghost has glorified us, how God the father, God
the son, and God the holy Ghost, are three in one, and one in three, and
that there is none other means, or way, for to obtain life everlasting, then
by him three, and them one: unto the which life everlasting, God for his grace
conduct us. Amen.

Certis great account have we to make of ancient Writers, yet will I not
praise them al, for I know that there are many, yea very many that write more
then they ought. for as every thing is corupted now adays, even so is writin,
corrupted, (...) any write things that are not to be written much less to be
read and well less to be licenced, but of that I leave the care unto those that
have authority to correct and amend every thing. And so, for so much as I
have said, and am to say, Readers may conjecture, how much we owe to
Historiographers, who in my mind, left of them selves immortal glory, for that
as they wrote, as those Princes were glorious, for that which they did, the
studious Writers have little esteemed the great travails they have suffered, in
readyng, studying, and writing. Notwithstanding, knowing how always there
were, are, and I believe, will be certain groutheaded, ill manered, and to say
better, envious, that when Writers pass through labor, they go abroad
solasing: when Writers watch, they sleep: when Writers fast, they are a
banquettyng, and a feastyng: when that the Writers are tossyng and turnyng
their books, they go wallowing in vices: and yet for all this, they will set
the^ selves to judge, to mar^e, and to condemn other men's doctrine, and even
if they had the authority that Plato had in Greece, that Solomon had among the
Hebrews, that Licurgus among the Lacedaemonians, Premetheus among the Egyptians,
Apolonius among the Indians, and Secu^dus among the Assyrians, or else the
cloquence that Cicero had in Rome Few you shall find, I be leave none, that be
now adays in the Latin tongue diligent, in the Greek expert, in the Hebrew
learned, with the Spanish adorned, upon the Italian language well grounded, and
in the French curious, or else in tossing of books desirous, and if any do it,
he is mocked of many, iested at of every body, envied of al, imitated of few,
loved of less, sought of none. You shall find certain doltes, better fed the^
taught, certain Antony nownowes, who before they have seen a book, before they
know what it is, and whereof it treates, will be so bold as to defame it. You
shall see certain men, not men, but rather beasts, (I am almost minded to name
them) who are so large in speaking, and so straight in studying, that with out
blushyng they will dare to say, that there is no book but they have readde, or
else seen: behold what presumption is this, every one is given to condemn
books, few to commend the^. You shall see three or four in a company, and one
will take a book in his hand, and begin to read two or three-words, and one
will say, he is too coy: another will say, he speaks out of purpose: one will
say, he is too dark: an other will say, it is not good vulgar: another will say,
al is feigned: another will say, he is to curious: another, he is crafty, so
that, to speak briefly, the matter rests as suspected, and the Author goes
not altogether unspotted. There are certain other shameless, that without
shame will be so hardy, as to say, that there rests nothing to see, but they
have seen it: they will vaunt themselves, that there is no one thing to
discover, that they have not discovered, affyrming that there is nothing to be
read, that they have not read they will swear that there is nothing to be
written, that they have not written: some other will assure the^ selves, that
there is nothing to be known that the^ know not. (Ha crafty people, ha shameless
nation) who art cause that many and many that would write, leave of, and al
through such envious men. Tell me of courtesy, the greatest Princes that have been have they not taken delight in Writers and Philosophers? Plutarch, was not
he master unto Traian? Alexander, had not he Homer for his friend? and
Aristotle for his master, Ha noble sayeing of Philip, that great king of
Macedonia, and father to Alexander the great, when as he said, that he thanked
his gods that his son Alexander was borne, whilst Aristotle lived, and
gave him, him to be his Tutour: that great king Darius, had not he for his
familiare, Plotinus? Augustus had Pistus, Pompey had Plautus, Titus had
Plinius, Adrianus had Secundus, Antonius had Apolonius, Theodosius had
Claudius, S^ncrus had Fabatus: Philosophers in the old time had such authority
in princes houses, that princes sons did acknowledge them for Fathers, and
their Fathers for Masters. (Few now adays do imitate them, and less do
compare with the^) how much good Philosophy does unto princes and lords, let
us learn of Marcus Aurelius, who was exalted unto the Empire, not for his
riches, but for his learning, not for his high blood, but for his Philosophy,
not because he did inherit it, but because he had deserved it by his good
works. He was a Philosopher very sage, a prince very mighty, an Emperor much
feared, of a right judgment in all justice, grateful unto all his friends,
pacient in his trauayles, how well he could dissemble with his enemies, how
severe against tyrants, how peaceable with the peaceable, how frindly to the
wise, how he did endeavor himself to imitate the simple, how fortunate in his
wars, how bountiful in Peace: he was temperate in eating, moderate in
spending, grateful to them that served him, pacient to such as offended him,
dilligent to mainteyn peace, faithful in keeping truces, he was a lord of a deep
understanding, learned in the Greek and Latin tongue, and beside all this,
how hauty in his words, how profound in his Sentences. Verily you see his
works imitated of few, but forsaken of many. Oh how much have Philosophers
been esteemed in old time, so many and so many histories make mention of it.
You see how the Philosopher Brusillus was esteemed of all the Senate of Rome?
Oh how much were the seven Sages of Greece esteemed? you may read it: how much
Anatharsus was esteemed of Cressus, it is manifest that he sent his Ambassadors
from Lidia to Athens with wany treasures, to ask for him, and pray him he would
come see him, promising him the government of al his realm and counted himself
deformed and unfortunate, because he had no Philosophers to keep him company,
and to counsel him. Falaris that great tyrant would delight in learned me^,
and in Philosophy, and would never be without. Oh golden age, when learning
was sought for far and near: when wit was exercised, and policy practiced,
and virtue honored. Well did Tullie say the truth, when as he said, O
Philosophy, the searcher of al good virtues, and the expeller of all vices,
that common weal did account it self happy, that Realm blessed, that City
in peace, that had good Philosophers in it, for to exalt virtue, and to
suppress vice, to reward the good, and punish the bad, to esteem the learned,
and neglect the ignorant. Wherefore my opinion is, that Writers be made account
of, and that their good works be esteemed: but it is not so, well may we hope
for it, but not look for it.

Verily you have made me here a long Sermon, that I believe you should be weery.

Yea verily I am weery, and the more I speak of them, the more I may ^^e more
I praise them, the more they merit to be praised. Now ad^^es few give
themselves to read, and less to study: verily it greueth me to think upon it.

I believe that many do it for to spare money.

So they do certain.

I would there were such a Law, that if one should bring up his children,
without teaching them somthyng, and especially to read, write, and speak
diverse la^guages, that he should be beheaded, or else punished grievously.

Yea, but we may rather hope for such a thing; then look for it. Oh God, when
I consider the grievous Laws that have been against those that were idle in
the old time. O triumphing Rome, when every one was bound to learn something,
and if by chance any one were found idle, he was grievously punished, as well
his parents, as he: then were there not so many robberies, stealynges,
filchings, and murdrings. And whence come these things, but only because youth
is so delicatly brought up, that when their fathers and mothers approach unto
death, they can do nothing, if they have any thing, they spend it quickly, if
they have nothing, they go a stealing, and become high way thieves. What is
their end? they prove if Hemp be strong, as there is daily experience of it,
and al these things might be shunned, if it would please their fathers to
think thereupon when they are young, and not pamper them up so proudly, nor
bring the^ up so idly. What a shame is it, that you shall see an English man
come in company of strangers, who can neither speak, nor understand with
them, but stands as one mute, and so is he mocked of them, and despised of al,
and none will make account of him? What a shame is that? what a reproach to his
parents? what a loss to him? and what hearts grief to think thereon? Learning
and wisdo^e, let fortune do what she please that never is lost, waters can not
mar it, nor fire burn it if it prevail thee not in one place, it will
prevail thee in an other: no tempest can consume Science. Oh how well was it
said of the Poet, when one demanded of him, where all his treasures were, he
aunsweared, In my bosom. Learning is heavy, and yet it waieth not, it is
great, and takes up no great place, it is fair, and yet few seek it,
profitable, and yet is forsaken of many: she is sweet, but yet few will taste
of her: brave Palaces, are they not subject unto tempest? beauty of body unto
sickness? riches unto Fortune? Who has money, can buy no learning lightly, and
who has learning, finds palaces and riches, fame, glory, reputarion, and
money, come where he will. The ancient Philosophers did understand it aright,
for if they could not study by day, they studied by night, they counted it no
labor to wake, were it so now adays, the world would go after an other manner.

Verily you say true, but tell me a little of courtesy, your judgment, of
Diligence, and what it is, for I have heard say, that it is a thing very
profitable, to the^ that practice it.

Ragionamenti sopra Diligentia, Humanita Clementia, tempera^tia, and Sobrieta,
Cap. 28. Reasonyngs upon Diligence Humanity, Clemency, Temperance, and
Sobriety, Cha. 28.
IO vi diro il me glio che io posso, Diligentia si puo chiamar vna de le
principal figlie di virtu, perch come dice il Filosofo, la piu gran virtu che
sia, si e di abandodonar otio, and la piu grande comendatione che l'huomo puo
hauere, si e di esser diligen e in cercar di ottener bone cose: diligentia e
habile di far la piu difficile cosa facile, la piu cruda cosa matura, le piu
strane cose familiare, la piu dura cosa molle: con diligentia, tanti e tanti
Filosofi diuennero cosi famosi. Fra gli antichi si dice, che inanzi che
Industria e Diligentia fusse conosciuta, non si sap^a che cosa fusse ordine, ma
quando che si comincio a studiar, e cercar a conoscere il been dal male, dico,
che qua^do che si commncio a praticar astutia, che si metteua cose in ordine,
che ragione comincio a reggere, quando che si comincio a cercar dotrina,
esercitar virtu, al'hora venne vna eta nuoua, and e ben vero quello che dice
Tullio, O Filosofia, la vera fontana di ogni virtu, and la persettione di
intendimento, and ben felice si puo dir quel regno, dove che il prencipe cerca
con diligentia di esaltar virtu, di supressar vitio, di remunerar i boni, di
punir i cat^iui, di honorar i dotti, di odiar i ignoranti: dove che non si
porta rispetto a nessuno, ne a nobile, ne a ignobile, ma che ogni cosa si regge
secondo la verita, la qual cosa si fa rare volte hoggi di.

Certo io credo che voi siate profeta, perch dite il vero, ma se non vi
dispiace, che io vi dia tanto fastidio, di chiarir^ mi che cosa sia Humanita et
Clementia, perch io vedo che sono si rado praticate fra gli huomini hoggi di
che credo che non siano buone e profiteuole.

Io vi diro il piu broue che io posso, ma la mia capacita e cosi cattiua, che
no^ posso adempir il vostro desiderio, ma acetiate la mia bona volenta, cosi
facendo, fate da fedel amico, perch io non sono dott^.

Io per sempre acetto la sua bona volonta mostrata verso di me, certo.

A dirui la verita, si come superbia opressa amore, prouoca sdegno, genera
malitia, confunde giustitia, e corompe gran stati, cosi Humanita e Clementia
genera vna certa afetione, aumenta amicitia, mantiene amore, suporta equita:
finalmente, preserua ogni gran stato: Perch come dice Alessandro Seuero, non
ci e niente che facci un prencipe amato da i suoi sugietti, che humanita,
nessuna cosa aquista honor a un Nobile piu presto che l, esser clemente, niente
genera amor, mantiene concordia, pace, e quiet tra i vassali, che il prencipe
esser clemente, i suoi Consiglieri humani, i suoi magistrati cortesi and
amoreuoli: piu honor aquistara un prencipe a dire, questa cosa posso fare, che
dire, questa cosa voglio fare, e far been per male, che agiungere male sopra
male. Perch che piu nobil virtu puo esser in un prencipe, che l'esser
clemente, pronto in perdonar, lento in castigar. Che eccelentia e in un Nobile?
che ornamento in un Gentilhuomo? che comendatione in ciascaduno, l'esser
clemente? acresce fama, aquista honor, guadagna vittorie. Al contrario, se
l'huomo e superbo, altiero, e tiranno, lui aquista infamia, lui aquista odio da
molti, amor da pochi, e molte volte perde il stato: cosi a dirui la mia
opinione, innumerabile sono le comodita che vengono a l'huomo essendo humano,
clemente, e liberale. Ma al contrario, essendo auaro, crudele, e superbo, lui e
sottoposto a la varieta di Fortuna: lui e sottoposto a molti pericoli e danni,
e anche a morte.

Certo voi dite il vero, ma certo noi Inglesi siamo obligati a render infinite
gratie a Dio, che ci ha concesso si bona Regina, cosi humana, cosi clemente,
cosiliberale, and cosi misericordiosa, che poche se ne trouano sue pari.

Certissimamente voi dite il vero, ma noi siamo cosi ingrati verso Dio per la
sua bonta, in concedercela, and verso lei mamarci, verso noi stessi in non
conoscerci noi stessi, and si^mo cosi corotti da ingratitudine.

Orsu, se vi piace, ditemi in poco, in tree o quatro parole, che cosa sia
Sobrieta and Temperantia, and anche se e cosa cosi degna da esser abracciata,
come era all' anticha.

Veramente io vi diro il mio parere, Temperantia e vna virtu, che non si puo
laudar a bastanza come merita, ma il meglio che so, velo diro in quatro parole,
Sobrieta and Temperantia sono virtu, che non sono tanto stimate adesso come
sono state altri tempi, and pochi tengono le Regole di Anarchase Filosofo, che
era molto dotto.

Che Regole sono quelle?

Il Filososo persuade i prencipi a esser temperati in vita, sobrij in parlar, e
astenersi da mangiar molto, per che in vincer apetito, and concupiscentia, and
supressar piacere, e vna grande vittoria. Colui e valente vittore, famoso
Conquistore, e potente prencipe, che sa vincer se medesimo, un gran numero di
bone virtu acompagnano Sobrieta and Temperanza, come abstinentia, continentia,
chastita, and sapientia: and al contrario, un mondo de vitij ne seguono, come
ebrieta, lusuria, and altre furfantarie. La compagnia di ebrij, e piu odiosa,
che profitteuole: piu dangerosa, che sana, piu sporcha, che amicheuole: la vita
del vno e famosa, la vita del'laltro infamosa: la temperanza e virtu del'uno e
comendeuole, la insatieta and malitia del altro e da esser condannata, el ci
hisogna considerar che noi mangiamo per viuer, and non viuiamo per mangiare,
come fanno molti. Tree Leggi erano in Thebe, che erano in grande estimatione: La
prima di ad'orar i lor Deij: la seconda, di honorar i suoi parenti: la terza,
di astener da mangiar troppo, e pascere cosi ingordisiamente, come si fa hoggi.
O te^perata vita, qua^do temperantia era osseruata: O mondo d'orato, quando che
ne vino, ne banchetti erano conosciuti, al'ho ra chastita era conosciuta nel
Tempio di Vesta. Al'hora gli Imperatori frequentauano la Capella di Jupiter,
al'hora concupi scentia non ardiua venir ne la Corte de Cesare, al'hora
abstinentia caminaua per il mercato in ogni Citta, al'hora il mondo era chasto,
al'hora il mondo triumfaua, ma adesso ogni cosa va ala rouersa.

Certo e vna cosa lamenteuole, a considerar il stato di questo mondo.

I Will tell you as well as I can, Diligence may be called one of the principal
daughters of Virtue for even as the Philosopher says, the greatest virtue that
is, is to flee idleness, and the greatest commendation that any man can have,
is to be diligent in seeking to obtain good things: Diligence is able to make
the vneasyest thing, easy: the rawest thing ripe, the straungest things,
familiar: the hardest thing, soft: with Diligence, so many, and so many
Philosophers became so famous. It is said, that in the former age, before
Industry and Diligence were known, none knew what order was, but when that
they began to study, and to seek to know the good from the bad, I say, when
that they began to practice polici, that they did put things in order, and
that reason began to rule, when they began to seek out learning, and
exercise virtue, then came a new age: and it is true that Tulli^ says, O
Philosophy, the true fountain of all virtues, and the perfection of
understanding, and well may that Realm be called happy, where the prince seeks
with diligence to exalt virtue, and supresse vice, to reward the good, and
punish the wicked, to honor the learned, and hate the ignorant: where no
respect is borne no more to one then to another, either to the noble, or to the
unnoble, but that every thing is ruled after the truth, the which is seldom
seen now adays.

Certis I believe that you are a Prophet, for you say true, but if it do not
displease you, that I trouble you so much, as to tell me what thing Humanity
and Clemency is, for I see that they are so seldom used among men now a
days, that I believe they are not good, nor profitable.

I will tell you as briefly as I can, but my capacity is so bad, that I fear
me I can not very well fulfill your desire, but accept my good will, and so
doing, you shall do like a faithful friend, for I am not very well learned.

Certis I always accept your good will, always showed toward me.

To tell you the truth, eue^ as pride oppresses love, provoke disdain,
ingendreth malice, co^foundeth justice, and corrupts great states, so
humanity and cleme^cie engenders a certain affection, augme^teth frind ship,
mainteineth love, supporteth equity: finally it preserves any great estate.
For even as Alexander seuerus says, there is nothing that makes a prince to
be beloved of his subjects, then humanity, nothing sooner gets honor unto
a Noble man, then to be clement, nothing gendreth love, mainteyneth concord,
peace, and quietness among the subjects, the^ a prince to be clement, his
Cou^sellers humane, his Magistrates courteous and loving: more honor shall a
Prince purchase, to say, this thing I can do, then to say, this thing I will
do, and do good against ill, then to add evil upon evil. For what more
noble virtue can be in a Prince, then to be clement, ready to forgive, and
slow to punish? What an excellency in a Noblema^? what an ornament in a
Gentleman? what commendation in all men, is it to be clement? it increases
fame, purchases honor, and gets victories. Contrariwise, if a man be
proud, hauty, and a tyrant, he purchases infamy, gets hate of many, love
of none, and many times he loses his estate: and so, to tell you my opinion,
innumerable are the commodities that come unto man, to be humane, clement, and
liberal. But contrariwise, if he be covetous, cruel, and proud, he is subject
unto the variety of Fortune: he is subject to many perils and dangers, and
also unto death.

Certis you say true, but verily we English me^ are bound to render infinite
thanks to God, for that he has granted us so good a Queen, so humane, so
clement, so liberal, and so mercyful, that few are found her peers.

Undoubtedly you say true, but we are so ungrateful toward God for his
goodness in granting her to us, and toward her in loving us, and toward our
selves, in not knowing our selves, and we are so corrupted of ingratitude.

Well, if it please you to tell me in three or four words, what Sobriety and
Temperance is, and also if it be a thing so worthy to be embraced, as it was
in the old time?

Verily I will tell you my mind, Temperance, is a virtue that can not be praised
so much as it deserves, but as well as I can, I will tell it you in four
words, Sobriety and Temperance, are virtues, that are not so much esteemed
now, as they have been in times tofore, and few hold the rules of Anacharsis
the Philosopher, who was well learned.

What Rules are those?

The Philosopher persuades princes to be te^perate in their life, sober in
speaking, and to ab stain from much eating, to overcome appetite and lust: and
to suppress pleasure, is a great victory. He is a valiant victor, a famous
Conqueror, and a mighty prince, that can vanquish him self, a gteat number of
good virtues do accompany Sobriety and Temperance, as abstinence,
continency, chastity, and wisdom: and contrary, a world of vices do follow,
as drunkenness, lechery, and other villainies. The company of drunkardes is
more odious, then profitable: more dangerous, then healthful: more filthy,
then friendly: the life of the one is famous, the life of the other infamous:
the temperance and virtue of the one is commendable, the insaciety and
wickedness of the other is to be condemned: we must consider, that we do eat
to live, and not live to eat, as many do. Three Laws were in Thebes, that
were in great estimation: The first was, to woorshyp their Gods: the second,
to honor their parents: the third, to absteyne from too much eating, and
feeding so excessiuely, as is used now adays. O temperate life, when
temperance was observed: O golden world, when neither Wine, nor banquettes
were known, then was chastity known in the Temple of Vesta. Then the
Emperors did frequent the Chapel of Jupiter, then Lust durst not come to the
Court of Caesar, then abstinence walked through the markette in every Cittye,
then the world was chaste, then the world did triumph, but now every thing
goes contrary.

Certis it is a lamentable thing, to consider the state of this world.

Ragionamenti sopra Silentio, and Liberalita, and in laud di Eta. Cap. 29.
Reasonynges upon Silence and Liberality and in praise of Age. Chap. 29.
DItemi vi prego, comendate voi Silentio, e Taciturnita, come hanno fatto molti
al tempo vechio?

Silentio e cosa degna da esser comendata da tutti, abracciata da molti, and
accarezata da ogni stato.

Socrate insegnaua a i suoi scolari tree cose: la prima, da esser taciturno nela
lingua: la seconda, vergognoso in viso: la terza, sauio in cuore: perch dice,
La sapientia del pazzo, e ne la sua lingua, and la lingua del sauio e ascosta
nel suo cuore. Demostene dice, Silentio in un Prencipe, e cosa necessaria:
Silentio e vna rara virtu, Silentio e gioia di gran valor: Tu non fai male a
nessuno, tu non tradisci nessuno, tu non inganni nessuno, e pur Silentio e la
piu pesante soma che sia, il piu grieve pensier, un disagio che sempre brucia,
chesempre stimola l'huomo. O qua^to pochi seen trouano di quelli hoggi di, che
sanno tacere fra gli huomini? manco fra le done.

Certo voi dite il vero, pochi se ne trouano.

Ditemi di gratia, che cosa e liberalita, io credo che sia un gran vitio.

Perch dite voi cosi?

Perch si pochi la vsano.

E per quello debbe esser vitio?

Che so io? Io vedo che si pochi vsano Liberalita, che io pensaua che fusse,
come a dir un gran tradimento, perch si vsa cosi rare volte.

Ma non vedete voi, che il mo^do va al contrario, dove che l'huomo doueria vsar
liberalita, lui vsa auaritia e cupidita, Liberalita e vna gran virtu, and per
quello pochi la vsano, e manco la praticano. Liberalita e vna virtu accarezata
da pochi, disprezata da molti, pochi se ne trouano, che in dar sono presti, and
in acettar lenti: pochi vogliono creder a Curtio, quando che lui dice, Che a
posseder assai non e richezze, ma auaritia e cupidita, e al contrario, a non
desiderar niente, ma donar assai, quello e un posseder gran richezze, and esser
liberale. Pochi credo nessuno se netrouera hoggi di, che siano come molti sono
stati in Roma, che erano franchi e liberali verso la piu paate, benefattori de
tutti, e auari verso nessuno, e i richi teniuano casa aperta. Liberalita in un
prencipe, gli aquista amore e feed: a un Nobile, seruitio and bona volonta da
tutti. Liberalita aguista a ogniuno beneficij: ma pochi dicono con Alessandro
Imperatore.

Che cosa dice lui?

Lui dice, che il preucipe doueria sempre essere piu pronto and presto in dare,
che in pigliare.

O nobil detto da un prencipe.

Fu un altro che domando a Alessandro, dove erano tutte le sue richezze, che
lui haueua aquistate in tante guerre che lui haueua fat: lui fece segno verso
i suoi sudditi, and disse, ne li cuori de la la mia gente.

O nobil prencipe.

Dice lui, che piu gran cosa puo desiderar un prencipe da i suoi sugetti, che
feed e verita verso lui? che piu laudabil cosa in un prencipe, che liberalita
and lenita verso i suoi sudditi: la liberalita di un pouero, si e il suo bon
volere. Che piu gran dono puo dar l' huomo, che quello che gli vien dal cuore?
Fu vo Re in Thebe, che fu si liberale mentre visse, che quando mori, non si gli
trouo tanti denari apresso per sepelirlo: non si gli trouo denari in Banchi,
oro in casse, gioie in cofani, richezze nascoste.

De quelli se ne troua pochi. Perch piu che l'huomo ha, piu lui ha da temer la
mutabilidilita di Fortuna. Ogniuno e liberale in parlare, ma pochi franchi in
donare: ogniuno parla contra inuidia e malitia, e pur ci odiamo l'un l'altro.
Noi continualmente esclamiamo contra tirannia, e pur siamo senza misericordia,
noi dispreziamo superbia, e pur siamo senza humanita, noi abhoriamo glotonia
and ebrieta, and pur sempre siamo a banchetti, a feste: noi sempre cridiamo
contra otio, e pur sempre siamo otiosi: noi sempre diciamo male de la lingua
che scandaliza, e pur non sapiamo dir been di nessun^. O Dio, a che termine
siamo, ogniuno ha inuidia al suo prossimo, ogniuno cerca di auanza l'altro.

Io credo che il mondo sia quasi ala fine.

Cosi credo anche io.

Certo signor voi mi hauete compiaciuto in molte cose, ma anchora vi prego a
dirmi qualco sa di Eta.

Bione quel Filo sofo dice, che Eta e il vltimo porto di riposo, il fine di
ogni miseria, la porta di vita, la osseruatrice de tuttii pilgrimaggi, and vna
cosa honoreuole, desiderata da tutti. Fu vno che gli doman do perch lui
laudaua tanto Eta? lui rispose, se been la prima vera e piaceuole, l' Autuno e
fertile, i fiori che crescono nela prima vera ne l' Autuno si maturano, cosi
lui compara l'eta del' huomo ale quatro stagione del'anno, il tempo che lui
cresce, e come la prima-vera, il tempo de la sua fortezza e la State: il tempo
che lui comincia a esser sauio, e come l' Autunno: and la sua vechiezza, e come
l'inuerno, il qual finisce ogni cosa. Dolci sono i detti de i vechi, i loro
consigli perfetti, il loro gouerno sicuro. O come e fragile e debile giouentu,
quante citta e castella sono state ruinate, per hauer consiglio de gioueni?
quanti regni sono stati subuerti, per hauer hauuto consiglio de gioueni. Eta
come e piena di prouisione, di sapientia, di esperientia, e di studio. Il
gouerno di vna republica, non consiste solamente in forza, ma nela virtu de
lamente. Un huomo e come un pomo, che non e maturo ^l quale e brusco, ma
essendo ma^uro, diuien dolce, cosi l'huomo essendo giouine, e furioso e brusco,
non vuolp^egar, ma essendo vechio, e d^lce, humile verso tutti. Eta non ha
piacere in questo mondo, non frequenta banchetti, abhorisce libidine: quello
che piace a vechi, non piace a gioueni: quello che i vechi sanno per
esperientia, i gioueni non lo vogliono creder, ne con ingegno, ne con consigli.
O quanto mal e stato fatto per giouentu? quante republiche sono state river
sciate? quanti regni sono stati subnerti, prencipi traditi, amici ingannati.
Per la qual cosa, nela mia opinione, noi siamo meglio accettar eta, che
giouentu.

Certo io credo cosi.

I Pray you tell me, do you commend Silence, and Taciturnitie, as many have done
in the old time?

Silence is a thing worthy to be commended of all men, embraced of many, and
cherished of every estate.

Socrates did teach to his scollars three things, the first was, to be silent
in speech, the second, to be shamefaste in the face: the third, to be wise in
heart: for says he, the wisedo^e of a fool is in his tongue, and the tongue of
the wise man is hydden in his heart. Demosthenes says, that silence in a
Prince, is a necessary thing: Silence is a rare virtue, Silence is a jewel of
great valor: Thou hurtest no man, thou betrayest no man, thou deceyuest no
man, and yet Silence is the heauiest burden that is, the weightiest thought a
disease that always burns that always pricketh a man. O how few are there
found now adays among men, that hold their peace? but fewer among women.

Verily you say true, few there are found.

Tell me of courtesy, what thing Liberality is, I believe that it is a great
vice.

Wherefore say you so?

Because so few do use it.

And for that is it a vice?

What can I tell? I see so few use Liberality, that I thought it had been as
it were a kind of great treason, because it is used so seeldome.

But see you not that the world goes contrary, for where man should use
liberality, he uses avarice and covetousness. Liberality is a great virtue,
and therefore few do use it, and less do practice it. Liberality is a
virtue cherished of few, despised of many: few there are found, that in
geuyng are prompt and ready, and in taking slow: Few will believe Curtius,
when as he says, that to possess much, is no riches, but avarice and
covetousness, and contrariwise, to covet nothing, but give much, that is a
possessing of great riches, and to be liberal. Few I believe, or none at al,
there are to be found now adays, that are, as many have been in Rome; that
are frank in giving; liberal toward the most part, benefactors unto al, and
covetous toward none: such men did keep open house. Liberality in a Prince,
purchases him love and faith: in a Noble man, service and good will of all.
Liberality purchases unto al men benefits, but few say with Alexander the
Emperor.

And what says he?

He says, that a Prince should always be more prompt and ready in geuyng,
then in taking.

Oh noble saying of a prince.

An other demanded of Alexander, where were al his riches, that he had gotten
in so many wars that he had made? he made sign toward his subjects, and
answered, In the hearts of my people.

Oh noble prince.

He says, what greater thing can a Prince desire of his subjects, then truth
and faith toward him? What thing can be more laudable in a Prince, then
liberality and lenity toward his subjects? the liberality of a poor man, is
his good will. What greater gift can a man give, the^ that as proceeds from
his heart? There was a king in Thebes that was so liberal whilst he lived, that
when he dyed, there was not so much money found by him, as to bury him: he left
no money upon banks, gold in chestes, jewels in cofers, nor riches hydden.

Of those there are found few. For the more a man has, the more he ought to
fear the mutabilitie of Fortune. Every one is liberal in speech, but few are
frank in giving: every one speaks against envy and malice, and yet we hate
one another: we continually exclame against tyranny, and yet we are
mercylesse: we despise pride, and yet we are without humanity: we abhor
gluttony and drunke^nes, and yet we are always feastyng and banquettyng: we
always cry out against idleness, and yet we are always idle: we are
always speakinge evil of sclaunderous tongues, and yet we can say well of no
body. O God, at what point are we? every one does envy his neighbor, we al
seek to overcome one another.

I believe that the world be almost at an end.

So believe I also.

Certis sir you have satisfied me in many things, but yet I pray you to tell me
somethyng of Age.

Bion that Philosopher says, that Age is the last port of rest, the end of
all misery, the haven of life, the fulfyllyng of all pylgrimages, and an
honorable thing, and desired of al. There was one that asked him wherefore he
praised age so much? he answered, although the Spring be pleasant yet the
Harvest is fertile, the flowers that grow in the Spring, in Harvest are
ripened, so he compares the age of man, unto the four seasons of the year:
the time that he grows, is like the Spring: the time of his strength, is the
Summer: the time that he begins to be wise, is like the Harvest, and his age
is like winter, which finisheth al things. Sweet are the sayings of old men,
their counsel perfect, their government sure. Oh how frail and weak is
youth? how many Cities and Castles have been brought to ruin through the
counsel of young men? how many kingdoms have been subverted through young men's
counsel? Age is full of provision, of sapience, of experience, and of study.
The Rule of a common weal does not only consist in strength, but in the
virtue of the mind. A man is like an apple, that is not ripe, but sour, but
being ripe, becomes swee e: so a man buyng young, is furious and sour, and
will not bend, but being old, is sweet, and humble toward al. Age has no
pleasure in this world, frequenteth not banquettes, abhors lust: that
which pleases old men, delights not young men: that which old men know
by experience, young men will not believe it, neither with understanding nor
counsel. O how much evil has been don through youth? how many commonweals
have been overthrown? how many kingdoms subverted, Princes betrayed, friends
deceived? Wherefore in my opinion, we are better accept age, then youth.

Verily I believe so.

De li costumi de certe genti. Cap. 30. Of the manners of certain Nations.
Chap. 30.
D Itemi di gratia, se sapete i costumi di certe natione, io so che li sapete.
Tell me of courtesy, if you know the customs of certain nations, I know you
know the^. Io vi diro il piu breue che io posso: gli Ethiopij sono un certo
popolo di Caria, sono semplici, brutti, e sciaui: I Cartaginesi sono fal^i, and
ingannatori: quelli di Babilonia, sono malitiosi, and corotti: I Persiani,
ebrij, and glottoni: I Siciliani scarsi auari, and pur fedeli: quelli di Caspia
sono crudeli: quelli di Lesbia, sporchi: quelli di Scithia senzalegge: quelli
di Corintho, fornicatori: I Boetiani, molto rudi: I Simeriani, ignoranti: I
Sibariani, molto bestiali: quelli di Lacedemonia, molto arditi: gli Atheniesi,
delicati: I Romani superbi, and gloriosi: I Spagnoli, viandanti, sdegnosi, and
disprezatori: gli Italiani, superbi and vendicatori: I Franzesi astuti, and
s^eri: I Todeschi sono guerrieri: I Sassoni, dissimulatori: quelli di Sueuia,
cianciatori: il Britanno (cio e l' Inglese,) negotratore: il Irlandese,
saluatico: il Cimbriano, seditioso, and horribile: Il Boemo, molto discortese,
and cercatore di nouelle: Il Scozzese, pergiuro: Il vandallo, mutabile: Il
Bauiero, buffone. De gli aliri, non mi ricordo troppo been. I will tell you as
briefly as I can: The Ethiopians are a certain people of Caria, they are
simple, foul, and slaves: the Cartaginians are false, and deceivers: those of
Babylon, are malicious, and corrupted: the Persians are gluttonous, and
drunkardes* the Cicilians are very niggards, and yet faithful: those of Caspia
are cruel: they of Lesbia, filthy the Scithians Lawelesse: the Corinthians,
fornicatours: the Boetians, very rude: the Simerians, ignorant: the Siberians,
very beastly: they of Lacedemonia, very hardye: the Athenians, delicate: the
Romans proud and glorious: the Spaniards, trauelers, disdainful, and despisers:
the Italians, proud and reuengers: the Frenchmen, crafty and fierce: the
Germans, warriors: the Saxons, dissemblers: those of Sucuia, tatlers: the
Britain, (an Englishman) a busy body: the Irishe man, wild: the Cimbrian,
seditious, and horrible: the Boemian, very discourteous, and desirous of news:
the Scottish man, perjured: the Vandal, mutable: the Bauarian, a scoffer. Of
other I do not well remember. Certo viringratio per questo, di bon core. Verily
I yield you thanks for this, with a good heart.


Discorsi sopra Musica and Amor. Cap. 31. Discourses upon Music, and Love.
Chap. 31.
COme vi piace la Musica a voi? How does Music please you? La mi piace been,
and a voi. It pleases me well, and you. Musica e cosa laudabile. Music is a
laudable thing. Signor si, perch anche i Santi l'hanno vsata, come Re David,
quando che lui era malinconico, si ralegraua in sonar e cantar Salmi in laud
di Iddio suo signore. Musica si dice esser l'alegrezza di cuore: Musica
conforta il tuo animo, fa paura il nimico, perch si come Musica e piaceuole,
cosi e dolente, and anche e piena di harmonia and melodia, cosi e anche
terribile, paurosa, e spauentosa: ma ci sono molti, che la abusano hoggi di, la
qual cosa mi dispiace. Yea sir, for Saints have also used it, as king David,
when he was any thing sad, or melancholic, he took delight in playing and
singing Psalms in praise of God his lord. Music is said to be the rejoicing
of the heart: Music comfort the mind, and fears the enemy, for even as
Music is pleasant, so is it doleful, and also it is full of harmony and
melody, and also it is terrible, fearful, and terrifying: but there are many
that do abuse it now adays, which thing displeases me. Voi dite il vero. You
say true. Che cosa e amore? What is love? Amor e un dilett ^uole dispetto, and
un dispetteuole diletto. Amor honesto e ordinato da Iddio: amor dishonesto e
prohibito da Iddio, la piu difficile cosa che sia, amor la fa facile: la piu
dura cosa che sia, amor fa molle: la piu pericolosa cosa che sia, amor si
arischira per andempir il suo volere. Ma hoggi di trouerete dove vno ama
honestame^te, cento amano dishonestamente. Love is a delectable despite, and a
spiteful delight. Honest love is ordained of God: dishonest love is forbidden
of God: the difficultest thing that is, Love makes it easy: the hardest thing
that is, Love makes it soft: the most perilous thing that is, Love will
venture to bring it to pass. But now adays you shall find, that whereas one
loves honestly, an hundred love dishonestly. Veramente voi dite il vero.
Verily you say true. Non aecade parlar tanto di amore, ogni libro ^ p^eno di
amori, con tanti Autori che sarebbe pena persa, a parlar di amore. We need not
speak so much of love, al books are full of love, with so many authors, that it
were labor lost to speak of Love.


Discorso sopra libidine, and la sua forza. Cap. 32. A Discourse vton Lust, and
the force thereof. Chap. 32.
DItemi di gratia, qual e il piu gran vitio che sia piu praticato hoggi di? OF
courtesy tell me, which is the greatest vice that is most practiced now
adays? Io vi diro, mi pare che tutti i vitij sipraticano. I will tell you, me
thinks that al vices are practiced. Voi dite il vero, ma qual e il piu grande,
e di piu forza, e posanza? You say true, but which is the greatest, and of
most strength and puisance? Io credo, Libidine. I believe, Lust. Cosi credo
anche io. So believe I also. Perch Libidine e in tutti li stati, tanto ne
l'prencipe, quanto ne l'suddito, ta^to ne l'uno, come l'altro, ogniuno gli e
suggetto. Superbia principalmente ha la sua sedia fra prencipi e gran stati:
Cupidita fra gli vechij, Magistrati, and Officiali: Inuidia fra tutti i
mecanichi: Vsura fra Cittadini: Simonia fra vescoui and preti: Hipocrisia fra
gli Religiosi: Inganno fra gli Mercanti: ma libidine ha sedia in tutti questi
stati: Libidine e signor di tutto: ha vinto Signori, Dotti, Sauij, and
eloquenti: ha vinto i piu gran paladini che siano stati: Libidine fu causa che
Cleopatra giaque con suo fratello, come suo marito: fu causa, che il Re Cynare
dormi con sua figliola: Libidine fece dormir Macareo con sua sorella Canace:
f^ce che Menephron dormi con sua madre, che Oedipo giaque con sua madre, and
hebbe siglioli di essa. O crudel mostro, O bestial furor, O furia infernale,
che incanti i sauij, che inganna i dotti, che vinci i piu forti, che sottometti
ogniuno al iuo gioco. Libidine fu causa de la ruina di Troia: Libidine fu causa
che Sodoma e Gomora furono destrutte, che David pecco con Bersabe, che Amon
pecco con Thamar, che Absolon giaque con la Concubina di suo padre, che i duo
vecchi cercarono di sforzar Susanna, che Holoferno sinamoro di Judith. Libidine
fu causa che la testa fu tagliata al santo Euangelista: Libidine fu causa che
il Deluuio anego tutto il mondo, Iddio per la sua misericordia voglia aprir i
cuori de i suoi sugetti, e dar li gratia, che libidine non habbi for za
nessuna. For Lust is in all estates, as well in the prince, as in the subjects,
as much the one as the other, al me^ be subject unto it: Pride principally has
her seat amongst Princes and great Estates: Covetousness among old men,
Magistrates, and also Officers: Envy among handicraftesmen: Usury among
citizens: Simonie among Bishops and Priests: hypocrisy among the religious
and deceit among Merchants: but Lust has a seat among all Estates: Lust is
lord of al: it has overcome Lords, Learned men, Wise, and eloquent: it has
vanquished the gretest knights that have been Lust was cause, that Cleopatra
lay with her brother, as with her husband: was cause that king Cinaris lay
with his daughter: Lust made Machareus lie with his sister, Canace: it made
Menephron lie with his mother, that Oedipus lay with his mother, and had
children by her. Oh cruel monster, Oh beastly rage, Oh infernal Fury, thou
incha^test the wise, thou deceiuest the wise, thou ouerco^mest the strong, thou
subuest al men unto thy yoke. Lust was the cause that Troy was ruinated: Lust
was the cause that Sodom and Gomor were destroyed: that David sinned with
Bersabe, that Airmo^ sinned with Thamar that Absolon lay with his fathers
Concubine, that the two old men sought to ravish Susanna, that Holofernes fell
in love with Judith. Lust was the cause that the Evangelists head was cut
of. Lust was cause, that the Flood drowned all the world. God for his mercy
grant, to open the hearts of al his subrectes, and give them grace, that Lust
may have no force at al. Iddio lo acconsenti che sia cosi. God grant it be
so.


Ragionamenti sopra virtu, con le sue figlie, che cosa e il fine di Guer ca,
quale sono bone opere, quatordeci bone Regole, con altri diuersi discorsi. Cap.
33. Reasonyngs upon Virtue, with her daughters, what is the end of war,
which be good works, fourteen good Rules, with diverse other discourses.
Chap. 33.
IO ho sentuto dir molte volte, che virtu ha certe figliole, Io vo ria saper
quale sono. I Have heard say many times, that virtue has certain daughters, I
would know who they be Virtu ha quatro figliole. Virtue has four daughters.
Quale sono esse? Which be they? Forza, Prudentia, Giustitia, and Temperantia.
Force, Prudence, Justice, and Temperance. Io ho inteso che forza ha figliole
anchora lei. I have heard say, that Force has daughters also. E vero ella ne
ha quatro, come magnanimita, magnificentia, patientia, and perseuerantia, and
tutte sono bone. It is true, she has four, as Magnanimity, Magnificence,
Patience, and Perseverance, and al are good. Quale sono le figliole di
Temperantia, e quante? Which be the daughters of Temperance, and how many? Elle
sono dieci, come Vergogna, Honesta, Abstinentia, Chastita, Sobrieta,
Continentia, Clementia, Modesta, Studiosita, and Humilita. They are ten, as
Shame, Honesty, Abstinence, Chastity, Sobriety, Continency, Clemency,
modesty, Studiositie, and Humility. Quale sono le figliole di Giustitia, and
quante sono? Which be the daughters of Justice, and how many are they? Ci sono
due sort di Giustitia, come comutatiua, and distribuitiua: le sue figliole
sono quindeci, come Innocentia, Religione, Oratione, Pieta, Osseruatione,
Obedientia, Gratia, Gratitudine, Penitentia, Verita, Fedelta, Liberalita,
Misericordia, Equita, and Amicitia. There are two sorts of Justice, as
Commutatiue, and Distribuetiue: their daughters are fiftiene, as Innocence,
Religion, prayer, godliness, Observation, Obedience, Grace, Gratitude,
Penitencie, Verity, Faithfulness, Liberality, Mercy, Equity, and Amity.
Quale sono le figlie di Prudentia? Which be the daughters of Prudence? Queste
sono esse, come Dotrina, Consideratione, Bon desiderio, Intendimento, bona
Volunta, memoria, ragione, feed, Charita, and Speranza. These be they, as
doctrine, consideration, good desire, understanding, good will memory, reason,
faith, charity, and hope. Dite mi di gratia, che cosa e il fine di guerra.
Tell me of courtesy, what is the end of war. Il fine di guerra, e questo:
Iddio e bestiamato, renegato, detestato, le Chiese sono profanizate, e
sacrilegiate, le Ville brugiate, le Citta destrutte, i Castelli subuerti, le
Fortezze ruinate, gli huomini vccisi, le done for zate, le vergine violate, i
beni presi e rapiti. In guerra non ci e feed, leg, amor, humanita, humilita,
charita, ne honesta: ma oogni orgoglio, ambitione, crudelta, arogantia,
disobedientia, furto, anaritia, latrocinio, pilagio, pergiuro, fraud, impieta,
fornicatione, adulterio, ira, incesto, furor, bestemia, inuidia, vendetta,
sceleragine, ogni fur fam eria sivsa in guerra, non si harispet to a nessuo.
The end of war is this, God is blasphemed, denied, and detested, Churches
are profanizated, and sacrileged, Villages are burned, Cities destroyed,
Castles subverted, Fortes ruinated, men slain, women forced, Virgins
violated, goods taken, and rapt. In war there is no faith, law, love,
humanity, humility, charity, nor honesty: but all pride, ambition,
cruelty, arrogancy, disobedience, stealth, avarice, pilfering, pillage,
perjury, fraud ungodliness, fornication, adultery, wrath, incest, horror,
blasphemyng, envy, revenge, villainy, al knavery is used in war, there is no
respect borne to any. Queste sono buone opere: Visitar gli amalati, far
limosina a gli poueri, insegnar a li ignoranti, dar bon esempio, dar bon
consiglio, consolar gli aslitti, insegnar bona dottrina, non scandalizar
nessuno, cercar il profitto del tuo prossimo, perch lo comanda iddio honorar
'Dio, ben edirlo, laudarlo, magnisicarlo, and esaltarlo. These are good works
to visit the sick, to do al^nese unto the poor, to teach the ignorant, gene
good example, give good counsel comfort the afflicted, teach good doctrine,
sclaunder no body, seek the profit of thy neighbor, for God commands it,
honor God, bless him, pray se him, magnify him and exalt him. Quatordeci
bone Regole per adornar un Gentilhuomo: esser sempre humile di cuore: parlar
poco, eragioneuolme^te: non esser pronto e facile a ridere: tacer sia che un
sia interogato: tener i Statuti, and or li^^ de i tuoi superiori, tanto
spiritueali, come Te^porali: farc nto di esser il minor de tutti: tien ti i de
no di far ogni cosa: Confessa i tuoi peccati a Dio: Habbi paci^ntia in
aduersita: Sottometti ti a tuoi superiori: Vinci il t uo volere: accorda al'
opinione del sau^o: va ves^^to mother at amente: prega Iddio, and credi n^l
padre, nel sigliolo, and nel spirito sarto, e non cercar di esser saluato per
altro mezo che per lui. Fourtiene good rules for to adorn a Gentleman: to be
always humble in heart: to speak little, and reasonably: be not ready and
prone to laugh: hold thy peace, till thou be asked: keep the statutes of thy
superiors, as well Spiritual, as Temporal: account thy self the least of
al: account thy self unworthy to do any thing acknowledge thy sins to God:
have patience in adversity: submyt thy self to thy superiors: vanqui he thine
own will: agree with the opinion of the wise: apparel thy self moderately:
pray God, and belene in the father, the son, and in the holy ghost and seek
not to be saved by any other means, then by him. Io vi prego, ditemi qua li
sono li nimici de le quatro virtu morale. I pray you tell me, which be the
enemies of the four moral virtues. Ce ne sono assai, come pergiuro,
disordine, follia, afett^one, apetito, fastidio mondano, concupiscentia,
orgoglio, ambitione, simulatione, hipocrisia, tra limento, ingratitudine,
mentire, insacieta, superbia, obliuione, gelosia, vtolentia, desperatione,
importunita, dispetto, furore, arogantia, malitia, and inuidia. There are a
great many, as perjury disorder folly, fond affection, appetite, worldly care,
concupiscence, wrath, ambition, dissimulation, slattery, hypocrisy, treason,
ingratitude, lying, insacietie, pride, forgetfulness, jealousy, violence,
desperation, importunity, despite, horror, arrogancy, malice, and envy. I
Ministri di aduersit a sono, Tentatione, infirmita, ignorantia, guerra, peste,
fame, processo, discordia, perdita d'amici, fastidio, and diuer si accidenti,
and altri inconuenienti. The Ministers of adversity are, Temptation,
sickness, ignorance, war, plague, hunger, process, discord, loss of
friends, care, and diverse accidents, and other in conueniences. I ministri di
prosperita sono, Innocentia, humilita, specialta, favor, pieta, conscientia,
amor, discretione, benignita, integrita, amicitia, sede hon desiderio, gratia,
and timor di Dio. The ministers of prosperity are, Innocence, humility,
specialtie, favor, pitic, conscience, lone, discretion, benignity,
integrity, amity, says, good desire, grace, and fear of God. Questi sono i
messi di peccato, Sugestiune, cogitatione, diletto, banchetto, festino,
dissolutione giuoco, and ballo, follia, piacere, prodigalita, inconstantia,
inconsideratione, et cattiua compagnia. These are the messengers of syn,
Suggestion, cogitation, delight, banqueting, feasting, dissolution, play, and
dau^sing, folly, pleasure, prodigality, inconstancy, inconsideration, and
evil company. Questi sono i cinque sensi di Natura, cio e, Vedere Se^tire,
Toccare, Gustare, et odorare, ma guarda come, quando, quale, che, and dove.
These are the five senses of Nature, that is to say, To See, to Hear, to
Feel, to Taste, to Smell, but look how, when, which, what, and where. Quatro
sort di tentatione, Concupiscentia, ambitione, Hipocrisia, and vana speranza.
Four sorts of temptation, as Concupiscence, ambition, hypocrisy, and vain
hope. Quatro humori regnano nel'huomo, secondo i quatro clementi, cio e, Vna
complessione e sanguigna, l'altra cholericha, l'altra flemmaticha, l'ultima
Malinchonicha. Four humors reign in man, according to the four Elements,
that is to say, One complexion is sanguine, an other cholerik, an other
flegmatike, and the last, melancholic. Si vede de gli huomini che diuent ano
poueri per tree cause: alcuni per esser troppo pietosi: ma de quelli ce ne
pochi. alcuni per esser troppo liberali: de quelli ce ne ma^co, alcuni per
esser troppo prodighi: ma de quelli ce ne assai in Londra. There are men, that
becomme poor through three causes: some because they are too pitiful: but of
those there are few. Some for being too liberal: of those there are less:
some other for being to prodigal: of those there are a great many in London.
Da tree cose guardate, cio e, Da un Sicopha^te, da un Adulatore, da un
presuntuoso. Of three things beware, that is, of a Sicofant, of a flatterer,
and of a presumptuous man. Tree cose bone in un prencipe, Misericordia,
Eloquenza, and Dotrina. Three good things in a prince, mercy, eloquence, and
godliness. Vna cosa in tree fal'huomo saluo da ogni male, Padre, Figliolo et
lo, spirito santo. One thing in three makes man safe from al evil, Father,
Son, and holy ghost. I tree corsi del'huomo, Pueritia, Giouentu, and Vechieza.
The three courses of man, chyldishnes, youth, and age. Tree bone Pegole per
ogniuno, Reggi il tuo volere: tempera la tua lingua: rafrena il tuo ventre.
Three good rules for every man Rule thine own will, temper thy tongue, refrain
thine own belly. Tree bone cose: Verita, charita, e virtu. Three good things,
truth, charity, and virtue. Tree sort di flagello, Fame, peste, and guerra.
Three sorts of destruction, Famine, plague, and war. Tree cose bone per vna
donna, le richezze di Giuno, la sapi^tia di Pallas, la belezza di Cerere. Three
good things in a woman, The riches of Juno, the wisdom of Pallas, the beauty
of Venus. Tree sort di eloquentia, Gramatica Retorica, Dialettica. Three sorts
of Eloquence, Gramar, Rhetorique, and Logique. Tree sort di Filosofia,
Natural, Morale, Loica. Three sorts of Philosophy, Natural, moral, and
Logical. Tree sensi del'huomo, Natural, vitale, ragioneuole. Three senses of
man, Natural, Vital, Reasonable. I quatro Elementi, Aqua, Foco, Air, and
terra. The four Elements, Water, Fire Air, and Earth: Tree sort de huomini
possono mentire per auctorita, un Medico, un Vechio, and un che e stato
lontano. Three sorts of men may lie by authority, a Physician, an Old man,
and a Trauayler.


L'opinione di Mar co Aurelio, and Ouidio, sopra amore, et che cosa e. Chap.
34. The opinion of Marcus Aurelius, and Ovid, upon Love, and what it is. Chap.
34.
DItemi di gratia (se vi pia ce) la vostra opinione in questa cosa, se vi par
meglio chel, huomo ami donna, o no. I Pray you tell me (if you please) your
opinion in this thing, If you think best, that a man love a woman or no. Io vi
diro, lui puo amare, se li piace, ma grandi and innumerabili sono i pericoli, a
che si sottomotte l'huomo che conuersa con done, and grande e il riposo and
quiet, che viene a quelli che del tutto le abandonano. I will tell you, he may
love, if he please, but great and innumerable are the dangers, that he submyts
him self unto, that does hant women, and great is the rest and quietness that
comes unto those that altogether abandon them. Come puo essere, che ne riesca
affanno and dolor in amar donna, and ripeso and quiet in non amarle. How can
that be that there may come care and grief in loving a woman, and rest and
quietness in not loving them. Sapete come dice Marco Aurelio, gia Imperator di
Roma? Know you how Marcus Aurelius, sometimes Emperor of Rome, says? Signor
no, per cortesia ditemelo. No sir* of courtesy tell me. Lui dice, parlando di
questo ponto, se l'huomo non ama donna, sui e reputato villa^o: se luile a na,
lo tengono legero^ se lui le lascia, persano che lui si ^ timido, e cotardo: se
lui le s^gue, lui e person: se lui le serve, non fanno contodi lui: se lui non
le serve, lohanno in grand' odio: se lui le vuole hauere, non lo vegliono hauer
lui: se lui non le desidera, lo cercano: se lui gli t^en compagnia, lui perde
il suo nome: se lui non gli t^en compagnia, pens^no che non sia huomo: se lui
le cerca, lo fuggono: se lui non le cerca, lo vanno ^ercando: lui: se lui le
ad'ora, lo disprezano: se lui non le adora, piangono) che cosa volete dunche
che ^acci il misero huomo, se non del tutto abandonarle? He says, speaking of
this point, if a man love not a woman, he is reputed as a villayne: if he love
the^, he is counted light: if he leave them, they think him to be fearful and
a dastord: if he follow them, he is lost: if he serve the^ they make no account
of him: if he serve the^ not they hate him greatly: if he will have them, they
will not have him: if he do not desire them, they seek him: i^ he keep them
company, he loses his name: if he keep the^ not company, they think him no
man: if he seek them, they slay him: if he seek them not, they go seeking
him: if he woorshyp them, they despise him: if he do not woorship them, they
weep: what will you that the wretched man do, but altogether forsake them: Ma
Iddio ha comandato, che l'huomo debbe lasciar padre, e madre, fratelli e
sorelle, per acostarsi a donna. But God commanudeth, that man shall leave father
and mother, sister, and brother, to join him self with a woman. E vero ogni
volta, che lei sia pudica and honesta, perch il tener compagnia a donna, non
essendo sua legitima moglie, e tenuto gran peccato, come e vero. It is true, so
she be honest and chaste: for to keep company with a woman, if s^ee be not his
lawful wife, it is counted a great sin, as it is in deed. Ma ditemi di
gratia, d'onde viene questo amore, che gli huomini portano all done? Ho
setuto d^re, che fino li dei hanno amato: amor ha fatto diuentar homini sauij,
pazi: homini dotti, ignoranti: homini forti, deboli. D'onde viene questa cosa.
But tell me of courtesy, whence comes this love, that men ^eare unto women? I
have heard say, that the gods have loved: Love has made wise men become
fools, learned men ignorant, strong men weak: from whence comes this thing?
Come volete che io lo sappi, quando che gli dotti, sauij, and forti, and anche
li Dei non lo hanno potuto sapere. Ouidio dice, cosi, amore e, no^ so che cosa,
lui viene non so d'onde, chi l'ha mandato, io no^ lo so: lui genera, io non so
come: lui e contento, io non so de che: amor si sent, non so quanto spesso.
Amor mi da fastidio, non so perch: amor mi penetra la carne, and si non sparge
sangue: lui piglia radice nel mio core, and non mi rompe carne. Che ingegno,
che sapientia, che forza, che dotrina, che inganno, che fortuna mi puo difender
da amore? io non so certo. How will you have me know it, when learned men, wise,
and strong, yea gods could not know it? Ovid says, that Love is, I wot not
what, he comes, I wot not whence, who has sent him, I know not: he
ingendreth, I know not how: he is co^te^ted I know not with what: Love is felt,
I know not how often: love trobleth me, I know not wherefore: love does pierce
my flesh, and shedeth no blood: he takes root in my heart, and breaks no
flesh. What engine, what wisdom, what strength, what learning, what deceit,
what fortune can defend me from Love? I know not certain.


Diuersita de gli huomini. Cap. 35. The Diversities of men. Chap. 35.
SE lui e rustico, nessuno tien conto di lui ^ se lui e di alto sangue, lui e
santuoso: se lui e ricco, lui e vitioso: se lui e pouero, lui e auaro: se lui e
valente, lui e trogpo ardito: se lui e cotardo, lui e defamato: se lui e
parlatore, lui mente: se lui parla poco, e tenuto pazzo: se lui e bello, lui e
desiderato: se lui e brutto, lui e geloso: se si intramette, e chiamato
importuno: se lui tace, e tenuto semplice: se lui ride, e detto ignorante: se e
liberale, e tenuto prodigo: se non e liberale, e tenuto scarso and auaro.
Vedendo si questo, vdendo si questo, and sapendosi questo, che fara l'huomo
tristo, doloroso, and spectalmente se ha prudentia: perch se si vuol separare
dal mondo, la carne non li da licentia, and se vuol seguire il mondo, il suo
cuore non lo consent. Pensino tutti gli huomini che hanno a contentar ciascuno
con seruitu, and beneuolenza: perch to gli fo a sapere, che may non
contenteranno tutti gli huomini, Anchora che faccia qua^to puo come huomo, and
faccia quanto deue, come bon vicino, and che caui forza de la deboleza con
molta fatica and rimedij alla pouerta, coni suoi sudori, and si ponga per
compiacer a ciascuno in ogni pericolo, al sine non potra may contentar tutti:
da alcuni sara amato, da alcuni odiato, da alcuni ripreso, da alcuni adulato:
se lui fa been, e inuidiato da molti: se lui fa male, e disprezato da assai. O
pouero homo, se tu hauessi tutti gli ochi di Argo, le mani di Briaro, la
sapientia di Salomone, con le ricceze di Mida, and la eloquentia di Cicerone,
and le belezze di Assolone: tu non compiacerai may tutti.

Certo voi dite il vero.

IF he be rustical, none account of him: if he be high of blod, he is
sumptuous: if he be rich, he is vicious: if he be poor, he is covetous: if he
be valiant, he is too hardye: if he be a dastard, he is defamed: if he be a
tatler, he is a liar: if he speak little, he is counted a fool: if he be
fair, he is desired: if he be foul, he is ielous: if he be a medler, he is
called importune: if he hold his peace, he is counted simple if he laugh, he is
called ignorant: if he be liberal, he is deemed prodigal* if he be not liberal,
he is counted covetous and scarce. Man seeing this, hearing this, and knowing
this, what shall the poor and wretched man do, and specially if he have any
wisdom? for if he will separate him self from the world, the flesh will not let
him: and if he will follow the world, his heart co^senteth not to it. Let al men
think, that have to content every one with service and benevolence: for I let
them to know, that they shall never content all men, although he do as much as
man can do, and though he do as much as he ought, like a good neighbor, and
that he take force from weakness, with much labor and remedy unto poverty,
with his sweat, and put him self in all peryls only to please al me^, at the
last he shall never content all men. of some he shall be loved, of some hated, of
some checked, of some flattered: if he do well, he is enuyed of many: if he do
il, he is despised of many more. Oh poor man, if thou had all the eyes of
Argos, the hands of Briarius, the wisdom of Solomon, with the riches of
Midas, and the eloquence of Cicero, and the beauty of Absalon, thou shall
never please al men.

Verily you say true.

Certi belli, dotti, et galanti detti, tolti da Antonio Gueuara, scritti da
lui, sopra diverse ocasioni. Cap. 36. Certain fine, learned, and gallant
sayings, taken from Antonio Gueuara, written by him, upon diverse occasions.
Cha. 36.
ANtonio Gueuara chiama Dio, quel solo verbo diuino, vnigenito del padre,
signor perpetuo delle Gierarchie, piu antico di tutti i secoli, prencipe delle
eternita, principio dal quale ogni cosa hebbe principio, primo genito di Dio,
creatore di tutte le creature, saluatore di tutti i dispersi, Sacerdote
vniuerso, Intercessore per tutti i peccatori, and redentore di tutta l'humaua
gente: habbi mi sericordia di tutti noi. ANtonio Gueuara calls God, the only
divine word, only begotten of the father, everlasting Lord of the Gierarchies,
more ancient the^ al ages, prince of al eternities, beginning, from who^ al
things had beginning, first begotten of God, creator of al other creatures,
Savior of all the dispersed, universal priest, Intercessor for all sinners,
and redeemer of all the humane people, have mercy upon us all. Il medesimo in
laud de la chiedi Dio. The self same in praise of the Church of God. O
gloriosa Chiesa militante la qual non sei altro che Oro ne la feccia, Rosa tra
la spine, grano tra la paglia, midolla tra le ossa, perla tra le conche marine,
anima santain carne putrida, vnica fenice ne la cabbia, naue tra le fiere onde
ingolfata, la quale tanto piu e combatuta tanto piu si mostra gagliarda, tu non
mostri may la tua potentia, seron quando sei da tuoi nimici ofesa, and sei
ofesa da i piu potenti Re, and defesa da i piu deboli and poueri, Iddio per la
sua gratia longo tempo ti mantenga and difenda. Oh glorious militant Church,
which art naught else but gold in dross, a rose amongst thorns, grain amidst
straw, marow amidst bones, pearl amidst the sea shelles, a holy soul in
rotten flesh, one only Fenix in the cage, a ship amidst the fierce waves
engolfed, which the more it is striue^ withal, the stronger thou show
thyself thou show not thy might, but only when thou art of thine enemies
offended, and art offended by the mightiest kings, and defended of the weakest
and poorest. God for his grace long time maintain and defend thee. Il detto in
laud de Iddio. The same in praise of God. Io confesso and dico con la
religione cristiana, che non vi e altro che un solo Dio, creatore del Cielo,
and de la terra, della cui eccelentia, potentia, maesta, and gloria, poco ne
puo esp^m^re la lingua nostra, perch non puo il nostro ing gno comprendere le
cose divine, ne il nostro intellet to discernerle, ne la nostra memoria
ricordarsene, and molio meno la nostra lingua dimostrarle, ne la nostra me^te
capirle, and da lui, per ui, and in lui, credo ottene^ saluatione. I confess,
and say with the Christian Religion, that there is but one only God, creator
of heaven and earth, of whose excellency, puisance, majesty, and glory, our
tongue can little express, for our wit and reason can not comprehend the
Divine things, neither our vnderstandying discern them, neither our memory
remember it, and much less our tongue show it, neither our mind conceive it:
and by him, through him, and in him, I hope to obtain salvation. Poco apresso
dice in laud de Dio, Io dico and confesso, che non ci e che vno solo Dio
creatore, perch creo tutto il mondo: potente, perch ha potentia in Cielo, and
in terra: Immortale, perch non hebbe may principio, and may non hauera fine:
incorutibile, perch non patisce ne corutione, ne diminuitione, immutabile,
perch non muta may l'eterno conseglio: inconprensibile, perch la sua maesta
non si puo conoscere, no la sua potentia intendere: onnipotente, perch ha
potentia sopra vini and morti, sopra buoni and cattiui: and l'huomo non ha da
adorar che vno solo Dio, perch si come il mondo fu creato per vno solo, cosi
tutte creature deuono adorare vno solo, perch si come un prencipe non consent
che un altro si chiami prencipe nel suo regno, cosinon vuol Iddio che si aderi
aliro Dio, che lui nel m^ndo: fu gran benesicio che il padre ei cre^sse senza
che noi ie p^^g^^^m^, che il figliolo ci ^comp^r^sse, senza essere aiu^^^o ^^^
alcuno, and sopra tutto, in f^^^i Christiani, and che il santo Spirito ci
santificasse, senza che noi lo merit^ssimo. A little after he says in praise of
God, I say, and confess, that there is but one only God creator, because he
created all the world: mighty, for he has puisance in heaven and earth:
immortal for he never had beginning, and never will have end: incorruptible, for
he bydeth neither corruption, nor diminuition: immutable, for he never altreth
his eternal counsel: incomprehensible, because his majesty can not be known,
neither his puisance be understood: almightye, for he has power over the
living and the dead: over the good and bad. and man ought not to woorship but
one only God, for even as the world was created by one only, so all
creatures ought to woorshyp one only: for even as a Prince will not grant that
another shall be called Prince in his Realm, so will not God that any other God
shall be worshipped in all the world: it was a great benefit, that the father
should create us, and we not pray him, that the son should buy us, and not
be helped of any: and besides all this, in making us Christians, and that the
holy ghost should sanctify us, and we not deserve it. Detto delmedesimo
autore, parlando di vntiranno. A saying of the same Author, speaking of a
tyrant: Io vedo de prencipi che diuentano tiranni, per quello che gli mancha,
and alcuni diuentano vitiosi, per quello che gli soprabonda, dimando hora,
quale di questi male e il minore, o che il prencipe sia pouero, and tiranno, o
che egl^sia ricco et vitioso, a me pare assai meglio, che egli sia ricco et
vitioso, che pouero, et tiranno, perch finalmente si dannera se medesimo con
il vitio, et con larichezza giouera al popolo: ma essendo pouero, con la
tirannia ofendera a molti, et con la pouerta non giouera ad alcuno, perch il
prencipe pouero, non puo porgere a i ricchi, ne soccorere a i poueri: il
prencipe che siahuomo cattiuo, et ricco prencipe, e assai piu vtile
allarepublicha, et piu tolerabile fra gli huomini, che un buon prencipe, che
sia pouero huomo. I see Princes that become tirants for that which they want,
and some become vicious, for that which they have too much of. I ask now
which of these e^yls is the least, either that the Prince be poor and a
tyrant, or else, that he be rich, and vicious? unto me it seems far better,
that he be rich and vicious, then poor, and a tyrant: for at last, with the
vice he will condemn him self, and with riches he will do good unto the
people: but being poor, with tirannie he will offend many, and with poverty,
he will help no man, for the poor prince can not gene unto the rich, neither
succor the poor: the Prince that is an evil man, and a rich Prince, is far
more profitable to the common weal, and more tolerable to men, then a good
prince, that is a poor man. Detto del medesimo sopra honor. A saying by the
same, upon honor. Non may ho letto, che siano altra cosa le conditioni che si
trouano nel'honore, la onde molto beavi debbono mirare coloro, che maneggiano
in quello, et sono tali le sue qualita, Egli domanda chi non lo conosce: parla
con chi, non lo ascolta: pratica con chi non lo ha veduto: corre dietro a chi
lo fugge: honora, chi non lo stima: cerca, chi non cerca lui: domanda, chi non
lo domanda: Fidasi di che egli non conosce: et finalmente, l'oficio del honor
e tale, che egli siparte da chi lo tien in gran stima, et si ferma con chi ne
tengono poco conto: i curiosi viandanti non dimandano che luoco sia questo, o
quello, ma solame^te cerca^o d sapere quale sia il camino, che gli co^duce a
quel luogo dove vanno. Et per^io voglio inferire che i baroni Heroici, and
generosi, non debbono di subito voltar gli occhi all'honore: ma solamente
mirare al camino di virtu, che va ad aparecchiar ci gli honori, per che
altramente vediamo ogni giorno, molti restare infami, solame^te perch cercano
honori, and che molti piu rimangono honorati, perch fuggono gli honori, Oh
mondo immondo, tu sai been, che io conosco i tuoi andamenti, come tu sei un
sepolcro de morti, vna pregion de viui, vna botega de vitij, un castigo de
virtuosi, vno scordamento de passati, inimico de presenti, un rouinator dele
cose gra^de, un turbatore delle picciole, vna stanza de pelegrini, vna piazza
de vagabondi: finalmente, O mondo, tu sei un riuersciatore de buoni, and vno
che desta i mali, and vno che inganna tutti, and dicendo il vero, in te niuno
puo viuer contento. I have never read, that the conditions that are found in
honor are any other, so that they ought to look well, that deal in it, and
such are his conditions, he asks those, that, know him not, speak^^^ to
them that hear him no^: practices with those that have not seen him: runs
after those that flee him: honoreth such as esteem him not seeks those, that
seek not him: he trusts the^, he knows not: and finally, the office of
honor is such, that he departs from those that account of him, and abides
with those, that make no account of him: the curious wayfarers ask not what
place is this, or that, but only seek to know which is the way, that
leads them unto that place whither they go, Whereupon I will infer, that the
heroical and generous knights ought not of a soden to turn their eyes toward
honor, but only behold the way of virtue, and that goes to prepare us honors,
for otherwise we see every day, many rest defamed, only because they seek
honors, and that many rest honored, because they flee honors. Oh filthy
world, thou know well that I know thy proceedings, how thou art a grave for
the dead, a prison for the quick, a shop of vices, a punishment for the
virtuous, a forgetting of the passed, an enemy of the present, a destroyer of
great things, a disturber of the small, a dwelling place for pilgrims, a
market place for vagabondes: finally, O world, thou art an ouerthrower of the
good, and one that do awake the evil, and one that deceyuest all, and to
say the truth, in thee none can live content. Il medesimo Autore inuita i
prencipi a esser virtuosi, and di temer Dio. The self same Author does inuit
Princes to be virtuous, and to fear God. Quando i prencipi non temeno Dio, and
non osseruano i suoi commandamenti, ne segue che i loro vassali non sono boni
Christiani, perch essendo la font salsa, gli e impossible che i Riui suoi
siano dolci, vediamo per esperientia, come un freno refrena un cauallo, vna
ruota muoue un Molino, un timone regge vna naue, and cosi vnprencipe buon^ o
tristo, trabera seco tuttol' suo regno, se esso adora Dio, tutti fanno il
medesimo, se esso gli serve tutti gli seruono, se esso lo lauda tutti lo
laudano, perch l'albero non puo far, altri frutti, ne fiori, senon conformi
al'humore, che piglia la loro radice. When Princes fear not God, and keep not
his commandments, there follows, that their subjects are not good
Christians, for the Spring being salt, it is impossible for the ryuers of it to
be sweet, we see by experience, how one bridle does bridle ^horse how one
wheel does move a Myl, how a Rudder rules a ship, even so a prince, be he
good or bad, draws to him al his Realm, if he woorshyp God, they do all the
like: if he serve him, they all serve him likewise: if he praise him, they all
praise him: for the tree can yield no other flowers nor fruits, but agreeable
to the humors that the root takes. Bell detto del detto autore. A fine saying
of the said Author. Iddio non si puo ingannare con parole, ne corompere con
doni, ne conuincere con prieghi, ne spauentare con minaccie, ne satisf^^ gli
con scuse, perch lui sa tutti i pensieri del huomo. God can not be deceived
with words, nor corrupted with gifts, nor overcome with prayers, neither
feared with threatenynges, nor satisfied with sense, for he knows all the
though^es of man. Bell detto del detto Autore. A fine saying of the said Author.
Le guerre civilly le piu volte si leuano, per la superbia de magiori, che per la
disobedientia de minori. The (...) r^s are ofter times raised through the pride
of the greatest, the^ through the disobedience of the least. Il detto autore
ciinuita a obedir un solo Dio, and un solo prencipe. The said Author inuiteth
us to obey one only God, and one only prince. Non senza gran misterio ordino
Dio, che in vna famiglia vi fusse solamente un padre di famiglia: in un popolo
comune, vuole che comandi un Citadino solo: in vna Prouincia, un solo
gouernatore: che un regno sia gouernato per un Re solo, and un esercito per un
Capitano solo: and che vno Imperatore sia Monarcha and signore di tutto il
mondo, lui viene a inferire che non bisogna adorar, senon un Dio solo, and
seruir un solo prencipe. Not without great mystery did God ordeine, that in a
family there should be only one father of family: in a common people, he will
that one only citizen command: in a Province, one only governor: and that
one Realm be governed by one only king, and a camp by one only captain: and
that an Emperor be Monarch and lord of all the world. His meaning is, we must
woorshyppe but one only God, and serve one only prince. Detto del medesimo
autore dice. A saying of the said Author. Andando per il mondo, ho visto che
il seditioso comanda al pacefico, il superbo all'humile, il tiranno al giusto,
il crudele al piatoso, il cotardo al' ardito, l' ignorante al'prudente: ho
visto i peggior ladroni, apiccar in piu innocenti. Going through the world, I
have seen, that the seditious commau^d the peacible, the proud command the
humble, the tirant the just, the cruel the pitiful, the dastard the hardy, the
ignorant the prudent: I have seen the worst thieves hang the most innocent.
Bell detto and verissimo, del detto autore soprai nostri prelati. A fine saying
and a true, of the said Author, upon our Prelates. Hora vediamo alcuni
gouernare anime nelle Chiese, che non sono bastanti a gouernar pecore ne le
montagne, and che questo sia vero, se ne vede giornalme^t, el' efctto, perch
tali prelati non gouernano, ma guastano: non giouano, ma ofendono: non
resistono a i nimici, anzi gli danno in mano gli inocenti: non sono Giudici, ma
tiranni: non sono clementi, ma carnesici: non aumentano la republicha, ma
dissipano la giustitia, non conseruano le leggi, ma trouano nuoui tributi: non
suscitano il been ma suscitano il male: questi sono i vescoui del nostro
Papato. Now we see some govern souls in Churches, that are not sufficient
to govern sheep in the mountains, and that this be true, we see the effect
thereof daily, for such Prelates do not govern, but mar: they do not help,
but offend: they do not resist enemies, but rather yield the innocent into
their hands: they are not Judges, but tyrants: they are not clement, but
hangmen: they do not augment the common weal, but spoil justice: they do
not keep the laws, but find new tributes: they do not raise the good, bur
raise the bad: these are the Bishops of our Popedom. Il detto Autore parlando
de prencipi. The said Author speaking of princes. Da un albero piccolo, altro
non siricerca, senon che egli renda il frutto al suo tempo, ma dall' albero
alto and ponderoso, si aspetta che egli sostenti: gli alberipiccoli et debili
faccia ombra a gli stanchi, dia il srutto a gli affamati, et che si mantenghi
contra i venti importuni: perch i prencipi virtuosi hanno da essere vn' ombra
per ristorare tutti i buoni, che sono stanchi, la chiesa ci inuita a fare molte
cose, and la conscientia ci rimorde, che si guardiamo da molte. Percio se mi
prometteno i prencipi, che farano solamente due cose, cioe, che sarano fedeli a
la legged' Iddio, la quale adorano, and che non vseranno tiranna contra i
popoli, i quali gouernano, fino ad'hora gli prometto la gloria, and la
beatitudine, la quale bramano, perch solamente quel prencipe muore securo, il
quale muore in carita di Cristo, and ha viuuto nell' amore del prossimo. We
seek naught else of a little tree, but that he yield fruit in his due time:
but of the high and mighty tree, we look that he sustain: the weak and
little trees, make shadow unto the weery, give fruit unto the hungry, and that
he keep himself against the importune winds: for princes that are virtuous,
should be a shadow for to restore all the good that are weerye, the Church
inuiteth us to do many things, and conscience does remember us to take heed of
many, Wherefore if princes do promise me, that they will do only two things, that
is, that they will be faithful to the law of God, which they worship, and that
they will not use tyranny against those people who^ they govern, until then, I
promise the^ the glory and bles sednes which they desire: for only that prince
dies secure, which dies in the charity of Christ, and has lived in the love
of his neighbor. Bell detto del detto autore. A fine faying of the said Author.
Gli e Regola infallibile, and esperimentata da buoni, and huomini rei, che
tutti naturalmente bramano piu tosto che gli auanzi, che gli manchi, and tutto
quello che si brama, con molta diligentia si cerca, and quello che si cerca,
con fatica si aquista, and quello che si aquista con fatica, si possede con
amore, and quello che con amore si possede, si perde con dolor, and sempre si
piange quello, che si possede con amore. It is an infallible rule, and
experienced of the good and bad men, that all men naturally desire rather to
have to leave, then to lack, and all that, that is desired, with much
diligence is sought, and that which is sought with labor, is gotten, and that
which is gotten with labor, is possessed with love, and that which with love
is possessed, is lost with sorrow, and that always we weep for that, which we
possess with love. Il detto Autore poco apresso. The said Author a little
after. Quanto tiene il prencipe in bocca, sia pieno di verita, quanto egli
tiene in mano, sia manifesta misericordia, and tenga le orecchie chiuse all
bugie, and il core aperto alla clementia. So much as the Prince holds in his
mouth, let it be verity, so much as he holds in his hand, let it be manifest
mercy and keep he, his ears close from lies, and his heart open to clemency.


Parole di Plutarco scritte da lui, a Traiano Imperatore, con diuersi altri
detti di Antonio Gueuera. Cap. 37. Words written by Plutarch, to the Emperor
Traiane, with diverse sayings of Antonio Gueuara. Chap. 37.
PArole di Plutarco scritte al Imperatore Traiano. Words written by
Plutarch, unto the Emperor Traiane. Faccio ti a sapere, O Traiano mio signore,
che tu, and il tuo Imperio siate un corpo mistico, a foggia di un corpo viuo
and vero, perch debbono queste due cose stare tanto conformi, che l'
Imperatore siralegri di hauere tai sogetti, and che i popoli si rechino a
ventura di hauer un tal Signore. Et perch dipingono il corpo mistico, and l'
Imperio a foggia di huomo viuo, e da sapere, come il capo, il quale e superiore
a tutte le parti, signisica il prencipe che comanda a tutti: gli occhi, con i
quali vediamo, sono gli huomini da been, i cui virtuosi esempij seguiamo nella
republicha: le orecchie cou le quai vdiamo, sono i vassalli, i quali obidiscono
a i nostri comandame^ti, la lingua con la quale parliamo, significa i sauij, le
cui leggi et dotrina stiamo a vdi re^i capelli che sono nel capo, so no gli
huomini aggrauati, che dima^da^o dal re giustitia: lamano, et i bracci, sono i
caualieri, i quai resistono a i nimici: i piedi che sost entano tutti i membri,
sono i lauoratori, i quai danno da mangiare a tutto l' popolo: le ossa dura che
sostentano la carne debile, sono gli huomini sauij, i quali solieuano dalla
fatica la republicha: i cori che non vediamo con li occhi, sono gli amici, che
danno i consiglij secreti: finalmente: la gola che vnisce la gola al capo, e l'
amore tra il Re, et il regno, che mostrarepub licha. I let thee to know, O
Traian my Lord, that thou and thine Empire are one mystical body in manner of a
true and living body: for these two things ought to be so conformable, that the
Emperor may rejoice to have such subjects, and the people may account the^
selves fortunate, to have such a lord And because they paint the mistical body
and the Empire in manner of a living body, it is to be known how the head which
is superior of all the other parts, it signifies the prince that commands
all, the eyes, with the which we see, are honest me^, whose virtuous examples
we follow in the commonweal: the ears, wherewith we hear, are the vassalles
which obey our commandments: the tongue, wherewith we speak, signifies the
wise nie^, whose laws, and learning we do hear: the hears that are on out
head, are the grieved me^, that ask justice of the king: the hands and the
arms are knights, which resist our enemies: our feet that sustain the
members, are laborers which give meat unto all the people: the hard bones,
that sustain the weak flesh, are wise men, which ease the common weal from
labor: the hearts, which we see not with the eyes, are friends that give us
secret counsayles: and lastly, the throat, that does unite the throat and
the head, is the love betwixt the king and his Realm, that the common weal
shows. Detto di M. Antomo Gueuara. A saying of M. Antonio Gueuara. Vediamo
che tutte le cose da la Naturacreate, fanno la loro operatione verso la part
di sopra. Vediamo la terra che manda i vapori all' insu, le piante cres^ono
ali' insu, i mari ondeggiano all' insu, gli arbori germogliano versosu, il
fuoco va insu, solamente il misero huomo cresce all' ingiu, perch la carne
humana, la quale e solamente terra, e nasciuta di terra, e viue di terra,
procura di auicinarsi alla terra. Ben disse Aristotele, che l' huomo era un
albero, piantato alla riuerscia, nel cui capo sono le radici, il tronco e il
corpo: i rami sono i bracci, la scorza ela carne, i nodi sono gli ossi, la m
idolla e il core, le roditure de i vermi, sono la faccia, la gom ma e l'
humore, i fiori sono l e parole, and i frutti sono le b uone opere, and l'
huomo per andar dritto: dove tiene i piedi, doueua tenere il capo, perch il
capo e la radice, and i pie di sono i rami. We see that al things created of
Nature, show their operation toward the upper part. We see that the earth
does send her vapoure upward, the plants grow upward, the seas flow
upward, the trees budde upward, the fire goes upward, only the wretched man
growethe downwarde, for the humane flesh, which is only earth, is borne of
earth, and lives of earth, procures us to draw near to earth. Well did
Aristotle say, that man is a tree, planted contrary, in whose heads are the
roots: the stock is the body, the branches are the arms, the bark is the
flesh, the knots are the bones, the pith is the heart, the gnawing of the
worms, is the face, the gom is the humor, the blossoms are words, and the
fruits are good works, and man to go right: where he has his feet, should be
his head, for the head is the root, and the feet are the branches. Detto del
detto Autore. A saying of the said Author. Colui che ama di cuore, non diuiene
arogant e nelle prosperita, ne si ritir a ne la contraria fortuna, non
silamenta nella pouerta, non si affligge del poco fauore, non si part nella
persecutione, and finalmente, l' amor and la vita non hanno fine sin' alla
sepoltura. He that loves heartily, becomes not arrogant in prosperity,
neither withdraws him self in contrary fortunes time, does not lament in
poverty, does not despair through little favor, does not depart in time of
persecution: and lastly, lou e and life end not, until to the g rave. Bell detto
del detto Autore. A fine saying of the said Author. Tarquinio fu molto ingrato
al suo Suocero, infame al suo sangue, traditore della sua patria, crudele alla
sua persona, and commesse adulterio con Lucretia, ma tutta via non fu chiamato
ingrato, ne infame, ne crudele, ne traditore, ne adultero, ma Tarquinto
superbo. Tarquinius was very ingratful to his father in law, infamous to his
blood, traitor to his country, cruel to his person, and committed adultery
with Lucretia, but yet for all that he was not called ungrateful, neither
infamous nor cruel, neither trayter, nor fornicater, but Tarquinius the proud.
Il detto in laud di un suo amico. The said Anthour in praise of a friend of
his. Io ti s^riuo, come ad un particolar amico, and compagno antico, come a
colui che e fedel segretario de i miei desiderij, nella cui conuersatione, non
ho may sentito dispiacere, nella cui bocca non ho may trouato menzogna, and
nella cui promessa non trouai may manca mento. I write unto thee, as unto a
particular friend, and to an ancient fellow, as unto him that is a faithful
Secretary of my desires, in whose conversation, I never felt displeasure, and
in whose mouth, I never found lie, and in whose promise, I never found want.
Un bell modo di rispondere, del detto autore, essendoli domandato vna difficile
questione. A fine way to answer, of the said Author, he being demanded a
hard question by one. Giuroti caro amico, che la tua dimanda mi spauenta,
vedendo come non basta la mia Filosofia per rispondere alla tua dimanda, perch
se mi dimandi per tentarmi, mi moteggi di prosuntuoso, ma Se mi dimandi da
scherzo, mi moteggi di leggierezza: se mi dimandi da douero, mi tratti da
ignorante: se mi dimandi per insegnarmi, io sono parcchiato per imparare: se mi
dimandi, perch brami di saperlo, io ti confesso, che non te lo so insegnare:
se mi dimandi, perch altri te ne habbino interogato, puoi esser certo che
nessuno sara satisfatto della mia risposta: and se a caso me ne dimandi, perch
te l' habbi sognato dormendo, poi che sei desto non creder a sogni, perch sono
vani. My dear friend, I swear unto thee, that thy demand does fear me,
seeing my Philosophy is not sufficient to answer unto thy demand, for if thou
ask me, to tempt me, thou mockest me of presumption, but if thou ask me in
jest, thou mockest me of lightness: if thou ask me in ernest, thou use me as
ignorant: if thou ask me, to teach me, I am ready to learn: if thou ask me,
because thou desire to know it, I confess I can not teach it thee: if thou
ask me, because some other body has asked thee, thou may be sure that
none shall be satisfied of mine aunsweare: and if perchance thou ask me,
because thou have dreamed it, sleping, since thou art awake, believe not
dreams, because they are vain.


Discorso del detto autore, sopra Belta Cap. 38. A Discourse of the said
author, upon Beauty. Chap. 38.
IL detto Autore parlando di Belta.

L' huomo molto bello, altro non e senon vn' ombra di donna: and la donna molto
brutta, altro non e, che vna bestia di Montagna. Noi che siamo Cristiani,
dobiamo stimar poco la belt a corporale: poi che da quella piu volte nasce la
bruttura dell' anima: sotto la ghiaccia Cristalina, sta il fango pericoloso:
dentro la mar aglia lauorata, si nutrisce il mala detto Serpe: dentro dal dente
bianco, rode il tarlo importuno: ad un panno molto fino, la tarme fa maggior
straccio, and il verme piu noce all' arbore fruttifero. Lui vuole inferire, che
sotto i corpi belli, and le fac cie di vago aspetto, si nascondono horribil
vitij, per certo i gioueni poco prudenti, and alquanto leggieri, la buona
dispositione, and la belta del corpo altro non e che la madre de molti vitij,
et la rouina di tutte le virtu. O cecita mundana, O vita che non viue, O morte
che non may ha fine: io non so per qual ragione alcuno huomo ardisce di
vanagloriarsi di questa belta vana, sapendo che non e che la forma per empir la
sepoltura, et che tutta la delicatezza de suoi me^bri, ha da esser in poter de
gli afamati serui. Par mi veramente, che quantunque i Cipressi siano molto
dritti, i Lauri molto belli, i Platani molto ombrosi, i Cedri molto alti, i
Ginepri molto odoriferi, gli, Olmi molto grandi, and ventosi: Non per cio sono
questi albert, de gli altri piu belli. Per questa comparatione voglio dire, che
quantunque vn' huomo generoso sia molio dritto di corpo, di alto lenaggio,
molto ombroso de fauori, molto bello di faccia, molto odorifero per fama, molto
alto di sangue, molto potente nella republica, egli non percio e di miglior
vita. Se non m' ing anno sotto il faggio seccho, si conseruano gli animali
grossi, l' albero nano e il primo a dare il frutto: tra le pungenti spine,
nascono le Rose odorifere: il Castagno inrizzato ne da le Castagne saporite.
Voglio dire, che gli huomini brutti and piccoli all volte sono piu vtili nella
republica, perch faccie picciole et brune, sono inditio de cuori valorosi. O
prencipi pieni di follia, O arditi figlioli di vanita, non vi pensate, che
tutta la vostra pazzia sta sogetta all' opilatione del polmone, al caldo del
fegato, al' dolor dello stomacho, all' enfiature de i piedi, a i mouimenti del
Cielo, all congiontioni della Luna, all' Eclissi del Sole, alla noiosa Estate,
all' importuno inuerno: Non vedete che solamente vna febre, non solo lieua la
belta, ma anchora fa venire la faccia scolorita, vedo certi (senza ingegno) che
vogliono che tutto il corpo sia lampeggiante, la roba monda. il saio netto, il
letto ben fatto, la tauola delicata, i vasi ricchi, and solamente consentono,
che la trista anima sia sozza: sono ardito a dire, and da Christiano posso
afermare, che chi vuol tener monda la cosa, la qual f^ce l' huomo: and
consent, che sia sozza l' anima, la quale fece Iddio. Questo gli auuiene, o
perch manca di giuditio, o perch abonda di pazzia: vorrei sapere quale
eccelentia hanno coloro, che sono dottati di belta, piu che chi ne sono
mancati? forse che l' huomo bello ha due anime, and il brutto vna sola: forse
che i belli sono sauij, and i brutti ignoranti: forse che i belli sono sani,
and i brutti infermi: forse, che i belli sono gagliardi, and i brutti cotardi:
perauentura che i belli sono been auenturati, and i brutti sgratiati: forse,
che solamente i belli sono essenti da i vitij, and i brutti sono priuati di
virtu: forse, che solamente i belli hanno per patrimonio perpetuo la vita, and
i brutti ad habitare nelle sepolture: Io dico di no: no^ vediamo noi ogni
giorno, che la bruttura e fatta bella con virtu, et la beleza fatta brutta con
vitij.

Se been un giouine fusse cosi bello, and di cosi bella dispositione che tutti
cibino i suoi occhi a mirarlo, and sipieghino i cuori adamarlo: Che diremo,
quando ci abattiamo (in questa fiorita eta) che nell' abbero hieri staua sana,
and bella, and intiera, senza sospetto alcuno, che si potesse perdere, and che
poi vien un caldo, and l' abrucia, un vento importuno di vna tribulatione la
torce, il coltello in^mico l' accorcia, le Api di non pensati casi la
consumano, l' aqua della tribulatione la desfa, il caldo de la persecutione la
consuma: and finalmente, il uerme de la corta vita la arde and guasta, and pei
il putrido de la morte, la getta a terra. O vita humana, che sempre sei
sgratiata, mi marauiglio come non prendi sospetto, and ricordarti che la tua
belta e sottopofra alla sepoltura? Non vedi tu che gli alberi che sono ne gli
giardim, dalla varteta de i frut ti, si conosce la loro diferenza, cioe, la
quercia dalle sue giande, la palma a i datoli, il Platano all foglie, la Vite
all Grappe, il Castagno, all castagne, ma quando si secca la radice, si
taglia il troncone, i quai gittati nel suoco, tornano in cenere. Dimando, se
alcuno in esse cenere conoscera qual fusse la diferentia da un albero all'
altro? Per questa comparatione voglio dire, che tra tanto che la vita di questa
morte, o la morte di questa vita, ci viene a trouare, siamo tutti come alberi
nel giardino: de i quali vno si conosce a le radice de suoi passati fatti l'
altro all foglie delle sue parole, quello a i rami de i suoi fauori, quell'
altro a i frutti delle sue richezze, altri alla sua scorza brutta, and altri ne
fiori di esser belli, altri per esser pi^cioli come nani, altri per esser
grandi come giganti, altri essendo secchi come vecchi, altri per esser verdi
come gioueni, altri per esser fruttiferi come ricchi, altri sterili come
poueri: finalme^te, siamo tutti vna cosa simile, and caminiamo tutti alla
sepoltura, and come siamo fuori di questo mondo, qual diferentia sara tra i
belli and i brutti? Certo nessuna. Non vedete che quantunque il Cedro sia alto
and bello, non percio ha il suo carbone piu bianco, and benche la quercia sia
picciola and brutta, non percio e piu nera la sua cenere, tanta diferenzia ci
sara tra le ossa di un prencipe, and quelle di un pouero. O huomo senza
inteletto, non sai tu, che Iddio ti creo accio tu morissi? tuo padre ti genero
accio che tu morissi? tua madre ti partori, per morire? and tu sei nato di
donna, per morire? and finalnalmente, tu viui, per morire: and pur non voi
sentire nominar morte. Certamente l' huomo giouine e come un coltello mozzo, il
quale in processo di tempo, si guasta nel taglio de i sentimenti, l' altro di
si spunta nel giudicio, hoggi perde l' aciale delle forze, domatina lo piglia
la rugine dell' infirmita, hora lo torce con le auersita, horra intoppa nella
prosperita: quando e molto acuto di taglio per esser ricco, se ne va saltando:
quando e molto grosso di taglio, non taglia per pouerta: equanto piu il
coltello e tagliente, in tanto piu pericolo met la vita dell' huomo* Non e
cosa spauenteuole, a pensarui sopra, a veder certi braui, belli gioueni, in
poco di tempo si gli muta la belta in bruttura, si gli muta la proportione
della bocca, si perde il lustro della faccia, la barba negra diuenta bianca, il
capo nero si muta in caluo, le mascielle si fanno crespe, le nuuole ciecano gli
occhi, come fusse vna cortina auanti a quelli, i denti come auorio bianchi si
fan neri, la gotta a i pie leggteri met i ceppi, l' Apoplesia di spasimo a i
brazzi galanti,

THe said Author speaking of Beauty.

A man very fair, is naught else but a shadow of a woman, and a woman very
foul, is naught else, but a beast of the mountain. We that are Christians,
ought little to esteem corporal beauty, since that from it many times come great
deformities to the soul: under the Cristal yse, is the dangerous mire: within
the wrought wall, is the cursed serpent nourished: within the white tooth, does
the importune woorme fret: in the finest cloth, does the Moath great hurt, and
the woorme also annoyeth the fruitful tree. His meaning is, that within the
beautiful bodies, and face of a pleasant cou^tena^ce, are horrible vices
hidden, verily in youth, who are not very prudent, and somewhat light, the good
disposition, and beauty of the body, is naught else but the mother of many
vices, and the ruin of al virtue. O worldly blyndnesse, O life that lives
not, O death that never has end, I know not by what reason any man dare vain
glory of this vain beautye, knowing that it is naught else but the form to
fill the grave, and that all the delicacie of his members, shall be in the
hands of the hungry woormes. Verily me thinks, that although the Cypress
be very straight, the Bay very fair, the Platan of much shadow, the Cedar
very tal, the Gineper very odoriferus, the Elm very boisterous and wyndy: Not
for all this are these trees fairer then the other. By this comparison I will
say, that although a Noble man be very straight of body, of high lineage, well
shadowed with favors, very fair of beauty, very odoriferous through fame,
very high of blood, very mighty in a common Weal, he for all this is not of
better life. If I deceive not me self, under the Beech, great beasts do keep
the^ selves, the little tree is the first that gives fruit: amongst the
pricking briars, grows the odoriferus Rose: the crabbed Chestnut tree yel death
the sauory Chestnuts. I will say, that the litell and foul men, many times are
more profitable in the common weal: for small and brown faces, are tokens of
valiant hearts. Oh Princes full of folly, Oh hardy children of vanity, do not
you think, that all your foolishness is subject to the opilation of lights,
to the heat of the Liver, to the ache of the stomach, to the swellings of the
feet, to the mouings of heaven, to the coniunctio^s of the Moon, to the
Eclips of the Sun, to the noisome Summer, to the importune Winter. Do you not
see, that one ague not only takes away the beauty, but also makes the face
become colorles. I see certain (without wit) that will have al their bodies
glistering, their gowns neat, their coat clean, their bed well made, their
table delicate, their plate rich, and only will consent, that the poor soul be
filthy and foul: I dare say, and like a Christian may affirm, that who will
keep clean the thing that man made, and will consent, that the soul, which
God made, be foul: this chances, either because he wa^teth judgment, or
else, because he flows in foolishnes: I would know what excellency they have,
that are endued with beauty, more then those that want it? perhaps the
beautiful man has two souls, and the deformed man but one: perhaps the
beautiful are wise, and the foul, ignorant: perhaps the fair are healthful,
and the foul sick: perhaps the fair are strong, and the foul cowardes:
perhaps the fair are fortunate, and the foul unlucky: perhaps the fair are
void of vices, and the foul void of virtue: perhaps the fair only have
life in perpetual patrimonye, and the foul must dwell in their graves: I
say no: do we not see every day, that foulness is made fair with
virtue? and beautye is made foul with vices?

Although a youngman were so fair, and of so fair a disposition, that al
should feed their eyes in beholding him, and be^d their hearts in louuing him:
What shall we say, if we meet (in this flourishing age) that in the tree
yesterday was whole and sound, without any suspicion to be lost, and that then
comes a heat, and burns it, an importune wind of tribulation does wrye
it, the forreyne knyfe doothe disbarke it, the Be of vnaspected causes does
consume it, the water of tribulation does undo it, the heat of persecution
consumes it: and lastly, the worm of the short life does burn it, and spoil
it, and the^ the rot of death does cast it to the earth. Oh humane life, that
always art unhappy, I marvel that thou do not suspect and remember, that
thy beauty is subject unto the grave? Do thou not see, that the trees that
are in the Gardens, by the variety of their fruits, is their difference
known, I mean, the Oak by her Akernes, the Palm by the Dates, the Plain
tree by leaves, the Vine by the grape, the Chestnut tree by the chest nuts: but
when the root dies, the stock is cut down, which is cast into the fire, and
comes to ashes. I ask, if any, by these ashes can know, which is the
difference from the one tree to the other? By this comparison I will say, that
so long as the life of this death, or else the death of this life does comme to
meet us, we are all like trees in the Garden, the which some are known by
the roots of their passed deeds, another by the leaves of his words, another
by the boughs of his favors, another by the fruits of his riches, some other
by their foul bark, and some by their flowers, for being fair, others for
being as little as dwarfes, others for being as byg as giants, others for being
dry like old, others for being green like yongme^, others by being fruitful
like richmen, others by being barren like poor: lastly, we are al one like
thing, and we walk all toward the grave: and when we are out of this world,
what difference will there be between the fair and the foul? verily none. See
you not, that although the Cedar be high and fair, for all that is not his cole
whiter, and although the Oak be foul and little, yet is not the ashes of it
blacker: so much difference will there be between the bones of a prince, and
those of a poor man. O man without understanding, know not thou, that God
created thee that thou should dye? thy father begat thee that thou sholdest
die? thy mother delivered thee, to die: and thou art borne of a woman, to die:
and last of all, thou lyuest to dye: and yet wilt not thou hear death named.
Certainly a young man is like a blunt knife, the which in tract of time is
spoiled in the edge of the senses, another day he is blunted in judgment, to
day he loses the steel of his strength, to morrow the rust of sickness takes
him, now he is made crooked with adversity, now he stu^bleth upon prosperity:
when he is very sharp of edg, and rich withal, he goes leaping: when he is
very gross of cuttyng, he cutteth not for poverty: and the more sharp a knife
is, in so much more peril does man put his life, It is no fearful thing to
think upon, to see certain brave fair young men, in a short time their
beautye is changed to foulness, the proportion of their mouth is altered,
the brightness of their face is lost, the black beard becomes white, the
black head is changed to hoar, his cheeks beco^e wrimpled, the clouds blind
his eyes, as it were a courtayne before them, the Yuory white teeth are
changed to black, the gout, to nimble feet, puts on fetters, the fearful
palsy comes to the gallant arms,

vitij, and delle virtu molto attenti, ma nel castigarli, and osseruarle molto
negligenti, molti non sanno resistere al vitij ch'anno vituperati, ne
mantenersi ne la vita c' hanno lodata. vices, and of virtues very attentive,
but in punishing the^, and keeping them, very negligent, many can not resist
the vice, which they have abhorred, nor maintain the^ selves in the life they
have praised. E gran male per giouentu, acompagnarsi con i cattiui, and
separarsi da buoni, perch assai nuoce a vno la presentia de cattiui, and anche
la assenza de buoni. It is great hurt for youth, to accompany with the evil,
and separate him self from the good, for the presence of the evil, and the
absence of the good, hurts much one. In casa di un prencipe, non sta been,
chi non ha dolce parole in bocca, da comandare, and humile cuore da vbidire. In
the house of a prince, he does not well, that has not pleasant words in his
mouth, to command, and an humble heart to obey. Guai guai a quella terra dove
il signor e vitioso, il sogetto seditioso, il riccho auaro, and il consigliero
ignorante. Woe, woe unto that city, where the lord is vicious, the subject
seditious, the rich covetous, and the counselor ignorant. Gli animi Generosi
non mirano a quanto gli vien donato, ma a la intention del donatore. The
worthy minds look not unto what is given them, but unto the geuers mind.
Cresso Re de Lidia scriuendo a Anatharso Filosofo, lo prega, che venga a
vederlo, and dice al fine della sua lettera, Credi, and accetta quanto il mio
Imbassadore ti dira and dara, and per questa lettera ti prometto che quando
sarai gionto qua, di farti tesoriero, de mioi tesorri vnico consigliero de miei
affari, segretario de miei segreti, padre de miei siglioli, reformatore del mio
regno, maestro della mia persona, capo della mia republica, and finalmente,
Anatharso sara Cresso accio che Cresso douenti Anatarso. Cressus king of Lidia,
writing to Anatharsus the Philosopher, prays him, that he will come fee him,
and says at the end of his letter, Believe, and take so much as my Imbassador
will tell thee, and give thee, and by this letter I promise thee, that when thou
art come hither, I will make thee treasurer of my treasures, the only
counselor of my affairs, Secretary of my secrets, father of my children,
refourmer of my kingdom, master of my person, head of my common Weal, and
finally, Anatharsus shall be Cressus, to the end Cressus may become
Anatharsus. Pochi prencipi fariano il simile, se ci fussero Filosofi hoggi di.
Few Princes would do the like, if there were Philosophers now adays. E bono
per saper la vita de i vitiosi, por emendar la nostra, ma e meglio cercar di
sapere quella de i saui and buoni, per imitarla. It is good to know the life of
the vicious, to amend ours, but it is better to seek to know the life of the
wise and good, to imitate it. Dice Anatharso, scriuendo a Cresso, Re di Lidia,
I very Filosofi di Grecia, non atendeuano ad imparare a comandare, ma
humiliarsi: non a parlare, ma a tacere: non a resistere, ma a vbidire: non
ad'aquistare molto, ma a contentarsi di poco: non a vendicarsi delle offese, ma
a perdonare le ingiurie: non a pigliare l'altrui, ma a dare del nostro: non ad
esser honorati, ma ad esser virtuosi: imparauano ad abhorire quello che altri
bramano, cioe, richezze: and al contrario, ad amar quelle cose, che gli altri
abhoriscano, cio e, la pouerta, pochi lo fanno hoggi di. Anatharsus says,
writing to Cressus king of Lidia, the true Philosophers of Greece, did not
attend to learn to commau^d, but to be humble: not to speak, but to be
silent: not to resist, but to obey, not to purchase much, but to be content
with little: not to be revenged of offenses, but to pardon injuries: not to take
that which is others, but to give of ours: not to be honored, but to be
virtuous: they did learn to abhor that, which other men desire: that is,
riches: and contrariwise, to love those things, that other men abhor, that
is, poverty: few do it now adays. Non ci e Leone tanto feroce, ne Serpente
tanto venenoso, ne Vipera tanto furiosa, ne altro animale tanto schiuo, che vna
voltal' anno, non si vnisca il maschio con la femina. There is no Lion so
fierce, no Serpent so venomous, no Viper so furious, neither other beast so
fearful, that once in the year, the Male does not join with the Female.
Gli e antico prouerbio, che l' odor de gli odori, si e il pane: il sapore de
sapori, si e il sale: l' amor de gli amori, sono i figlioli. It is an ancient
proverb, that the odor of odours, is the bread: the savor of savors, is the
falt, and the love of loves, is children. La moglie che ha tristo marito,
faccia conto di hauer il Demonio in casa: and il marito c'ha la moglie cattiua,
facci conto di hauer l' inserno in casa. Et dico oltre, che le femine cattiue
sono peggio de le Fury infernale, perch nei' Inferno sono tormentati
solamente i cattiui: male femine indomite tormentano i buoni and cattiui. The
wife that has a naughtye husband, let her make account to have a Devil in the
house: and the husband that has a naughty wife, let him account to have hell in
his house. I say moreover, that ill women are worse, then the infernal
Furies, for in Hell the badde are only tormented, but the unruly women, do
tormente both good and badde. Il modo del gouernare, ricerca non solamente la
scientia, and l' esperientia, ma etiandio la forza per aprendere gran imprese,
prudentia per conoscerle, valor per eseguirle, solecitudine per continuarle,
pacientia per sostenerle, mezzi per sustentarle, and sopra tutto, animo per
fornirle, a honor Dio, and beneficio del prossimo. The manner to govern, has
not only need of science and experience, but also force to undertake great
enterprises, prudence to know them, valor to execute them, diligence for to
continue the^, patience to sustain them, means to uphold the^, and over all this, a mind to accomplish the^ to the honor of God, and benefit of his
neibor. La vita del'huomo non e altro che vna longa giornata che principia
quando lui nasce, et finisce quando muore. The life of man is naught else but a
long journey, that begins when he is borne, and ends when he dies. Vna
bella donna altro non e, che vna pilola d' orata, la qual ciba gli occhi, a
esser mirata, and e poi sprezzata, quando se ne fatta la pruoua A fair woman
is naught else but a gylt pyl, the which feeds the eyes being looked on, and
is despised, when trial is made of it. Vna donna da been, e come un fasano, la
cui piuma e stimata poco, and de la carne ne faciamo gran conto. An honest
woman is like a Fesant, whose feathers is little accounted of, and of the flesh
we make great account. Le triste done sono come la Volpe, la cui pelle teniamo
cara, and sprezziamo la loro carne. The naughty women are like the Foxes, whose
Skynnes are held dear, and the flesh is despised. Se un huomo riprende la
moglie inanzi testimonij, altro non fa che sputare in Cielo, perch lo sputo
gli torna nella faccia. If a man do check his wife before witnesses, he
does naught else but spit in the heaven, for the spittle does return upon
his face. Le done sono fretollose nel dimandare, determinate nel operare,
inpaciente nel soferire, estreme ne i loro desiderij, perch vedo certe done
che si metteranno a desiderar tal cose che non sono state ne veduti da morti,
ne vdite da vini. Women are hastye in askyng, determined in woorkynge,
impacient in sufferynge, extreme in desirynge: for I see certain women that
will set them selves to desire such things as were never seen of the dead,
neither heard of the living. Vedo che se donna ha desio di qualcosa, comanda
alla lingua che la dim indi, ai piedi che la cerchi, a gli occhi che la miri,
all mani che la conserui, anche al cuore che l' ami. I see if a woman has
lust to a thing, she commands her tongue to ask it, her feet to seek it,
her eyes to behold it, her hands to preserve it, and also her heart to love
it. Vedo anche se vna donna ha timore di qualche persona, non lascia per
vergogna di acusarla, ne per pouerta di perseguitarla, ne per timore di farlo
vcidere. I see also, if a woman be afraid of some body, she lets not for
shame to accuse him, neither for poverty to persecute him, neither for fear
to cause him to be slain. Vedo certe done, che se subito non hanno quelche
domandano, si mutano di faccia, dicono con la lingua parolo di affanno, fanno
risonar la casa con la loro voce, scandalizano tutta la vicinanza: finalmente
gettano la spuma per la bocca, fino che hanno il loro desiderio. O misero
huomo, che sei sottoposto a donna. I see certain women, that if presently they
have not that they ask for, they alter their countenance, they speak with
their tongue fond words, with their noise they make the house resounde, they
offend al their neighbors: lastly with their mouth they cast some, until
they have their desire. O wretched man, that art subject to a woman. Ci sono
certi huomini hoggi di, che sono dotati di gratie, ma poueri di virtu, piu
belli che virtuosi, piu gagliardi che piatosi, piu ricchi che elemosinarij, piu
crudi che giusti, piu valorosi che pudenti, piu curiosi che sauij. There are
certain men now adays, that are adopted with graces, but poor of virtue,
more fair the^ virtuous, more strong then pitiful, more rich the^ almose
geuers, more cruel then just, more valiant the^ prudent, more curious then
wise. Bell detto di Gratiano, andando alla guerra, Se io vinco, ho quanto
desidero: se io muoro, satisfaccio quanto son debitore. A fine sayeing of
Gratianus, going to war, If I overcome, I have as much as I desire: if I dye,
I satisfy so much as I owe. Essendo il prencipe ginsto, il Clero santo, la
Chiesa ben fauorita, la Republica emendata, et tutto il regno pacefico, quel
Prencipe, quel Clero, quella Chiesa, quella republica, and quel regno saranno
benedetti a Dio. The Prince being just, the Cleregie holy, the church favored
well, the common weal amended, and all the realm peaceable, that prince, that
Clergy, that Church, that common weal, and that realm shall be blessed of God.


Discorso in laud di Henrico ottauo, Re di Inghilterra. Cap. 40. A discourse
in praise of Henrye the eight, king of England. Chap. 40.
HEnrico ottauo, Re di Inghilterra, fu di sangue generoso, ne le armi
esperimentato, di ingegno acuto, per i capelli canuti venerabile, di aspetto
grave, nel parlare polito, dritto in giustitia, chiaro ne la sua vita, puro in
conscientia, integro di Nobilita, alto nell' eloquentia, profondo ne la
sapientia, elegante nel scriuere, dolce nel pronontiare, virtuoso in operare,
sauio nel conoscere^, giusto nel sententiare, diligente nel castigare, prudente
nel disimulare, presto in soccorer i poueri, pronto in aiutar gli aflitti,
vigilante in esaltar la parola de Iddio, constante ne la feed, largo nel dar
lemosina, solecito nel riscuoter prigioni, piatoso verso i opressati, magnanimo
di cuore, sobrio nel viuere, valoroso ne le guerre, verace nel suo procedere,
conform al parer de sauij, amico de dotti, grato a ibuoni, temuto de gli
insolenti, honorato da molti altri prencipi, amator de la pace, conseruator de
le tregue, mantenitore de la sua parola, fedele ne le sue promise, liberale
verso molti, auaro verso pochi, famoso in clementia, diligente nell' esaltar
virtu, and punir vitio, uegligente nel'mantener vitio, and aba^donar virtu:
finalmente, dottato di tutte quelle bone virtu che apartengono a bon prencipe,
essente de tutti i costumi di tiranno o crudele: pochi se ne trouano suoi pari.
Iddio per la sua misericordia longo tempo voglia mantener sua figlia. Amen.
Cosi sia.

HEnry the eight, king of England, was of a generous blood, in his Arms
experienced, of a sharp wit, through his hoarye hears woorshipfull, of
countenance grave, in his speech neat, in justice right, in his life clear,
in conscience pure, perfect in Nobility, high in eloquence, profounde in
wisdom, eloquent in writing, pleasant in pronouncyng, virtuous in woorkyng,
wise in knowing, just in giving of sentence, diligent in punishing, prudente in
dissembling, ready to succor the poor, prone to help the afflicted,
vigilant in exalting the word of God, constant in faith, large in giving of
alms pliant in redeemyng of prisoners, pitiful toward the oppressed, of a
stout courage, sober in living, valiant in wars, true in his proceedyngs,
agreeable with the wise, a frind to the learned, grateful to the good, feared of
the insolent, honored of many other princes, a lover of peace, a preserver of
truces, a maynteyner of his word, faithful in his promises, liberal toward
many, covetous toward few, famous in clemency, diligent in exalting virtue,
and punishing vice, negligent in mainteinyng of vice, and abandonyng virtue:
lastly, adopted of all those good virtues that apperteyne unto a good prince,
void of all the customs of either tirant or cruel: few are found his
peers. God for his mercy long time maynteyne his daughter. Amen. So be it.

Belli discorsi di Antonio Gueuara, sopra diverse occasion. Cap. 41. Fine
discourses of Antonio Gueuara, upon diverse occasions. Chap. 41.
IDdio creo tutte le cose che seruissero al' huomo con condition che l' huomo
seruisse solamente a Dio, and l' huomo e tanto ingrato, che vuol posseder ogni
cosa, and non vuol seruir a Dio. GOd created al things, that they should serve
man, upon condition that man should serve God only, and man is so ungrateful,
that he will possess every thing, and will not serve God. Un cattiuo prencipe fa
che i suoi soget ti siano rubelli, and il seruo ribello, fa il suo signor
tiranno. An evil prince causes that his subjects are rebels: and the servant
a rebel, makes his lord to be a tirant. Spauenta piu la parola dell' animoso
che la lanza del cotardo. The word of the courageous, fears more then the
spear of the dastard. E impossible, che la malitia humana possa disordinare
quello, che la diuina prouidentia ha ordinato. It is impossible for humane
craft, to disorder that, which the divine providence has ordained. Noi
vediamo con gli occhi, and non conosciamo: vdiamo con le orecchie, and non
comprendiamo: parliamo con la lingua, and non intendiamo: il nostro intelletto
e tanto debole, che a conparatione e assai piu quello che non sapiamo, che
quello che sapiamo. We see with our eyes, and yet we know not: we hear with
our ears, and yet we do not co^prehe^d: we speak with our tongue, and yet we
understand not: our understanding is so weak, that in comparison, that which
we know not, is far more, then that which we know. Vediamo che quando le
radici del albero sono tagliate via, presto i frutti si secchano. We see, that
when the roots of the tree are cut away, the fruit of it do quickly dry. E
meglio assai morire con honor, che viuere con vergogna: prouerbio Romano. It
is far better to dye with honor, then to live with shame. a Roman proverb.
Un Filosofo essendo domandato che cosa fusse la moglie, lui rispose, la moglie
e il naufragio del' huomo, la tempest a di casa, l' impedimento di ogni quiet,
vna prigione della vita, un danno continuo, guerra cotidiana, animal malitioso,
un danno che may non cessa: and finalmente, la donna non e altro, che vna
bestia a lato all' huomo, and pur la donna e un male necessario. A Philosopher
being asked what was a wife, he aunsweared, The wife is the shipwreck of the
man, the tempest of the house, the impediment of all quietness, a prison of
life, a continual damage, a daily war, a malicious creature, a damage that
never ceasseth: and finally a woman is naught else then a beast by the side of a
man, and yet a woman is a necessary evil. E facil cosa ocupar l' altrui, ma e
cosa dificile a conseruarselo. It is an easy thing, to occupye that is other
men's, but it is an uneasy thing, to maintain it. Bell modo di parlare. A fine
manner of speech. Poco gioua il Timone, quando la naue e spersa: poco giouano le
arm, quando il campo e rotto: poco val la medicina, quando l' huomo e morto:
and poco vall' aqua, quando la casa e brucciata. Little avails the Rudder,
when the ship is lost: little avail weapons, when the camp is broke: little
helps the medicine, when the man is dead: and little helps the water, when
the house is burnt. Bello discorso sopra la Morte. A fine discourse upon death.
La Morte altro non e, che un eterno sonno, vna dissolutione del corpo, un
spauento de ricchi, un desio de poueri, un caso ineuitabile, un pellegrinaggio
incerto, un latrone d'huomini, vna madre del sonno, sorella del riposo,
compagna di quiet, vn' ombra di vita, un separarsi da viuenti, vna compagnia
de morti, vna resolutione de tutti, un fornire le fatiche, et un fine de vani
desiderij: finalmente la morte e un carnefice de cattiui, and un grandissimo
premio de buoni. Death is naught else but an eternal sleep, a dissolution of
the body, a fright to the rich, a wish of the poor, a case that can not be
avoided, an uncertain pilgrimage, a stealer of men, a mother of sleep, a
sister of rest, a compagnion of quietness, a shadow of life, a partyng from
the living, a company of the dead, a resolution of al, a finishyng of labors,
and an end of vain desires: finally, Death is an executioner of the evil, and
a great reward of the good. Bella descrittione del mondo. A fine description of
the world. Il mondo e un ricutto de cattiui, un carnefice de buoni, vna somma
de vitij, un tiranno di virtu, vno inimico di pace, un amico di guerra, un
dolce accetto de vitiosi, un fiele de virtuosi, un defensore da bugie, vno
inuentore di nouita, un lagho di vanita, un deserto di follia, un mare di fur
fanterie, la pro fondita di leggierezza, vn' inquietudine d'ignoranti, un
martello de huomini maluagi, un tauoliero de golosi, un forno di
concupiscentia: and finalmente, il mondo altro non e, che vna Caribdi oue
pericolano i nostri cori, and vna Scilla oue si affuocano tutti i nostri
pensieri, perch il mondo altro non ha in se, senon superbia, inuidia, lussu,
ria, odio, ira, bestemia, auaritia, and pazz^a, ogni cosa in se e instabile,
misero, inganneuole, immondo, and tristo, and veramente si puo dir mundano,
perch la terra in esso e l' euaritia, il fuoco e il desio, l' aqua, l'
inconstantia, l' air, la pazzia, le pietre, la superbia, i flori, il contento,
gli alti alberi, sono i pensieri: il mare profondo, e il core: il Sole di
questo mondo, e la prosperita, la Luna significa il mutame^to continuo: il
mondo si e nostro crudel nimico, nostro falace amico, che sempre ci da fatiche,
sempre ci lieua il riposo, lui ci priua de nostri tesori, lui e temuto da
buoni, lui e amato da tristi, lui e dissipatore d' altrui beni, and auaro de
suoi, lui e macinatore de tutti i vitij, and il carnefice de tutte le virtu: il
mondo trattiene i suoi con inganni, lui trahe a se i stranieri con delitie, lui
robba la fama de i morti, met a sacco la fama and vita de i viui, lui tiene
conto di noi, et noi non osiamo tenir conto di lui, and ogni cosa in questo
mondo, non e che vanita. The world is an assembly of the evil, an headsma^ of
the good, a sum of vices, a tirant of virtue, an enemy of peace, a friend of
war, a sweet accepting of the vicious, a gall of the virtuous, a defender of
lies, an inuentour of nouelles, a lake of vanity, a desert of follye, a sea of
knauerye, the depth of lightness, an vnqnietnesse of the ignoraunte, an
Hammare of naughtye men, an exchequer of the gluttons, an oven of
concupiscence: and finally, the world is naught else, but a Caribdis, where our
hearts do perish, and a Scilla, wherein al our thoughts are smothered, for the
world has nothing else in it, but pride, envy, lechery, hatred, ire,
blasphemy, covetousness, and follye: every thing in it, is unstable, wretched,
deceitful, unclean, and naughtye, and verily it may be called worldly, for
the earth in it is covetousness: the fire, is desire: the water, in
constancy: the air, folly: the stones are pride: the flowers, contentations:
the high trees, are the thoughts: the deep sea, is the heart: the Sun of
this world, is prosperity: the Moon signifies the continual mutabilitie:
the world is our cruel enemy, our failing friend, that always gives us
labors, always takes us from rest, he depriueth us of our treasures, he is
feared of the good, he is loved of the evil, he is a destroyer of other men's
goods, and covetous of his own he is a forger of al vices, and the hangman of
al virtues: the world holds his, with deceit, he draws strangers to him
with dainties, he steals fame from the dead, he sacketh the fame and life of
the living he keeps account of us, and we dare not keep account of him, and
al things in this world are but vanity. Chi si lascia vincer da la
malinconia, si gli turbano i pensieri, la memoria si gli confonde, la carne gli
trema, il giuditio si gli altera, and la ragione si ritira da lui* He that
lets him self be ouerco^e with sadness, his thoughts are troubled,
confou^deth his memory, his flesh tre^bleth his judgment alters, and reason
is withdrawn from him. Le qualita de gli Elementi, la Terra e fredda and
secca, l' aqua e humida and fredda, l' air e caldo and humido, il fuoco e
caldo and secco. The qualities of the Elements, The earth is cold and dry, the
water moist and cold, the air hot and moist, the fire hot and dry. L' Autore
scriue in laud di un Senator Romano, and dice, Lui fu di sangue generoso,
moderato nelle prosperit a, paciente nelle aduersita, animoso nelle fatiche,
solecito nelle imprese, prudente ne i consigli, fedele con gli amici, accorto
con gli inimici, geloso del suo nome, honesto della persona, ne con la lingua,
ne con la vita non may scandalizzo, ne affilisse persona. The Author writes in
praise of a Roman Senator, and says, He was of an high blood, moderate in
prosperity, pacient in adversity, hardye in his labors, careful in his
enterprises, prudent in counselles, faithful with his friends, wary with his
enemies, ielous of his name, honest of his person, neither with tongue, nor yet
with life, did he ever sclaunder, or trouble any person. Le con litione del
huomo assannato and tribulato, lui sospiradi giorno, lui veglia di not te, in
compagnia si afligge, solo piglia riposo, abhorisce la luce, ama le tenebre,
bagna la terra conlagrime, penetra l' aria con sospiri, del passato sent pena,
il presento non li piace, l' auuenire gli da pensiero, si affigge quando vien
consolato, and narrando le sue pene, piglia conforto, con compagnia non sta
contento, and solo sta mal disposto. The conditions of an afflicted and
troubled man, he fights by day, he waketh by night, with company he is
trobled, alone he takes rest, he abhors light, he loves darkness, he
wetteth the earth with tears, pierseth the air with sighs, he feels pain
of that is past, that is present pleases him not, he museth of that to come,
when he is comforted he afflictes himself, and in reciting his pains, he
takes comfort, with company he is not content, and alone he is ill disposed.
Bell modo di scriuere, del detto Autore, scriuendo a un suo amico che era
bandito. A fine way to write, of the said Author, writing to a friend of
his, that was banished. Non vediamo noi, quanto e varia la Fortuna, and in
quanto poco spacio accade vna disgratia? In questo che hora voglio dire,
condanno me, accuso te, mi lamento de i Dei, cito i morti, chiamo i viui,
perch veggono loro, and vediamo noi, come habbiamo auanti gli occhi il male,
and non sappiamo conoscerlo, lo palpiamo con le mani, and non lo sentia^no, lo
habiamo ananti a i piedi, and non lo vediamo, il male ci parla all' or^chie,
and non lo vdiamo, ci chiama spesse volte, and non l'vdiamo, ci auisa ogni
giorno, and non gli crediamo, non vogliamo antiueder il pericolo, fino che non
ci e piu rimedio. Non pensiamo di viuer sicuri, a pensar che le cose piccole
non portino pericolo: Non vediamo noi per esperientia, che un poco di vento fa
cader i frutti da gli alberi, vna picciola scintilla abrucia vna montagna, con
vna picciola punta di un sasso, sirompe una naue, vna picciola pietra fa
intoppar il piede, un piccolo hamo piglia un gran pesce, vnapicciola ferita fa
morire vna gra^ persona? Per quanto ho detto, voglio inferire, che la nostra
vita etanto frale, and la fortuna tanto sciolta, che ci viene da quella part
il pericolo, dove stauamo piu securi. Molti sono i peri coli a che siamo
sottoposti, de quali non dubitamo niente: non vediamo noi per esperientia che
il Cirugico teme piu la Fistola chiusa, che l' aperta, il Piloto teme piu l'
aqua bassa, che l' alta, il buon gueriero teme piu un assalto secreto, che vna
manifesta bataglia. Voglio dire, che l' huomo prudente non si debbe guardare
dastranieri, ma da i suoi, non da nimici, ma da amici, non dalla crudel guerra,
ma da la finta pace, non dal danno publico, ma dal occulto pericolo. Se not
conoscessimo le qualita de la Fortuna, non si lamenteressimo cosi all'
improuisa di lei, perch a dire il vero, lei doueria essere tutta per tutti,
and doueria tener tutti contenti, and lei fa al contrario, and si scherza di
noi, essa ci mostra i suoi beni, and noi li pigliamo per heredita, essace li
impresta, and noi li pigliamo per continui, essace li da da scherzo, and noi li
pigliamo da douero: finalmente, non vediamo, che ella non fa altro, che darsi
la baia, ci da quello che e d' altri, and ci piglia il nostro: finalmente io
es^rto, prego, auertisco, amorisco, and supplico tutti i miei amici a imparar a
conoscer Fortuna, and non temer i suoi venti furibo^ li de i suoi trauagli, ne
spauentar si de i suoilampi, and t^^i^, ne creder alla ser^mta de i suoi
piaceri, ne darsi delle sue dolci lusing he, non far stima de i suoi amici, non
acompagnarsi con i suoi nimici, non pigliar piacer di quello che ci da, ne
sentir affanno per quello che ci lieua, and non rider per esser amato da
quella, ne piangere per esser disprezzato da essa: perch Fortuna e tanto
falsa, che molte volte t^ra l' Arco, and non ferisce, and molte volte non tira,
and ferisce. Do we not see how variable fortune is, and in how little space a
mischance happens? In that which now I will say, I condemn me self, I
accuse thee, I complain of the gods, I still the dead, and call the living for
they see, and we see how we have before our eyes, the e^yl, and we can not
know it, we touch it with our hands, and yet we do not feel it, we have
it before our feet, and yet we see it not, it speaks to us in our ears,
and yet we hear him not he calls us often, and we hear him not, he advises
us every day, and we believe him not, we will not foresee the peril, until there
be no more remedy. Let us not think to live secure, and think that small
things bring no peril: Do we not see by experience, that a little wind
causes fruit to fall from the trees? a little spark burns a mountain? with
the small point of a stone, is a ship broken, a little stone makes ones feet to
stumble? a little hook takes a great fish? a little wound makes a great
person to dye? For that which I have said, my meaning is, that our life is so
frail, and Fortune so loose, that dangers come to us from that part, that
we thought we were most sure. Many are the perils that we are subject
unto, of the which we doubt nothing. Do we not see by experience, that the
Surgeon fears more a close Fistule, then the open: the Pilote fears more
the low water, then the high: the good warrior fears more a secret assault,
then a manifest bataile. I will say, that a prudent man ought not take heed of
strangers, but of his own: not of his enemies, but of his friend: not of the
cruel war, but of the faygned peace: not of the public damage, but of the
hydde^ peril. If we did know the qualities of Fortune, we would not so
suddenly complain of her, for to say the truth, she should be all in all,
for all men, and should keep al content, and she does the contrary, and
iesteth at us: she shows us her goods, and we take them to our
inheritance: she lends them us, and we take them for a continuance: she
gives us them in jest, and we take them in earnest: finally, we see how she
does nothing else, but mock us: she gives us that which is other men's, and
takes from us, that which is ours: finally, I exhort pray, warn, admonish,
and beseech al my friends to learn to know Fortune, and not to fear the ragyng
wyndes of her trauayles, nor to be afrighted of her lamps and thunders,
neither believe the clerenes of her pleasures, nor trust her sweet
flatteringes, nor to esteem her friends, nor accompanye with her enemies, nor
take pleasure in that she gives us, neither feel grief for that which she
takes from us, nor laugh for being loved of her, neither weep for being
despised of her: for Fortune is so false, that many times she draws the
Bow, and wounds not, and many times she draws it not, and yet wounds.


Discor si del detto Autore circa Capitani et Soldati del nostro tempo, and
mostra come bisognerebbe scegliere i Giudici. Cap. 42. Discourses of the said
Author, concerning Captains and soldiers af our time, and shows how Judges
should be chosen. Cap. 42.
IN Roma antica Citta, non si daua ordine di Caualleria a nessuno, se non era
di sangue chiaro, di corpo ben disposto, nel parlare ordinato, nella guerra
esercitato, di core animoso, nelle armi fortunato, nella vita modesto bisognaua
che fusse approuato degno da tutti, and che nessuno si lamentasse di lui, il
vero, and non finto Caualiero non bisogna che sia superbo, malitioso,
furibondo, goloso, pusillanimo, ne scarso, ne bugiardo, ne bestem^atore, ne
pigro, ma valente, humile, scalirito, paciente, temperatto, netto, virile,
liberale, verace. Ma i Caualieri del nostro tempo non sono cosi, loro lasciano
l' oficio di Caualeria, and si mettono a l' oficio del' agricoltura, i loro
caualli sono buoi, le loro lanze sono stimoli, le loro spade scoriade, i loro
scudieri sono adesso lauoratori. I nostri Caualieri piu presto anderanno a la
villa a lauorare, che andare ala Frontiera a combattere. O quanto degenerano i
Caualieri del nostro tempo, da quelli del tempo passato? al' hora i Caualieri
si preciauano de gli infideli che haueuano amazato, and i suoi figlioli al
present si preciano del grano che hanno colto. Non sapeuano sospirare i
Caualieri antichi, senon quando si trouauano a qualche passo pericoloso, i suoi
successori non piangonon may, senon quando non pioue di Maggio: contendeuano i
loro padri l' un con l' altro, a veder chi poteua tener piu lanze, contendono
hora i figlioli chi ha piu intrate, and chi sa meglio sparagnare. O gran pazzia
che e soferto. IN Rome that ancient city, there was no order of knighthood
given to any, if he were not of clear blood, of body well disposed, in speech
ordinate, in wars exercised, of heart courageous, in Arms fortunate, in his
life modest, he must be approved worthy of al men, and that none should
complain of him, the true, and not faygned knight must not be proud,
malicious, raging, gluttonous, effeminate, filthy, nor scarce, nor liar, nor
blasphemer, nor slothful, but valiant, humble, nymble, pacient, temperate,
neat, manlye, liberal, and true. But the knights of our time are not so,
they leave the office of knighoode, and put them selves to the office of
husbandrye, their Horses are Oxen, their Spears are goades for Oxen, their
swoordes whippes, their Shields Rakes, their Esquires are Laborers. Our
knights rather will go to the village to work, then go to the Frontiers to
fight. O how much do knights of this time degenerate from those of times
passed? Then knights did praise them selves of the Infidelles which they had
killed, and their children at this present praise them selves of the grain
they have reaped. The ancient knights could not fight, but when they found
the^ selves in some dangerous strayt, their successors never weep, but when it
rayneth not in May: their fathers did contend one with an other, to see who
could keep most spears, their sons contend now who has more revenues,
and who can best spare. Oh great folly, that it is suffered. Bella definitione
del nostro corpo, del detto autore. A fine definition of our body, by the said
Author. O cari amici, non sapete voi che la nostra natura e la corutione del
nostro corpo, il nostro corpo e il molino de i nostri se^si, et i nostri sensi
sono giudici della nostra anima, et la nostr' anima e madre de i nostri
desiderij, et i nostri desiderij so no il boia della nostra giouentu, et la
nostra giouentu e la ve^ndetta de la nostra vechiezza, la nostra vechiezza e
spia de la nostra morte, and la morte al fine e l' hosteria dove piglia
alogiamento la nostra vita. Oh dear friends, know you not that our nature is
the corruption of our body, and our body is the myl of our senses, and our
senses are Judges of our souls, and our soul is the mother of our desires,
and our desires are the executioners of our youth, and our youth is the
revenge of our age, and our age is the spy of our death, and death at last
is the Inn where our life does take up his lodgyng. Il detto Autore descriue
la vita de i nostri soldati che sono al di d' hoggi, and dice la verita, I
nostri Capitani ne paesi daue passano fanno de le grande opressioni, and ne le
Prouincie dove dimorano, fanno de gran fur santerie. Io so dire, et posso
afermare, che il verme non fa tanto danno nel legno, ci la tarma ne la roba, et
la fauilla ne la stoppa, le Locuste ne le biade, come fanno i Capitani nelli
popoli, non lasciano animale che non amazzino, ne furto che non facciano, ne
vino che non beuano, ne denna che (...), ne buso che (...), ne temp^o che
(...), ne seditione che non causino, ne vita che non inte^dano, mangiano and
leueno, et non vogliono pagare, non vogliono seruire, che non siano ben pagati,
et e peggio del tutto, che se sono pagati, subito lo giuocano, se non sono
pagati, subito vanno a robbare, o siribellano, di sort che con pouerta sono
mal contenti, et con le richezze viuono vitiosi, et e venuto il caso a tanto
corompimento che adesso un Capitano somiglia un capo de homicidiali, origin de
seditiosi, tormenta^ore de buoni, suegliator de tuttii mali, capo de ladroni,
pirato de corsari: finalmente non dico quello, che pareno, ma affermo quel che
sono, sono carnefici de virtuosi, et hosteria de vitiosi. Io percio non li
biasimo tutti, perch so che ce ne de buoni qualcuno, ma sono molto rari,
rarissimi. The said Author describes the life of our soldiers that are now
adays, and says true, Our Captains in the countries where they pass, do
great oppressions, and in Provinces where they tarrye, they do great
villainies. I can say, and may affirm, that the worm does not so much hurt in
the wood, and the moth in the cloth, and a sparkle in the the towe, the
Locustes in the corn, as captains do among the people, they leave no beast
vnkylled, no stealth that they do it not, no wine that they drink not, no
woman that they force not, no hole that they find not, nor temple that they
spoil not, sedition that they cause not, no no life that they understand not,
they eat and drink, and will not pay, they will not serve, if they be not well
paid, and that is worst of al, if they be paid, strayt they play it: if they be
not paid, strayte they go and rob, or else rebel, so that with poverty
they are not contented, and with riches they live vitiously: and the case is
come to such a corruption, that now a Capytayne resemblethe a head of
slaughters, an original of seditions, a tormenter of the good, a waker of al
euyls, a head of the eues, a pirate of Rouers: and finally, I say not what
they seem, but I affirm what they are, they are headsmen of the virtuous, and
a lodging place of the vicious. I for all this blame the^ not at al, for I know,
that there are some good, but they are rare, yea very rare. Il detto Autore ci
narra come bisognerebbe s^egliere i giudici, ma lui e obedito da pochi. The
said Author does tell us, how Judges should be chosen, but he is obeyed of
very few. Ascegliere buoni giudici, bisogna scegliere de molti, i pochi: de i
pochi, piu saui: de i piu saui, i piu esperti: de i piu esperti, i piu
prudenti: de i piu prudenti, i piu quieti: de i piu quicti, i piu vecchi: de i
piu vecchi, i piu degni: perch in vero, un vero et degno giudice bisogna che
sia di sangue generoso, vecchio di eta, honesto di vita, et dipoca pazzia, ma
di molta csperientia, et nel parlar resoluto, perch il vero giudice non
bisogna inchinarsi per preghi, ne esser corotto con doni, ne lasciarsi ingannar
con parole, ne lasciarsitorcer con minaccie, ne piegarsi ad accetar denari, ne
esser vinto da pieta, ne anche esser troppo seuero in giudicare: ma certo,
certo, se ne troua pochi di questi, hoggi di, il buon giudice bisogna che habbi
sempre vna mano presta per sostener i buoni, and l' altra pronta per castigare
i cattiui, ma non e cosi, io voria che fusse cosi. To choose good Judges, you
must choose out of many a few: out of the few, the wisest: out of the wisest,
the expertest: of the expertest, the most prudent: of the most prudent, the
quietest: of the quietest, the eldest: of the eldest, the worthyest: for
verily, a true and worthy Judge must be of a generous blood, of age old, of
life honest, and of little follye, but of much experience, and in speech
resolute, for the true Judge must not incline him self with prayeinges,
neither be corrupted with gifts, nor deceived with words, nor bend with
threatenynges, nor bow him self to accept money, nor be overcome with pity,
and also to be severe in judging: but verily, verily, there are few found now
adays, the good Judge must always have one hand ready to sustain the good,
and the other prone to punish the wicked, but it is not so, I would it were so.
Orsu, per adesso io mi voglio licentiar un poco da voi, io sono stracco a
recitar tanti de questi detti, and piu che io scriuo and parlo, piu me ne viene
a memoria. Well, for this time I will take my leave a little of you, I am weerye
to rehearse so many of these sayings, and the more I write and speak, the more
comes to my memory. Veramente voi mi hauete fatto un grand' apiacere, and mi
hauete narrato de belli ponti. Certo quello M. Antonio Gueuera mostra been, che
era huomo di grand' ingegno. Verily you have done me a great pleasure, and
you have told me many brave points. Certainly that M. Antonio Gueuara
shows well, that he was a man of great understanding. Cosi era certo. So he
was certain. Ma di gratia fatemi anchora un apiacere. But of courtesy do me
one pleasure more Volentieri, se io posso. Gladiy, if I can. Signor si, che voi
potete. Yes sir, that you can. Et che cosa e? And what is it?


Nomi di tutti i membri che apertengono all' huomo, de i parenti, i giorni de
la settimana, con le stagioni del' anno, come si debbe numerare, con un certo
breue vocabulario. Cap. 43. Names of all the members appertaynyng to man, of al
parents, of the days of the week, with the seasons of the year, how one
shall number, with a certain brief Vocabularie. Chap. 43.
DI gratia fatemi ta^ta cortesia, ditemi in Italiano, tutti i membri che
apertengono a l' huomo. I Pray you show me so much courtesy, as to name me in
Italian, all the members which appertayue to man. Io sono contentissimo. I am
content. Cominciate dal Capo. Begin at the head. Un homo A man vna donna a
woman vna persona a person Il popolo the people la gente. the folk la plebe
the commons la Nobilta the Nobility Il corpo the body. la anima the soul Il
sangue the blood la testa the head Il capo the noule I capelli the hears le
orechie the ears Il ceruello the brains la front the browe la faccia the
face Il viso the visard Il volto the face gli occhij the eyes le galte the
cheeks Il naso the nose la bocca the mouth la lingua the tongue le labra the
lyps I denti the teeth le masighe the gummes la gola the throat Il barbotto
the chynne la coppa the hinder part la barba the beard la Skena the back le
spalle the shoulders I braccij the arms Ilgombito the elbowe le mani the
hands le dita the fyngers Il police the thumb le vngie the nails la pelle
the Skyn. Il petto the breast Il stomako the stomach Il ventre the belly Il
collo the neck Il bombeligo the naule la verga the yard la lonza the loyne le
chiappe the buttockes Il fiancho the flank le reni the raynes Il culo the arse
le natiche the buttockes Il gallone the thigh Il ginochio the knee le gambe the
legs I piedi the feet Il calcagno the heel le zonture the joints un osso a
bone le ossa the bones le popille the breasts le membra the members un pugno a
fist vna brancada a handful In seno in the bosom nel grembo in the lap vna
costa a ryb vna vena a vain un neruo a sinow Il polso the pulse le tempie the
temples la palma di la the palm of the mano hand le bud^lle the guts Il sputo
the spittle sputare to spitte Il cuore the heart le entraglia the entrails Il
segato the liver Il rognone the kidney Il fiele the gal la panza the panch un
petto a breast la vessiga the bladder un puzore a stink la sola del piede the
sole of the foot. la rogne the scabbes le tegna the scall sgratare to scratch
pizigare to pinch la toss the cough esser rauco to be hoarse la carne the
flesh. Veramente voi gli hauete nominato in ordine. Truly you have named them
in order. Io nu ho scordato quasi tutto. I have almost forgotten al. Ditemi
qualcosa circa parenti. Tell me something about parents. Io sono contento. I am
content. Mio auolo My grandsier mia auola my grandam Padre father madre mother
fratello brother sorella sister barba uncle ameda aunt neza neese nipote neuew
cugino cousin he cugina cousin she matrigna mother in law patrigno father in
law figliolo fonne figliola daughter figliozza goddaughter figliozzo godsonne
amico friend amicitia friendship dolceza sweetness amaritudine bytternesse
herede heir orfano orphan marito husband moglie wife consorte bedfelow vergine
virgin genero son in law virginita virginity cugnato brother in law sposo
bridegroom sposa bride maritagio marriage maritare to marry compare goship he
comare goship she vna balia a nourse Infant an infant un becco cornuto a
cuckold zeloso ielous auaro covetous amoreuole loving cortese courteous pensoso
thoughtful I giorni the days Domenichae sunday lunedi monday martedi tuesday
mercordi wednesday giouedi thursday veneredi friday sabato saturday vna
settimana a week un mese a month tree mosi three months un quarto di anno a
quarter of a year mezo anno hafe a year un anno a year un hora an hour meza
hora half an hour Il tempo the time la state the summer l' inuerno the winter
la prima vera the spring l' autunno the harvest caldo hot freddo cold I dodeci
mesi the. 12. months Gienaro January Febraro February marzo March Aprile April
Magio May Giugno June Luio July Agosto August Settembre September Ottobre
October Nouembre November Decembre December. giorni di festa holy days Natale
Christmas la circoncisione the Circumcision primo giorno del anno New years
day giorno di tree re Twelfth day la candelosa Candlemas day Carneuale
Shrouetide Domenica de le palm Palm sunday Pasqua Easter l' Ascensione
Ascension day la Pentecoste Whitsonday tutti i Santi Al Saints per contare.
to number. vno, due, masculino. one, two, masculine. vna, dua, feminino. one,
two, feminine vno one due two tree three quatro four cinque five sei six set
seven otto eight noue niene dieci ten vndeci eleven dodeci twelve tredeci
thirtiene quatordeci fourtiene quindeci fiftiene sedeci sixtiene dieci set
seuentiene disdotto eightiene disnoue nientiene venti twenty venti vno twenty
one venti due twenty two venti tree twenty three cosi segue in ordine. so
follows in order. trenta thirty quaranta forty cinquanta fifty sessanta
sixty settanta seventy ottanta eighty nonanta nientie cento an hundred mill
a thousand un miglion. a million Il numero ordinario the ordinarye number.
Primo First secondo second terzo third quarto fourth quinto fifth sesto sixth
settimo seventh ottauo eighth nono nienth decimo tenth vndecimo eleventh
duodecimo twelfth terzo decimo thirteenth Cosi segue in ordine. So follows in
order. Mercante a Merchant sensale a Broker fattore a factor cassiere a Cassier
seruitore a servant scriuante a Scriuener. respondente an answearer. si curta a
surety condutore a conductor asicuratore an assurer vsuraro an usurer
cambiatore a chaunger debitore a debtor creditore a creditor ingannatore a
deceiuer compagno a fellow moneta money denari money limoni Lemons aranze
Orenges pomi granati Pomgranates specie Spise Canella Sinamome Zenzero Ginger
Garofoli Cloves peuere Pepper Safrano Saffron Irios Irios Aloes Aloes Arsinico
Arsnicke Agaricho Agarike Tartaro Argol Garanza Madder pastello Woad Lino Flax
Caneuo Hemp pegola Pitch Cera Wax Nose moscada Nutmegs Zucaro Sugar pomo an
apple pero a Pear persico a Peach Fico a Fig Prugne Plumbes Mandole Almondes
Vua Grapes Corintij Corences Cerese Cheries Meloni Melons zucha a Goord Lana
Wool panno alto broad cloth Carisee Carsies Fustagno Fustian Ostada Woorsted
tela di lino lynnen cloth peso weight misura measure oncia an ounce libra a
pound verga a yard ala an ell braccio a brace caro dear bon mercato good
cheap riccho rich pouero poor assai yenough niente nothing acordo agreement
zedola a sedule a tempo at time a credito at credit vn' obligo a bond po^^ere
poulder (...) a penny gr^sso a groate riale a ryal soldo a shilling scudo a
crown fiorino a florence ducato a ducate angelotto an angel talero a doller
lira a pound interesso interest un nobile a noble un marcho a mark datio toll
botega a shop pacuzo a warehouse magazzino a pack house contare to number
pagare to pay perdere to loose riceuere to receive barattare to batter scriuere
to write rendere to render vendere to sell spendere to spend sparagnare to
spare ricordare to remember smentigare to forget fidare to trust credere to
believe pentire to repent acordare to agree la voce the voice Il pensiere the
thought sospirare to sigh sognare to dream dormire to sleep lacrime the
tears orefice a goldsmyth sartore a taylour calzolaio a shoemaker drapiere a
draper tessidore a weauer tentore a dyer fabro a smyth fornaio a baker pistore
a baker ferraro an Ironmo^ger berettaro a capper coco a Cook capellaro a
hatter spadaro a Cutler stringaro a point maker guantaro a gl^uer fa caldiere a
kettle maker vetraro a g^asse maker tubbaro a Cooper merzaro a M^r^er barbiere
a barber muratore a Di^^klayer pescatore a Fis^monger marangone a Carpenter
pelizaro a Skynner Sellaro a Sadler Tamburino a Drummer Certo io credo, che
questo piccolo vocabulario mi seruira. Certis I believe, that this little
vocabularie will serve me. Io so che ci sono tanti di questi vocabulari in
stampa, che voi ne potete comprar vno bon mercato. I know that there be many
of these vocabularies in print, which you may buy good cheap. Dunche non
acade pigliartanta pena di recitarne tanti, ma basta certa. Then you need not
take so much pain to rehearse so many, but it suffiseth certis.


Certe preghiere, come il Padre nostro, and il Credo, con altre, con certe
Regole Inglese. Cap. 44. Cer tayne prayers, as the Pater noster, and the
Creed, with others, with certain English Rules. Chap. 44.
VEramente voi mi hauete fatto un grand' apiacere: adesso se mi volete
insegnare qualche oratione, io per sempre vi restero obligato. VErily you have
done me a great pleasure: now if you will teach me some prayer, I always shall
rest as bound unto you. Cosi voleua fare, inanzi che me lo dicessi. So I would
have done, before you told it me. Padre nostro che sei ne li Cieli, sia
santificato il nome tuo, venga il regno tuo, sia fatta la tua volonta in terra,
come e fatta in Cielo. Donaci hoggi il nostro pane quotidiano: and perdonaci i
nostri peccati, come noi perdoniamo a quelli che ci hanno offeso, and non ci
indurre in tentatione, ma liberaci dal male, perch tuo e il Regno, la
potentia, la gloria, in sempiterno. Cosi sia. Our father which art in heaven,
hallowed be thy name: Thy kingdom come: thy will be done in earth, as it is
in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread, and forgive us our offenses, as
we forgive them that have offended us: and lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil. For thine is the kingdom, the power, and glory, for ever
and ever. So be it. Io credo in Dio padre onnipotente, creatore del Cielo, and
de la terra: et in Giesu Christo, vnico suo figliolo nostro signore, il qual fu
concetto di spirito santo, naque di Maria vergione, pati sotto Pontio Pilato,
fucrucifisso, morto, and sepolto, discese al inferno, and il terzo giorno
resuscito da morti, and ascese in Cielo, dove siede ala destra di Dio padre
onnipotente. Di li ha da venire a giudicare li viui, and li morti. Io credo ne
lo spirito santo, la santa Chiesa catolica, la Comunione de santi, la
remissione de peccati, la resuretione de la carne, and la vita eterna. Amen. I
believe in God the father almighty, maker of heaven and earth: and in Jesus
Christ his only son our-Lorde, which was conceived by the holy Ghost, borne
of the virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and
buried: he descended into hell: and the third day he rose again from the dead,
and ascended into heaven, where he sits at the right hand of God the father
almighty. From thence shall he come to judge both quick and dead. I believe in
the holy ghost, the holy catholic church, the communion of saints, the
forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting.
Ame^ Gratie inanzi pasto. Grace before meat. Ogni cibo che qui e portato, e
che si portera, benedica Iddio per la sua infinita bonta, e misericordia, per
Jesus Christo signor nostro. Cosi sia. ALl meat that here is brought, and will
be brought the Lord bless it through his infinite goodness and mercy, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. So be it. Dio salui la Chiesa, la nostra Regina, and il
nostro regno, e concedici pace per sempre, per il tuo figliolo Jesus Christo
nostro signore. Amen. God save the Church, and our Queen, with our realm,
and grant us peace for ever, through thy son Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Gratie doppo pasto. Grace after meat. TIringratia mo padre celeste, di tanti
doni che ci hai fatti, per sustentar questo corpo humano, piacciati anchora
signor, farci partecipe de quel tuo santo cibo spirituale, per sustentar le
nostre anime, a honor del ^uo santo nome, and a beneficio de nostri prossimi.
Amen. We yield thee thanks, O father celestial, for so many gifts that thou
have given us, to sustain this humain body withal, pleases thee also O Lord,
to make us partakers of that thy holy and spiritual food, to sustain our
souls, unto the honor of thy holy name, and benefit of our neighbors. Amen.
Iddio fa salua la Regina, la tua Chiesa, il suo Consiglio, da pace nel nostro
regno, per Jesus Christo nostro signore. Cosi sia. O God make safe the Queen,
thy Church, her Counsel, geeue peace in our Realm, through Jesus Christ our
lord So be it. A desso io resto so dis fatto. Now I rest satisfied. Ma pure io
vi voglio anchora recitar certi auertime^ti Inglesi, che si vsano spesso. But I
will also rehearse certain English forewarnings, that often are used. Quali
sono, vi prego? Which be they, I pray you? Colui che spend assai, e non
guadagna niente: Colui che guardane la sua borsa, and non troua niente: Colui
si puol doler, and non dir niente. He that spends much, and gets naught:
He that owes much, and has naught: He that looks in his purse, and finds
naught: He may be sorry, and say nothing. Certo questo mi fa quasi ridere, a
sentirlo. Certis this makes me almost laugh to hear it. Colui che puol, and
non vuole Colui che vorra, non potra: Colui che vorebbe, and non puole, puo
pentirsi, and non sospirare. He that may, and will not: He that would, shall
not? He that would, and can not, may repent, and sighe not. Colui che giura
tanto, sino che nessuno si vuol sidar de lui: Colui che mente, sino cho nessuno
non gli vuol credere: He that swears till no man will trust him: He that
lies till no man will believe him: Colui che tuol impresto, sino che nessuno
gli vuol prestarpiu, lui puo andar dove nessuno lo conosce. He that boroweth,
till no man will lend him, he may go, where no man knows him. Colui che ha
un bon patron, and non lo sa tenire: Colui che ha un bon seruitore, and non si
contenta di lui: Colui che ha tal costumi, che nessuno lo ama, puo ben sapere
che nessuno si fidara di lui. He that has a good master, and can not keep
him: He that has a good servant, and is not content with him: he that has
such conditions, that no man loves him, he may well know, that few will trust
him. Certo, certo, voi mi hauete mostrato tanta cortesia, che io ho quasi
vergogna a domandar altra cosa da voi. Truly, truly, you have showed me so
much courtesy, that I am almost ashamed to ask any other thing. Domandate
pure se vi piace, ogni cosa che io possa, io sono al comando vostro. Ask what
you please, any thing that I can, I am at your commandment. Io vi rendo mill
gratie, io vorei se non vi fosse noia, che mi in-segnaste qualche regola da
poter imparar a legere, parlare, pronuntiare, and scriuere la lingua Italiana.
I give you a thousand thanks, I would, if it were no annoiance to you, that you
would teach me some rules, that I might learn to read, speak, pronounce and
write the Italian tongue. Io sono contento, il meglio che io posso, ma anerti
te che quello lo voglio fare tutto in Inglese, accio che ogniuno lo possa
intendere, and poi piacendo a Dio, voglio dare certe regole a gli Italianij,
per poter im-parar la lingua Inglese, and quello voglio (piacendo a Dio) farlo
tutto in Italiano, ma vi prego, che mi vogliate venir a trouarmi domatina,
perch adesso io non mi trouo ben disposto. I am content, the best I can: but
look, for that which I will do, I will do it al in English, to the end every
one may understand it, and then, pleasing God, I will give certain rules to the
Italians, that they may learn the English tongue, and I will (plesing god) make
that al in Italian: but I pray you, that you will come to me to morrow morning,
for now I find not me self well disposed. Orsu, domatina io verro a
trouarui, piacendo a Dio. Well, to morrow morning I will come to you, pleasing
God. Fate cosi, io vi aspettero, ma venite a bon' hora. Do so, I will tarry
for you, but come betymes. Io verro a otto hoar. I will come at eight a clock.
Venite dunque or su, Dio vi dia la bona notte. Come then: well, God give you
good night. Et a voi il simile. And to you the like. Mi racomando a voi. I
commend me unto you. Vi bacio le mani, a Dio. Baso les manos. God be with you.


FINIS.
Necessary Rules, for Englishmen to learn to read, speak, and write true
Italian,
GOd give you good morrow sir: you may see, I do not forget our appointment
yester day, for I am come according to promise.

By my faith sir, you are welcome heartily, but I have almost forgot what our
appointment was.

And are you so forgetful? I believe it not: well let that pass. Truly sir, the
profit which I have reaped from out the pleasant conceits of your Dialogues,
is such, as would you but prescribe some perfect Method, for the true
pronuntiation of the Italian tongue, as you have already induced me into a
direct course, for the true interpretation of it (certainly) you should not
only pleasure me, but a great many more of my Countrymen.

Sir, to finishe the imperfect picture of the most perfect Paynter, or make a
second description of Troies destruction, since Apelles him self found a
Shoemaker, and Homer a Zoilus: as the one is to be of no man commended. so is
the other to be of al men condemned. The note of Cesars Popiniayes, has given
a Cave to the Cobblers Aue: neither will the foulness of a Crow allow his
crowing amongst the colored fowls: neither can the fayrenesse of the Mercers
shop, allow the foulness of the Dyers Lead.

And yet is the Dyers Lead, such an accidence in Subiecto, as were it not
incident to the Mercers wares, the finest silk in all his shop would neither
Subsistere, nor substare per se. And since you are a Dyer by profession, we
will be Mercers by confession. Only persuade your self, that the silk is
already in the Lead: Now let us see, if all the colors you have, are able, of
natural Englishmen, to dye us into artificial Italians.

Sir, your importunity in demanding, infers so fyt an opportunity in
satisfying your request, that as actor of many parts, I have set you before
mine eyes, as the only beholder of this untimely Tragedy. But mark you this
before hand, if any read to his liking, I include him in your action, and
thank you for him. If any look with misliking, I exclude him for you, and
frown upon you both. To those, whose trees have already yielded better
fruit, then these blossoms are ever like to prove, I send this as a black
Post, to furnish a white wall, to those which vochsafe the whetting of their
stomachs with such unsavory meats, I send this as a preparatiue, until a
fitter harvest shall serve, for the ripenyng of sweeter fruits. And thus
returnyng to our former purpose, what is it that you would know?

I would know, first, how many letters are used in the Italian tongue, and how
they are pronounced severally.

The Italians do commonly use thirty letters, and these are they: a. b. c. d.
e. e. f. g. g. h. i. j. i. l. m. n. o. o. p. q. r. s. s. s. t. v. u. v. z. z.
but we Englishmen pronounce our letters contrary to them: they pronounce their
letters thus, aa. bac. cae. dae. ea. eaf. gea. ak. ee. kac. ael. aem. aen. oa
pae. ku. aer. aes. tae. oo. zaet aet. and so forth.

Of al these letters, how many vowels be there?

There are niene by right, and these are they, a. e. e. i. j. o. o. V. v.

And how are these pronounced severally, I pray you tell me.

I will tell you them al, one after another, God willing.

The a. first has diverse significations, and diverse voices, and especially
thus, if it stand alone, and have an accent over the head, as thus, a. it
signifies unto: as for example, a voi, unto you, a Londra, to London: and that
is spoken something long, and as it were faint withal. The second voice of the
a. is this a. and that comes most in the end of some words, as cupidita,
covetousness, oportunita, opportunity, comodita, commodity, and that is
spoken broad, and as it were but meanly in length: as for example, you find
here these two words, they are written alike, and yet have two sundry
meanynges, as honesta, and honesta, and the first means honesty, and the
other honest, how should we know this, but by the accentes, which are very
necessary for the learner of the tongue, and yet they are seeldome used.
Wherefore, if you follow this simple rule, that is to take great heed in
placing your letters, and give them their right form, you shall not only write
true Orthographie, but attain unto the perfection of it in speaking, and
reading: and thus is the second a. in voice pronounced broad, high, and not
very long, as, honesta, for honesty, and other such like. The third and last
voice of the a. is pronounced somewhat low, moist, and in length but meanly,
as, honesta, for honest, prudentia, for prudence, alcuna, some one, and many
such innumerable: and this I think yenough for the vowel a.

By my troth sir, a good beginning.

Now the e has two pralations, the one open, the other close, and it has
also two fourmes, but they are very seldom used, and that I think is either
for spare of labor, or else for want of skill: a^nd yet those that are true, or
at least good Italians do use it: for this is a general rule in the Italian
tongue, look how it is written, so it is pronounced: and as it is pronounced,
so it is written.

The open e should have this form, e both in writing, and in printing, but
they are seldom used, and that is pronounced wide, open, and somewhat long,
as, Cielo, heaven, terra, earth, sempre, always, pieno, full, and so forth.

The close e has this form, as e, and that is pronounced somewhat close, and
long withal, as vedere, to see, riceuere, to receive, belezze, beauty, and so
forth. And when this form of e does stand alone, in reading it signifies
and, and stands for and, and is pronounced close, and neither long nor short.
Again, when you find an e stand alone with an accent over the head, as thus,
e, it signifies is, as, Lui e un bon huomo, he is a good man, Lui e andato
fuori, he is gone forth, and so forth.

The Italian i is sometimes used as a vowel, and sometimes as a consonant, and
when it is a vowel, sometimes it is pronounced pure and clean, and sometimes
moist, like our Englishy, and it has this form, i. the pure i is that, that
is most commonly used: and it is called pure, because it is purely and cleanly
pronounced, even as we pronounce our double ee in English, as iniquissimi, for
very evil, or else, disiodisissimi, for very desirous, or else, inimici, for
enemies, and so forth. That which is moist, has this form, i, or at least
should have, and that is not so commonly used, as the other, but yet we can
not be without it, as piaccia, pleases, cjancje, for tattele, ghjaccja, for
yse: behold the difference, if I will say naughty, or wicked, I shall say,
maluagia, and if I will say, wine of Candia, I shall say, maluagia also. How shall
one know the true meaning of these words, in reading them? perhaps you will
say, by the accentes. Put case there be no accentes, how then? (for I see
Italians them selves will unawares err in such like letters:) the pure i is
pronounced somewhat short plain, and clean. The other i is pronounced somewhat
long, and moist withal, and when you find i stand alone, it signifies, they,
as, i suoi beui, his goods.

The i that is used for a consonant, I will speak of him amongst the
consonantes, when I come to them.

The o likewise has two prolations, and also two forms it should have by
right, the one is open and the other close, the open should have the form
round, like a circle, as o, and that is pronounced open, high, and somewhat
long withal, as corpo, for a body, morto, for dead, forte, strong, forse,
perhaps, and such like words. The close o should have the form of an egg,
and not round, as o, and that is pronounced close, and somewhat short withal,
as honor, for honor, coloro, they, corrono, they run. In some words you
shall find two oes, as corpo, the first is open and high, the last is close,
and low, or else, morto, and many such like. But see, you shall find sometimes
an o stand alone, as this, without an accent, and that signifies as it were
an invocation, as O Dio, Oh God: and when it stands alone, and has an
accent, it signifies, or else, as Io, o tu, I, or else thou, or else, t 5, o lui,
thou, or he. And when you see the accent stand thus, o, pronounced high, pure,
broad, and long, as, tenero, I will hold, verro, I will come. etc.

The V is sometimes a consonant, and sometimes a vowel, of the consont V I will
speak among the consonantes, when I come to it. The vowel is somtymes pure,
and somtymes moist: the pure has, or at least should have this form, V, as
Vsura, usury, Vso, use, Vlulare, to houle. The moist has this form, as v,
and is pronounced as our double oo in English, as fvoco, fire, gverra, war,
nvouo, new, etc.

The form of the consonant V is this, v. When you see u thus, with an accent,
pronounced long, and high, as tu, up, ottuso, dull, or blunt, giu, down, virtu,
virtue.

Certainly sir, you have done me a great pleasure, but now I pray you to tell
me something concerning Dipthonges, if you can.

With all my heart sir, any thing that I know, you shall command me: the
Dipthongs that are used in the Italian language, are diverse, and they are
framed sometimes of two, sometimes of three, yea sometimes of four vowels: but
when they pass two, of force one of the vowels must be as they say in Itnlian,
liquido, that is, moist: those of two vowels are as these, fiori, flowers,
pieno, full, gvida, a guide. etc. of three are these, as mjei, mine, tvoi,
thine, guai, woe, and such like. Those of four are as these, fagivoi, a kind
of peason that grow in Italy, good to be eaten, and such others. And this I
think sufficient for vowels and dipthongs. Now will we come to the consonantes*

Do so, I pray you.

The divisions between the consonantes, which be mute, loud, high, low,
moist, or dry, and others they are manifest unto each one: wherefore I think
it labor lost to speak any more of that, but yet somewhat I will say in
general, of each one of them particularly, examinyng them one by one. Our
Italian language does so accord with the pleasant pronuntiation, and is
such an enemy to the contrary, that it can not abide in no word, to have
any more then two, or at the most, three consonantes together, and yet most of
the words begin with a consonant, and end with a vowel.

B. is the first, and in stead of that do we often use p. as Lebra, or else,
Lepra, a Hare, and with g. as debb'io, or degg'io, shall I, and io debbo, or
else, io deggio, I owe, and with v consonant, as dobbiamo, or doviamo, shall we.

The c does sometimes accord with que as in some places the c can not be
without a que so in many words the q can not be without c, but in aiding one
another, it must be in the myddest of a word, but of that we will speak
more, when we come to q. And sir, if you please, you may read the distinction,
and pronuntiation of these consonantes, in the Grammar that Scipio Lentulo
made, and Master Henry Grantham did translate, where they are at large set
out, and so doing, shall you save me a great labor, and a long study, for I can
not do it better then he has done, and yet I hope to show perhaps
something, that he did not show. Wherefore I hope, that betwixt us both, you
shall attain unto the perfect knowledge of the true pronuntiation of your
letters, with a little study.

I pray you, how like you his Grammar?

Truly sir, I like it well, and it is good.

There is an other Grammar and Dictionarie together, that an English man made,
called William Thomas, how like you that, I pray you?

Truly sir, I like it well too, but yet he left many things untouched, both in
his Grammar, and also in his Dictionarie.

Why then I hope, with the aid of those two Grammers, and you, I shall attain
unto the perfection of the Italian tongue.

Yea that you shall, I warrant you, by the grace of God, and besides that you
may have them for a trifle.

Now I pray you sir, proceed in your consonantes.

I will: the d in many words is used indifferently with t, as padre, patre,
father, madre, matre, mother, padrone, patron, patron, or master, lido, lito,
shore, Imperadore, Imperatore, Emperor, and such other. For the doubling of
it, look in Scipio Lentuloes Grammar.

The f does sometimes accord with V consonant, as, refe, reave, threede, and
many such like.

The g is of two natures, and also should be of two fourmes, but it is seldom
used: the one is simple, and altogether pronounced, and the other somewhat
moist, low, and short, and as it were with a kind of aspiration pronounced.
The simple should have this form, g, and does accord with c, as io giogo,
or, io gioco, I play, and gorgo or, gorco, a spout of water, sogiogare, or,
sogiocare, to subdue, and many other such like.

The other has, or at least should have this form, g, and is used in such
like words as, egli, he, figlio, son, ogni, any one, bisogno, need, and
that is most times conjoined with these consonantes, l and n.

In stead of double gg, many times we use double zz, as, Maggio, Mazzo, the
month of May, raggio, razzo, beams, oltraggio, oltrazzo, to do wrong, and
many other such like.

The h in this our Italian tongue, is but seldom used, but only as it were a
kind of aspiration, in drawing of the other letters longer, that either go
before h, or else come after, as in ahi, alas, ahotti, sometimes, hora, now,
hoggi, to day, hor hora, even now, or ahiome, hei, ha, for alas: and also it is
necessary to the verb have, and there it serves but only to draw the vowel
long, that follows it, as to ho, I have, tu hai, thou have, lui ha, he has,
not habbiamo, we have, voi hauete, you have, loro hanno, they have: and also in
the Noune huomo, for a man, it is used: and also it is used often after c and
g, as lvoco, a place, lvochi, places, fvoco, fire, fvochi, fires, and such
others. After g it is used in such like words, as riga, a line, righe,
lines, lago, a lake, laghi, lakes, and such others.

h also follows many times c, as che, what, cheto, quiet, chiaro, clear, and
in such words it is pronounced, even as we pronounce our English k.

In many places it is used, where they might as well be without it, as honor,
honor, honoro, I honor, honesta, honesty, hora, now, they might as well say,
onore, onoro, onesta, ora, etc.

Me thought I heard you even now speak of che, how chanseth it, that it is so
often used in the Italian tongue?

Sir, I will tell you, che has diverse significations, as that, the, which, what,
when, then, wherefore, for, because, but only, whereof, or nothing: che may be
applied to all these words. etc.

I pray you follow on with your consonants, you know where you left.

Yea sir, that I do: sometimes, marry but seldom, we use an i for a
consonant, and that is used in such like words, as begin with iu, ia, io,
ie, and such as g goes before them, as Giouanni, John. giusto, just, Giesu,
Jesus, Giasone, Jason, for in pronouncing of the vowel that follows it, the
sound of i is a little heard, and as it were does help to strengthen the
consonant that goes before it, that it may the better be conceived, for we
English men use i in stead of the consonant g, as you may see in the words
alone, as John, just, Jesus, Jason Jasper, and such like.

The k we need not to speak of it, for the Italian tongue may altogether be
without it, for in stead of it, we commonly use c alone, and sometime c and h
following it.

The l is used in the Italian tongue, as it is in the Latin and English, and
pronuced alike, sometimes single, and sometimes double, thereafter as occasion
serves.

The m likewise is used so as l, sometime double, sometime single: it is used
double always in the first plural persons, as noi fummo, we were, noi amammo,
we loved, facemmo, we did.

The n is used even as m is, and none otherwise, many times double, many times
single: but it is used in more Nounes then m is.

The p in Italian, will not have the company of any consonant to go either
before it, or after it, as it has in the Latin tongue: wherefore we say for
ipse, esso, he, Psalmus, Salmo, Psalms, Ptolomeus, Tolomeo, Ptolomie, it is
used in the midst of any letter, more double then single, as doppio, double,
doppiare, to double, and in these verbes, as seppi, I knew, seppe, he knew,
seppero, they knew, and ruppi, I brake, ruppe he brake, ruppero, they brake.
Sometimes in some places it does agree with V consonant, as ripa, riua, a
bank, sopra, soura, upon.

The q is not altogether pronounced in his whole strength and force, but when
there goes before it a, or else o, and between them a c, which does as it were
cause it to be pronounced fiercely, acqua, water, giaque, he lay, nocque, he
did annoy for the c that goes before tthe que does shorten the vowel that
goes before (thus it should be, but it is seldom used.) And when c is not set
before it, of force you must lengthe^ the vowel, as Aquilone, an Eagle, or else
Aquila, an Eagle, or such like.

The r is pronounced just in the Italian, as it is in the English, or Latin,
and is used diversely, both single and double. This letter is very well set out
by Scipio Lentulo.

I pray you tell me, is it never used double?

Yes marry is it, often, and specially in Verbes, as terro, I shall hold,
corro, I shall gather, verro, I shall come. It is also doubled in these words,
as Carro, a Cart, Torre, a Tower, terra, the earth. etc.

The s is of three prolations, and of three fourmes, and is a consonant that
greatly does adorn and beautify the Italian language, and very necessary to
it.

The first form of it is this, s. the which is more sweetly and cleanly
pronounced, then the others, as cosa, a thing, riposo, rest, or else, tosto,
quickly, nostro, ours. etc.

The second form of it, is s, and that is somewhat more sharp pronounced
then the other, as Rosa, a Rose, Fuso, a Spyndle, Viso, the face, etc.

The third form of it is this, or at least should be, s, the which may be
called fat and full, and that is pronounced as it were our English sh, as for
example, fascia, a swadleband, Vscio, a door, breseia, a city in Lombardie.
None of these may be doubled, but the second. The Latin words that commonly
vsex, in the Italian are changed to doubless, as ^asso, a stone, dissi, I
said, lussur^a, lust, Alessandro, Alexander, and such like.

Again, it is doubled in Nounes, where the Latins use p and s, as they say
ipse, we say esso, he, for scripsit, lui scrisse, he has written. It is also
doubled in many words that come from the Latin having b before s, as for
absolutus, we say, assoluto, absens, assente, absent, and such like.

Of the t somewhat we have spoken in d, and it is doubled in many words and
often, and pronounced fully, as sotto, under, otto, eight, dotto, learned,
cotto, sodden, matto, mad. But mark when t comes single before an ^,
pronounced as it were a single z, as Viti, vices. etc.

Of the v, when it is a consonant, this is the form of it, v, as vivera, he
shall live, vivande, meats, vedeva, a widow, virtu, virtue, verita, truth, and
such like.

Of the x we have no need in the Italian tongue, the x that the Latins use,
we change sometimes into the double cc, as eccelente, excellent, eccetto,
except: and sometimes in sc, as escelente, escetto, and sometime in double ss,
as we have showed above in the consonants, as Alessandro, Alexander, disse, he
said, condusse, he led: and some be changed into singles, as esaudire, to give
ear, esaminare, to examine, or else esperientia, experience, escludere, to
exclude. And also in many words that they begin with x, we begin also
with single s, as Serse, for Xerxes, Santippo Xantippo, Senofonte, Xenophon,
and that must you draw as it were a little long.

The z sometimes is used single, sometime double: the single does sometime
agree with t, and the form of that should be z, as Venetia, Venice,
diferentia, difference, gratia, grace, giustitia, justice: such words may you
very well write with single z, as Venezia, diferenzia, grazia, giustizia, and
such others. It is never doubled, but when it comes between two vowels, and
then it should have this form, zz, and that is pronounced as it were t and z
together, the which is a letter used in the high Almain tongue, and that is
written and printed tz, and is often used. Now it rests in the reader or
writer, to think of it, as batezzo, I do baptize, pozzo, a well, etc.

The y is never used in the Italian, and yet many times do we use double ij,
and yet we may be without it, for in speaking it is scant perceived, as vitij,
vices, and such others. And this I think sufficient for the letters, with the
help of Scipio Lentulo.

By my faith sir, you have done me a great pleasure, but now I would have you
tell me somethyng concerning the Sillables in the Italian tongue.

(...) as thus, onesta for honest, onesta for honesty, amore love, odio hate,
ingiuria injury, filosofia Philosophy, popolo people, gloria glory, offesa
offense, priuilegio, a privilege, cogliere to gather, or else corre, and many
such like. But when they come thus, a, then must they be pronounced very
broad, high, and somewhat long withal: and especially that letter that the
accent is over, whether it come in the beginning of a word, or no, as thus,
su up, giu down, Virtu virtue, ingiuria injury, beffe mockes, affanno care,
eccetto except, caddero they fell, fiocchi locks of hare, allui to him, dall'ui
from him, fiamma a flame, hanno they have, and many such innumerable.

Moreover, take this for a general rule, look almost in all words, whether
they be of one, two, three, four, five, or more sillables: of one, always
pronounce that vowell long: of two, the first: of three, or four, or more, the
last saving one, and so shall you never miss, whether the word have any
accent, or no: for many times the Italian is written without accentes, but it
were far better, if it were used, as for example, Il quale alzati gli occhi
vide brigata assai, the which lifting up hies eyes, saw many people: and the
accent comes always upon the open vowel, as geme he sobbeth, porto he
brought, porto I bring.

Let this be as a general rule unto you, for if you observe them, you shall
never miss, but pronounce right.

I had almost forgot to tell you one thing, and that is this, There are many
words in the Italian, that are cut of, and shortened. And look well, for upon
some of them, the accent comes upon the open vowel, and that must be drawn
in length, as bonta, for bontade goodness, citta, for cittade a city, virtu,
for virtude virtue, andare, for andare to go, veder, for vedere to see,
ragion, for ragione reason, valor, for valor valor, and many such more.

Certainly sir, this is the best rule that you have given me yet: I see that
the Apostraphes are much used in the Italian, I pray you tell me something
concerning them, how a man should place them, and how one should use them.

I will sir, as well as I can.

You are to note this, that when two vowels meet together, of two sundry
voices, one in the end of a word, the other in the beginning of a word, to
pronounce them both, it does not very well, and is as it were hard and
combersome for to speak, and nothing pleasant to the hearer. Wherefore, in
writing, the Apostrophes are used, whereby the Reader may know, where the vowel
wants, by the Apostrophe, for sometimes we take the last vowel from the first
word, and sometimes the first of the following word. It is good for you to
know how the Apostrophe must be set, for it has two fourmes, and they be
these,' 'the first sounds the want of the last vowel of the first word, and
the other sounds the want of the first vowel of the following word, as for
example, in this wants the last vowel of the first word, L' Imperatore the
Emperor, l' inuidia, the envy. And in this manner may you take away the first
vowel of the following word, as thus, Lo 'mperatore the Emperor, la 'nuidia
the envy. In this last manner of Apostrophing, there are two things to be
noted: the one is, that many times the o, be he Article, or Pronoune, does
most ask the Apostrophe, as thus, a'l tempo, at what time, che' l cjelo, that
the heaven, co'l pensiere, with thought, tu'l sai, thou know it, no'l
veditu? do not thou see it? and such others.

The other is, that no other sayings, or words, need the Apostrophe, but
those that begin with im, or else in, as Lo'mperatore, the Emperor,
La'mportunita, the importunity, lo'nganno, the deceit, la'nvidia, the envy:
and yet this kind of Apostrophe, is not so needeful as the first.

Many other words there are, where the Apostraphe is used, as the Article gli
is never used, but before i, whereof we will speak more hereafter, in the
Articles.

It is also many times used before such like words, as me', puo', qve', se',
suo', tuo', and such like, the which do mean, megljo, poi, qvelli, sei,
suoli, or suoi and tuoi.

Sometimes one word needs an Apostraphe both in the beginning and ending,
but that is most times in verse, as thus, Vmil' in se, ma'ncontr' amor'
superba, that is to say, humble in her self, but against love proud.

And many times words that may be Apostraphed both in the beginning and
ending, are not, as thus, Voi non potete ancora essere amaestrata a basta^za,
which may be written thus, Voi non potet' ancor' essere 'maestrat' a bastanza,
and many such more.

Also many times vowels meet, that need no Apostraphe, and also consonantes
meet with consonantes: mary they come in such words, as are clipped of the
last syllable or vowel, as I have told you before, as for example, Nessu'n
dolor maggior sentir potres, that is, No greater sorrow could I feel, which
goes very well. But mark this, the words thtt are clipped, do commonly end
in d, l, m, n, r, and t, as Un mal pensier lo moss, An evil thought moved him,
and Un buon caual mi piace, A good horse pleases me, or else, Il gran dolor mi
preme, etc.

Surely sir, this is a very good rule: but yet I pray you will you tell us
something concerning the points or distinctions which you use in the Italian
writing?

Concerning points, I think I need not greatly to speak of them, for they
are but seldom observed.

Yea, but yet I pray you tell me something of them, first, how many there are,
how they are framed, and how they are called, for I know they are very
necessary, not only for the speaker, but also chiefly for the writer of it.

Since you are so importune, I will do my best: I say first, that the speech
of man is as it were a certain instrument, wherewith he expresses and shows
forth his thoughts, and conceits of his mind: eue^ so is Writing an
instrument, with the which he expresses and shows forth the lively meaning
of his speech: and as you know, and can not deny, that that speech is most
perfect, that most perfectly can show forth, and express his thoughts, and
conceits of his mind, so can it not be denied, but that that kind of writing
is most perfect, that most perfectly can show forth and express the lively
meaning of the speech, with what kind of gallantnesse, delectation, pleasure,
felicity, and perfection this language may be both spoken, and written, and
the thoughts, minds, conceits, and lively meanyngs of it be uttered, both to
the pleasure and delectation of the hearer, speaker, reader, and writer. So
many and so many worthy authors that have written so many noble books of
arts, sciences, faculties, doctrines, and professions, both Divine, and
Profane, I am sure, that no language can better express or show forth the
lively and true meaning of a thing, then the Italian.

But verily one thing greeueth me sore and that is this, that of late it is
neither written, printed, nor read, as it should be, and now to use it as it
should be used, and to add unto it not only a perfection, but also a rich
ornament, it is needeful that we use this way: We see that the lively speech of
man does sometimes as it were hasten on, sometimes stay, now more, and then
less: sometimes as it were ask, and sometimes answer: sometimes as it were
affirm, sometimes change voice, and purpose.

Now that the like may be done in writing, many learded and wise men of old
time did devise these points,,;:.? () the first is called in Italian Coma, the
second, Ponto and Coma, the third, due ponti, the fourth, ponto fermo, the
fifth, ponto Interogatiuo, and those two last (in this manner) Parentesi: the
least of strength, is Coma, and so they go increasing, till they come to ponto
fermo, and that has more force and strength, then any of the rest.

Now, even as any well shaped body, has his principal and necessary members,
which are divided into lesser parts, even so any well framed speech has his
periodes, in stead of necessary and principal members, which are then divided
into other lesser parts.

Moreover, even as the wood feller cutteth his wood in pieces, and putting
diverse of those pieces together, makes a faggot, and with a wreath of wood
does bynd it about, which wreath is also of wood, and then of more or less
fagots, makes a load: even so the speaker or writer, does put many parts of
the speech together, and of them makes a construction, and then with the Verb
binds it together, which Verb is also a part of the speech, and then with
more or less constructions, makes a Petiodus. Also, even as those lesser
parts of the periodus, that are not bound together with the Verb, can neither
have sense nor construction. These are divided with the Coma, as for example,
Ne carezze, ne minaccie, ne premi^, ne pene, that is to say, neither cherishing
nor threatnyngs, neither rewards nor pains. Which saying has neither sense,
meaning, nor construction in it, till it be bound with a Verb: then has it
the construction, but not the sense. Then is it divided with the point and
Coma, as thus, Ne carezze, ne minaccie, ne premij, ne pene sa vanno may
bastanti; ne har anno may forza; that is to say, neither cherishing nor
threatenings, neither rewards ror pains shall ever be sufficient; or have the
force: But when it is accompanied with other parts, then it has a full sense
and construction in it: then must that have a ponto fermo, as for example, Ne
carezze, ne minacie, ne premij, ne pene saranno may bastanti; ne har anno may
forza, di separarci dall' amere di Dio. that is in English, neither cherishing
nor threatnyngs, neither rewards nor pains, shall ever be sufficient; nor
never have the force, to separate us from the love of God. And this is called a
Periodus. But when the periodus is longer, and has need of more sayings in
it, then are the two points used. The periodus should sometime begin with a
capital letter, sometimes not, and sometimes have a new head, and sometimes not,
thereafter as the variety, length, shortness, scantnesse, or variety of the
matter requires. The periodus has no limited measure appointed for it, but
they may be either short, or of a myddle sise, or long. And thereafter as they
are, may you use the points, after the manner that I have told you.

Yea sir, but I have heard you say nothing of that point which you call ponto
Interrogat^uo, nor of those which you call parenthesis.

Truly sir, I had almost forgotten them, but of them I will give you one good
example, and that shall serve you for a general rule, without any longer
discourse: and this shall be it: Io vorrei pure, (se possibil fusse) venirti a
trovare; ma come poss' io farlo? mentre durano qvesti fredds? e tra tanto ch'
io vengo, ricordati; di non ti fidar piu; di qvel' tuo amico: that is to say in
English, I would yet (if it were possible) come and find thee; but how can I
do it? whilst this cold lasts? and whilst I come, remember; that thou
trust no more: that thy friend. Or else this other, Non ti diss' io (e tu non
me' l' credevi) che gli eraun mancator di feed? that is, Did not I tell thee
(and thou would not believe me) that he was a breaker of his faith? And so
let this suffice of the Elements.

Of the speech.
Now let us say somewhat of the speech. The speech is first divided into four
parts the one is mutable, and the other immutable: the mutable does sometimes
alter, either through Cases, or else through Time. Through Cases, the Noune, the
Pronoune, and the Participle: through Time, the Verb.

But before we speak particularly of these matters, you are to note al those
things that may happen to any of them: which are, the Number, and the person.
The Numbers are two, as much to say, either of one, or more, either Singular
or plurale, either the most, or else the least: take which you please, for I
care not so I be understood. The Singular conteyneth in it but one only, and
the Pural all the other from one upward.

But you are to note here, that even as the Latins were wont to give the
Plural number to one only in the first person, even so in the Italian we use
to give the Plural number to one only man in the second person, saying thus:
Che fate voi qui signor Conte tutto solo? that is, What do you here sir County
al alone? And this is called, to give the title of you, and the other of thou.
Now will we speak of the Persons, shall we?

I pray you do so.

Of the Persons.
THe persons are three, the first consists in this only Pronoune, Io, that
is, I: the second only in tu, thou: but the third in all the rest, so that in
the Noune and the participle, is the third person contained: also may the
second be in the Vocatiues: also the first is in the pronoune, in one only.
But in all the other pronounes is the third used alone, and in the Verb they
are used al in both numbers, except it be in the Respective and the Infinitive.

Also you are to note, that sometimes we speak unto the second person, even as
it were the third, attributing unto it, as it were an honorable or woorshipful
title, saying, Lasignoria vostra, laeccelentia vostra, or else, la maesta
vostra. that is to say, your Lordship, your excellency, or else your majesty,
and such like, I leave to speak of many such odd little parcels, which are
more tedious then necessary, especially unto the begynners. As for those things
that are pertinent unto the mutable part are the Genders, the Cases, the signs
of Cases, and the Articles.

Of the Genders.
THe Genders used in this language, are two, that is to say, the Masculine, and
the Feminine: the Masculines are such as this, Il Cjelo, the Heaven, Il Sole,
the Sun, costui, this man, ciascuno, each man, amante, a lover, impazzito,
foolish, or mad.

The Feminines are these, or else such like, Laterra, the earth, la Luna, the
Moon, costei, this woman, ciasc^na, each woman, amante, a she lover,
impazzita, a woman become foolish, or else mad.

Of the Cases.
THe Cases are six, heretofore called Nominativo, Genitivo, Dativo,
Accusativo, Vocativo, and Ablativo, of some they are called, the first, second,
third, fourth, fifth, and sixth, the first is called right, and the other as it
were crooked.

Of the signs of Cases.
THe Cases can not be known in this language, through the variety of the
definitions, as they are in the Latin, and in the Greek: for it has two
definitions, (even as the Hebrew) the one in the Singulares, and the other in
the plurales, called Signs of Cases, the which are, di, de, a, ad, da the two
first show the Genitive. But this difference there is, that di is put where no
Article is, as Di Ferro, di Oro, di Argento, di Legno, that is, of Iron, of
Gold, of Silver, of Wood: but yet it is far better, to put an Apostrophe
before the last vowel of the first word, and so clip away the vowel, and say
thus, d' argento, of silver, d' oro, of gold, but de is always set before an
Article, as thus, del' cielo, of the heavens, del' aria, of the air, de la
terra, of the earth, de i casi, of the cases, de le genti, of the people.

The second is a, or else ad, with a vowel, and that follows the Dative, as a
Tito, unto Titus, al' vento, to the wynd, al' ora, at that hour, or else, even
then, ad Arno, unto Arno, ad altrui, unto others.

The third is of the Abbatiue, as da casa, from the house, da la piazza, from
the market place, da te, from thee, da c^loro, from them.

But yet there rest three Cases more, of the which, the fifth is known for the
calling, O, as O Giulio, O Inlius, O Alessandro, O Alexander. The other two,
that is, the first, and the fourth, they keep the Article with them: and
although that the sign de, seems sometime to be before the saying, without an
Article, as de mjei mali, of my euyls, de danni vostri, of your damages, de
tempi passati, of the times passed: yet for all that they want not it, but he is
as it were hydden in the words, and therefore the foresaid examples must be
written with Apostrophes.

The like happens also unto the other Signs, as a'tempi passati, at times
passed, da piu intendementi, of many, or from many understandings, and that is
also used in these small parcels, as bo', ne', pe' su', which mean, coi, nei,
pei, sui. And likewise you may say, or write, co'l, ne'l, pe'l, no'l, su'l,
which mean, con il, ne il, per il, non il, suil. It is also to be noted, that
each one of these small parcels set before the Article Il, the vowel is always
taken away, as you may see in the examples given before.

Now let us come to the Articles.

I pray you do so sir, if you be not weery.

To tell you the truth, I am almost weery, but nevertheless we will follow. The
Article is a word of a syllable only, and many times it is of one only letter,
and is set before the Mutables more commonly, and universally, although
sometime it be set before some particularly, as it has been shown of many,
and also before the Infinitive Mood of the Verbes which are made Nounes, as l'
udire, the hearing, il vedere, the seeing, il parlare, the speaking, lo stare,
the being. The Articles in all, are seven, five are of the Masculine, and two of
the Feminine. Of the five that are Masculines, two are of the singular number,
and three of the Plural. Those of the Singular are, Il, and lo: and those of
the plural, are i, li, and gli. Of the two Feminine, the one is of the singular
number, the other of the plural. The singular is, la, the plural, le. The manner
how to use them is this, Il is always set before a Consonant, as il Cjelo, the
Heaven, il Conte, the Earl, il monte, the hyl. But when s does proceed
another Consonant, you must set before it, lo, as lo sdegno, the disdain, lo
sforzo, the force, lo scoglio, the shelfe, or rock, or clift. And sometimes lo
is set before vowels, as lo amore, the love, lo effetto, the effect, lo
inimico, the enemy, lo ufficio, the office. But yet the Article before such
words, is better Apostrophed, and does sound more pleasanter, as l' amore,
l' effetto, l'inimico, l' ufficio.

But when the vowel o does follow, of force it must have an Apostrophe before,
as l' onore, the honor, l' Odio, the hate, l' orgoglio, the pride.

Moreover, this Article, if some vowel do follow it, it is both spoken and
written whole, and the word that follows it, is Apostrophed in stead of it,
as lo'mperatore, but of that we have spoken yenough before.

Also this Article is sometimes set before, mio, svoi, evor, qval, and qvale,
and after, per, messer, mon signor, and such other woorshipful names.

Of the use of the other articles, plural, and Masculine, the like we have to
say, as we have said of the Singular, that is to say, that i is used in the
same manner that il is used, before a Consonant, as i Cjeli, i Conti, i monti, i
pensjeri, the Heavens, the Earls, the mountains, the thoughts. And also gli
is used even as lo, as gli sdegni, gli scogli, gli sforzi, and also gli amori,
gli effetti, gli onori, gli ufficij. But when a vowel i does follow, it is
best to use the Apostrophes, and so to entermingle the one with the other, as
gl' inimici, the enemies, gl' infideli, the Infidels, gl' ipocriti, the
hypocrites: and contrariwise, if any other vowel do follow, you need not use
the Apostrophe at al, but as it were somewhat to mollify the i, and
entermingled with the following voice or word, and pronounce them both, as gli
esempij, the examples, gli odori, the smells, gli umori, the humors.

But when s does follow another consonant, then must you always write it, and
pronounce it fully, and distinctly, as gli scogli, gli stenti, gli scritti: but
li may be used in stead of the one and the other, of the two foresaid Articles,
and say, li Cjeli, li sdegni, li onori, and always without an Apostrophe, and
set it before a word that begins with i, for there you must use gli, to
do well, but yet with an Apostrophe, as gl' istorici, the Historiographers, gl'
indovini, the Diuiners, gl' inamorati, those that are in love.

Now will we come to the Articles of the Feminine, the Singular of it, is set
before a vowel and a consonant, accompanied with s, and there may you use an
Apostrophe, or else not, even as you list, as la erba, the herb, la ira, the
wrath, la strada, the street, la angoscia, the agony. You may say and write,
l'erba, l'ira, l'angoscia. And yet for a general rule, most times it is best to
use the Apostrophe, and especially if the vowel a follow the Article, as
l'acqua, the water, l'armento, the cattle.

The self same may you say of the Article plural of the Feminine, only that
always before the e you must use the Apostrophe, and also before the other
vowels, but not so often, the examples for all, shall be these following, le arti,
the arts, le ingiurie, the injuries, le ore, the hours, le usure, the
vsuries, le case, the houses, le strade, the streets. And so may you say,
l'arti, l'ingiurie, l'ore, l'usure, l'erbe, l'esequie: but in some words it is
better, and more necessary to accompany it with such words as run upon one
vowel, as la iniqvita, le iniqvita, the iniquity, and the iniquities, la
eredita, le eredita, the inheritance, and the inheritances, la citta, le citta,
the city, and the cities, and such others, where, if the Article were not
whole, and full, you should not know the one number from the other.

You are also to note this among your Articles, that even as Articles, these
two words are used, that is, Vno, and Vna, that is, one, Masculine, and one,
Feminine, for you may say, Vn' huomo, a man, Vn' cane, a dog, Vna donna, a
woman, Vna spada, a sword, Vna Lepre, a Hare: so you may say, and it is good
Italian, egli e amorevole, come il cane: or else, egli e amorevole, come un
cane; He is as loving as a dog: or else, cosi de fare, l'huomo da been; or
else, cosi de fare un huomo da been: so ought an honest man to do: or else, egli
e timido come la Lepre: or else, egli e timido com' una Lepre; He is as fearful
as a Hare: and egli sa ben maneggiar, la spada; or else, egli sa ben maneggiar,
una spada: He can well handle a sword: that distinction of Articles,
prepositiues, and Subiunctiues, brought up by the Grecians, is followed and
observed by some Italians, but not of me: for so much as the facility and ease
of the speech is greater without it, and also for other occasions.

And thus let this suffice you, concerning the Articles that go before the
Noune, and so (God willing) we will speak of the Nounes.

I pray you do so: for certaynely I think you are weerie.

Verily I am almost weery in deed: but yet I will follow on. The Noune is a
kind of voice that shows either the substance, or quality of the thing, and
therefore of the Nounes some are Substantives, and some Adjectives. The
Substantives are, Cjelo, Heaven, tempo, time, prato, afielde. Adjectives are,
sereno, clear, fugace, fleeing, verde, green, saying, Cjelo sereno, tempo
sugace, prato verde, that is, the clear Heavens, the fleeing time, the green
field.

There are also certain Nounes, that show a kind of substance more
particularly, and those are called proper, as these, Cesare, Caesar, Mongibello,
Mongibel, Roma, Rome, Nilo, the river Nilus.

There are othersome, that show it more universally, and more common, and these
are called Appellatiues, as terra, earth, sasso, a stone, huomo, a man.

Some other Nounes are called Comparatiues, some Superlatiues, some are
Numerales, some Following order, some other Equivochts, and Vnivochts, and some
Diminishers, and some Augmentours, and Heteroclites, and other some partitiues,
Distributiues and Negatiues. Every name has his definition among the vowels:
the proper names especially have in them all the vowels, as for example, a
Pitagora, Andrea, Emilia, Olimpia, Fiorenza, Arabia, Etna. In e, as Socrate,
Cesare, Cerere, Isifile, Lione, Tevere. In j, as Luigi, Giovanni, Fiordiligi,
Napoli, Parigi, and many names of Families, as Quirini, Savelli, Corsini. In o,
as Alessandro, Pjetro, Calisto, Milano, Bergamo, Po, Tebro, Apenino. In u, as
Giesu, Artu, Corfu, Peru. And all these names are either Plurals, without
Singulars, (although you might sometimes say, Il Tolomei, il Piccolomini, or
else, La Quirini, la Salviati. And these are names of Families,) or else
Singulars without Plurals, and say, Fabij, Camilli, Scipionj.

But the names Appellatiues of the Masculine, have three only definitions, in
the Singular, so that their Declensions are also three: the first ends in a,
the second in e, the third in o, but al three in the Plural, end in i.

The first Declension. Without Articles. With Articles.
NV. SIN. NV. PLV. NV. SIN. NV. PLV. Poeta. 1 poeti. Il poeta. 1 i poeti. di
poeta. 2 di poeti. de'l poeta. 2 de i poeti. a poeta 3 a poeti. a'l poeta. 3 a
i poeti. poeta. 4 poeti. Il poeta. 4 i poeti. o poeta. 5 e poeti. o poeta. 5 o
poeti. da poeta. 6 da poeti. da'l poeta. 6 dai poeti.

Truly sir, I think I need not decline these Nounes in English, for there
are so many, and so many of this Grammers, that every one can decline them, so
that you mark, and learn well the declinyng of them in Italian, I think that
sufficient, for you know they go in order: and also, he that can decline one,
can decline them alalmost.

You know, that Il poeta means the Poet, de'l poeta, of the poet, a'l
poeta, to the poet, il poeta, the poet, o poeta, O poet, da'l poeta, from
the poet, etc. The Plural number goes even so, it is but even adding an s,
at the end of poet, and say, poets.

Well sir, I will take this for a general rule.

There are a great many of these Nounes declined in Scipio Lentuloes Grammar,
and William Thomas his Grammar, but the English of them does but little good,
mary the Italian is necessary: and so will I follow on, and decline those Italian
Nounes, that seem hardest for you to learn.

I pray you sir, do so, so shall you do me a great pleasure.

What there wants in me, you shall have in the Grammers above rehearsed, for
they will do you much good, if you mark them very well.

The second Declension. Of Strale, a Shaft, and Amore, Love.
NV. SIN. NV. PLV. NV. SIN. NV. PLV. lo strale. 1 gli strali. l' Amore. 1 gli
amori. de lo strale. 2 de gli strali del' amore. 2 de gli amori a lo strale. 3
a gli strali. al' amore 3 a gli amori. lo strale. 4 gli strali. l' amore. 4 gli
amori. o strale. 5 o strali. o amore. 5 o amori. da lo strale. 6 da gli strali
dal' amore. 6 da gli amori The third Declension. Of Cjelo, the Heaven, and Oro,
Gold.
NV SIN. NV. PLV. NV. SIN. NV. PLV. Il Cjelo. 1 i cjeli. L' Oro. 1 gli Ori.
de'l cjelo 2 de i cjeli. del' Oro 2 de gli Ori a'l cjelo. 3 a i cjeli. al' Oro.
3 a gli Ori. il cjelo. 4 i cjeli. l' Oro. 4 gli Ori. o cjelo. 5 o cjeli. o Oro.
5 o Ori. da'l cjelo 6 da i cjeli. dal' Oro. 6 da gli Ori.

The Appellatiues of the Feminine, in the singular, do end for the most part
in a, and a good number in e, and one only in o, and very few in V. The first
have the plural in e, as singul. l' erba, Plural, l' erbe, the herb, and the
herbs.

The second in i, as singul. la Nave, plur. le Navi, the ship, and the
ships: yet Dante has used le mano, for the hands.

The fourth has the Plural, like unto the Singular, and that is, because they
are clipped words, as singular. la virtu, Plur. le virtu, the virtue, and the
virtues: singul. la gru, Plur. le gru, the Crane, and the Cranes: singul. la
Servitu, plur. le Servitu, the service, and the services. The Declensions are
very many, and so many are the terminations, as for example:

The first Declension. Of Stella, a Star, and Erba, an Herb.
NV. SIN. NV. PLV. NV. SIN. NV. PLV. La Stella 1 Le Stelle l' erba 1 l' erbe de
la stella. 2 de le stelle de l' erba 2 de l' erbe a la stella 3 a le stelle a
l' erba 3 a l' erbe la stella 4 le stelle l' erba 4 l' erbe o stella 5 o stelle
o erba 5 o erbe da la stella. 6 da le stelle. da l' erba. 6 da l' erbe The
second Declension. Of Nave, a Ship, and Art, Art.
NV. SIN. NV. PLV. NV. SIN. NV. PLV. La Nave 1 le navi L' Art 1 l' arti de la
nave. 2 de le navi de l' art 2 de l' arti a la nave 3 a le navi a l' art 3 a
l' arti la nave 4 le navi l' art 4 l' arti o nave 5 o navi o art 5 o arti da
la nave. 6 da le navi da l' art 6 da l' arti. Third Declension. Fourth
Declension Mano, a hand. hands. Virtu, virtue. Virtues.
NV. SIN. NV. PLV. NV. SIN. NV. PLV. La mano 1 le mani La virtu 1 le virtu de
la mano 2 de le mani de la virtu. 2 de le virtu a la mano 3 a le mani a la
virtu 3 a le virtu la mano 4 le mani la virtu 4 le virtu O mano 5 O mani O
virtu 5 O virtu da la mano 6 da le mani. da la virtu. 6 da le virtu.

And so follow on, all the Cases and Numbers of this Declension, so that I
think it in vain, to speak any more of them, for the Adjective names, are
al, either of one voice alone, or of two. Those of one voice alone, have the e,
in the singular number, and i in the plural, and serve as well for the
Masculine, as the Feminine, as hvomo vile, femina vile, a vile man, a vile
woman: hvomo nobile, femina nobile, a noble man, a noble woman. And so may you
say, hvomini vili, femine vili, vile men, vile women: and hvomini nobili, and
femine nobili, noble men, and noble women.

But when they are of two voices, one is for the Masculine, and the other for
the Feminine. The Masculine ends in o, in the singular number, and in i, in
the plural, as sasso duro, a hard stone, ghiaccio freddo, cold Yse, fvoco
caldo, hot fire. And so may you say, sassi duri, hard stones, ghiacci freddi,
cold Yses, fvochi caldi, hot fires.

But the Feminine ends in the singular number in a, and in the plural in e,
as pjetra dura, a hard stone, neve fredda, cold snow, fiamma calda, a hot
flame. And so may you say in the plural number, pjetre dure, nevi freddi,
fiamme calde, hard stones, cold snowes, hot flames.

The manners of the varying of the Adjectives, are like unto those that are
past: but before I leave to talk of them, I will tell you four things, the one
is, that none do ever end in i in the singular number: an other is, that they
do agree with the Substantives, even as in the Latin. The third is, that
sometimes they may be made Substantives, as thus, Tornami a mente, s'alcun
dolce may hebbe 'lcortristo: The last is, that sometimes the Adjective
Masculme, does agree with the Substantive Feminine, as ogni cosa pieno di
spavento: every thing full of fear.

Of the Comparatiues.
THe Comparatiues are not many in this language, but a few taken from the
Latin, the which are, Maggiore greater, minore lesser, migliore better,
peggiore worse, superiore superior, inferiore inferior.

The other are made with this word piu. which signifies, More, as piu forte,
more strong, piu dotto, more learned, piu bella, more fair, piu saggio, more
wise. And to make it have more force, we add unto it, and put before it,
molto, or assai, that is, much, or else vie, saying, molto piu dotto, much more
learned, assai piu bella, much more fayrer, vie piu gentile, far more gentle.

And in using them, we give them the second Case, as thus, Egli e piu forte, di
te: he is more strong then thou. tu sei molto piu dotto di lui: Thou art much
more learned then he: Noi siamo vie piu potenti di voi: We are far more
mighty then you. Now will we come to the Superlatiues.

Of the Superlatiues.
THe Superlatiues may fully be fourmed of all the Adjectives, but they are not
so Comparatively used, as the Latins do use them, who will say, Ettore fu
fortissimo, Hector was very strong: Questa donna e bellissima, This woman is
very fair: Il mele e dolcissimo, The honey is very sweet, without any other
Comparison.

Also we can not give to the Superlatiues any addition, as to the Comparatiues,
as thus, qvale e qvella, che ha stampato? the which is abominable, and naught,
not tolerable.

Of the Numeral Nounes, the first is of the Masculine, and of the Feminine: for
because we say, Vno, and Vna, the Masculine Gender loses the vowel, the
consonant following him, as Un cane a dog, un legno a wood, un sasso a stone.
And a vowel following, then it loses it by an Apestrophe, as vn' asino an
Ass, vn' Elefante an Elephant, vn' Orso a Bear.

The Feminine Gender keeps the vowel, a Consonant following, as vna casa a
house, vna pianta a plant, vna bestia a beast.

But if a vowel follow, it loses it most times, and especially a, as Vn' anima
a soul, Vn' erba an herb, Vn' imagine an image, Vn' ora an hour, Vn' urtica
a Nettle.

And the Masculine, as well as the Feminine, is apostrophed before this word
altro, when we say, Vn' altro an other he, and Vn' altra an other she.

And if it be in the Copulative, then do we add the article to it, and o, as
l' uno e l' altro, and l' una and l' altra, the one and the other. Also may
that kind of voice be apostrophed.

The second number may be also of the Masculine, and the Feminine Gender,
distinctly: for you may say, Duo agnelli, two Lambs, and due pecore, two
sheep. For many good Authors have given the voice due, as well to the
Masculine as to the Feminine, and so will we, as thus, Due agnelli, two lambs,
due done, two women. Also dui is found in some authors: but Dua is a common
word among the Florentines, which is not so tolerable, unless it be upon
necessity, in Verse.

In this self same number are ambe, and ambo, used for both. The first
belongs to the Feminine, the second, as well to the Masculine, as the
Feminine, as ambe le mani: you may say, ambo le mani, both the hands, and ambo
li piedi, both the feet. You may also say, and it has that signification, as
ambedue le mani, ambedue i piedi: and ambeduo le mani, and i piedi. And Dante
for the self same word, uses ambodue, and amendue, amenduni, and amendune.
The Commons will say, Tutte due, tutte dui, and tutti duo. And some ancient
poets have written, Entrambi, and intrambi.

The numeral numbers are immutable: but to the end they may be known to every
one, I will begin at the first, and by them which I shall note, shall you know
all the rest, Vno 1. due 2. tree 3. qvatro 4. cinqve 5. sei 6. set 7. otto 8,
nove 9. dieci 10, undici 11. dodeci 12. tredei 13. qvatordici 14. qvindici 15.
sedici 16. dicisette 17. diciotto 18. dicinove 19. venti 20. etc. and so by
adding the tenthes to the ones, thou may number as much as thou wylt: but
mark when any vowel follows, to use the Apostrophe, as thus, vent' uno, 21.
vent' otto 28. trent' uno 31. trent' otto 38. etc.

Where no vowel follows, use no Apostrophe, as thus, venti due 22. venti tree
23. venti qvatro 24. venti cinqve 25. venti ses 26. venti set 27. venti nove
29. and so trenta dve 32. trenta tree 33. trenta qvatro 34. and so following.

These are the tenthes that follow, as Dieci 10. venti 20. trenta 30. qvaranta
40. cinqvanta 50. sessanta 60. settanta 70. ^ttanta 80 novanta 90. cento 100.
due cento 200. tree cento 300. qvatro cento 400. cinqve cento 500. set cento
700. otto cento 800. novecento 900. mill 1000. etc: And so may you number,
tylyou come to Millions.

We also say, Vna decina, a tenth, Vna dozzena a dosen, Vna ventina, a score,
Vnatrentina, a thirty, Vna qvarantina, a forty.

And so may you number, till you come to a hundred, still adding tina, to each
ten. Sometimes we also say, Un centinaio, an hundred, Un migliaio, a
thousand. And in the plural number we say, le centinaja, le migliaja, for the
hundreds, and the thousands, etc.

Now, concerning the ordinary Noune, it is reason we speak something of it,
but not much. The ordinary number is this, primo, and primjero, first, secondo,
second, terzo, third, qvarto, fourth, qvinto, fifth, sesto, sixth, setimo,
seventh, ottavo, eighth, nono, nienth, decimo, tenth, Vndecimo, eleventh,
duodecimo, twelfth, tredecimo, thirteenth, or else, decimo terzo, qvarto decimo,
and decimo qvarto, fourteenth, qvinto decimo, and decimo qvinto, fifteenth,
sesto decimo, and decimo sesto, sixteenth, dicesettimo, and decimo settimo,
seventeenth, dicjotte simo, and decimo ottavo, eighteenth, dicenovesimo, and
decimo nono, nienteenth, ventesimo, and vigesimo, twentieth, ventesimo primo,
one and twentieth, trentesimo, and trigesimo, thirtith, and so follow on,
qvarantesimo, and qvadragesimo, fourtith, cinqvantesimo, and qvinqvagesimo,
fiftith, sessantesimo, and sessagesimo, sixtith, settantesimo, and
settuagesimo, seuentith, ottagesimo, and ottuagesimo, eighttith, novantesimo,
and nonagesimo, nientith, and centesimo, an hundredth, and so forth, till you
come to milesimo, a thousand.

All the Nounes may be Aduerbes, adding to each one this voice, volta, saying,
Vna volta, one time, due volte, two times, tree volte, three times, and so
forth, as djeci volte, ten times, venti volte, twenty times. And so may you
follow, till you come to Millions, but I think that needs not.

Now let us come to the Nounes Heteroclites: there are certain Nounes, that
somewhat do differ from the others, and those I put among the Heteroclites.

Now, of these, some have in the singular number, the Gender of the Masculine,
and in the plural number, the Gender of the Feminine, which does somewhat
agree with the Latin Neuter, and these are they, as:

NV. SIN. NV. PLV. These words, paio, and paia, somtyms signify two things set
together, as Un paio di guanti, a pair of gloves, due paia di buoi, two
couple of oxen, tree paia di Caponi, three couple of Capons. Il riso le risa Il
qvadrello le qvadrella Il paro le para Il paio le paia lo Staro le Stara lo
Staio le Staia

And sometimes these words are taken from the Verb parere, to seem. The
like is said of paro; and para: but pari signifies either of quantity, or else
quality, and serves al Numbers, and Genders. For we may say, Il pari, la
pari, i pari, le pari: which signify the like, the peer, the paragon, etc.

Some others there are, that have the Plural, and the Sngular number alike, as
la spezie, le spezie, the Spise, la citta, le citta, the city, la virtu, le
virtu, the virtue, and many other eclipped words, of the which we have spoken
before, and yet we use most the singular number, and they are al of the Feminine
Gender.

Other there are, almost like to them above, but not altogether, as, Feed, fe,
faith, piede, pe, foot, Regge, Re, King.

Other some have the Singular, and not the Plural, as ^gnjuno, cjascuno, each
one: and other set among the Pronounes, as we have said already.

Other some have the Plural number, and not the singular, as, le labbja, the
lyppes: and names of families, as we have said tofore.

Other some in the Singular of one gender, and of one end: and in the plural,
of two Genders, and of two ends, as these that follow.

NV. SIN. SINGVL. NVM. NV. PLV. NV. PLV. PLVR. NVMB. Il corpo The body corpi le
corp^a the bodies il mimbro the member i membri le membra the members il
cervello the brain i cervelli le cervella the brains il cigljo the eye lyd i
cigli le ciglia the eye lyddes il laboro the lyppe i labbri le labbra the
lyppes il braccio the arm i bracci le braccia the arms il dito the finger i
diti. le dita the fingers il ginocchjo the knee i ginocchi l'ginocchia the
knees il calcagno the heel i calcagni le calcagna the heels il vestigio the
sign i vestigij le vestigia the signs il budello the gut i budelli le budella
the guts l' osso the bone gli ossi le ossa the bones il corno the horn i
corni le corna the horns il legno the wood i legni le legna the woods il ramo
the branch i rami le ramora the branches il frutto the fruit i frutti le
frutta the fruits il muro the w^ i muri le mura the walls il castello the
castle i castelli le castella the castles il carro the cart i carri le carra
the carts lo strido the shricke gli stridi le strida the shrickes il lvogo the
place i lvoghi le lvghora the places il lato the side i lati le latora the
sides il prato the field i prati le pratora the fields il campo the camp i
campi le campora the camps l' Orto the garden gli orti le ortora the gardens
il rastello the rake i rastelli le rastella the rakes il filo the thread i fili
le fila the threedes il vestime^to the garment i vestime^ti l'vestime^ta the
garments il grado the degree i gradi le grado^a the degrees il peceato the
sin. i peccati le peccata. the sins.

Other some there are, of one Gender, and of one end in the singular number,
but in the plural of two Genders, and of three ends, as for example.

NV. SIN. NV. PLV. NV. PLV. NV. PLV. ENGLISH Il fico I fichi le fiche le ficha
the fygges. Il pugno I pugni le pugne le pugnora the fistes.

And upon necessity, if it be in some Poetical invention, you may use some of
them that have been rehearsed before, so, and it is tolerable to say, Fruit,
castelle, corn, veslimente, and such other like.

Again, some are of one Gender, and of one end, in the singular number, and of
two Genders, and four ends in the plural number, as Il pugno, i pugni, le
pugne, le pugna, le pugnora, the fistes, and some such others, although some
will not allow the endyng of them in e.

Other some there are, that in the singular number, and in the plural number,
have but one Gender, and in the singular, one end, and in the plural, three
ends, as.

NV. SIN. NV. PLV. NV. PLV. NV. PLV. ENGLISH. l' animale gli animali gli animai
gli anima the creatures il cavallo i cavalli i cavai i cava' the horses il
laccjvolo i laccjvoli i laccjvoi i laccjvo' the snares il figljvolo i figljvoli
i figljvoi i figljvo' the children Il qvercivolo i qvercivoli i qvercivoi i
qvercivo' the Oaks il piccivolo i piccivoli i piccjvoi i piccjvo' the small
bello belli bej be' fair qvello qvelli qvei qve' those tale tali tai ta' such
qvale qvali qvai qva' which.

And al these have the l in the singular number: and although they are not al
single names, yet for their conformity, they are here set together, because
they can not be better applied: and yet there are a great many more, which are
forgotten, but I hope these will suffice you.

There are others also, which have in the singular number, t^o ends, and in
the plural number but one, and yet al are of one Gender, as for example:

NV. SIN. NV. SIN. NV. SIN. NV. PLV. NV. PLV. Il cavaliere Il cavaljero the
knight I cavaljeri the knights il destriere il destriero the courser i
destrjeri. the coursers il nocchjere il nocchjero the maryner i nocchjeri the
marryners il canceljere il canceljero the chancellor i canceljeri the
Chauncellours il candeljere il candeljero the ca^dlesticke i candeljeri the
Candlestickes.

And other such like, a great many.

Those which we have spoken of above, are al of the Masculine Gender, and these
that follow, are of the Feminine, and some have two ends in the singular, and
two in the plural.

NV. SIN NV. PLV. NV. SIN. NV. PLV. ENGLISH. la frode le frodi la froda le
frode the fraud la fronde le frondi la fronda le fronde the boughs la lode le
lodi la loda le lode the laud l' arm l' armi l' arma le arm the armours l'
ale l' ali l' ala le ale the wings la ghjande le ghjandi la ghjanda le ghjande
the Akornes.

Other some there are of the Masculine and Feminine Genders, but with one end
in the singular, and one in the plural number, and these are they:

NV SIN NV PLV NV SIN NV PLV ENGLISH. Il font I fonti la font le fonti the
fountain il front i fronti le front le fronti the browe il fine i fini la
fine le fini the end NV. SIN NV. PLV NV. SIN NV. PLV ENGLISH. Il Serpe I Serpi
la Serpe le Serpi The Serpent il cenere i ceneri la cenere le ceneri the ashes
il margin i margini la margin le margini the margent.

But il fante, and la fante, and il noce, and la noce, have diverse
significations, wherefore they are not put in.

There are other some, that are both of the Masculine, and of the Feminine, but
of diverse ends, as follows:

NV. SIN. NV. PLV. NV. SIN. NV. PLV. ENGLISH. l' orecchjo gli orecchj l'
orecchja le orecchje The ears il Secchjo i Secchj la Secchja le Secchje the
buckets il melo i meli la mela le mele the honey il pero i peri la pera le pere
the pears.

But you are to not here, that even as the Latin tongue was wont to give the
Feminine Gender to gli arbori, the trees, and the Neuter Gender a i frutti, the
fruits: the Italian contrary to that, gives the Masculine Gender to the
trees, and says, l' arbore, the tree, in the singular number, and gli arbori,
the trees, in the plural number: and the Feminine to the fruits, saying, le
frutte, the fruits. And we say for the trees, il pero, il noce, l' olivo, il
castagno, the Pear tree, the Walnut tree, the Olive tree, the Chestnut tree:
and to the fruits, la pera, la noce, la Oliva, la Castagna, that is, the
Pear, the Nut, the Olive, the Chestnut.

Some she does confound, as the Latin does, as these: il fico, il per^, il
cotogno, the Fig, the Pear, the Quince, and others. Although we can give to
certain fruits, the Gender of the trees, yet can we not give to the trees,
the Gender of the fruits.

Finally, there are others of the Feminine Gender, that have three ends in the
singular number, and three in the plural, but the one is common to them both,
as the Noune Virtue.

NV. SIN. NV. SIN. NV. SIN. NV. PLV. NV. PLV. NV. PLV. la virtu la virtute la
virtude le virtu le virtuti le virtudi la Servitu la Servitute la Servitude le
Servitu le Servituti le Servitudi la Citta la Cittate la Cittade le Citta le
Cittati le Cittadi la bonta la bontate la bontade le bonta le bontati le
bontadi. and many such other: but yet the eclipped words are most in use, and
the others little.

A great many other like parcels I leave behind, which are in this Italian
tongue, mary not so much used. Wherefore I leave them, as more tedious, then
pleasant, or profitable, either for the learner of it, or any other. And thus
will I end concerning Nounes, and God willing we will come to the Pronounes.

Of the Pronounes.
BY the Pronounes did diverse ancient Authors understand certain determined
voices, the which do as it were show forth, or demonstrate the name of a
thing, and divided them into sundry and diverse parts, calling some Primatiues,
some Deriuatiues, other some Demonstratiues, some Relatiues, some Possessiues,
some Interrogatiues, and Indefinitiues.

There are also other divisions found among them, which be good for us: our
Primitiues are, Io, I, tu, thou, se, egli, e, ej, and lui, for he, colui,
qvello, for that he, or that same, and qvegli, qvelli, qvei, and qve', for
those same, or them same, qvesto esto, this he, qvesta esta, this ^hee, costui,
cotesto, cotestui, this same he, che, what, chi, and cui, for who, or whom,
qvale, and il qvale, for which: esso, desso, and stesso, for him self,
cjascuno, and cjascaduno, for each one, and every body, veruno, and niuno, for
no one, and nessuno, for no body, alcuno, and qvalcuno, for some one, or some
body, altri, altro, and altrui, for other or others, cjo, and cjoche, this, and
sometimes yea, many times, cjoe, and cjoche, stands for, so that, or what so
ever, tale, such, or the like, medesimo, self, or else, self same.

The Derived are these, as Mio, mine, tuo, thine, suo, his, nostro, ours,
vostro, yours, loro, they, cui, and altrui, are sometimes used for the same: of
which there are certain bastardes derived, as Mo for now, ma but, to, thine,
ta, thine, speaking to a woman, so, his, of the which, somewhat we will speak
hereafter.

But it is to be noted, that unto the Pronounes, there is no Article given,
except it be to, il medesimo, the self same, and il qvale, the which, (who
are Relatiues,) but only the signs of Cases. And also some there are, that
are without it, as you shall know hereafter.

You are also to know, that some pronounes are of each gendre, and these are
they, Io, tu, se, loro, coloro, costoro, cotestoro, cui, and altrui: all the
others, are some of the Masculine only, and some of the Feminine only.

It is also to be remembered, that the first person is of the pronoune alone,
Io, and the second of the alone, tu, and all the rest belongs to the third,
now let us come to the particulars.

NV. SIN. ENGLI. NV, PLV. ENGLI. Io, and i, are never but of the first case,
the other of the obliques, and noi, is of all cases. 1. Io. i. I. 1. noi. we.
2. di me of me. 2. di noi. of us. 3. ame, mi, m', to me. 3. a noi, ne, ce. ci,
c'. to us. 4. me, mi, m'. me. 4. noi. us or we. 6. da me. from me. 6. da noi.
from us.

NV. SIN. ENGLI. NV. PLV. ENG. Tu, may be of the first, and fifth case and of
no other but the other are of others, and voi, is of all cases, tu. 1 thou. voi
1 you di te. 2. of thee. di voi 2 of you ate, ti, to 3. to thee, a voi, ve, vi,
v', 3 to you te, ti, to 4. thou voi, ve, vi, v', 4 you o tu. 5. o thou o voi, 5
o you da ie. 6. from thee da voi, 6 from you NV. SIN. English. NV. PLV.
English. This se, never does vary neither case nor number, in the third case
it stands sometimes without the sign, as: Chi porta l'ume djetro e se non
gjova, who caryeth the light behind and helps not him self. We see certain
words in these three pronounes end in, t and in, e, which are, mi, ti, si. ci,
vi, and so, me, te, se, ce, ve, when they end in i. they are joined with a
Verb, either before, or after it, if before, then are they sometimes
apostrophed, sometimes not, if after it, then are they entermingled with it,
under an accent, and if the accent be open, the latter letter then is dobled.
di se 2 of him, di se, 2 of them a se, se, si, s' 3 to him, a se, 3 to them se,
si, s' 4 him, se si, 4 them da se, 6 from him da se, 6 from the^,

Now because these voices are only of the third and fourth case, let us see
first those of the third: as, mi pjace, or else pjacemi, and m'e caro, it
pleases me, ti gjova, gioavti, and t'aggrada, it avails thee or helps
thee, si compjace, compjacesi, and s'appaga, he is pleased or well apaide, ci
diletta, dilettaci, and c'e grato, it pleases, or delights us, vi gjova
giovavi, and v'abbella, it helps, or avails you, si compiaecjono,
compiaccjonsi, and s'apagano, they are either pleased or else well apaied.

Those of the fourth case are such, mi preme, prememi, and m'aggrava, it
greeueth me, ti cvoce, cvoceti, and t'abbrugja, it boyleth, or burns thee, si
mostra, mostrasi, and s'asconde, he shows and hides himself, ci preme,
premeci, and c'agrava, it greeueth us, vi cvoce, cvocevi, and v'abbrugia, it
boyleth and burns you, si mostrano, mostransi, and s'ascondono, they show
and hide themselves. And if the accent be upon the last, we say dammi give
me, and many such: As for the others as we have said before in the dobblinges.

But you are to note, and mark, that you fall not into that error, to join
these little parcels, with the Verbes, as some do very disorderly, for when
they should say, se ti manchera cosa alcuna, if thou want any thing, or else,
ti daro la promessa, se ti trovero, I will give thee, the promise, if I find
thee: they will say, se manchera^ti cosa alcuna, darotti la promessa se
troueuotti: which is very ill, he tl at knows no other rule, rather then to
fall in this foul error, let him never join them, and if he will do it
without blame, let him do it unto other Verbes, and not in those, as, lo lo
trovai, e dissigli il fatto mio, I found him, and told him my business or else,
Io mi parti di la, e ridussimi a casa, I parted from thence and brought me
self home.

It is also to be known, that many times, such parcels, are more used for an
ornament, and fulfilling of the speech, then for necessity, as thus, Egli si
creed, e tu ti pensi, che ogniuno che ci nasce, he believes, and thou do
think, that each one that is borne, and many such more, if they be well set
together they make the speech to show, and seem more pleasant, and gallant,
as, Io mi ti racomando, I commend me to thee, tu miti mostrasti aronto, thou
showedst thy self to me prompt, eglij mi si proferj da se, he did proffer him
self to me io mj ci fermai, I did stay my self there, tu ti ci facesti
incontro, thou of thy self came against, or toward me, ej ci si offerce, he
offered him us, and many other such which do commonly end in, i. But if they
end in e, either it is when they are not joined with the verb, as, se non me
le darai, io te le pigliero, if thou geuest them not me, I shall take them from
thee, or else if they be joined they have the little parcel with it, as,
Dammene, give me thereof, Andjancene, go we, pentitevene, repent you of it,
accorsersene, they perceived themselves, or else there is as it were some
comparision; as Io lodo te, e tu bjasimime; I praise thee, and thou blamest
me: or else there follows some infinitive, as, Io av^vo inteso, te esser,
risanato, e questa nuova fece me tardare il viaggio: I heard say that thou wast
healed again, and this news made me to stay the voyage, moreover they may
end in, i, and in, e, when they follow either, l, or else, r, as, calmi,
calm, valmi, valme, parmi, parme, darmi, darme. It is also good to be noted,
not to use in the common course of speech to set any of these little parcels
before the Infinitiues, nor Gerondes, nor Participles, nor Supines, and say, mi
fare, tidire, si mostrando, vinarrante, m'insegnante, si pentito, for it is
abominable.

In this language, they are always put behind, saying, farmi, dirti,
monstradosi, narrantevi, pentitosi, sometimes also these little parcels end in e
and i, and happens when they are joined with Subiunctiue articles, or else
Pronounes, as, raccomandos segli and raccomandoglisi, he recommended himself
to him; portaitegli, or else portaigliti; I brought them to thee, and such
others, which for want of time I pass over. Now let us come to the rest.

NV. SIN. ENGLISH. NV. PLV. ENGLISH. Egli, e, ei, 1 He Eglino. 1 they, or them.
di lui 2 of him, or his. di loro, loro. 2 of them, or theirs a lui, lui, gli
li. 3 to him. a loro, loro, gli, li. 3 to them. lui, il, lo, 'l, l'. 4 he, or
him loro, gli, li. 4 they, or them. da lui. 6 from him da loro. 6 from the^.
NV. SIN. ENGL. NV. PLV. ENGL. Ella, la. 1 She, or her. Elleno. 1 They, or
them. di lei. 2 of her, or hers. di loro, loro. 2 theirs, or of them. a lei,
lei, le. 3 to she, or her. a loro, loro, gli. 3 to them. lei, la. 4 she, or
her. loro, le. 4 they, or them. da lei. 6 from her. da loro. 6 from them.

Egli, eglino, ella, elleno, e, and ei, are of the first Case, but lui, lei,
loro, are of the Obliques, and yet they are otherwise used of the common sort.

In the third Case you may say, Io dissi a lui, io dissi lui, io gli dissi, and
io li dissi, for I told him.

And in the fourth, Io vidi lui, io il vidi, and io 'l vidi, for, I saw him,
Io lo intesi, and Io l' intesi, I understood him.

And as well in the singular, as in the plural may you say, E mi vide, and ei mi
vide, he saw me: e mi videro, and ei mi videro, they saw me.

Of the Feminine Gender, in the plural number you may say, Ella mi disse, she
told me: s' ella m' avesse detto, if she had told me: Se la fosse viva, if
she were alive.

And in the third Case, Io dissi a lei, io dissi lei, and Io le dissi, I told
her.

And in the fourth, Io vidi lei, io la vidi: I saw her.

In the greater number they are al Obliques, as well the Masculine, as the
Feminine, and in this wise they often loose the last vowel, and often times
they are found without the sign of the second and third Case, saying: le lor
mogli, their wives, i lor mariti, their husbands, Io diedi a loro, io diedi
loro, io gli diedi: I gave them.

But in the fourth case we say, Vidi loro, gli vidi, li vidi: I saw them. And
yet in the Feminine Gender we only say: le vidi. Egli and e are often used,
for to make up the word, in the end: lui and lei are used as fourth Cases,
after the Verb Essere, to be, as S' io fossi lui, if I were he, S' io fosse
lei, if I were she. And also after this word Come, as, or such like, saying,
Io son ricco come lui: I am as rich as he: Io son grosso come lei: I am as
gross as she: We also say, S' io fossi come te, If I were as thou.

And after the absolute Geroundes, as Andando lui, he going. But if a Verb did
follow, we should say, Andando egli, s' incontro in un suo amico: he going, met
with a friend of his. Also, lui, lei, and loro, are often used of good
Authors, in stead of Colui, colei, coloro, and that happens, when Che does
follow, as, Invoco lei, che ben sempre rispose. We have a great many more, as,
qvello, qvell', qvel, qvegli, qvelli, qvei, for that, and qvelli, qvegli, qvei,
and qve' for those: The which to decline, I think it but labor lost.
Wherefore, if you would know how to decline them I pray you take Scipio
Lentuloes Grammar, where he writes very well and learnedly of the Pronounes,
far better then I can do: wherefore I pass them over, but yet not
altogether.

Qvegli and qvelli are not used in the singular case, but only in the
relation: and it were better, if they were not used at al in the singular,
because they make the plural doubtful.

Note also, that those words that end in lli, often times change the first l
into g, as qvelli those, belli fair, fratelli brethren: you may say, qvegli,
or begli, or frategli. And when qvello is without company, it signifies Qvella
cosa, that thing: as qvel che si dice, that which is said, or else, qvel che
si fa, that which is done, which does as it were accord with the Latin
Neuter.

Many other little odd words, that in other places are Articles, here they
are Pronounes, as Io il presi e lo stracejai, or else, presilo, e straccjailo, I
took him, and tore him: and so, gli presi et straccjai, or else, presili, et
straccjaili, I took them and tore them, and so, jo la vidi, and vidila, I saw
her, and Io le vidi, and vidile, I saw them, and as for, qvesto, and esto,
this, and qvesti, these, of the Masculine, and qvesta, esta, and sta, this, and
qveste, these, of the Feminine, and of cetesto, cotestui, and costui, for this
same, cotesti, cotestoro, and costoro, for these, and cotesta, and costs, for
this, she, and coteste, for these she is, I pray you look in Scipio Lentulo, as
for Che, it never changes voice, but always is a like in every Gender, in all numbers, and cases. as, Il Dio che io adoro, The God that I worship, La
bonta che e in lui, the goodness that is in him, I cjeli che risplendeno, the
stars that shine, La terra che scalda il sole, the earth that the sun warmes,
Qvello che no^ fece may persona, that which never person did. And here it is as
it were a member, and has that nature, sometimes we find it to bear an
article, or else a sign of the case, and then does it signify, cosa, a thing,
as, Ej dice, di voler volare, il che da maraviglia ad ognjuno. He says he
will fly, which thing causes each one to wonder, Di che cjascuno si fa beffe:
Which thing every one iesteth at. Al che niuno acconsente. To which thing none
co^senteth. Il che niuno non creed: The which thing none believes, Da che
ognjuno si gvarda: Of which thing every one takes heed. Or else, Elle dicono
cose, che fanno maravigljare ogniuno: They tell things, that makes each one
wonder. Di che cjaseun si maraviglia: Of which thing each man does marvel. A
che niuno da feed. To which none gives credit. Che niuno creed. That no body
believes. Da che si part ognjuno: From which each one departs.

In the third case, being without sign, or article; it is interogatiue, as,
Che te ne pare? what think thou of it?

Many other things mi^^t be said of this word che, and of the diverse
significations of it, which I pass over for want of time, and also I have
told you above, the sundry and diverse meanings of it.

I pray you tell me something about this word, che, and especially how it is
pronounced.

Che, is pronounced in Italian, even as we pronounce our ke in English, and
chi, even as kee, if e and i alone follow c, then pronounce it shi, or she, but
if a and o follow it, then pronounce it ka, or ko, and so forth.

Surely this is a good rule, but now follow on your pronounes.

Here are also to be remembered chi, and cui, who, are also Relatiues, and
interogatiues, as chi hai tu visto: who have thou seen. Also of chiunqve,
whosoever, but that has the nature of the latin neuter also, il qvale, and li
qvale, of the Feminine, which with the articles are relatiues, and without
interogatiue, and Demonstratiue, and often they loose the last vowell as, Tuil
qvale ti di lletti de la musica; thou the which delightest in music, voi i
qvali vi di lettate del canto; you the which delight in the song, di qval di
voi e l'onor; of the which of you is the honor. Here is also, esso, which
sometimes means he, or himself, and essi, they or themselves, essa, hirselfe
or she, and esse, they or themselves, and they serve for all cases, and
numbers, but it often ioynes with other pronounes, and nounes substantives, as,
con esso me: with me self, con esso voi: with your self, con esso loro: with
themselves, then is there, ste sso, stesse, ste ssa, and stesse, and desso,
dessi, dessa, desse, which do accord much with esso, essi, essa, esse, then
have we among the pronounes, qvalche, which signifies sometimes, some, and
with the homo, and volta donna: or some such thing it signifies, some man,
some thing, some woman, as qvalche homo, qvalche donna, qvalche cosa: it
serves all Genders, it has no plural number, and it must have a substantive,
the^ have we cjascuno, cjascuna, cjascheduno, and cjascheduna, which is, each
one, or else, each, all the which are without plural each of them may be clipped
of the last vowell in writing, as, cjascun fedel: each faithful, or cls,
cjascadun tiranno, each: tirant, some will use catanno, or ess, cadauno, but it
is filthy, and not to be used, then have we ogniuno, ogniuna, that is, each
one, or else every one which does altogether agree with cjascuno, or cjascuna,
then have we veruno, and veruna, for no one, it has no Plural, in the
Masculine it may be clipped of the last vowell, then have we also niuna, and
niuna, of the self same meaning that veryno is but only that niuno goes
always in the beginning of any saying, as, N'iun u' era present, There was no
one present, niuna persona, no one person, it may be either clipped, or
apostrophed, which you please, and thereafter as occasion serves, then have we
nessuno, and nessuna, for no body, or not one, you may write it nessuno, and
nissuno, and nessun, for it has no plural, then have we nullo, and nulla,
which sometimes is set among the nounes, sometimes among the pronounes, Nullo,
and Nulla, may upon occasion be set with the substantive, but most times, it
is of the neuter, and sometimes it signifies nothing, and sometime, something,
as, Tunon fainulla, thou do nothing, or else, volete voi nulla: will you
something, or any thing, Poss'io nulla pervoi, can I any thing or something for
you, then have we qvalcuuo, and qvalcuna, alcuno, and alcuna for some, or, some
one, or some body, it may also loose the last vowell, it may either be alone,
or with company, as, Alcuni animali, sono terreni, alcuni aqvatici: alcuni
aerei, some creatures are earthy, some watrie, and some of the air. Then have
we qvalunqve, or chiunqve, for who so ever, or what so ever, they serve for
both Genders, but that qvalunqve, can not be without a Substantive, and may be
applied either to a person, or a thing, as, qvalunqve pjanta: what plant so
ever, qvalunqve huomo, what man so ever, and chiunqve can not be put to
things, but to a person, as, chiunqve chjede ricev^ who so ever asks
receives, chiunqve cercatrova, whosoever seeks finds.

Then have we altro other, altri others, the Masculine, and altra and altre the
Feminine. If l be put before it, as l' altro, then it signifies the other: and
gli altri the others. Then have we alirui, signifying sometimes others, and
sometimes other men: as per colpa altrui, for other men's fault, or else, Io
lascio tal carico ad alirui: I leave such a charge to others.

Then have we cjo, signifying this, as cjo mi piace: this pleases me. etc.
Then have we cjoche, sometimes it means any thing, sometimes every thing,
sometimes what so ever. Many ways it may be applied, for they are two
Pronounes joined together. This cjo is accompanied many times, with sundry
voices, and has sundry meanyngs, as accjo to the end, accjoche to the end,
percjo therefore, and sometimes because, olirea cjo moreover, or besides this,
sopra cjo over, or upon this, senza cjo without this, contutto cjo for all this,
percjoche for because, and many such other like.

Then have we for the singular tale, and tali, tai, and ta' for the plural, for
such, or the like. This Pronoune somtymes is with an Article, somtymes without
it, when with it, it is Demonstratiue, and without it, Relative. Sometimes it
is used whole, and sometimes clipped, as I have partly told you before. When
it is with an Article, then do we say, Il tale m' anoia: such a one annoyeth
me: la tale mi p^ace: such a one pleases me. Here it is Demonstratiue: but
Rolatiue it is thus, Qvale me la djedi, tale la recevei: Such as he gave, such
I received.

When it is Indefinitiue, sometimes it answeareth che, as Tal vi su che non vi
rorebbe esser stato: Such a one was there, as would not have been there. And
sometimes it is joined with che, as Talche due bestie van sotto una pelle: In
such wise, or, so that two beasts go under one skin.

Then have we also among the Pronounes, Il medesimo the self same, of the
Masculine Gender, and the singular number, and i medesimi, the self same, of
the Plural number: la medesima, the self same, of the Feminine Gender, and
singular humber: le medesime, of the Feminine Gender, and Plural number.
Sometimes it is joined with other Pronounes, and Substantive Nounes, and
sometime without an Article, as Io medesimo, I me self, Voi medesimi you your
selves: Essi or loro medesimi, they them selves. So may you say, Essa medesima,
she her self, esse medesime they them selves.

Then have we other Nounes, called Possessiues, or else derived, and these are
they: Mio, mjei, mia, mie, mine, Tuo, tvoi, tua, tue, thine, Suo, svoi, sua,
sue: his: nostro, nostra: our: nostri, nostre, ours: of the Plural: Vostro,
vostra: your: Vostri, vostre: yours: the which are of each Gender, and of each
number, as Il mio libro: my book: i mjei parenti: my parents: mia madre: my
mother: mie sorelle: my sisters: il tuo ventre: thy belly: i tvoi libri: thy
books: tua mente: thy mind, or memory: tue scarpe: thy shoes. etc.

Then have we Cui, altrui, loro, these three Pronounes are always of the
second Case, as well in the one Gender, as in the other, and they are of a
possessing nature, Il cui merito: whose merit: la cui virtu: whose virtue: i
cui cos^umi: whose customs: and il lor pensjere: their thought: la loro mente:
their mind. etc. and l' altrui valor: others valor: l' altrui modestia:
others modesty: gli altrui tefori: others treasures. etc.

Then are there these other little parcels, but they are but seeldome used, if
they be, they are used of country men, and among the commons, and are joined
to other names, as Mo, ma, to, ta, so, derived from Mio, mia, tuo, tua, suo:
they may be called bastard Pronounes: them I pass over, because I would not
wish any to use them. etc.

Now will we (God willing) speak somewhat of the Participles.

I beseech you do so, if you be not weery.

Of the Participles.
THe last part of Speech, that through Cases does vary, is the Participle,
of the which I mind not to speak much, because Scipio Lentulo has done it
very well. For the more I go about to make it agree with the Latin, the
further I enter into confusion, and into a thing more vain, then necessary:
For the Italian may almost altogether be without them: and in many places it
does abhor them, as a man would say, Beato il temente Iddio, e credente a la
sua parola, e sperante ne le sue promise: Blessed is the fearer of God, and
believer of his words, and hoper in his promises.

Such manner of speech is abominable in our speech, for in stead of it, we use
to say, Beato chi teme Iddio, e creed a la sua parola, e spera ne le sue
promise: that is, Blessed is he that fears God, and believes his word, and
hops in his promises. And thus much is for the present time.

But for the time passed, the number is very great, and for the Future time, it
is but once used, and that is taken from the Latin, and yet may the Italian
language (as) well express her meanyngs, conceits, and thoughts, by Gerundes,
as the Latin with her Participles: the which sometimes are Gerundes, and
sometimes Participles, as if I will speak of time present, I shall say: Io
correndo mi stanco: I runnyng, weery me self: for mente corro: whilst I
run. If of passed ryme, I shall say, A vend' io corso, son tutto sudato: I
having run, am al sweatty: for Poi che ho corso: or else, perch ho corso. If of
the Future time, I shall say, Dovend'io a correre: or else, Io che son per
correre: or else, Io che debbo correre: or else, Io che voglio correre: or else,
Io che ho a correre ^^ voglio spogliare: that is, I being to run: or else,
having to run, or I that am to run, Or, I that must run, or, I that have
to run, will put of my clothes. See how many we have for one, yea many more,
and this we have in the Italian Gerondes that the Latin have not, we know
the time and they do not, because there is certain voices that seem
participles and are not, and many that are not and yet seem to be, for to be
sure of that, you must note the time, for when they signify time they are
participles, and when they do not, they are not, and so I think this
sufficient concerning them. Until now have we talked of the elements, of the
parts of speech, mutable through cases, now will we come to those which are
mutable through time, the which are verbes.

Of the Verbes in general.
THe verb is that part of speech which only does vary through time, for
because the Verb is he which signifies the time, as it is manifestly known:
now amongst al these verbes, some be as it were subject to a kind of order,
and some not: those which be of many ancient Gramarians have been divided into
four companies, and of them called Conjunctions. The first of the which, are
those that end in are, with the accent on the last syllable save one, as,
amare, cantare, danzare; to love, to sing, to dance.

The second sort are those that end in, ere, and also with the accent on the
last save one, as, temere, to fear, vedere, to see, possedere, to possess.

The third sort are those that end also in, ere, but the accent on the last
vowell saving two, as, leggere, to read, scrivere, to write, ridere, to laugh.

The fourth and last does end in ire, with the accent on the last saving one,
as, Vdire, to hear, sentire, to feel, and sometimes to hear, partire, to
part, or depart, the verbes that are subject to such orders and rules are
infinite, but those that disagree from them are but a few. Of the first
conjugation this are they. Do, I give, Fo, I make Sto, I stand, Vo, I go.

Of the second, Cado, I fall, Debbo, shall I, Paio, I seem, Posso, I may, or
can, Soglio, I am wont, Tengo, I hold, Voglio, I will.

Those of the third are composed of Duco, as Produco, I produce, Riduco, I
reduce, Conduco, I conduct, Pongo, I set, Scjolgo, I loose, Tolgo, or Togli, I
take.

Those of the fourth, are Apro, I open, Dico, I say, Mvoio, I dye, Vengo, I
come, Ire, or Ire, To go.

With these are also joined those that end in Sco, as Nodrisco, I nourish,
Langvisco, I languish. And these are subject to no order, or rule.

Now if a man do stand in doubt of some Time, or Person, of which Verbes he
be, let him ouerrunne these few that are without order, and if he find it, he
shall be certified of the doubt, if not, he shall be sure that he is of the number
of those, that are subject to order. But because many times of our Verbes do
show them selves to agree with the Participle, and with the Verb Avere, to
have, or else with the Verb Essere, to be, it is to be known, that the Verbes
that are Transitiues, that is to say, that are named, or be incident in, or to
the thing that they treat of, then do they occupy the Verb Avere, as Io ho
letto molti libri: I have read many books. Io me l' avevo gvadagnato con l'
arm in mano: I had won it with weapons in hand, but those that touch the
party that speaks, they end with these small parcels, Mi, ti, ci, vi, si,
which do answer to Io, tu, noi, voi. And others do occupy and use the Verb
Essere, as Io mi son ralegrato del' tuo been, ben che tu ti fossi doluto del
mio: I have rejoiced of thy welfare, although thou have sorowed of mine. And
Noici siamo accostati a lui; e voi vi sete vergognate di sarlo: Who have
approached our selves to him; and you have been ashamed to do it. Qvando essi
si saran pentiti de^l mal sare; noi ci consolere^o: When as they will be
repented of evil doing; then will we comfort our selves. But Posso, and Voglio,
do serve to both those Verbes above mentioned.

Now because there are certain things, that appertain unto all the Verbes, or
most part of them al these may be conjoined with the Verb Avere, because he is
the first, but those that particularly appertain either to one Verb or an
other, or else more to one conjunction then to an other shall be set in their
special places.

Now the Verb being (as we have said alredie) he that signifies, shows,
and notes the time, I know not for what occasion he should more be divided in
Moodes, then in his natural times, I will first that my Verb be divided in
his times, which are, the time passed, the time present and the time to come:
and unto this I add the diverse or variable time, as more plainly I will show
you hereafter, and although that the time passed do exceed, it is necessary
for us to begin in time present, because he is the root and chief cause of
our Verbes and talk, and not in the passed as the Hebrews do, and then the
diversities that are in each of this times are divided into certain Chapters,
the which but of mean scholars will be comprehended. Let the others know,
that even as those in the first age did but break, and stamp the grain, and
thereof did make a kind of past, and sodde it, which we call, Sugol^, or
Polenta, and did eat it and thereon fed, and when the true making of bread was
found, they would not lightly be persuaded, but that their old fashion was
best, and not the new. Even so will those do that are accustomed to this, Dio
volesse che, or, Dio voglia che, Dio haresse voluto che, and conejosia che,
concjosia cosa che, concjofusse stato che; and other such I will not force all
men to learn my rules, but those that will. This know I by experience, that
those that thoroughly observe them; although they never have been in Italy,
shall both speak, read, and write better then those that observe them. But
now let us come to the Declensions, or will you have it Coniugations? and let
us begin with the Verb, Avere, as,

The present Definitive.
NV. SIN. English. NV. PLV. English. ho or aggio 1 I have. abbjamo avjamo or 1
we have. hai 2 thou have. ave mo. avete 2 you have, ha, ave, or ae. 3 he has
hanno or han 3 they have

Aggio, ave, and ae, are most commonly used of Poets.

The second person does commonly end in, i, in all the Verbes, but sometimes
the letters do vary, as, Dolgo, I plain, Dvoli, thou plainest, Dico, I say,
di, thou say, Paio, I seem, pari, thou seem, Pongo, I set, poni, thou
set, Seggo, I sit, sjedi, thou sit, Tengo, I hold, tjeni, thou hold,
vengo, I come, vjeni, thou come, Voglio, I will, vvoi, thou wilst, colgo, I
gather, coi, or cogli, thou gatherest, Scjolgo, I loose, or unbind, scjogli,
or scjoi, thou loosest, or vnbyndest, Soglio, I am wont, svoi, and svoli, thou
art wont.

Then are there some that have, n, before, g, and in some the, g, goes before
the, n, as cingo, cigni, to gyrd, attingo, attigui, to attain, or to draw
unto, Dipingo, dipigni, to depaint, gjungo, gjugni, to overtake, mungo, mungni,
to melch, Spengo, spegni, to quench, upon necessity may we say, piango,
piangi, or piangni, to weep, pungo, pungi, and pugni, to prick, stringo,
stringi, and strigni, to gripe fast, vnge, ungi, or vgni, to anoint: but fingo,
has only fingi, to feign, of glorio, we say glorio, to glory, and soffio,
suffij, to blow, for the others have the, i, pure, and these, liqvido, that is
moist.

The third person in the first Conjugation does end in a, as canta, ama,
salta, he sings, loves, ^eapeth, and such others. All the others do end
in, e, as vede, ride, ode, he sees, laugheth, and hears, in Posso, we may
say, pvo, pvote, and pvoe, he can, but the two last are Poetical. We also say
often svol, val, and vvol; and also, pon, tien, vien, riman, and such others
may be of the second and third, both the one and the other. The two first
plurals of this present time, and likewise the first of the varying time, are a
like, but to make them seem somewhat unlike, some writers have changed the,
m, into, n. and to make them also to disagree from the third that have the
accent on the last saving two, we put the accent on the last save one, and say,
Noi abbiano, facciano, diciano, we have, do, and say, this voice may also upon
occasion in all Verbes leave the last vowel, the Verbes that end in, sco, have
not this first person, we say, pogniamo, t^gm^mo, and traggiamo.

The second plural because it does not vary a little, may be known from
the infinitive, changing the, r, into ^, as amare, amate, dovere, dovete,
leggere, leggete, sentire, sentite, facete, and dicete, are not to be used,
sete, you be, or are, is of the Verb essere, to be, of the which we will
speak hereafter.

The third in all Verbes may loose, and leave the last vowell, saying, aman,
veggon, leggon, di^on, they love, see, read and say, but in this Verb and all
others of (monosilaba) we double the, nn, and say, hanno, danno, fanno, sanno,
they have give do, or make, and know, as partly I have told you in the
letter, n, yea sometimes we cast away not only the vowell but the whole
syllable, and say, han, dan, fan, san, we also say, possono, ponno, and pon,
debbono, denno, and den.

The time that follows is that, which until now we have given to the
imperative, the which certainly has a certain regard, or respect more then
the others, (as they say) means how to speak, for it does not always
command, but it exhorts, forewarnes, grants, forbyddeth, prayseth, and
gesteth, and diverse other such effects, having always a certain regard to
whom he speaks, wherefore I call them Respectiues, rather then Imperatiues,
and set him as a Sise, and not as a Gender, and here I speak only of his
Present, for his Future is set in his own place.

Respective.
NV. SIN ENGL. NV. PLV ENGL. 1 1 abbjamo have we Abbi 2 have thou 2 abbjate
have ye abbja 3 have he 3 abbiano have they

This second person of the singular number, in the first Conjugation, does
end in a, and in the third, in i: nevertheless sometimes to this i, do we
add an a, and say, abbja, sappja, debbja, in stead of abbi, sappi, debbi, and
such others. But these words are most used of Poets. In certain other
Verbes, we cast away the vowel, and say, Vjen, tjen, for vjeni, tjeni, and
diverse others. And this is done as well when a vowel follows, as a consonant:
yea sometime we cast away the whole syllable, and say, co, ve, to, for cogli,
vedi, and togli.

In stead of this time we may use the Infinitive, with the Negative, and say,
Non ti scordar di me: Forget not thee self of me. Non far cosi: Do not so.
Non l aver' per male: Have it not in ill part.

The first plural may leave the last vowel, and so we may say, Debbjamo,
debbjate, debbjano: We owe, you owe, they owe. And so, Sappjamo, we know,
vogljamo, we will, and such others.

The third plural likewise may loose the last vowel, and the last vowel save
one, may be i, and a. But yet in all Verbes, the first Conjugation has not
always the i, as, amino, love they, cantino, sing they.

In the Verb Dare, and Stare, we say, Diano, and dieno give they: Stiano, and
stieno, stand they. We are also better to say, Odino, and legghino, then
Odano, and leggano And so let this suffice you for the present time.

Now let us come to the passed, whose use will seem naughty, to the
scrupulous, but yet will yield a contentation and profit to the wise.

Of time passed, and uncertain.
NV. SIN ENGL. NV. PLV ENGL. Avevo 1 I had. Avevamo 1 We had. aveva aveamo avea
avevi 2 thou had. avevate 2 you had avevi aveva 3 he had avevano 3 they
had. avea aveano.

From the first, and third, when they do end in a, you may take away thev,
and say, Vedea, I saw, or he saw, leggea, I read, or he read, and such others.

So may you do in the first and third in the plural, but not in the first
Conjugation, although that Petrarca has said, facea, and fea: which may be
granted to other Poets also. Avia, Solia, and such like, can not be granted:
Vedavamo, correvano, dioceavamo, and leggeavamo, and such like, are altogether
to be abhorred. Well may we say, Fallav imo, we failed, or did fail, so it be
in the Verb Fallare^ and not fallire.

Also may you say, Aggradare, and aggradire, apparere, and apparire, colorare,
and colorire, empjere, and empire, impazzare, and impazzire, inanimare, and
inanimire, pentere, and pentire.

The two voices of the second plural person, now adays are much used. The
first and third Plurals, may leave the last vowel. Potjemo, venjemo, and such
others, are to be fled.

Of time Indefinitiue.
NV. SIN ENGL. NV. PLV ENGL. Ebbi, or avei. 1 I had. avemmo 1 we had. avesti 2
thou had aveste 2 you had. ebb 3 he had ebbero, or ebbono 3 they had.

Some ancient Writers have used E^, but it is not to be observed: this Person
does vary more then any other, and is very necessary to be known. The first
Conjugation of it does end in ai, as Amai, I loved, Cantai, I sounge. The
second has diverse terminations, as Potei, I could, or might: Ebbi, I had:
Ta'cgvi, I held my peace: Godetti, I did enjoy: and diverse such others.

The third likewise has as many, as Battei, I stroke: credetti, I did believe:
conobbi, I knew: chiefi, I requested: ruppi, I brake.

The fourth does also vary, as Vdi, I heard: apersi, I opened: venni, I came,
etc. When this voice ends in i, saying in stead of Vsaimi, and deliberaimi:
usami, and deliberami. And so, Direlo, farelo, for Direilo, and fareilo.

The second singular person does end in sti, in all Verbes, as Avesti,
fosti, amasti, vedesti: thou had, thou wast, thou louedst, thou saw, etc.

The third person does end diversely, whereof we will speak more hereafter.

The first plural person ends in mmo, as Amammo, leggemmo, We loved, we read.
etc.

The second ends always in ste, as Godeste, patiste: You enjoyed, and
suffered. etc.

The third also has many differences, whereof we will speak in other places.
But yet one thing we will note, that they al may leave the last vowel, as Ebber
amaron, sentiron: They had, loved, and felt, and such others.

Sometime it may leave the last save one, as Ferno, they did. Sometimes it
loses the whole syllable, as legaro, they bound. etc.

VICINO. near at hand. VICINO. near at hand. NV. SIN. NV. SIN. NV. PLV. NV.
PLV. ho avuto 1 I have had abbiamo avuto. we have had. hai avuto 2 thou have
had. avete avuto ye have had. ha avuto 3 he has had. hanno avuto. they have
had. DICOSTO. distant. DISCOSTO distant. NV. SIN. NV. SIN. NV. PLV. NV. PLV.
ebbi avuto. 1 I have had ave^mo avuto. we have had. avesti avuto. 2 thou haste
had aveste avuto. ye have had. ebb avuto. 3 he has had. ebbono avuto. they
have had. LONTANO NV. SIN. far of. SIN. NV LONTANO NV. PLV far of. PLV. NV
Avevo, avuto. 1 I had had. avevamo, avuto. 1 We had had. avevi, avuto. 2 thou
had had. avevi, avuto. 2 ye had had. aveva, avuto. 3 he had had. avevano,
avuto. 3 they had had.

These two first Preterperfect Tenses, together with that that goes before,
do signify from the Latin only in voice, but yet they have a contrary
signification.

Of that which goes before, we have already spoken: but of these three here
set together, it is to be known, that the first is nearest to the Present
tense, the which does show a thing done presently. The second is somewhat
distant from it. The third shows a thing far of, and done long ago. And
this is the cause why I have set them under these Genders, Near hand, Distant,
Far of. By the which Genders or Chapters, a man may know their difference:
For Ho avuto, does agree with time present, as, Qvando ho mangiato, voglio
here: When I have eaten, I will drink. Ebbi avuto, does answer the
Indefinitiue, as Qvand' io l' ebbi veduto, disubito 'l conobbi: When as I had
seen him, straightwayes I knew him. And avevo veduto, does somewhat touch the
thing passed, as Io l' avevo ben veduto, mano 'l conoscevo: I had well seen
him, but I knew him not.

We may also apply it otherwise, but it will be too tedious for me to rehearse
it, and for you to hear it. But yet one thing mark by the way, that the
Participles that do agree with the Verb Avere, may be joined, and may serve
both Genders and Numbers, as well in things going before, as in things
following, as Io ho desiderato lo tue comodita: I have desired thy commodities.
Io ho desiderato la tua comodita: I have desired thy commodity. So may you
say, Io ho desiderati i tvoi comodi: and Io ho desiderat e le ^ve comodita. But
all the Participles joined with the Verb essere, do accord always with the
Nominative Ca^e, as we will speak more of that, in the same Verb.

Condizionato. Conditioned, or agreed upon.
NV. SIN English. NV. PLV English. Abbja avuto. 1 when I have had abbjamo
avuto. 1 when we have had. abbi avuto. 2 when thou have had. abbjate avuto. 2
when you have had. abbja avuto. 3 when he has had abbino avuto. 3 when they
have had.

Patovito. upon bargayne.
NV. SIN. SIN. NV NV. PLV NV. PLV avessi avuto. 1 Had I had. avessimo avuto. 1
Had we had. avestu avuto. 2 had thou had aveste avuto. 2 had you had. avesse
avuto. 3 had he had. avessero avuto. 3 had they had.

Sogivnto. At hand.
NV. SIN SIN. NV NV. PLV PLV. NV avret avuto. 1 I should have had. avremmo
avuto. 1 we should have had. avresti avuto. 2 thousholdst have had. avreste
avuto. 2 you should have had. avrebbe avuto. 3 he should have had. avrebbone
avuto. 3 they should have had.

Infinitivo. Infinitive.
Avere avuto, to have had.

Essere stato per avere, to have been to have.

Under the Gender called Vario, are things pertinent to these three Preteritiues.

Avvenire. To come. Definito.
NV. SIN SIN. NV NV. PLV PLV. NV Avero, avro, or else, aro. 1 I shall have
Averemo, avremo, or, aremo 1 we shall have. averai, avrai, or, avra'. 2 Thou
shall have. averete, avrete, or, arete. 2 you shall have. avera, avra, or, ara.
3 he shall have. averanno, avranno, or, ara^no. 3 they shall have.

Upon the last syllable of the first and third person of this Future, the
accent is always needful in all Verbes: and in the last save one we always use
the e, as Cantero, I shall sing: prendero, I shall take. But the Verbes of the
first Conjugation use the i, as Vdiro, sentiro, I shall hear, and feel. And
those of Monosillaba have the a, as Daro, faro, I shall give, and make.

There are many Futures, that are more used eclipped, then whole, as Avro,
sapro, for avero, sapero, I shall have, or know. Diraggio, and faraggio, are
not to be used, unless it be upon great necessity, in Rhyme, but Diro, and
faro, etc.

Rispettiuo, Respective.
NV. SIN. NV. SIN. NV. PLV. NV. PLV. 1 avremo or aremo 1 we shall have. avrai
or arai. 2 thou shall have. avrete or arete. 2 you shall have. avra or ara. 3
he shall have. avranno or aranno. 3 they shall have.

The third singular also of this Future, must have the accent upon the last
syllable, sometimes and often in the third plural it leaves the last syllable,
and we say, in steed of faranno, aranno, faran, diran, So is it in many Verbes.

Condizionato, Conditioned.
NV. SIN. NV. SIN. NV. PLV. NV. PLV. aro avuto 1 I shall have had. aremo avuto,
1 we shall have had arai avuto, 2 thou shall have had arete avuto. 2 you shall
have had ara avuto 3 he shall have had. aranno avuto, 3 they shall have had

This Future is different from the first, for the does show us a certain
time conditioned, and indefinitiue, as. Qvando io l'aro veduto lo credero: When
I shall have seen it, I shall believe it. Or else, S'egli l'ara trovate le dara:
If he shall have found it, he will give it thee.

Infinitive.
Dover avere, Esser to be or have to have. per avere, Aver, ad avere.

As for the voices of our fore passed Gramarians set under the Optatiue, and
Subiunctiue moodes, do not we see? And they also confess it, that they show
naught else but a conditioned speech. And that by some of them, one can not
know rightly what time one speaks of. Wherefore they seek to help them
with such like voices, as. Dio volesse che: Would to God that. Or else,
Concjosia cosa che: For as much And many such others, and this is worst of all,
that many times some thinking to speak of present, or passed time, speak of
the Future, as. Se tu vemissi a trovarmi io ti parlerei: that is, If thou
should, did, or would come and find me, I would speak to thee, is
not this a manifest Future, as they say, Wherefore and in consideration of
that, those voices that do not show a manifest time, are by me set under a
Gender called in Italian Vario, that is diverse, varible, or uncertain, the
which is added to the three times.

Variable, and conditioned.
NV. SIN. NV. SIN. NV. PLV. NV. PLV abbja, or aggia, 1 have I or let me have.
abbjamo, or aggjamo. 1 have we or let us have abbi, or abbja, 2 have thou
abbjate. 2 have ye abbja, or aggia. 3 have he or let him have abbjano, abbino,
or aggjano. 3 have, they or let the^ have

All these three singular persons commonly end in, i. in the first
coniugations, as. Io ami, tu ami, colui, ami. And in the fourth all three in,
a, as: Io senta, tu senta, colui senta. But in the second and third, they have
the first, and third person end in a, and the second in, i, as. Io vegga, tu
vegghi, colui vegga, to scriva, tu scrivi, colui scriva. Also some in the first
person do end in, i, and, a, as, Vogli, and voglia, mvoi, and mvoia, dichi,
and dica, also some do end in, a, all three persons though they be not of the
fourth, also some end in the Verb, So, I know, as, Io Sappja, tu sappja, and
sappi colui sappja. And some all three persons have both ends, as. Io faccja,
and facci, tu faccja and facci colui faccja and facci, of the first Plural, we
have spoke of it before in the definitive of the present. We may say, Vegnjamo,
or venghjamo, let us come, also, Vdiamo, udiate, and odiamo, odiate: Hear we,
or let us hear, and hate we, or let us hate, the one is of the Verb Odo, I
hear, the other of the Verb, Odio, I hate, in the third we find, Veggjano,
and Vegglino, diano, and Dieno, siano, and Sieno, this person may leave the
last vowell.

Pattovito, That is upon condition, or Bargain.
NV. SIN. NV. SIN. NV. PLV. NV. PLV avessi, or avesse, 1 had I, avessimo, 1 had
we, avessi, 2 had thou, aveste, or avessi, 2 had you, avesse, or avessi, 3
had he, avessero, avessino, or avesseno. 3 had they,

The first and third singular persons have their end in e, or else, i, but the,
i, is fittest for the first, and e, for the third, the other declensions are
Poetical, also, Venesse, fusse, perconsse, for Venisse, fosse, percosse,
facessi, and fessi, are as well of the second, as of the first.

In this second person may you add tu, and take away the last syllable, and
say, Avestu, fostu, and vedestu. In the third plural, we may easily leave the
last vowel, and say, Avesser, avessin, and such others.

Soggiunto. Subiunctiue.
NV. SIN SIN. NV NV. PLV PLV. NV Arei, aavrei, or, averia. 1 I should have.
aremmo, or, avre^mo. 1 we should have. aresti, or avresti. 2 thou sholdest have
areste, or, avreste. 2 you should have. arebbe, avrebe, or, averia. 3 he should
have. arrebbono, avrebbero, averiano. 3 they should have.

The Latin has not this Time. Sometime we say, Potre, sare, for Potrei,
sarei, aand also for Potrebbe, sarebbe.

To the second person in this Time, we may add, and join unto it, tu, and
fay, Avestu, potrestu. Averieno, with the accent on the last syllable save one,
is not to be used.

Infinitivo. Infinitive Mood.
Avere. 1 To have.

This Time often leaves the vowel, and often becomes a Noune, and has the
Masculine Article, and is in all Cases, and agrees both with Nounes and Verbes,
and immutables, as Il fuggir de'l tempo: The fleeing of the time. Un batter
d'occhjo: an ineling of na eye. And many such others, the which to rehearse,
were but labor lost. For all books are full of such. We say sometimes,
Scjorre, and scjogliere, torre, and togliere. We say, Bear, porre, but not
Bevere, and ponere. And thus let this suffice you for this Verb.

Of the Verb Essere, To be.
THis Verb is very necessary to the Italian tongue: in so much as we have no
Verb Passive, nor can express the Passive voice, without the help of this
Verb: wherefore I think it good to decline it, and then to give over, hoping
that by these two Verbes, and by the Rules before given, they will suffice you.
For to make a long discourse, and to show the declinyng of them, it would
require a great volume, and (as I suppose) would trouble and weery the Reader.
For I know this of a certainty, that if twenty men do study the Italian
tongue, perhaps not one of them does learn the Grammar: and that is the cause
why they never attain unto the perfection of it. And again, there are so many
Verbes declined by Scipio Lentulo, and William Thomas, that I refer you to
them, still remembering my Rules, (as very necessary) and also (by the help of
God) I mean hereafter, and that shortly perhaps, to set out another book very
necessary for the learner of it, the which I mean to translate, as the best,
perfectest, and surest way that ever hitherto has been devised.

Wherefore I pray you to accept this by the way, in good part, and remember it
is given for good will. And if it please God that I do the other, I will show
things there more at large, and especially the Verbes: and other things to,
the which I hope will do you much good.

Surely sir, these rules which you have already given me, are very good, and by
them I hope to attain unto the perfection of it, with a little labor, yet
notwithstanding if you will give me any other rules, I shall think my self
much bounden unto you, not only I, but a great many more of my country men,
which do take great delight in the Italian tongue. Wherefore I pray you forget
not your promise but proceed even when most you please, and remember where you
left.

I remember it very well, I promised you to decline the Verb. Essere. To be,
the which is this.

Essere, To be, of the present time and definitive.
NV. SIN ENGL. NV. PLV ENGL. Sono, son, or so. 1 I am. Siamo, or, semo,
poetical. 1 We are, or, we be. Sei, or, se. 2 Thou art. Sete, or, siete. 2 Ye
are, or be. e. 3 He is. Sono, or, son. 3 They are, or be. Rispettivo.
Regarding, or to have respect.
NV. SIN ENGL. NV. PLV ENGL. 1 Siamo. 1 Be we. Sij, or sia. 2 Be thou. Siate. 2
Be ye. Sia. 3 Be he. Siano. 3 Be they. Passato, that is time passed.
NV. SIN. English. NV. PLV. English. ero, era. 1 I was eravamo, or, eramo. 1
we were eri 2 thou wast eravate, or erate. 2 you were era. 3 he was erano. 3
they were Indefinitivo, Indefinitiue.
NV. SIN English. NV. PLV English. fui, fu. 1 I was or have bin. fummo. 1 we
were or have bin fusti, fosti, and fui 2 thou wast or have bin fuste, foste. 2
you were or have bin. fu, or fue, 3 he was or has bin. furono, sure no furo,
and fur. 3 they were or have bin. Vicino, Nere hand, not far of.
NV. SIN English. NV. PLV. English. Sono or son stato, 1 I have bin Siamo
stati. 1 we have bin. Sei stato, 2 thou have bin, Siete, or sete stati, 2 you
have bin* e stato, 3 he has bin, Sono, or son stati. 3 they have bin.
Discosto, Somewhat distant, not far of.
NV. SIN. English. NV. PLV English. fui stato, 1 I have or had bin. Fummo
stati. 1 We were or had bin. fosti stato, 2 thou have, or had bin foste
stati, 2 you were or had bin. fu stato, 3 he has, or had bin. furno stati, 3
they were or had bin

Fostu is almost always Interogatiue. The Participles unto this Verb
conjoined are not variable, as in the Verb avere, but agree with the right,
as, il vecchio e, statogioviae, the old man has been young. La donna e stata
ingannata; the woman has been deceived. Gli inganni sono stati scoperti; The
deceiptes have been discovered L' Amazone sono state done belli cose, The
Amasones have been warlyke woman.

Lontano, That is far of.
NV. SIN. English. NV. PLV English. ero stato. 1 I had bin, eramo stati, 1
we had bin. eri stati. 2 thou had bin eravate stati or eri stati, 2 you
had bin, era stato, 3 he had bin, erano stati 3 they had bin. Condizionato,
Condicioned.
NV. SIN. English. PLV. NV. English. Sia stato, 1 When I have bin Siamo
stati, 1 When we have bin, Sij stato, 2 when thou have bin. Siate stati, 2
when ye have bin Sia stato, 3 when he has bin Siate stati, 3 when they have
bin Pattovito, Upon bargain, or condition.
NV. SIN. English. NV. PLV English. Fossi stato, 1 Had I bin, Fos^imo stati,
1 Had we bin, Fostu stato 2 Had thou bin Foste stati, 2 Had ye bin, Fosse
stato 3 Had he bin. Fossero stati. 3 Had they bin. Soggiunto. Subiunctiue.
NV. SIN ENGL. NV. PLV. ENGL. Sarei stato. 1 I should have bin Saremmo stati.
1 we should have bin saresti stato, 2 thousholdst have bin. sareste stati. 2
ye should have bin sarebbe stato. 3 he should have bin sarebbero stati. 3 they
should have bin Infinito. Infinite.
Essere stato. Essere stato per essere. to have bin. to have bin to be.
Avvenire. DEFINITO. Time to come. Definitive.
NV. SIN. ENGL. NV. PLV. ENGL. Saro. 1 I shall be. Saremo, 1 we shall be. sarai.
2 thou shall be. sarete. 2 ye shall be. sara fia, and fie. 3 he shall be.
saranno fiano. 3 they shall be. Rispettivo. To have some respect, or
consideration.
NV. SIN. ENGL. NV. PLV. ENGL. Saro. 1 Shall I be. Saremo. 1 shall we be sarai.
2 shall thou be. sarete. 2 shall ye be. sara. 3 shall he be. saranno. 3 shall
they be. Condizionato. Conditioned, or upon Condition.
NV. SIN SIN. NV NV. PLV PLV. NV Saro stato. 1 I shall have been. Saremo stati. 1
we shall have been sarai stato. 2 thou shall have been sarete stati. 2 ye shall
have been sara stato. 3 he shall have been saranno stati. 3 they shall have been
Infinitivo. Infinitive.
Essere per essere, To be, or have to be. Dover essere, Avere ad essere.

Vario. Time not certain, but varying. Condizionato. Upon some condition, or
conditioned.
NV. SIN. SIN. NV NV. PLV. NV. PLV Sia. 1 let me be, Siamo. 1 let us be. Sij,
sia, sie. 2 be thou. siate. 2 be you. sia. 3 let him be fiano, sieno. 3 let
the^ be. Pattovito. upon bargayne.
NV. SIN English. NV. PLV English. Fossi, fussi. 1 Were I. Fossimo, fussimo. 1
Were we. fossi, fussi. 2 were thou foste, fuste, fussi. 2 were ye. fosse,
fusse. 3 were he. fossero, fussero. 3 were they. Soggivnto. Subiunctiue.
NV. SIN English. NV. PLV English. Sarei, saria. 1 I should be. Saremmo. 1 we
should be. saresti. 2 thou sholdest be. sareste. 2 ye should be. sarebbe, fora,
and saria. 3 he should be. sarebbero, sarebbono, sarieno, sariano. 3 they should
be.

Infinito. Infinite.
Essere. To be.

This Verb is also used among the principles, as Sidto, staca and Suto, suta,
to have been in the singular number, and Stati, ta^^, and Suti, suit, to have been, in the plural number.

To this Verb will we apply thee, Gerondes and these are they.

Of present time, Essendo, being. Of time past, Essendo stato, stata, stati,
state, Having bin. Of time to come, Dovendo esserre, avendo ad essere, and
essendo per essere, being or having to be,

As for the Verbes, that are subject to a rule, and are of the four
Coniugations, these are they that follow, but I will use brevity and refer
them to the courteous readers judgment.

Of the first Conjugation.
Amo, I love, ami, thou love, ama, he loves, amiamo, we love, amate, ye
love, amano, they love, amai, I loved, amasti, thou louedst, amo, he loved,
amammo, we loved, amaste, you loved, amarono, amorono, amaron, amar, they
loved, amare, to love, esserper amare, dover amare, aver ad amare, to be or
have to love. The Futures of the first Conjugation, that are more used clipped,
then whole, are these and such like, Andro, dimor^o merro, perro portro; that
is I shall go, stay, lead, pain, carry, you may also say, Andaro, dimorero,
menero, penero, portero, as partly we have talked of before.

Of the second Conjugation.
Veggo, or Veggio, I see, vedi, thou see, vede, he sees, vegglamo, vedemo,
we see, vedete, you see, vedono, or veggono, they see, vidi, I saw, vedesti,
thou saw, vide, he saw, vedemmo, we saw, vedeste, you saw, videro,
vider, they saw, vedere, to see, aver a vedere, esser per vedere, dover
vedere, to be, or have to see, the Futures that in this Conjugation are used
most times short, and eclipped then whole, and long, as we have said above in
the general rule, are these, as, avro, bero, cadro, dovro, parro, rimarro,
sapro, sosterro, terro, varro, vedro, that is I shall, Have, Drink, fall, owe,
seem, remain, know, sustain, hold, be worth, see, and certain others which
are not so much in use.

Of the third Conjugation.
Leggo, I read, leggi, thou read, leg, he reads, leggiamo, we read,
leggete, you read, leggono, they read, Lessi, I read, legesti, thou reddest,
less, he read, leggemmo, we red, legeste, you read, lessero, lessono, they
read, leggere, to read, aver, a leggere, dover, leggere, esser per leggere, to
be or have to read, even as this word lessi, goes, so go these that
follow, Afflissi, condussi, cossi, fessi, and fendei, fissi, That is I
afflicted, conducted, sodde, cleft, fixed, and their compou^des, Mossi, ressi,
scossi, scrissi, strussi, vissi that is, I moved, ruled, received, writ,
destroyed, lived, and all do dobble: wherefore? We have told you above in the
Consonant, s, there are also other of this declension, but they do not dobble,
for they have consonantes going before the, s, as these, Arsi, colsi, corsi,
dipinsi, giunsi, finsi, estinsi, mu^si, punsi, piansi, porsi, scorsi, scjolsi,
sparsi, spensi, strinsi, sursi, svelsi, tinsi, torsi, vinsi, volsi, morsi, I
burned, gathered, ran, painted, overcame, fained, extinguished, milchd,
prickd, wept, reachd, ouerranne, let loose, despersed, quenched, griped,
risoppe, vnrooted, dyed, made cooked, overcame, or vanquished, turned, byt.
Other there are of this declension, which do not dobble, and yet have not a
Consonant to go before, the which do as it were imitate the latin tongue and
these are they. Accesi, ascosi, chjesi, chjusi, confusi, corquisi, difesi,
divisi, misi, or posi, that is, I kindled, hid, requested, locked, consuted,
conquered, defended, divided, set, and the compounded of these are, Presi,
rasi, resi, risi, rosi, risposi, spesi, tesi, vccisi. I took, shaued, rendered,
laughed, freted, answered, spent, tended, kilde, or slew. They have also other
de^lensions, which are, Conobbi, cr^bbi, nacqvi, nocqvi, ruppi, roppi, and
rompet. And so Battei, concepei, credei, empjei, perdet, procedet, and
processi, rend^i, ricevei, vendei: I knew, did grow, was borne, annoyed broke,
struck, conceived, believed, filled, lost proceeded, rendered, received, sold.

This may also end in tti, and say, Ricevetti, resistetti, and such others.

In the third person we say, Perde, perse, or, perdette, and so forth he lost.

Of the fourth Conjugation.
ODo, I hear, odi, thou hear, ode, he hears, Vdjamo, we hear, Vdite, ye
hear, odono, they hear. Vdi, I heard, Vdisti, thou heardest, Vdi he heard,
Vdimmo, we heard, Vdiste, ye heard, Vdirono, udiron, udiro, udirno, udir, they
heard. Vdire, to hear, avere udito, to have heard, dover udire, avera udire,
esser per udire: To be, or have to hear.

Odiamo, odiate, are of the Verb Odiare, to hate, and not Vdire.

The Verbes that are clipped in this Conjugation, are Verro, morro, I will, or
shall come, dye. A few others there are, which are used most commonly of some
Poets, but they go very hard.

The Conjugation of the Verbes passiues.
Son' amato, sei amato, e amato, I am, thou art, he is loved, Siamo amati, sete
amati, sono amati, we are, you are, they are loved, essere amato, to be loved,
essere stato amato, to have bin loved.

Of the impersonals I will speak nothing, because they are not so much in use
of the common sort, but of the learned Poets, and I think but few Poets will
learn of me.

Of the Verbes which be not subject to rules.
Already we have told you that there are some Verbes that are content to be
subject to certain rules. Of those that are subject to such rules, somewhat we
have spoken of before. Now let us come to the others, that are not, and
somewhat do disagree from the other, and to the end they may be better known,
I have here set them to the four Coniugations: those of the first Conjugation,
are four, agreeing with the Monosilaba, and these are they Do, I give, so, I
make, or do, sto, I stand, vo, I go.

Of the first Conjugation.
DO, I give, Dai, thou geuest, da, he gives, diamo, we give, date, you give,
danno, dan', they give, Detti, djedi, djei, dje, I gave, desti, thou gave,
debt, djede, he gave, demmo, we gave, deste, you gave, djedero, dettono,
dettero, d^eder, djero, djer, they gave, Dare, to give.

Fo, and faccio, I make, or do, fai, thou make, or do, fa, face, fae, he
makes, or does, faccjamo, fate fanno, and san, we, you, they, make, or do.
Feci, fei, I made, or did, fa^ esti, or festi, thou madst, or did, fece, fe,
he made, or did, facemmo, femmo, we made, or did, faceste, feste, you made, or
did, fecero, fer^no, ferono, fero, fer, they made, or did, fare, to make, or
do.

Vo, and vado, I go, vai, thou go, va, vae, he goes, andjamo, we go and
ate, you go, vanno, van, they go, andai, I went, andasti, thou wentest, ando
he went, andammo, we went, andaste, you went, andarono, andorono, andaro,
andar, they went, andare, to go, dover andare, esser per andare, aver, ad
andare, to be, or have, to go.

S^o, I stand, stai, thou stand, sta, he stands, stiamo, state, stanno,
stan, we, you, they stand, stetti, I stood, stesti, thou stoodest, stette,
he stood, stemmo, steste, stettero, sterono, steron, stero, we, you, they
stood, stare, to stand, dover stare, esser per stare, aver astare, to be, or
have, to stand.

Of the second Conjugation*
THose that are subject to no rule of the second Conjugation, are these, or
such like, Cado, debbo, dolgo, paio, posso, so, soglio, tengo, voglio, I fall,
shall, or owe, complain, seem, can, know, am wont, hold, will.

Cado, or caggio, I fall, cadi, thou fallest, cade, he falls, cadjamo, or
caggjaemo, cadete, cadono, or caggiono, me, you, they fall, cadere, to fall.
etc. The Verb cascare, to fall is subject to a rule, all the rest not
specified go after the ordinary manner.

Of the third Conjugation.
THe Verbes in this third Conjugation, do differ somewhat from the other, for
they are so eclipped and whosoever looks not well to the^, may lightly err,
If I should declare them all, it would be to tedious. Wherefore I will but
show the variety of one only, for example and that shall be, Toglio, I take,
toglio, tolgo, I take, togli, toi, thou take, toglje, toll, toe, to, he
takes, togljamo, we take, togljete, ye take, togljmo, tolgono, they take,
togli, to, te, take thou, togljete, take ye, togljevo, I did take, toglj^vamo,
we did take, ^olsi, I took, togljesti, thou tookest, tolse, he took,
togljemmo, togljeste, toljero, we, ye, they took, ho tolto, I have taken,
^bbi tolto, I had taken, avessi tolto, had I taken avrei tolto, I should have
taken, aver tolto, to have taken, torro, I shall take, torrai, thou shall take,
t^rra, he shall take, torremo, torrete, torranno, we, ye, they shall take,
torre, tor, togliere, to take, esser per torre, aver a torre, dover torre, to
be, or have, to tak, in my next book you shall have this Verb set out at
large.

Of the fourth Conjugation.
IN the fourth Conjugation, without the Rules, are Ire, and ^ire, to go. There
are also certain others, which somewhat do vary, but in the Indefinitiues
only, as Apri^e, dire, morire, salire, venire, To open, say, dye, ascend,
come* and certain others, in which I will use brevity. And here is the end
of one of the two principal divisions of the speech (as I told you before) that
is to say, of the two mutable parts. Now let us come to the immutable.

Of the immutable part.
THe immutable, or indeclinable, (take which you like best) have been
heretofore of many learned men, divided into four chiefest parts, and
parcels, which be very necessary, and so behoueful, that the Italian tongue may
not in any wise be without them, because they are such an ornament and
beautifying of it: and these are they, the Aduerbes, the Conjunctions, the
Prepositions, and the Interiections: whose significations I will briefly show
unto you, and first we will begin with the Aduerbes.

Of the Aduerbes.
Di lvogo. Of place. Qvi Here, or hither. qva Ci chilo, the Bergamasco. za, the
Venetian. Per qvi Hereaway, or hereabout. per qva intorno qvi circa qvi qvi ad
intorno per de za, Venetian. Di qvi Hence, or avoid. di qva qvinci di qvinci
Qvagiu. Down here, or hither. Qvasu. Up here, or hither. Di qva, edi la. here,
there, hence, thence Vi There, or thither, or thereaboutes. li ivi qu^vi costa
cola la. Di costa Thence. di la di li. Per la Thereaway, or therabout. per li
per de la la d' intorno per costa la intorno per cola intorno la cir ca la li
circa li. La su Up here, or thither, or there above. li su la alto costi su la
sopra costa su. la disopra costi. La giu Down hither, or thither, or there
below li giu la basso costi giu la sotto costa giu. La e qvi There, or here, or
there. qvi e la. Appo, or apresso, Hard by, and sometimes, after. Ove dove
Where, or whither. O, or V, poetical. onde. Nosco, With us. Meco, with me.
Teco. with thee. D'onde Whence, or from whence. de onde onde. In publico
Openly. In palese. Altrove. Elsewhere, or otherwhere. Altronde From some other
place. D' altronde. I a eve There, whereas, whereupon. la dove. la d' onde la
onde. Indi From thence. qvindi. di qvindi. di qvivi. D'attorno About. D'intono
Circa and cerca Intorno In giro Per tutti i lati Wheresoever. Ovunqve Dove si
sia Dovunqve Ove che Dove che In qvalunqve lvogho Qvantunqve Although, or as
oftentimes. Benche Qvantunqve volte Dentro Within. Entro Fvori Without, or out
Di fvori Fvora Fvore Fori commonly Su Up, or upon. Suso Sopra Sovra Adosso
Al'insuso Upward. Al, ascesa Super Up by. Giu Down. Giuso Al'ingiu Downward.
Alladiscesa In occulto Secretly, or privily Occultamente Secretamente Alto
high, or there ahigh la alto la d'alto. Basso Low, beneath, or below. la basso.
Apje, or apjedi. A foot, or on feet. Da lungi, or lunge Far of. di lungi,
or luntano. Sopra, or disopra Above. sotto, or disotto Under. a traverso.
Overthwart. Di tempo. Of time. Oggi. To day. Aqvesti giorni Now adays. oggidi
aqvesti tempi. hoggimai modernamente. Hora may Already, or more then time. hor
may ho may. Ora, or hora Now. test adesso. Di present Presently, or now.
adesso ^desso. Ieri, or hieri. Yesterday. Di merigio At noonetyde, or else,
midday. a mezzo di. Iermatina. Yester day morning Iersera. Yester night.
Stamane This morning. stamatina. Sto giorno This day. Di matina. In the
morning. Posdomani. next day, tomorow Sta sera. This evening. Sta notte. This
night. Di notte. By night. Su'ltardi. When it is late. Di giorno. By day.
Domani. Tomorow. Al'alba del di. At the break of day Do matina. tomorow morning
A bon ora. Early. Inanzi di. Before day. Or', ora By and by, even now. ad'
hora, ad' hora adesso adesso. Pur' ora. A while sithence, of late. poco fa. pur
adesso. Tutta via Always. ogni ora sempre may sempre di continuo continuamente
Inanzi Before, or foreward avanti Adjetro Behind. djetro di djetro. Vicino.
Nigh, a neighbor. Per lo addjetro Heretofore, in times past. anticamente Per
lo passato. Por lo inanzi. Hereafter. da qvi inanzi per lo avvenire per l'
avvenire. Per tempo In time. in tempo a tempo Con il tempo With time. il
seqvente giorno. The day following. Fin qva EHitherto, until this day. fin ora
in fino a qvi da indi in qva in fino al present fin qvi in fino al di d' oggi
in fino a qvesto giorno in fino adesso. Da indi inanzi From thence forewarde.
da indi. Longo tempo. Long time. Gran pezza A good while since. gia molto tempo
di gran tempo un pezzo fa gran tempo fa. Presto Quickly. tosto test. Ratto
Swiftly. Velocemente. Di fatto. out of hand. Subito on a sudden, forthwith,
incontinent. di subito incontinente imantinente. Spesso Often. sovente. Spesse
volte Oftentimes. sovente volte. Rado Seldom. dirado. Rade volte Seldom
times. rare volte. May Ever, or never. non may giamai. When. Qvando qvando may.
Vnqve Sometimes. vnqva alcuna volta qvalche volta alcuna fiata tal volta
talora, talhora. Tardo, tardi. Late. Non may, or may. Never. Al' hora. Then.
Mentre. Whilst. Qvalora. At what time. Qvando che sia. When so ever it be.
All volte. At times. Il piu delle volte. For most times. Gia, or digia.
Already. Sempre Always. tutta via. Sempre may Continually, evermore. di
continuo. Giornalmente Daily, every day. ogni giorno. Diqvalite Of quality.
Been Well. Benissimo Very well. Otti mamente Most well. Male Evil. Pessimo
Very evil. Pessimamente Most evil. Fedele Faithful. Fedelmente Faithfully.
Ornato Adorned, or decked Ornatamente Trimly, or deckedly. Volentjeri
Willingly. Voluntjermente Di buona voglia Di cvore Heartily. Con tutto'l cvore
Di bvon cvore Cordialmente Saviamente Wisely. Dottamente Learnedly. Veramente
Truly. Falsamente Falsely. Di qvantita. Of quantity. Molto Much. Abastanza
Enough. Assai Enough Piu More. Via piu Much more. Molto piu Assai piu Poco
Little. Pochissimo Very little. Tanto So much. Cotanto Tanto piu So much more.
Assai piu Contanto piu Qvanto? How much, or else, as much. Negando Of denying.
Non, no Not, No. No, no, No, No. Non gia Not now. Non mica Not a cromme. Ne
anche Neither. Signor no Sir no. Messer no Master no Signora no Lady, or
madam no Madonna no Mystres no. Njente che sia Nothing that is. Apunto Fully.
Njente Nothing. Nulla Affermando, Of affirming. Si Yea, or, I. Certo For
certain, assuredly. Si certo Per certo Al fermo Certamente Al sicure Di certo
Veramente Truly, verily, or certes, or even so. In vero Cosi certo Di vero Da
vero In verita Crescendo. Of increasing. Troppo To much. Di soverchio
Superfluous. Maggiormente More rather. Massimamente Chiefly, specially.
Dottissimamente Most learnedly. Benissimamente Very or most well. Del tutto
Wholly, altogether, Afatto utterly. Diminuire Of Diminishing. Meno Less. Poco
meno A little less. Apoco, a apoco By little, and little. Piano Softly. Pian
piano Very softly. Alqvanto Somewhat. Nivna cosa No one thing Poco A little.
Poc^etto Very little. Pje inanzipje foot before foot. Di discretione. Of
discretion. Altrimente Otherwise. Senza Without. Separatamente Severally.
Puntamente Pointmeale. Secretamente Secretly. Apertamente Openly. Di giurame^to
Of swearring. A feed, or afe In faith. Sopra la miafede Upon my faith. Alla
feed In faith, Si in verita Yea in verity. Per mia feed By my faith. In verita
di Dio By the verity of god Da gllant'huomo By an honest man. A fedi
Gentil'huomo By the faith of a ge^telman. Per l'anima mia By my soul. Per Dio
By God. A feed Dio By the faith of god. Di desiderare. Of wishing or desiring.
O se, o si Oh if, O Dio voglia God grant. O se Dio Volesse Oh if God would. O
Dio volesse I would to God. O pjaccja a Dio May it please God. O che Oh that.
Di desedere. Of forbydding. Gvarda Behold. Non arisehiare Venture not.
Gvardati Take heed. Deh non Fie no. Not fare Do not. Vedi See. Gvarda ben
look well. De inanimare. Of encouraging. Or via Now go to Gr su Fa Do. Su
Up. Ala gagliarda Mightily. Coraggto Courage. Spediscila Dispatch it.
Finiscila. Finishe it. Ala forte Strongly. Or oltre On further. Davaloroso Like
a valiant. Ardita mente Worthily. Valoro samente Valiantly. Da bravo Bravely.
Ala brava Bravamente Di ragunare Of assembling. Insjeme Together. Insjememente
Parimente In like sort. Similmente Di pari By couples. Appari Al pari Ashjera
By troops, or companies. Di parangonarre. Of companing. Piu. More. Meno Less.
Via piu Much more. Molto piu Assai piu Via meno Much less. Assai meno Molto
meno Poco piu A little more Poco meno A little less. Megliore Better. Meglio
Peggiore Worse. Peggio Tanto As much Cotanto Altre tanto As much more. Due
cotanti Il doppio Tree cotanti Il pju del mondo The most in the world. Arispetto
In respect, or comparison. Arimpetto Allato Accanto A comparatione Di
eccettare, Of excepting. Salvo che Saving, except, only. If not, or, but
that. Salvo Solo Eccetto Eccetto che Fvor che Da qvesto in fvori In fvori Fvori
Se non Di similitudine. Of similitude. Come As. Si come So as. Cosi So, or
thus. Agvisa In such wise. Qvasi Almost. In modo In such manner, or wise. Intal
modo In manjera Nel medesimo modo In gvisa A gvisatale Cosi fatta mente Di
dubbjo. Of doubting. Forse Perhaps. Peraventura Peradventure Se per caso If
case. Per caso In case, perchance, it may happen. Accaso A sort In sort. Per
sort Di dimosteare. Of showing. Ve, or vello Behold. Ecco Eccolo Behold him,
or it. Eccola Behold her, or it. And so forth. And so forth. Mi, Ti, Vi, Li,
Le, Ci. Di scegljere. Of choice. Megljo Better. Piu^osto Rather. Anzi But,
rather. Of gesture. Tentone Gropingly. Ginochione On the knees. Di ordine. Of
order. Inanzi Before. Avanti Davanti Djetro. Behind. Di djetro Poi After.
Poscia Dapoi Dopoi Dipoi Doppo Fratanto In the mean while. Tratanto In tanto
Olere a cjo Besides that. Oltre a qvesto Besides this. Subito By and by,
straight way. Subito subito Di subito Hor' ora Adesso adesso Alla fine In the
end, at last. Percjo Therefore. Peruo Pertanto Onde Whereupon. Laonde Prima
First, or first of all. Primamente Primjeramente Secondo Second or secondarily
or thereafter. Secondariamente Didoma^dare Of asking. Onde avviene? How does it
happen? Onde e? From whence is it? Perch? Wherefore? Per qval cagione? By what
occasion? Ache modo? In what manner. Ache gvisa? In what wise? Ove? Where?
Qvando? When. Di dichjarare. Of declaratione Cjo e That is. Verbigratia As for
example. Ergo Then. S'intende So it is understood.

Of the Conjunction.
Now even as we have declared the Aduerbes, and the meaning of them, now will
we come to the Conjunctions, and will do the like of them, hoping that by them
you shall do much good, for they are very necessary, if they be well noted.

Di congiungere, Of joining, or coupling Et (a vowell following) And. E (a
consonant following) Anco Also. Anche Ancora Etiandio Altresi Poetical Di
contimar il senso, in par lare, et congiungerle parole, Of continuing the sense
in speech and joining the words. In modo che In such sort as. In guisa che In
such wise as. Di manjera che In such manner as. per si fatta ma^jera che In
such manner of Si fatta mente che sort as. Piu tosto Rather. La onde Whereupon.
Piu tosto che Rather that or then Se If. Se non If not. Di modo che So that.
Poi che Since that. Senon che If not that. Perch Wherefore, because, Pertanto
for what. Che For, that, as, the which, or who, What? or what, when, than,
Wherefore, because, but only whereof or within. Che che At the least. Che chi
Pero che For because, because that, therefore. perch percio che impero che
impercio che. Come As, or even. come How? O Or, either. Overo Or else. O pure Or
yet. Ma But. Ne Neither. Of abhorring. Oibo Fie, what the devil is this? fih thy
chie puch che diavol e qvesto? Of stilling. Vh Still, whist. zi vh vh zito sta
cheto sta cheto. Of calling. Oh Oh, or hey. Who is there? Who goes there? ola
chi e la ohu chi va la? Of vanity, or vain. In vano In vain, or to no end.
in darno a voto Senza, pro inutilmente. Ofscarsitie. A pena Scarsely, with
labor, uneasy. a fatica a gran pena a gran fatica disicilmente. Of nothing
Nulla Nothing, no one thing, or naught at al. njente punto punto punto nessuna
cosa njuna cosa. Of praying. Eh I pray you, I pray, of courtesy, for Gods
sake. deh deh si deh no eh si per l'amor di dio deh per vostra fe deh per
vostra cortesia per corsia di gratia. of sorowing O Alas, helas, aies me, werie
me, werie werie, oh God. oh ah ahi ohi oi me hoime hei lassome ahi lasso oh
Dio. Del contrario. of contrariety. Nendi meno Nevertheless. njente di meno
njente di manco nondi manco. Tutta via Notwithstanding. tutta volta. Impero
che. For because. Ben che How beit, although se ben che come che ancor che
ancora che avenga che qvantunqve che etiandio che con tutto che. Del scemamare.
Of withdrawing. Al meno At the least. al manco. Purche So that. tanto So much.
solo. Only. Di conceder caso. of yielding case. Percio che Because that. accio
To the end. accioche. to the end that Concjo sia. For as much. Concio sia cosa
For as much as. concio sia cosa che. Di concludere. of concluding. Dunqve Then.
adunqve Iu summa In sum, in the end in fine a la fine. O lire ogni credenza.
Beyond al credit. Pero Therefore. percio impero. La onde. Whereupon. Ilperche.
The cause why. Altrimenti, Otherwise, alirimente. Of doubt, used to adorn the
speech. Osi, ono. Eeither yea, or no. Ora. Now. Pure. Yet. Ben. Well.

Of the Prepositions, and Interiections.
THe Prepositions and Interiections, heretofore of some have been divided into
two parcels, and of other some they have not, but have gone together in one.
Now I considering of them, have thought it good, to let them both go
together, for so much as many words are both Prepositions, and Interiections.
And being separated, would as it were (to the unlearned) breed a kind of
confusion. Wherefore I pray you to accept them in good part, and weigh my good
will.

Of the Prepositions, and Interiections.
Prepositioni. Prepositions. In, as in cjelo, and in terra. In. etc. Ne, as nel
cjelo, and ne la terra. A. To. ad. Di. Of. de. Da. From, or of. Per. For, by,
or through. Dopp. After. Sopra. Upon. Di sopra. Above. Olire. Beyond, or
beside. Djetro. Behynd. Apresso. At, with, by, or after Apetto. In comparison.
Con. With, as withhym, or her. Con esso, or essa. Senza. Without, as without
him. Ver Toward. verso in verso. Intra Between, amongst or within. infra tra
fra. Sotto Under. di sotto. Contra Against. contro incontro. Accanto Near, by
the side. allato presso. Rimpetto Oueragainst. per mezzo dirimpetto. Fin Until,
or unto. fino sino infino insino. Avan^i Before, or in presence Dinanzi Inanzi
Intorno About. Atorao Circa Fuori Without. Dentro Within. Su Up. Giu Down. Di
la On the other side. Diqva On this side. Lungi Earre of. Lunge

Now God willing will we draw to an end, and make a conclusion of this
little work, for I am sure, you are weerie to hear so long a process.

Not so sir but I pray you proceed.

You are to note that in this language we have certain little parcels as it
were prepositions, which never go alone, but are always joined to other
words, and specially to Verbes. And these be they and other such like, as.

Dis in Dissare To undo Di in Dissido I mistrust. Es in Esalto I exalt. Mis in
Miscredere To misbeleeue. Pos in Pospongo I set against. Ra in Raccoglio I do
gather. Re in Respiro I sigh again. Ri in Ripiglio I do take again. Tra in
Trametto I do put between. Fra in Frastaglio I do hacke or choppe. Tras in
Trasporto I do transport Inter in Interompo I do interrupt.

Then are there other such little parcels which are used often, marieas, it
were, for an ornament of the speech then for necessity, and they be these,

Egli, as, Egli non e ancor gran tempo passato,

It is not yet long time passed.

Ei, as, Ei no'l sapr a may persona,

No person shall ever know it.

Ne, as, Io me ne parti e me n'andai,

I parted and went away.

E, as, E mi pare vna gran cosa, che,

Me thinks it is a great thing, that.

Ben, as, Ben mi pareva di strano, che,

It seemed strange unto me, that.

Pur, as, Sta pur avedere,

Say, stay, and see, or behold.

There rests but one thing to show, and that is to show the strange,
diverse, and sundry meaninges of the word, che, and the conioyning of it, with
other words, of the which I have been requested diverse times of sundry my
friends, and also I think it a good thing, and necessary to all men.
Although somewhat we have spoken of it above yet we came nothing near it.
There is no voice so much, and so often used in the Italian tongue, as is, che,
and that is because it has so many significations, for sometimes it is
Relative, and other whilst not, and accords with all, Cases Numbers, and
Genders, and when it has an Article it has the nature of the Latin Neuter as
we have said above in the Pronounes. Sometimes, it serves as a beginning of a
naration, after the preface as thus, Dico adunqve: che, Wherefore I say that,
che, sometimes serves as it were for a forewarning, as, T^iprego, che'l tuo
nemieo del mto mal non rida. I pray thee, that they enemy laugh not at my
evil, sometimes it does as it were answer unto that, that is spoken before
and has the meaning of perch, as.

L'anima, ch'e sol da Dio e satta gentile,

Che gia d' altrui non puo venir tal gratia.

My soul that only of God is made gentle,

For that such grace can come from no other.

Sometimes it shows as it were what may happen, as thus,

Non fare; che non te ne avenga qvalche male.

Do not; to thend there happen not some mischance to thee.

Sometimes it does as it were, show the matter and substance, of that, that
we talk of, as thus,

Qvesta novella djede tanto che ridere,

This news gave cause of such laughter,

Sometimes it shows the meaning of, il medesimo, but after another manner, as
thus,

Io voglio, che tu sappi, che io ti porto grandissimo amore,

I will, that thou know, that I bear thee very great love.

Sometimes it is dobbled and signifies, cjas cuna cosa che, any thing that,
and we say, che, che.

Sometimes it is set as a beginning of every chapter or else diverse parcels, as
thus,

Che'l diamante e pju duro di tutte l'ltre pjetre,

That the Diomond, is harder then all other stones, or else thus,

Che'l cjelo e pju duro che 'l diamente,

That the heaven is harder then a Diomond.

Sometimes it makes as it were a comparison, as thus,

Pju duro che'l Diamante.

More harder then Diomond, or else,

Alessandro fu pju fortunato, che alcun' altro signore del mondo,

Alexander was more fortunate, then any other Lord in the world.

Again it is dobbled and joined to many other words and sayings, as partly
we have showed before and partly will show here, and then make an end.

Accjoche To the end. Per ben che although that An corche Although that. Solche
Only that or except that. Avenga che Salvo che Come che Even as. Eccetto che
Co^ tutto che For all that. Fuor che Co^cjosia che For as much as Subito che As
soon as. Sendo che Being that. Tantosto che Essendo che Tosto che Perch
Wherefore. Prima che Before that. Oltra che Besides that. Avanti che Ilperche
The cause why Fin che Until that forse che Perhaps that. Tanto So that. Peril
che Wherefore that Si che ogni voltache Any time that. Tal che Pressoche After
that Talme^te che Impero che for so much Posto che Non che Not that. Pur che
Percjoche For because Pero che Mentre che Whiles that. Dunche che Da che Since
that. Di modo che Poi che Dopo Da poi che Poscja che Gia che

And thus I end beseeching all courteous gentlemen to accept my good will, and
still remember it is not my profession, that which I have done, I have done
for good will, and did it only to pleasure a private friend of mine, not
thinking it should have come to light, for if I had I would have taken
greater heed, if it be well accepted I ask no more, if it be not; blame not
me, but blame my friend that was the cause thou see it. If I can see or
perceive by any means thou do pleasure in it, I promise thee a better, if
not, here I end for ever. If perchance thou find among the Aduerbes,
Conjunctions, Prepositions, and Interiections any word twise^, consider the
sundrye^ meaninges of them, for as they have diverse natures so diversely they
are placed. And thus I; commit thee to the Almighty, who prosper and keep
thee, and me to his will, and pleasure, and send us grace to serve him. From his
lodging in Woster place, thine to his power. I. F.

Patisco il male, sperando il been:
Sperando vivo, vivendo mvoro.
FINIS.
Regole necessary per indurre gli 'taliani a proserir la Lingva Inglese.
Carmi Gentilhvomini, se io volessi pigliar sopra di me, a dimostrar la natura
di qvesta varjali^gva Inglese, io pigljerei troppo gran carico supra di me; and
m' anderia invilupando in un simile Laberinto, che senza grand^ss ma fatica,
longo tempo, e con^invo s^udio non me ne potria leggjerme^^^e ^vduppare; e cosi
fareiun gran volume. Per tanto Iol scjo tal carico a ^^uio pju dotta di
me^njenie di manco il megljo che io so, and pjubre vemeute cho io posso, vi
daro qvi certe Regole altutto danon esser gittate v^a^* Sperando che tutta via
accetterete la ^^a bona volonia sempre aricordando vi che non e la mia
professione essendo io povero Artefice, e del tutto ignorante de similcose.

Qvesta Lingva Ingle se a dirla scjetta, credo che sia la pju confusa Langva de
tutte le altre, percjo che ella e derivata da molte altre ungve, e ogni di va
togljendo delle parole in presto: Molte ne piglia da la Italiana, pju da la
Todesca, assai pju da la Franzese, and infinite da la Latina, and anche taluna
da la Greca. Ma si amo come si voglia, il tutto rimetto al cortese Lettore, ma
qvesto tengo per fermo, che la-vera, and antica Lingva Inglese, e tutta dermata
de la Monosilaba; perch tutte qvelle paro^e che ha^no pjudi una silaba, sono
qvasi tutte derivate da altre Lingve: perch l'antica Lingva Inglese inanzi ch
ella fosse cosi confusa, e mescolata come e, poche parole haveres^i tri vate di
duo, o tree S^abe, ma tutte di una, qvanto al proferirla, ella e contrarja a la
nostra, perch se una parola e di molte lettere non si proferiscono, tutte la
qval cosa e causa che ella e difieile a imi parare. Nel scriverla, and
proferirla, ella s' acorda alqvanto con la Franzese. Ma per farla breve,
venjamo all lettere, e vediamo qvante lettere si usano ne la Lingva Inglese.

Le lettere che comunemente in qvesta Lingva si usano, sono venti Otto; and
qveste sono d'esse.

A. a. b. c. d. e. ee. f. g. h. i. k. l. m. n. o. oo. p. q. r. s, t. v. u. w..
x. y. z. and.

Gli Inglesi proferiscono le loro lettere contrario a le nostre, e qvesto e il
lor' modo:

Ac. by. ci. di. i. et il doppio ee. come il nostro doppio ii. e longo: of. gi.
ach. ei. che. el. em. en. il semplice o. come noi altri, ma il doppio oo. come
il nostro u. e longo pi. chiu. er. es. ti. iu. doppio iu. ex. vei. iserd. and.
ouero, and.

I Vocali che comnnemente s usano in qvesta Lingva, sono tette, cjoe, a. e. ee.
i. o. oo. u.

Comunemente l' a si proferisce di una manjera, non cosi largo come faccjamo il
nostro: ma come sarebbe adire ea, posto insjeme. L' e semplice, giusto come il
nostro i, and breve: Il doppio anche a qvel modo, ma un poco piu longo: il
semplice e, qvando viene solo nel sine di una parola, ouero si gli vien djetro
qvalcho Consonante bisogna proferirlo breve: et fuori de la bocca, come: This
beast I sle, Qvesta bestia io amazzo. Overo, I go to bed, Io vado in letto,
Overo, I hurt my leg, Io mi ho fatto male a la mia gamba. Tutte qveste parole,
sle, fle, hcd, bed, leg, sono proferite alte, pure, e sopra il tutto l' e.
Breve, come, a l' Italiana, e cosibisogneria proferirlo nel' a. b. c. ma non si
fa, perch ci sono cosi usati. Il doppio ee, sempre sia in che parola si
vgolia, e proferito come ho detto di sopra, come l' Italiano ij. ma lungo, come
sarebbe adire.

I see, Io vedo: my knee, il mio ginocchio: I ween, Io penso. Tutte qveste
parole, See, knee, ween, bleed, feed, be, o altre simile, bisognache siano
proferite longhe, and alqvanto dentro la bocca, and percjo sempre tirerai il
doppio ee, pju a la longa del semplice. Il simile habbiamo a fare dell' o
semplice, e del oo doppio. L' o semplice ha da esser proferito largo, e alto,
con la bocea aperta, and alqvanto breve, come: A barren Do is as swift as a To,
Vna Cerva sterile e si veloce come un Cervo. Overo, I love God, Io amo Dio.
Overo, He has a Rod, Lui ha uuaverga. Ma pur anche qvando V seg ve l' o, non
va proferito cosi alto, ma un poco pju basso, come, I love, Io amo: and cosi de
gli altri. L' oo doppio va proferito giusto come il nostro V puro, and alqvanto
longo, come, This woman I woo, Io faccjo l' amor a qvesta donna. Overo, This
work I do, Qvesta opera io faccjo.

L' i, gli'nglesi lo profer: scono a qvesto modo, come se fosse ei, and
alqvanto largo, and longo, ma non troppo come i, che vuol dir, Io, e cosi
vaproferito il y, senon che l' y vien qvasi sempre nel fine di unaparola. Qvel
le parole che comincjano con i vocale, scambjano l' i in y, accjo non ci sia
confusione, perch se i vien nel principio di molte parole, e pro ferito come
il g.

L' V qvalche volta e vocale, qvalche volta consonante, e doveria haver due
form: ma non e cosi. La vocale vaproferita bassa, e alqvanto liqvida, come,
Thus, cosi, Thou, tu, You, voi. La consonante va proferito come l' Italiana,
come, Vain, vano, very much, assaissimo, Velvet, Veluto, and simile altre.

L' V doppio ha qvesta forma, w, e va proferito molto liqvido, come, With, con:
overo insjeme, Water, acqua, and simili altri.

De gli consonanti non faremo troppo longo discorso, ma il piu breve che posso
gli passeremo via. Il b va sempre proferito pjeno, e puro. Il c sempre puro,
pjeno, and non may liqvido, e qvasi come, che, in Italiano: et se h li segve,
va proferito come sh. Il d and l'f non accade parlarne. L' h e di grand'
ornamento a la lingva Inglese, and si e la pju dificile lettera per gli
Italiani da profer^re, perch e di gran forza, massime in simile parole come
qve ste: Thou, tu, that, qvello, this, qvesto. Per proferir simile parole come
vanno proferite, bisogna come sarebbe adire tenir i denti qvasi insjeme con
apoggiarvi la punta della lingua tramezzo, e parlando subitamente ritirarla
indjetro, e appoggiar la al palato della bocca: a proferire what, che cosa,
which, qvale, who, chi, where, dove, bisogna fare come se vole ssi suppjare,
and tenir la lingva ferma nel mezzo della bocca, senza toccar njente, e
comin^jar a proferir lent at amente. Ma ne le parole che comincjano con h,
come, Hay, fjeno, hat, capello, how come, hen, una gallina, and simile altre
inumerabile, bisogna usare una certa gran sorza nel proferile: massimamente ne
l' h e proferirlo pjeno, e grasso.

L' i spesse volie, se vjen nel principio di una parola si confa con il g, and
e consonante, come, Jasper, Gasparo, Job, Giobe, John, Giovanni, e simile
altre: e dove va proferito come vocale, and liqvido, spesso gli inglesi inav:
duiamente errano circa qvesta lettera, e per fuggire simile errore, comin^jano
le loro parole con, y, and qvello proferiscono come i vocale, and liqvido.

Il k e (...) pjeno, e con gran forza, come ca, overo che. Il l. m. n. p. si
pro^eriscono purt: Il q pjeno, and ha qvasi natura del k, overo cu. Del' r non
accade parlarne. L' s, se vjen in principio di una parola, va proferito puro,
and se vjene in mezzo di qvalch* parola, essendo semplice, et segvendoli j et e
ha la natura di z ^^^plice, come, To muse much, mazeth my musing mind, etc.

Il, t, and, z, non accade parlarne, perch hanno Sempre vna forma and vna
natura, come nel' Italiana.

I dit^ onghi che si us^no ne lalingva, Inglese sono, nuove, alcuni dicono unde
ci ma io ne ho messo due fra gli vocali, i, qvali sono, ee, and oo, lanatura de
qvali hahbjamo gia des^ itto, gli altri nuove sono qvesti, au, ey, eu. ya. ye,
yo, oy, ou, l' ay, dove si sia che vjene va proferito longo and come, aei, e
cosi va proferito, au, longo, qualche volta longis simo, ma pur sempre in tutti
gli dittongli la vocale che va prima, e proferita longa, and la seg vente
breve, and perde assai de la sua forza, e cosi (senza far longo discorso) vanno
proferiti tutti gli altri senon che, ou, va scritto sempre cosi, ow, come town,
vna villa, tower, vna torre, loud, mows, sows and insiniti altri.

Cisono poi, anche qvesti dua che possono andar nel numeno de gli dittonghi,
oa, and oa, e va^no proferiti molto longhi and pjeni, massime la precedente. Ci
sono molte parole ne la ling va ing le se che pajono di dua silabe, and si sono
senon di vna, ale qvali bisogna hauer grand' avertimento nel proferirle been,
and veramente darovvi qvi unaregola la qvale tener ete per gener a^e, Molte
parole siano di tree, di qvatro, e di cinqve, di set, lettere, sono di una
^ilaba, and alcune siniscono, in vocale, al^une in consonante, se siniscono in
co^sonante, l'ultima vocale va proferita molto I reve^se in (...) la precedente
vocale va proferita molto longa, and pjona, ma evertite che se parola finisce
in vocale qvasi semper e, c, come per ^s^pto, I wade, Io vo Per l'acqva, I
walk in the shade, Io (...) ne l'ombra, my bow is weak. il m^o arco e
deb^le, I will it break, Lo voglio rompere, This pear is tipe, Qvesto pero e
maturo. I hope to drink, Io spero di bevere, tutte qvest* parole, wade, shade,
bow, weak, break, pear, ripe, hope, drink, la precedente vocale va
proferita lunga, con la bocca aperta, and se la vocale e levata via vanno
proferite by eve, ^^n la bocca alqvanto pju chiusa, come, wad, shad, bow, weak,
break, pear, rip, hop, drink, etc. e sono di altra natura and aliro senso, man
v^rtite che l'ultima vocale non va proferita njente, serve senon per tirar, la
precedente ala lunghezza, and tale parole non sono senon di una si^aba se ben
forse gli Italiani le leggerra^no in d^e, per o non sono senon di una indivise,
Nota, anc^ra che le parole, che sono derivate da altre ling ve and sono di pju
silabe, che siniscono, in, ble, come, Incredible, incredibile, honorable,
honorevole, syllable, silaba, simile parole non vanno proferite, e let, cosi
come sono scritte cjo l'ultima silaba, ble, ma va^no let, e proferite,
incredibel, honorabel, sillabel, and simile altre. Nota ancora se per sort
troverai parole che l'e, sia l'ultima lettera eccetto una, and che, s, segva,
l'e, siperde del tutto and non va proferito mjente come, Sorts, Fortes,
Carts, and simile altre, non vanno proferite come sono scritte, ma a qvesto,
modo, Sortz, Fortz, Cartz, and pigliate qvesta per regola generale.

Certe necessary, aspiratione, particelle and terminatione, per qvegli che
imparano la lingva Inglese da esser da loro imparate, con il modo di
proferirle, perch chja sa ben proferir qveste sa proferire tutta la lingva,
alcune de esse sono parole, alcune no, ma pure esorto ogniu no ad imparare a
proferirle been and qveste son a'esse.

Ay, Aid, maid, rayd, frayd, rayn, brayn, swayn, ay, hayl, wayl, rayl: ayt,
wayt, strayt, hayt, bayt, hayd, rayned, wayr, ayke.

Au And, baud, fraud, gaun, gaunt, grant: awn, lawd, hawk, wa, win, gawn,
lawn, sawt, haunt, saunt, fraunt.

ee, Flee, gee, see, heed, need: greek, week, creep, sweep, weep.

ey. Eyl, eylo, heyl, reyk, weyk, teyk: seyn: heyn, treyn, heyr, feyr

Eu. Eud, lewd, shrewd, lews, lewt, rewin, fewl, new.

ya. Yate, yeard.

ye. Yel, yield, yest, yield.

yo. You, youth, yole.

oo. Do, woo: brood, good, rood, stood: wood, hoof, loof, book, shook, took,
fool, pool, sool, tool, room: boon, moon, soon.

oy. Roy, soy, loy, soil, oil, foyl: coy^, soys, noys.

ow. Loud, cowd: town, sound, fowr, towr, shower, owl, kowl bowl, sows, mows,
rowt, dowt, showt, tous, frous.

Ach each ich och vch Agh egh igh ogh vgh

Ath eth ith oath vth Aght eght ight oght vght.

Ash esh ish osh vsh

Bath crath bath lath math nath path tath rath snath

Bache lache drache tache

Bech fech rech tech

Beche feche reche leche teache peche

Beech feech keech seech

Bych pych lych much rych tych stych wych which

Bache piche tiche rich diche wiche miche

Boche loche poche much roche

Buch duch gruch luch much

Bagh lagh begh legh sigh nigh bogh dogh

Kogh bugh hagh mugh

Aght kaght faght beght feght sleght weght bight

Sight night wight boght foght noght bught lught

Basih dassh lassh massh nassh rassh wassh thrassh

Flassh rassh bessh fressh flesh nessh bissh dissh

Syssh wissh rissh bossh dossh throssh frossh nossh

Bussh dussh frussh lussh russh thrussh

Buthe loathe mathe bathe blath grath lath rath

Buth loch math bath blathe grathe lathe rathe

Beth neth heth leth wreth beth queth sheth neth

Wreeth beeth sees teeth

Both loath wroth looth sooth tooth

Buth ruth vuth ruthe truth

Bab babe bak bake bal bale ban bane bar bare

Bas base bar bate

Bred bread breed med mede meed red read reed

Bib bibe hid hide rid ride dik dike fill fiile

Bob bobe bood god good good rod rode rood

Bub bube rud rude lud lude mul mule.

Et cosi io finisco, racoma^dando mi del tutto a la cortesia vostra, sperando
che accettarete la mia bona volonta: State con Dio.

Di Londra a do. 10. Agosto. 1578. Vostro del tutto. G. F.
Tutto d' altrui.
Imprinted at London, at the three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas Dawson, for
Thomas Woodcocke.


