THE TWO NOBLE KINSMEN: Presented at the Blackfriers by the Kings Majesty's
servants, with great applause:

Written by the memorable Worthies of their time.

Mr. John Fletcher, and Mr. William Shakspeare. Gent.



Printed at London by Tho. Cotes, for John Waterson: and are to be sold at the
sign of the Crown in Paul's Churchyard. 1634.

PROLOGVE.
NEw Plays, and Maydenheads, are near a kin, Flourish.

Much followed both, for both much money g'yn,
If they stand sound, and well; And a good Play
(Whose modest Scenes blush on his marriag^ day,
And shake to loose his honor) is like her
That after holy Tie, and first nights stir
Yet still is Modesty, and still retains
More of the maid to sight, than Husbands pains;
We pray our Play may be so; For I am sure
It has a noble Breeder, and a pure,
A learned, and a Poet never went
More famous yet twixt Po and silver Trent.
Chaucer (of all admired) the Story gives,
There constant to Eternity it lives;
If we let fall the Nobleness of this,
And the first sound this child bear, be a hiss,
How will it shake the bones of that good man,
And make him cry from under ground, O fa^
From me the witles chafe of such a wrighter
That blastes my Bays, and my famed works makes lighter
Then Robin Hood? This is the fear we bring;
For to say Trut^, it wa^e an endless thing,
And too ambitious to (...) to him;
Weak as we are, and almost breathless swim
In this deep water. (...) you hold out
Your helping hands, and we shall take about,
And something do^ (...): You shall hear
Scenes though (...) Art, may yet appear
Worth two hours travel. To his ^nes sweet sleep:
Content to you. If this play do not keep,
A little dull time from us, we perceave
Our losses fall so thick, we must needs leave.
The Two Noble Kinsmen.
Actus Primus.
Ent^ Hymen with a Torch burning: a Boy, in a white Robe before singing, and
strewing Flowers: After Hymen, a Nymph, encompast in her Tresses, bearing a
wheaten Garland. Then Theseus between two other Nimphs with wheaten Chaplets
on their heads. Then Hipolita the Bride, lead by Theseus, and another holding
a Garland over her head (her Tresses likewise hanging.) After her Emilia
holding up her Train. The Song. Music.

ROses their sharp spines being gone,
Not royal in their smells alone,
But in their hew.
Maiden Pinckes, ofodour faint,
Dazies smel-lesse, yet most quaint
And sweet Time true.
Prim-rose first borne, child of Ver,
Merry Spring times Herbinger,
With her bells dim.
Oxlips, in their Cradles growing,
Mary-golds, on death beds blowing,
Larkes-heeles trymme.
All dear natures children: sweet-
Ly fore Bride and Bridegroomes feet^ Strew Flowers.
Blessing their sense.
Not an angle of the air,
Bird mclodious, or bird fair,
Is absent hence.
The Crow, the ^ndrous Cuckoe, nor
The boding Raven, nor Clough he
Nor ^hattring Pie,
May on our Bridehouse perch or sing,
Or with them any discord bring
But from it fly.
Enter 3. Queens in Black, with vailes staind, with imperial Crowns. The 1.
Queen falls down at the foot of Theseus; The 2. falls down at the foot of
Hypolita. The 3. before Emilia. 1. Qu. For pitties sake and true gentilities,
Hear, and respect me.

2. Qu. For your Mothers sake.
And as you wish your womb may thrive with fair ones,
Hear and respect me,

3. Qu. Now for the love of him whom love has markd
The honor of your Bed, and for the sake
Of clear virginity, be Advocate
For us, and our distresses: This good deed
Shall raze you out o'th Book of Trespasses
All you are set down there.

Theseus. Sad Lady ^ise.


Hypol. Stand up.


Emil. No knees to me.
What woman I may steed that is distressed,
Does bind me to her.

These. What Is your request? Deliver you for all.


1. Qu. We are 3. Queens, whose Sovereigns fell before
The wrath of cruel Creon; who endured
The Beakes of Ravens, Tallents of the Knights,
And pecks of Crows, in the foul feilds of The^
He will not suffer us to burn their bones,
To urne their ashes, nor to take the off^nce
Of mortal loathsomenes from the blessed eye
Of holy Ph^bus, but infects the winds
With stench of our slain Lords. O pity Duke,
Thou purger of the earth, draw thy feared Sword
That does good turns to the world; give us the Bones
Of our dead Kings, that we may Chapel them;
And of thy boundles goodness take some note
That for our crowned heads we have no roof,
Save this which is the Lions, and the Bears,
And vault to every thing.

These. Pray you kneel not,
I was transported with your Speech, and suffered
Your knees to wrong themselves; I have heard the fortunes
Of your dead Lords, which gives me such lamenting
As wakes my vengeance, and revenge for'em
King Capaneus, was your Lord the day
That he should marry you, at such a season,
As now it is with me. I met your Groom,
By Marsis Altar, you were that time fair;
Not Iunos Mantle fairer then your Tresses,
Nor in more bounty spread her. Your wheaten wreathe
Was then nor threashd, nor blasted; Fortune at you
Dimpled her Cheek with smiles: Hercules our kinesman
(Then weaker than your eyes) laid by his Club,
He tumbled down upon his Nenuan hide
And swore his ^ws thawd: O grief, and time,
Fearful consumers, you will all devour.

1, Qu. O I hope some God,
Some God has put his mercy in your manhood
Whereto heel infuse power, and press you forth
Our undertaker.

These. O no knees, none Widow,
Unto the Helmeted-Belona use them,
And pray for me your Soldier.
Troubled I am.
turns away.
2. Qu. Honored Hypolita
Most dreaded Amazonian, that have slain
The Sith-tuskd-Bore; that with thy Arm as strong
As it is white, wast near to make the male
To thy Sex captive; but that this thy Lord
Borne to uphold Creation, in that honor
First nature stilde it in, shrunk thee into
The bownd thou wast ore-flowing; at once subduing
Thy force, and thy affection: Soldiresse
That equally can poize sternenes with pity,
Whom now I know have much more power on him
Then ever he had on thee, who ow'st his strength
And his, Love too: who is a Servant for
The Tenor of the Speech. Dear Glass of Ladies
Bid him that we whom flaming war does scortch,
Under the shadow of his Sword, may cool us:
Require him he advance it ore our heads;
Speak't in a woman's key: like such a woman
As any of us three; weep ere you fail; lend us a knee;
But touch the ground for us no longer time
Then a Doves motion, when the head's plucked off:
Tell him if he in the blood cizd field, lay swollen
Showing the Sun his Teeth; g^inning at the Moon
What you would do.

Hip. Poor Lady, say no more:
I had as leife trace this good action with you
As that whereto I am going, and never yet
Went I so willing, way. My Lord is taken
Heart deep with your distress: Let him consider:
I Will speak anon.

3. Qu. O my petition was kneel to Emilia.
Set down in ice, which by hot grief uncandied
Melts into drops, so sorrow wanting form
Is pressed with deeper matter.

Emilia. Pray stand up,
Your grief is written in your check.

3. Qu. O woe,
You cannot read it there; there through my tears,
Like wrinckled peobles in a glass stream
You may behold 'em (Lady, Lady, alack)
He that will all the Treasure know o'th earth
Must know the Center too; he that will fish
For my least min^ow, let him lead his line
To catch one at my heart. O pardon me
Extremity that sharpens sundry wits
Makes me a Fool.

Emili. Pray you say nothing, pray you,
Who cannot feel, nor see the rain being in it,
Knows neither wet, nor dry, if that you were
Tho ground-peece of foam Painter, I would buy you
T'instruct me against a Capital grief indeed
Such heart pierced demonstration; but alas
Being a natural Si^ter of our Sex
Your sorrow beats so ardently upon me,
That it shall make a counter reflect against
My Brothers heart, and warm it to some pity
Though it were made of stone: pray have good comfort.

These. Forward to the Temple, leave not out a Jot
O'th sacred Ceremony.

1. Qu. O This Celebration
Will long last, and be more costly then,
Your Suppliants war: Remember that your Fame
Knowles in the ear, o'th world: what you do quickly,
Is not done rashly; your first thought is more.
Then others labored meditance: your premeditating
More then their actions: But oh love, your actions
Soon as they mooves as Asprayes do the fish,
Subdue before they touch, think, dear Duke think
What beds our slain Kings have.

2. Qu. What greifes our beds
That our dear Lords have none.

3. Qu. None fit for'th dead:
Those that with Cords, Knives, drams precipitance,
Weary of this worlds light, have to themselves
Been deaths most horrid Agents, human grace
Affords them dust and shadow.

1. Qu. But our Lords
Ly b^string fore the visitating Sun,
And were good Kings, when living.

These. It is true. and I will give you comfort,
To give your dead Lords graves:
The which to do, must make some work with Creou;

1. Qu. And that work presents it self to the doing:
Now twill take form, the heates are gone to morrow.
Then, booteles toil must recompense it self,
With it is own sweat; Now he is secure,
Not dreams, we stand before your puislance
Wrinching our holy begging in our eyes
To make petition clear.

2. Qu. Now you may take him,
Drunk with his victory.

3. Qu. And his Army full
Of Bread, and sloth.

These. Artesuis that best know
How to draw out fit to this enterprise,
The prim'st for this proceeding, and the number
To carry such a business, forth and levy
Our worthiest Instruments, whilst we despatch
This grand act of our life, this daring deed
OfFate in wedlock.

1. Qu. Dowagers, take hands
Let us be Widows to our wo^s, delay
Commends us to a famishing hope.

All. Farewell.


2. Qu. We come unseasonably: But when could grief
Cull forth as unpanged judgment can, fit'st time
For best solicitation.

These. Why good Ladies,
This is a service, whereto I am going,
Greater then any was; it more imports me
Then all the actions that I have foregone,
Or futurely can cope.

1. Qu. The more proclaiming
Our suit shall be neglected, when her Arms
Able to lock Jove from a Synod, shall
By warranting Moone-light corslet thee, oh when
Her twyning Cherries shall their sweetness fall
Upon thy tastefull lips, what will thou think
Of rotten Kings or blubberd Queens, what care
For what thou feelst not? what thou feelst being able
To make Mars spurn his Drom. O if thou couc^
But one night with her, every hour in it will
Take (...) of thee for a hundred, and
Thou shall remember nothing more, then what
That Banquet bids thee too.

Hip. Though much unlike
You should be so transported, as much sorry
I should be such a Suitour; yet I think
Did I not by th'abstayning of my joy
Which breeds a deeper longing, cure their surfeit
That craves a present medcine, I should pluck
All Ladies scandal on me. Therefore Sir
As I shall here make trial of my prayres,
Either presuming them to have some force,
Or sentencing for ay their vigor dombe,
Prorogue this business, we are going about, and hang
Your Shield before your Heart, about that neck
Which is my (...), and which I freely lend
To do these poor Queens service.

All Queens. Oh help now
Our Cause cries for your knee.

Emil. If you grant not
My Sister her petition in that force,
With that Celerity, and nature which
She makes it in: from henceforth i will not dare
To ask you any thing, nor be so hardy
Ever to take a Husband.

These. Pray stand up.
I am entreating of my self to do
That which you kneel to have me; ^yrithous
Lead on the Bride; g^t you and pray the Gods
For success, and return; omit not any thing
In the pretended Celebration: Queens
Follow your Soldier (as before) hence you
And at the banckos of Anly meet us with
The forces you can raise, where we shall find
The moytie of a number, for a business,
More bigger looked; since that our Theme is haste
I stamp this kiss upon thy current lip,
Sweet keep it as my Token; Set you forward
For I will see you gone. Ex^unt toward the Temple.
Farewell my beauteous Sister: Pyrithous
Keep the feast full, bate not an hour on it.

Pirithous. Sir
I Will follow you at ^eeles; The Feasts solempnity
Shall want till your return.

These. Co^en I charge you
Boudge not from Athens; We shall be returning
Ere you can end this Feast; of which I pray you
Make no abatement; once more farewell all.

1. Qu. Thus do thou still make good the tongue o'th world.


2. Qu. And earnst a Deity equal with Mars,


3. Qu. If not above him, for
Thou being but mortal mak^ affections bend
To Godlike honors; they themselves some say
Groan under such a Mastry.

These. As we are men
Thus should we do, being sensually subdude
We loose our humane title; good cheer Ladies. Flourish.
Now turn we toward your Comforts. Exeunt.

Scaena 2. Enter Palamon, and Arcite.
Arcite. Dear Palamon, (...) in love then Blood
And our prime Cosen, yet unhardned in
The Crimes of nature; Let us leave the City
Thebs, and the temptings in it, before we further
Sully our gloss of youth,
And here to keep in abstinence we shame
As in Incontinence; for not to swim
In The aid o'th Current, were almost to sincke,
At least to frustrate striving, and to follow
The common Stream, twold bring us to an Edy
Where we should turn or drown; if labor through,
Our gain but life, and weakness.

Pal. Your advice
Is cride up with example: what strange ruins
Since first we went to School, may we perceive
Walking in Thebs? Skars, and bar^ weeds
The gain o'th Martialist, who did propound
To his bold ends, honor, and golden Ingots,
Which though he won, he had not, and now flurted
By peace for whom he fought, who then shall offer
To Marsis so scornd Altar? I do bleed
When such I meet, and wish great (...) would
Resume her ancient fit of Ielouzie
To get the Soldier work, that peace might purge
For her repletion, and retain anew
Her cha^itable heart now hard, and harshe^
Then strife, or war could be.

Arcite, Are you not out?
Meet you no ruin, but the Soldierin
The Cranckes, and turns of Thebs' you did begin
As if you met decaies of many kinds:
Perceive you none, that do arowse your pity
But th'un considerd Soldier?

Pa^. Yes, I pity
Decaies where ere I find them, but such most
That sweating in an honorable Toil
Are paid with ice to coole'em.

Ar^ite, It Is not this
I did begin to speak of: This is virtue
Of no respect in Thebs I spoke of Thebs'
How dangerous if we will keep our Honors,
It is for our r^syding, where ev^ry evil
Has a good cullor; where eve'ry seeming good's
A certain evil, where not to be ev^ Iumpe
As they are, here were to be strangers, and
Such things to be meet Monsters.

Pal. It Is in our power,
(Unless we fear that Apes can Tutor's) to
Be Masters of our manners: what need I
Affect another gate, which is not catching
Where there is faith, or to be fond upon
Another way of speech, when by mine own
I may be reasonably conceived; saved too,
Speaking it truly; why am I bound
By any generous bond to follow him
Follows his Tailor, happily so long until
The followed, make pursuit? or let me know,
Why mine own Barbe^ is unblest, with him
My poor Chinne too, for it is not Cizard just
To such a Favorites glass: What Cannon is there
That does command my Rapier from my hip
To dangle't in my hand, or to go tip toe
Before the street be foul? Either I am
The fore-horse in the Teame, or I am none
That draw in the sequent trace: these poor fleight sores,
Need not a plantin; That which tips my bosom
Almost to the heart's,

Arcite. Our Uncle Creon.


Pal. He,
A most unbounded Tyrant, whose successes
Makes heaven unfeard, and villainy assured
Beyond its power: there is nothing, almost puts
Faith in a feavour, and deifies alone
Voluble chance, who only attributes
The faculties of other Instruments
To his own Ne^ves and act; Commands men service,
And what they win in it, boot and glory on;
That fears not to do harm; good, dares not; Let
The blood of mine that is sibbe to him, be sucked
From me with Leeches, Let them break and fall
Off me with that corruption.

Arc. Clear spirited Cozen
Lets leave his Court, that we may nothing share,
Of his loud infamy: for our milk,
Will relish of the pasture, and we must
Be vile, or disobedient, not his kinesmen
In blood, unless in quality.

Pal. Nothing truer:
I think the Echoes of his shames have dea'ft
The ears of heavenly Justice: widows cries
Descend again into their throats; and have not: Enter Valeri^s.
Due audie^nce of the Gods: ^alerius

Ual. The King calls for you; yet be leaden footed
Till his great rage be off him. Phoebus when
He broke his whipflocke and exclaim dagainst
The Horses of the Sun, but whisperd too
The low denes^e of his Fury.

Pal. Small winds shake him,
But what is the matter?
Val. Theseus (who where he threats appalls,) has sent
Deadly defyance to him, and pronounces
Ruin to Thebs, who is at hand to seal
The promise of his wrath.

Arc. Let him approach;
But that we fear the Gods in him, he brings not
A jot of terror to us; Yet what man
Thirds his own worth (the case is each of ours)
When that his actions dregd, with mind assurd
It Is ba^ he goes about.

Pal. Leave that unreasond.
Our ser^ices stand now for Thebs, not Creon,
Yet to be neutrall to him, were dishonor;
Rebellious to oppose: therefore we must
With him stand to the mercy of our Fate,
Who has bounded our last minute.

Arc. So we must;
Is It sed this wars afoote? or it shall be
On fail of some condition.

Val. It Is in motion
The intelligence of state came in the instant
With the defier.

Pal. Lets to the king, who, were he
A quarter carrier of that honor, which
His Enemy come in, the blood we venture
Should be as for our health, which were not spent,
Rather laid out for purchase: but alas
Our hands advanced before our hearts, what will
The fall o'th stroke do damage?

Arci. Let the event,
That never erring Arbitratour, tell us
When we know all our selves, and let us follow
The becking of our chance.
Ex^nnt.
Scaena 3. E^ter Pirithous, Hipolita, Emilia.
Pir. No further.


Hip. Sir farewell; repeat my wishes
To our great Lord, of whose succes I dare not
Make any timorous question, yet I wish him
Exces, and overflow of power, and't might be
To dure ill-dealing fortune; speed to him,
Store never hurtes good Governors.

Pir. Though I know
His Ocean needs not my poor drops, yet they
Must yield their tribute there: My precious Maid,
Those best affections, that the heavens infuse
In their best temperd pieces, keep enthroand
In your dear heart.

Emil. Thanckes Sir; Remember me
To our all royal Brother, for whose speed
The great (...) i will so^licite; and
Since in our terrene State petitions are not
Without gifts understood: I Will offer to her
What I shall be advised she likes; our hea^ts
Are in his Army in his Tent.

Hip. In's bosom:
We have bin Soldiers, and we cannot weep
When our Friends don their helmes, or put to sea,
Or tell of Babe, broachd on the Lance, or wom^n
That have sod their Infants in (and after eat them)
Tho brine, they wept at killing 'em; Then if
You stay to see of us such Spinesters, we
Should hold you here for e ver.

Pir. Peace be to you
As I pursue this war, which shall be then
Beyond further requiring.
Exit Pir.
Emil. How his longing
Follows his Friend; since his depart, his sportes
Though craving seriousnes, and skill, past slightly
His careless execution, where nor gain
Made him regard, or loss consider, but
Playing ore business in his hand, another
Directing in his head, his mind, nurse equal
To these so diffring Twyns; have you observed him,
Since our great Lord departed?

Hip. With much labor:
And I did love him fort, they two have Cabind
In many as dangerous, as poo^e a Corner,
Peril and want contending, they have skift
Torrents whose roaring tyranny and power
In The least of these was dreadful, and they have
Fought out together, where Deaths-selfe was lodgd,
Yet fate has brought them off: Their knot of love
Tide, weau'd, entangled, with so true, so long,
And with a finger of so deep a cunning
May be out worn, never undone, I think
Theseus cannot be umpire to himself
Cleaving his conscience into twain, and doing
Each side like Justice, which he loves best.

Emil. Doubtless
There is a best, and reason has no manners
To say it is not you: I was acquainted
Once with a time, when I enjoyd a Play-fellow;
You were at wars, when she the grave enrichd,
Who made too proud the Bed, took leave o'th Moon
(which then looked pale at parting) when our count
Was each a eleven.

Hip. It Was Flauia.


Emil. Yes
You talk of Pirithous and Theseus love;
Theirs has more ground, is more maturely seasons,
More buckled with strong Judgment. and their needs
The one of the other may be said to water 2. Hearses ready with Palamon; and
Arcite: the 3.

Their intertangled roots of love, but I
And she (I sigh and spoke of) were things innocent,
Loved for we did, and like the Elements Queens. Theseus: and his Lords ready.

That know not what, nor why, yet do effect
Rare issues by their operance; our souls
Did so to one another; what she liked,
Was then of me approov'd, what not condemd
No more arraignement, the flower that I would pl^cke
And put between my breasts, oh (then but beginning
To swell about the blossom) she would long
Till she had such another, and commit it
To the like innocent Cradle, where Phoenix like
They did in perfume: on my head no toy
But was her pattern, her affections (pretty
Though happily, her careless, were, I followed
For my most serious decking, had mine care
Stolen some new air, or at adventure humd on
From misicall Coynadge, why it was a note
Whereon her spirits would sojourne (rather dwell on)
And sing it in her slumbers; This reh^tsall
(Which fury-innocent wots well) comes in
Like old importments baftard, h^s this end,
That the true love tweene Maid, and maid, may be
More then in sex individual.

Hip. You Are ont of breath
And this high speeded-pace, is but to say
That you shall never (like the Maid Flavina)
Love any that is called Man.

Emil. I am sure I shall not.


Hip. Now alack weak Sister,
I must no more believe thee in this point
(Though, in it I know thou do believe thy self,)
Then I will trust a sickely appetite,
That loathes even as it longs, but sure my Sister
If I were ripe for your persuasion, you
Have said enough to shake me from the Arm
Of the all noble Theseus, for whose fortunes,
I will now in, and kneel with great assurance,
That we, more then his Pirotho^, possess
The high throne in his heart.

Emil. I am not against your faith,
Yet I continue mine.

Exeunt. Cornets. Scaena 4. A Battle struck within Then a Retrait: Flourish.
Then Enter Theseus (victor) the three (...) him, and ^all on their faces before
him.
1. Qu. To thee no star be dark.


2. Qu. Both heaven and earth
Friend thee for ever.

3. Qu. All the good that may
Be wishd upon thy head, I cry Amen to it.

These. Th'imparciall Gods, who from the mounted heavens
View us their mortal Heard, behold who err,
And in their time chastise: go and find out
The bones of your dead Lords, and honor them
With treble Ceremony, rather then a gap
Should be in their dear rights, we would suppl'it.
But those we will depute, which shall invest
You in your dignities, and even each thing
Our have does leave imperfect; So adieu
And heavens good eyes look on you. what are those?

Exeunt (...). Herald. Men of great quality, as may be judgd
By their appointment; Some of Thebs have told's
They are Sisters children, Nephews to the King.

These. By The Helm of Mars, I saw them in the war,
Like to a pair of Lions, smeard with prey,
Make lanes in troops aghast. I fixed my note
Constantly on them; for they were a mark
Worth a god's view: what prisoner was it that told me
When I enquired their names?

Herald. We leave, they are called
Arcite and Palamon,

These. It Is ^ight, those, those
They are not dead?

Her. Nor in a state of life, had they bin taken
When their last hurts were given, it was possible 3. Hearses ready.

They might have bin r^covered; Yet they breathe
And have the name of men.

These. Then like men use 'em
The very lees of such (millions of rates)
Exceed the wine of others. all our Surgions
Convent in their behoof, our richest balmes
Rather then niggard wast, their lives concern us,
Much more then Thebs is worth, rather then have 'em
Fre^d of this plight, and in their morning state
(Sound and at libcrty) I would 'em dead,
But forty thousand fold, we had rather have 'em
Prisoners to us, then death; Bear 'em speedily
From ou^ kind air, to them unkind, and minister
What man ^o man may do for our sake more,
Since I have known frights, fury, friends, beheastes,
Loves, provocations, zeal, a mistress Task,
Desire of liberty, a feavour, madues,
Has set a mark which nature could not reach too
Without some imposition, sickness in will
Or wrestling strength in reason, for our Love
And great Appollos mercy, all our best,
Their best skill tender. Lead into the City,
Where having bound things scatterd, we will post Flourish.
To Athens for our Army.

Exeunt. Music. Scaena 5. Enter the Queens with the Hearses of their
Knights, in a Funeral Solempuity, etc.
Vrnes, and odours, bring away,
Vapors, sighs, darken the day;
Our dole more deadly looks than dying
Balmes, and G^mes, and heavy cheares,
(...) vials filled with tears,
And clamers through the wild air flying.
Come all sad, and solemn Shows,
That are qui^-eyd pleasures foes;
We convent naught else but woes.
We convent, etc. 3. Qu. This funeral path, brings to your households grave:
Joy ceaze on you again: peace sleep with him.

2. Qu. And this to yours.


1. Qu. Yours this way: Heavenslend
A thousand differing ways, to one sure end.

3. Qu. This world's a City full of straying Streets,
And Death's the market place, where each one meets.

Exeunt severally. Actus Secundus.
Scaena 1. Enter Iailor, and Wooer.
Iailor. I may depart with little, while I live, some thing I
May cast to you, not much: Alas the Prison I
Keep, though it be for great ones, yet they seldom
Come; Before one Salmon, you shall take a number
Of Minnowes: I am given out to be better lyn'd
Then it can appear, to me report is a true
Speaker: I would I were really, that I am
Deliverd ^o be: Marry, what I have (be it what
it will) I will aflure upon my daughter at
The day of my death.

Wooer. Sir I demand no more then your own offer,
And I will estate your Daughter in what I
Have promised,

Iailor. Well, we will talk more of this, when the solemnity
Is past; But have you a full promise of her? Enter Daughter.
When that shall be seen, I tender my consent.

Wooer. I have Sir; here she comes.


Iailor. Your Friend and I have ch^nced to name
You here, upon the old business: But no more of that.
Now, so soon as the Court hurry is over, we will
Have an end of it: I'^h mean time look tenderly
To the two Prisoners. I can tell you they are princes.

Daug. These strewings are for their Chamber; it is pity they
Are in prison, and twer pity they should be out: I
Do think they have patience to make any adversity
Ashamed; the prison it self is proud of 'em; and
They have all the world in their Chamber.

Iailor. They are fa^'d to be a pair of absolute men.


Dangh. By my troth, I think Fame but stammers 'em, they doers.
Stand a greise above the reach of report.

Iai. I heard them reported in the Battle, to be the only


Daugh. Nay most likely, for they are noble suffrers; I
Mervaile how they would have lookd had they been
Victors, that with such a constant Nobility, enforce
A freedom out of Bondage, making misery their
Mirth, and affliction, a toy to jest at.

Iailor. Do they so?


Daug. It seems to me they have no more sense of their
Captivity, then I of ruling Athens: they eat
Well, look merrily, discourse of many things,
But nothing of their own restraint, and disasters:
Yet sometime a divided sigh, martyrd as twer
In The deliverance, will break from one of them.
When the other presently gives it so sweet a rebuke,
That I could wish my self a Sigh to be so chid,
Or at least a Sigher to be comforted.

Wooer. I never saw'em.


Iailor. The Duke himself came privately in the night, Enter PAla^on, and
Arcite, above.
And so did they, what the reason of it is, I
Know not: Look yonder they are; that is
Arcite looks out.

Daugh. No Sir, no, that is Palamon; Arcite is the
Lower of the twain; you may perceive a part
Of him.

Iai. Go too, leave your pointing; they would not
Make us their object; out of their sight.

Daugh. It is a holliday to look on them: Lord, the
Diffrence of men. Exeunt,

Scaena 2. Enter Palamon, and Arcite in prison.
Pal. How do you Noble Cosen?


Arcite. How do you Sir?


Pal. Why strong enough to laugh at misery,
And bear the chance of war yet, we are prisoners
I fear for ever Cosen.

Arcite. I believe it,
And to that destiny have patiently
Laid up my hour to come.

Pal. Oh Cosen Arcite,
Where is Thebs now? where is our noble Country?
Where are our friend^, and kindreds? never more
Must we behold those comforts, never see
The hardy youths strive for the Games of honor
(Hung with the painted favors of their Ladies)
Like tall Ships under sail: then start among'st 'em
And as an Eastwind leave 'em all behind us,
Like lazy Clouds, whilst Palamon and Arcite,
Even in the wagging of a wanton leg
Out-stript the peoples praises, won the Garlands,
Ere they have time to wish 'em ours. O never
Shall we two exercise, like Twyns of honor,
Our Arms again, and feel our fyry horses
Like proud Seas under us, our good Swords, now
(Better the red-eyd god of war never were)
Bravishd our sides, like age must run to rust,
And deck the Temples of those gods that hate us,
These hands shall never draw'em out like lightning
To blast whole Armies more.

Arcite. No Palamon,
Those hopes are Prisoners with us, here we are
And here the graces of our youths must wither
Like a too-timely Spring; here age must find us,
And which is heaviest ( Palamon) unmarried,
The sweet embraces of a loving wife
Laden with kisses, armd with thousand Cupids
Shall never claspe our necks, no issue know us,
No figures of our selves shall we ever see,
To glad our age, and like young Eagles teach'em
Boldly to gaze against bright arms, and say
Remember what your fathers were, and conquer.
The faire-eyd Maids, shall weep our Bauishments,
And in their Songs, curse ever-blinded fortune
Till she for shame see what a wrong she has done
To youth and nature; This is all our world;
We shall know nothing here but one another,
Hear nothing but the Clock that tells our woes.
The Vine shall grow, but we shall never see it:
Summer shall come, and with her all delights;
But dead-cold winter must inhabit here still.

Pal. It Is too true Arcite. To out Theban hounds,
That shook the aged Fo: rest with their echoes,
No more now must we halloa, no more shake
Our pointed Iavelyns, whilst the angry Swine
Flies like a parthian quiver from our rages,
Struck with our well-steeld Darts: All valiant uses,
(The soode, and nourishment of noble minds,)
In us two here shall perish; we shall die
(which is the curse of honor) lastly,
Children of grief, and Ignorance.

Arc. Yet Cosen,
Even from the bottom of these miseries
From all that fortune can inflict upon us,
I see two comforts rising, two mere blessings,
If the gods please, to hold here abrave patience,
And the enjoying of our greefes together.
Whilst Palamon is with me, let me perish
If I think this our prison.

Pala. Certainly,
It Is a maine goodness Cosen, that our fortunes
Were twyn'd together; it is most true, two sou^es
Put in two noble Bodies, let them suffer
The gaul of hazard, so they grow together,
Will never sincke, they must not, say they could,
A willing man dies sleeping, and all is done.

Arc. Shall we make worthy uses of this place
That all men hate so much?

Pal. How gentle Cosen?


Arc. Let Us think this prison, holy sanctuary,
To keep us from corruption of wors^ men,
We are young and yet desire the ways of honor,
That liberty and common Conversation
The poison of pure spirits; might like women
Woo us to wander from. What worthy blessing
Can be but our Imaginations
May make it ours? And here being thus together,
We are an endless mine to one another;
We are one another wife, ever begotting
New birthes of love; we are father, f^ends, acquaintance,
We are in one another, Families,
I am your heir, and you are mine: This place
Is our Inheritance: no hard Oppressor
Dare take this from us; here with a little patience
We shall live long, and loving: No surfeits seek us:
The hand of war ^urts none here, nor the Seas
Swallow their youth: we^e we at liberty,
A wife might part us lawfully, or business,
Quarrels consume us, Envy of (...) men
Crave our acquaintance, I might s^ken Cosen,
Where you should never know it, and so perish
Without your noble hand to close mine eyes,
Or pra^rs to the gods; a thousand chances
Were we from hence, would seaver (...).

Pal. You have made me
(I thank you Cosen Arcit^) almost wanton
With my Captivity: what a misery
It is to live abroad? and every where:
It Is like a Beast me thinks: I find the Court here,
I am sure a more content, and all those pleasures
That woo the wills of men to vanity,
I see through now, and am sufficient
To tell the world, it is but a gaudy shadow,
That old Time, as he passes by takes with him,
What had we bin old in the Court of Creon,
Where sin is Justice, lust, and ignorance,
The virtues of the great ones: Cosen Arcite,
Had not the loving gods found this place for us
We had died as they do, ill old men, unwept,
And had their Epitaphes, the peoples Curses,
Shall I say more?

Arc. I would hear you still.


Ral. Ye shall.
Is there record of any two that loved
Better then we do Arcite?

Arc. Sure there cannot.


Pal. I do not think it possible our friendship
Should ever leave us.

Arc. Till our deaths it cannot Enter Emilia and her woman.
And after death our spirits shall be led
To those that love eternally. Speak on Sir.
This garden has a world of pleasures in it.

Emil. What Flower is this?


Wom. It Is called Narcissus Madam.


Emil. That was a fair Boy certain, but a fool,
To love himself, were there not maids enough?

Arc. Pray forward.


Pal. Yes.


Emil. Or were they all hard hearted?


Wom. They could not be to one so fair.


Emil. Thou would not.


Wom. I think I should not, Madam.


Emil. That Is a good wench:
But take heed to your kindness though.

Wom. Why Madam?


Emil. Men are mad things.


Arcite. Will ye go forward Cosen?


Emil. Can not thou work: such flowers in silk wench?


Wom. Yes.


Emil. ^e have a gown full of 'em and of these,
This is a pretty color, wilt not do
Rarely upon a Skirt wench?

Wom. Deinty Madam.


Arc. Gosen, Cosen, how do you Sir? Why Palamon?


Pal. Never till now I was in prison Arcite.


Arc. Why what is the matter Man?


Pal. Behold, and wonder.
By heaven she is a Goddess.

Arcite. Ha.


Pal. Do reverence.
She is a Goddess Arcite.

Emil. Of all Flowers.
Me thinks a Rose is best.

Wom. Why gentle Madam?


Emil. It is the very Emblem of a Maid.
For when the west wind courts her gently
How modestly she blows, and paints the Sun,
With her chaste blushes? When the North comes near her,
Rude and impatient, then, like Chastity
She locks her beauties in her bud again,
And leaves him to base briers.

Wom. Yet good Madam,
Sometimes her modesty will blow so far
She falls for it: a Maid
If she have any honor, would be loath
To take example by her.

Emil. Thou art wanton.


Arc. She is wondrous fair.


Pal. She is all the beauty extant.


Emil. The Sun grows high, lets walk in, keep these flowers,
We Will see how near Art can come near their colors;
I am wondrous merry hearted, I could laugh now.

Wom. I could lie down I am sure.


Emil. And take one with you?


Wom. That Is as we bargain Madam,


Emil. Well, agree then.

Exeunt Emilia and woman.
Pal. What think you of this beauty?


Arc. It Is a rare one.


Pal. Is It but a rare one?


Arc. Yes a matchles beauty.


Pal. Might not a man well lose himself and love her?


Arc. I cannot tell what you have done, I have,
Beshrew mine eyes for it, now I feel my Shackles.

Pal. You love her then?


Arc. Who would not?


Pal. And desire her?


Arc. Be fore my liberty.


Pal. I saw her first.


Arc. That Is nothing


Pal. But it shall be.


Arc. I saw her too.


Pal. Yes, but you must not love her.


Arc. I will not as you do; to worship her;
As she is heavenly, and a blessed Gods;
(I love her as a woman, to enjoy her)
So both may love.

Pal. You shall not love at all.


Arc. Not love at all.
Who shall deny me?

Pal. I that first saw her; I that took possession
First with mine eye of all those beauties
In her reveald to mankind: if thou love her.
Or entertain'st a hope to blast my wishes,
Thou art a Traitor Arcite and a fellow
False as thy Title to her: friendship, blood
And all the ties between us I disclaim
If thou once think upon her.

Arc, Yes I love her,
And if the lives of all my name lay on it,
I must do so, I love her with my soul,
If that will lose ye, faewell Palamon,
I say again, I love, and in loving her maintain
I am as worthy, and as free a lover
And have as just a title to her beauty
As any Palamon or any living
That is a man's Son.

Pal. Have I called thee friend?


Arc. Yes, and have found me so; why are you moved thus?
Let me deal coldly with you, am not I
Part of you blood, part of your soul? you have told me
That I was Palamon, and you were Arcite.

Pal. Yes.


Arc. Am not I liable to those affections,
Those joys, greifes, angers, fears, my friend shall suffer?

Pal. Ye may be.


Arc. Why then would you deal so cunningly,
So strangely, so unlike a noble kinesman
To love alone? speak truly, do you think me
Unworthy of her sight?

Pal. No, but unjust,
If thou pursue that sight.

Arc. Because an other
First sees the Enemy, shall I stand still
And let mine honor down, and never charge?

Pal. Yes, if he be but one.


Arc. But say that one
Had rather combat me?

Pal. Let that one say so,
And use thy freedom: else if thou pursuest her,
Be as that cursed man that hates his Country,
A branded villain.

Arc. You are mad.


Pal. I must be.
Till thou art worthy, Arcite, it concerns me,
And in this madness, if I hazard thee
And take thy life, I dcale but truly.

Arc. Fie Sir.
You play the Child extremely: I will love her,
I must, I ought to do so, and I dare,
And al, this justly.

Pal. O that now, that now
Thy false-sel^e and thy friend, had but this fortune
To be one hour at liberty, and graspe
Our good Swords in our hands, I would quickly teach thee
What tw'er to filch affection from another:
Thou a^ baser in it then a Cutpurse;
Put but thy hea^ out of this window more,
And as I have a soul, I Will nail thy life to it.

Arc. I hou dare not fool, thou can not, thou art feeble.
Pu^ my head out? I Will throw my Body out,
And leap the garden, when I see her next Enter Keeper.
And pitch between her arms to anger thee.

Pal. No more; the keeper's coming; I shall live
To k^cke thy brains out with my Shackles.

Arc. Do.


Keeper. By your leave Gentlemen:


Pala. Now honest keeper?


Keeper. Lord Arcite, you must presently to the Duke;
The caus^ I know not yet.

Arc. I am ready keeper.


Keeper, Prince Palamon, I must awhile bereave you
Of your fair Cosens Company.
Exeunt Arcite, and Keeper.
Pal. And me too,
Even when you please of life; why is he sent for?
It may be he shall marry her, he is goodly.
And like enough the Duke has taken notice
Both of his blood and body: But his falsehood,
Why should a friend be treacherous? If that
Get him a wife so noble, and so fair;
Let honest men never love again. Once more
I would but see this fair One: Blessed Garden,
And fruit, and flowers more blessed that still blossom
As her brigh^ eyes shine on ye. would I were
For all the fortune of my life hereafter
Yon little Tree, yon blooming Apricocke;
How I would spread, and fling my wanton arms
In at her window; I would bring her fruit
Fit for the Gods to feed on: youth and pleasure
Still as she tasted should be do^bled on her,
And if she be not heavenly I would make her
So near the Gods in nature, they should fear her. Enter Keeper.
And then I am sure she would love me: how now keeper
Where Is Arcite,

Keeper, Banishd: Prince Piritbous
Obtained his liberty; but never more
Upon his oath and life must he set foot
Upon this Kingdom.

Pal. He Is a blessed man,
He shall see Thebs again, and call to Arms
The bold young men, that when he bids 'em charge,
Fall on like fire: Arcit^ shall have a Fortune,
If he dare make himself a worthy Lover,
Yet in the Field to strike a bat^le for her;
And if he lose her then, he is a cold Coward;
How brav^ly may he bear himself to win her
If he be noble Arcite; thousand ways.
Were I at liberty, I would do things
Of such a virtuous greatness, that this Lady,
This blushing virgin should take manhood to her
And seek to ravish me.

Keeper, My Lord for you
I have this charge too.

Pal. To discharge my life.


Keep. No, but from this place to remo^ve your Lordship,
The window^ are too open.

Fall. Devils take 'em
That are so envious to me; prithee kill me.

Keep. And hang for it afterward.


Pal. By this good light
Had I a sword I would kill thee.

Keep, Why my Lord?


Pal. Thou bringst such pelting scuruy news continually
Thou art not worthy lif^; I will not go.

Keep. Indeed yon must my Lord.


Pal. May I see the garden?


Keep. Noe.


Pal. Then I am resolud, I will not go.


Keep I must constrain you then; and for you are dangerous
I Will clap more yrons on you.

Pal. Do good keeper.
I Will shake'em so, ye shall not sl^epe,
I Will make ye a new Morri^e, must I go?

Keep. There is no remedy.


Pal. Fare well kind window.
May rude wind never hurt thee. O my Lady
If ever thou have felt what sorrow was,
Dream how I suffer. Come; now bury me.
Exeunt Palamon, and Keeper.
Scaena 3. Enter Arcite.
Arcite. Banishd the kingdom? it is a benefit,
A mercy I must thank 'em for, but banishd
The free enjoying of that face I die for,
Oh twasa stud died punishment, a death
Beyond Imagination: Such a vengeance
That were I old and wicked, all my sins
Could never pluck^ upon me. Palamon;
Thou have the Start now, thou shall stay and see
Her bright eyes break each morning against thy window,
And let in life into thee; thou shall feed
Upon the sweetenes of a noble beauty,
That nature never exceeded, nor never shall:
Good gods? what happiness has Palamon?
Twenty to one, he will come to speak to her,
And if she be as gentle, as she is fair,
I know she is his, he has a Tongue will tame
Tempe sts, and make the wild Rocks wanton. Come what can come'
The worst is death; I will not leave the Kingdom,
I know mine own, is but a heap of ruins,
And no redress there, if I go, he has her.
I am resolved an other shape shall make me,
Or end my fortunes. Either way, I am happy:
I Will see her, and be near her, or no more.

Enter. 4. Country people, and one with a garland before them. 1, My Masters,
i will be there that is certain.


2. And I Will be there.


3. And (...).


4. Why then have with ye Boys; It Is but a chi^ing,
Let the plough play to day, i will tick'lt out
Of the lades tails to morrow.

1. I am sure
To have my wife as jealous as a Turkey:
But that is all one, i will go through, let her mumble.

2. Clap her aboard to morrow night, and stoa her,
And all is made up again.

3. I, do but put a feskue in her fist, and you shall see her
Take a new lesson out, and be a good wench.
Do we all hold, against the Maying?

4. Hold? what should aile us?


3. Arcas will be there.


2. And Sennois.
And Rycas, and 3. better lads never dancd under green Tree,
And yet know what wenches: ha?
But will the dainty Domine, the Schoolmaster keep touch
Do you think: for he does all ye know.

3. He Will eat a hornebooke ere he fail: go too, the matter's too far
driven between him, and the Tanners daughter, to let slip now, and she must
see the Duke, and she must da^nce too.


4. Shall we be lusty.


2. All the Boys in Athens blow wind in the b^ch on's, and here i will be and
there i will be, for our Town, and here again, and there again: ha, Boys,
heigh for the weavers.


1. This must be done in the woods.


4. O pardon me.


2. By any means our thing of learning sees so: where he himself will (...)
the Duke most pa^ously in our behalfes: he is excellent in the woods, bring him
to the plains, his learning makes no cry:


3. We Will see the sports, then every man to's Tackle: and Sweet Companions
lets rehearse by any means before The Ladies s^e us, and do sweetly, and God
knows what May come on it.


4. Content; the sports once ended, we will perform. Away Boys and hold.


Arc. By your leaves honest friends: pray you whither go^ you.


4. Whither? why, what a question's that?


Arc. Yes, it is a question, to me that know not.


3. To the Games my Friend.


2. Where were you bred you know it not?


Arc. Not farie Sir,
Are there such Gam^s to day?

1. Yes marry are there:
And such as you never saw; The Duke himself
Will be in person there.

Arc. What pastimes are they?


2, Wrestling, and Running; It Is a pretty Fellow.


3. Thou will not go along.


Arc. Not yet Sir.


4. Well Sir
Take your own time, come Boys

1. My (...) misgives me
This fellow has a vengeance trick o'th hip,
Mark how his Bodi's n^de for it

2. I Will be hanged though
If he dare venture, hang him plumb porredge,
He wrestle? he roast eggs. Co^ lets be gone Lads.
(...): 4.
Arc. This is an offered opportunity
I durst not wish for. Well, I could have wrestled,
The best men called it excellent, and run
Swifter, then wind upon a field of Corn
(Curling the wealthy ears) never flew: Il^ venture,
And in some poor disgu^ze be there, who knows
Whether my brows may not be girt with garlands?
And happiness prefer me to a place,
Where I may ever dwell in sight of her.
Exit Arcire,
Scaena 4. Enter Iailors Daughter alone.
Daugh. Why should I love this Gentleman? It Is odds
He never will aff^ct me; I am base,
My Father the mean Keeper of his Prison,
And he a prince; To marry him is hopeless;
To be his whore, is witles; Out upon it;
What pushes are we wenches driven to
When fifteen once has found us? First I saw him,
I (seeing) thought he was a goodly man;
He has as much to please a woman in him,
(If he please to bestow it so) as ever
These eyes yet looked on; Next, I pittled him,
And so would any young wench (...)
That ever dreamed, or vowed her Maydenhead
To a young hansom Man; Then I loved him,
(Extreame^y loved him) infinitely loved him;
And yet he had a Cosen, fair as he too.
But in my heart was Palamon, and there
Lord, what a coil he keeps? To hear him
Sing in an evening, what a heaven it is?
And yet his Songs are sad-ones; Fairer spoken,
Was never Gentleman. When I come in
To bring him water in a morning, first
He bows his noble body, then salutes me, thus:
Fair, gentle May de, good morrow, may thy goodness,
Get thee a happy husband; Once he kissed me,
I loved my lips the better ten days after,
Would he would do so every day; He greives much,
And me as much to see his misery.
What should I do, to make him know I love him,
For I would feign enjoy him? Say I ventured
To set him free? what says the law then? Thus much
For Law, or kindred: I will do it,
And this night, or to morrow he shall love me.

Exit. Scaena 4. Enter Theseus, Hipolita, Pirithous, This short flourish of
Cornets and Showtes Within.
Emilia: Arcite with a Garland, etc.
These. You have done worthily: I have not seen
Since Hercules, a man of tougher synewes;
What ere you are, you run the best, and wrestle,
That these times can allow.

Arcite. I am proud to please you.


These. What Country bred you?


Arcite. This; but far off, Prince.


These. Are you a Gentleman?


Arcite. My father said so;
And to those gentle uses gave me life.

These. Are you his heir?


Arcite. His youngest Sir.


These. Your Father
Sure is a happy Sire then: what prooves you?

Arcite. A little of all noble Quallities:
I could have kept a Hawke, and well have holloa'd
To a deep cry of Dogs; I dare not praise
My feat in horsemanship: yet they that knew me
Would say it was my best piece: last, and greatest,
I would be thought a Soldier.

These. You are perfect.


Pirith. Upon my soul, a proper man.


Emilia. He is so.


Per. How do you like him Lady?


Hip. I admire him,
I have not seen so young a man, so noble
(If he say true,) of his sort.

Emil. Believe,
His mother was a wondrous handsome woman,
His face me thinks, goes that way.

Hyp. But his Body
And fiery mind, illustrate a brave Father.

Per. Mark how his virtue, like a hidden Sun
Breaks through his baser garments.

Hyp. He Is well got sure.


These. What made you seek this place Sir?


Arc. Noble Theseus.
To purchase name, and do my ablest service
To such a well-found wonder, as thy worth,
Fo only in thy Court, of all the world
dwells faire-eyd honor.

Per. All his words are worthy.


These. Sir, we are much endebted to your travel,
Nor shall you loose your wish: Perithous
Dispose of this fair Gentleman.

Perith. Thanks Theseus.
What ere you are you are mine, and I shall give you
To a most noble service, to this Lady,
This bright young Virgin; pray observe her goodness;
You have honored her fair birthday, with your virtues,
And as your due you are hirs: kiss her fair hand Sir.

Arc. Sir, you are a noble Giver: dearest Beauty,
Thus let me seal my vowed faith: when your Servant
(Your most unworthie Creature) but offends you,
Command him die, he shall.

Emil. That were too cruel.
If you deserve well Sir; I shall soon see it:
You Are mine, and somewhat better than your rank I Will use you.

Per. I Will see you furnished, and because you say
You are a horseman, I must needs entreat you
This after noone to ride, but it is a rough one.

Arc. I like him better (Prince) I shall not then
Freeze in my Saddle.

These. Sweet, you must be ready,
And you Emilia, and you (Friend) and all
To morrow by the Sun, to do observance
To flowery May, in Dians wood: wait well Sir
Upon your Mistress: Emely, I hope
He shall not go a foot.

Emil. That were a shame Sir,
While I have horses: take your choice, and what
You want at any time, let me but know it;
If you serve faithfully, I dare assure you
You Will find a loving Mi^ris.

Are. If I do not,
Let me find that my Father ever hated,
(...), and blows.

These. Go lead the way; you have won it:
It shall be so; you shall receave all dues
Fit for the honor you have won; Twer wrong else,
Sister, beshrew my heart, you have a Servant,
That if I were a woman, would be Master,
But you are wise.
Flourish.
Emil. I hope too wise for that Sir.

Exeunt omnes.
Scaena 6. Enter Iaylors Daughter alone.
Daughter. Let all the Dukes, and all the devils rore,
He is at liberty: I have venturd for him,
And out I have brought him to a little wood
A mile hence, I have sent him, where a Cedar
Higher than all the rest, spreads like a plane
Fast by a Brook, and there he shall keep close,
Till I provide him Fyles, and food, for yet
His iron bracel^ts are not off. O Love
What a stout hearted child thou art! My Father
Durst better have endured cold iron, than done it:
I love him, beyond love, and beyond reason,
Or wit, or safety: I have made him know it
I care not, I am desperate, If the law
Find me, and then condemn me for it; some wenches,
Some honest hearted Maids, will sing my Dirge.
And tell to memory, my death was noble,
Dying almost a Martyr: That way he takes,
I purpose is my way too: Sure he cannot
Be so unmanly, as to leave me here,
If he do, Maids will not so easily
Trust men again: And yet he has not thanked m^
For what I have done: no not so much as kissed me,
And that (me thinks) is not so well; not scarcely
Could I persuade him to become a Freeman,
He made such scruples of the wrong he did
To me, and to my Father. Yet I hope
When he considers more, this love of mine
Will take more root within him: Let him do
What he will with me, so he use me kindly,
For use me so he shall, or i will proclaim him
And to his face, no-man: I Will presently
Provide him necessaries, and pack my clothes up,
And where there is a path of ground I Will venture
So h^ be with me; By him, like a shadow
I Will ever dwell; (...) bin thi^ hour the whoobub
Will be all ore the prison: I am then
Kissing the man they look for: farewell Father;
Get many more such prisoners, and such daughters,
And shortly you may keep your self. No^ to him: Cornets in sundry places.
Noise and hallowing as people a Maying:


Actus Tertius.
Scaena 1. Enter Arcite alone.
Arcite. The Duke has lost Hypolita; each took
A several land. This is a solemn Right
They owe bloomd May, and the Athenians pay it
To The heart of Ceremony: O Queen Emilia
Fresher then May, sweeter
Then her gold Buttons on the bows, or all
Th'en amelld knackes o'th Meade, or garden, yea
(We challenge too) the bancke of any Nymph
That makes the stream seem flowers; thou o Jewel
O'th wood, o'th world, have likewise blessed a pace
With thy sole presence, in thy rumination
That I poor man might eftsoons come between
And chop on some cold thought, thrice blessed chance
To drop on such a Mistress, expectation
most giltlesse on it: tell (...) O Lady Fortune
(Next after Emely ^y Sove^gne) how far
I may be proud. She takes strong note of me,
Has made me near her; and this benteous Morn
(The prim'st of all the year) presents me with
A brace of horses, two such Steeds might well
Be by a pair of Kings backed, in a Field
That their crowns titles tried: Alas, alas
Poor Cosen Palamon, poor prisoner, thou
So little dream'st upon my fortune, that
Thou think thy self, the happier thing, to be
So near Emilia, me thou deem'st at Thebs,
And therein wretched, although free; But if
Thou knew'st my Mistress breathd on me, and that
I eared her language, livde in her eye; O Coz
What passion would enclose thee.

Enter Palamon as out of a Bush, with his Shackles: bonds his fist at Arcite.
Palamon. Traitor kinseman,
Thou should perceive my passion, if these signel
Of prisonment were off me, and this hand
But owner of a Sword: By all oaths in one
I, and the justice of my love would make thee
A conf^ Traitor, o thou most persidious
That ever gently lookd the voydes of honor.
That eu'r bore gentle Token; falsest Cosen
That ever blood made kin, call'st thou her thine?
I Will prove it in my Shackles, with these hands,
Void of appointment, that thouly'st, and art
A very thief in love, a Ch^y Lord
Nor worth the name of villain: had I a Sword
And these house clogges away.

Arc. Dear Cousin Palamon,


Pal. Cosoner Arcite, give me language, such
As thou have showed me feate.

Arc. Not ^ding in
The circuit of my breast, any gross stuff
To form me like your blazon, holds me to
This gentleness of answer; it is your passion
That thus mistakes, the which to you being enemy,
Cannot to me be kind: honor, and honesty
I cherish, and depend on, how so ever
You skip them in me, and with them fair Coz
I Will maintain my proceedings; pray be pleased
To show in generous terms, your griefs, since that
Your question's with your equal, who professes
To clear his own way, with the mind and Sword
Of a true Gentleman.

Pal. That thou durst Arcite.


Arc. My Coz, my Coz, you have been well advertised
How much I dare, you have seen me use my Sword
Against the advice of fear: sure of another
You would not hear me doubted, but your silence
Should break out, though in the Sanctuary.

Pal. Sir,
I have seen you move in such a place, which well
Might justify your manhood, you were called
A good knight and a bold; But the whole weeke's not fair
If any day it rain: Their valiant temper
Men loose when they incline to treachery,
And then they fight like compelld Bears, would fly
Were they not tide.

Arc. Kinsman, you might as well
Speak this, and act it in your Glass, as to
His care, which now disdaines you.

Pal. Come up to me,
Q^it me of these cold Gyves, give me a Sword
Though it be rustie, and the charity
Of one meal lend me; Come before me then
A good Sword in thy hand, and do but say
That Emily is thine, I will forgive
The trespass thou have done me, yea my life
If then thou carry^, and brave souls in shades
That have did manly, which will seek of me
Some news from earth, they shall get none but this
That thou art brave, and noble.

Arc. Be content,
Again betake you to your hawthorne house,
With counsel of the night, I will be here
With wholesome viands; these impediments
Will I file off, you shall have gannents, and
Perfumes to kill the ^nell o'th prison, after
When you shall stretch your self, and say but Arcite
I am in plight, there shall be at your choice
Both Sword, and Armor.

Pal. Oh you heavens, dares any
So noble bear a guilty business! none
But only Arcite, therefore none but Arcite
In this kind is so bold.

Arc. Sweet Palamon.


Pal. I do embrace you, and your offer, for
Your offer do it I only, Sir your person
Without hipocrisy I may not wish Wind horns of Cornets.
More then my Swords edge ont.

Arc. You hear the Horns;
Enter your Music least this match between's
Be crossed, er met, give me your hand, farewell.
I Will bring you every needful thing: I pray you
Take comfort and be strong.

Pal. Pray hol^ your promise;
And do the deed with a bent brow, most creaine
You love me not, be rough with me, and power
This oil out of your language; by this air
I could for each word, give a Cuffe: my stomach
not reconcild by reason,

Arc. Plainly spoken,
Yet pardon me hard language, when I spur Wind horns.
My horse, I chide him nor; content, and anger
In me have but one face. Hark Sir, they call
The scatterd to the Banquet; you must guess
I have an office there.

Pal. Sir your attendance
Cannot please heaven, and I know your office
Unjustly is atcheev'd.

Arc. If a good title,
I am persuaded this question sick between's,
By bleeding must be cured. I am a Suitour,
That to your Sword you will be queath this plea,
And talk of it no more.

Pal. But this one word:
You are going now to gaze upon my Mistress,
For note you, mine she is.

Arc, Nay then.


Pal. Nay pray you,
You talk of feeding me to breed me strength
You are going now to look upon a Sun
That strengthens what it looks on, there
You have a vantage ore me, but enjoy't till
I may enforce my remedy. Farewell.
Exe^nt.
Scaena 2. Enter Iaylors daughter alone.
Daugh. He h^s mistook; the Beak I meant, is gone
After his fancy, It Is now welnigh morning,
No matter, would it were perpetual night,
And darkness Lord o'th world, Hark it is a woolfe:
In me has grief slain fear, and but for one thing
I care for nothing, and that is Palamon.
I wreake not if the wolves would jaw me, so
He had this File; what if I hallowd for him?
I cannot hallow: ifI whoop'd; what then?
If he not answeard, I should call a wolf,
And do him but that service. I have heard
Strange howles this live-long night, why may't not be
They have made prey of him? he has no weapons,
He cannot run, the Iengling of his Gives
Might call fell things to listen, who have in them
A sense to know a man unarmd, and can
Smell where resistance is. I Will set it down
He Is torn to pieces, they howld many together
And then they feed on him: So much for that,
Be bold to ring the Bell; how stand I then?
All Is char'd when he is gone, No, no Ilye,
My Father's to be hanged for his escape,
My self to beg, if I prizd life so much
As to deny my act, but that I would not,
Should I try death by dussons: I am mop't,
Food took I none these two days.
Sipt some water. I have not closd mine eyes
Save when my lids scowrd off their bine; alas
Dissolve my life, Let not my sense unsettle
Least I should drown, or stab, or hang my self,
O state of Nature, fail together in me,
Since thy best props are warpt: So which way now?
The best way is, the next way to a grave:
Each errant step beside is torment. Lo
The Moon is down, the Cryckets chirpe, the Schreichowl
Calls in the dawne; all offices are done
Save what I fail in: But the point is this
An end, and that is all.
Exit.
Scaena 3. Enter Arcite, with Meat^, Wine, and Files.
Arc. I should be near the place, hoa. Cosen Palamon.

Enter Palamon.
Pal. Arcite.


Arc. The same: I have brought you food and files,
Come forth and fear not, her'e sno Theseus.

Pal. Nor none so honest Arcite.


Arc. That Is no matter,
We Will argue that hereafter: Come take courage,
You shall not dye thus beastly, here Sir drink
I know you are faint, then i will talk further with you.

Pal. Arcite, thou might now poison me.


Arc. I might.
But I must fear you first: Sit down, and good now
No more of these vain parlies; let us not
Having our ancient reputation with us
Make talk for Fools, and Cowards, To your health, etc.

Pal. Do.


Arc. Pray sit down then, and let me entreat you
By all the honesty and honor in you,
No mention of this woman, it will di^urbe us,
We shall have time enough.

Pal. Well Sir, I Will pledge you.


Arc. Drink a good hearty draught, it breeds good blood man.
Do not you feel it thaw you?

Pal. Stay, (...) t^ll you after a draught or two more.


Arc. Spare it not, the Duke has more Cuz: Eat now.


Pal. Yes.


Arc. I am glad you have so good a stomach.


Pal. I am gladder I have so good meat to it.


Arc. Is It not mad lodging here in the wild woods Cosen


Pal. Yes, for then that have wild Consciences.


Arc. How tastes your vittails? your hunger needs no sauce I see,


Pal. Not much.
But if it did, yours is too (...): sweet Cosen: what is this?

Arc. Venison.


Pal. It Is a lusty meat:
Give me more wine; here Arcite to the wenches
We have known in our days. The Lord Stewards daughter.
Do you remember her?

Arc. After you Cuz.


Pal. She loved a black-haird man.


Arc. She did so; well Sir.


Pal. And I have heard some call him Arcite. and


Arc. Out with it faith.


Pal. She met him in an Arbor:
What did she there Cuz? play o'th virginals?

Arc. Something she did Sir.


Pal. Made her groan a month for it; or 2. or 3. or 10.


Arc. The Marshals Sister,
Had her share too, as I remember Cofen,
Else there be tales abroad, you will pledge her?

Pal. Yes.


Arc. A pre^ty broune wench t'is-There was a time
When young men went a hunting, and a wood,
And a broad Beech: and thereby hangs a tale: heigh ho.

Pal. For Emily, upon my life; Fool
Away with this straind mirth; I say again
That sigh was breathd for Emily; base Cosen,
Dare thou break first?

Arc. you are wide.


Pal. By heaven and earth, there is nothing in thee honest.


Arc, Then I Will leave you: you are a Beast now:


Pal. As thou makst me, Traitor.


Arc. There Is all things needful, files and shirts, and, perfumes:
I Will come again some two hours hence, and bring
That that shall quiet all,

Pal. A Sword and Armor.


Arc. Fear me not; you are now too foul; fare well.
Cet off your Trinkets, you shall want naught;

Pal. Sir ha:


Arc. I Will hear no more.

Exit.
Pal. If he keep touch, he dies for it.

Exit.
Scaena 4. Enter Iaylors daughter.
Daugh. I am very cold, and all the Stars are out too,
The little Stars, and all, that look like aglets:
The Sun has seen my Folly: Palam^n;
Alas no; he is i^ heaven; where am I now?
Yonder Is the sea, and there is a Ship; how't tumbles
And there is a Rock lies watching under water;
Now, now, it beats upon it; now, now, now,
There Is a leak sprung, a sound one, how they cry?
Upon her before the wind, you will loose all else:
Up with a course or two, and take about Boys.
Good night, good night, you are gon^; I am very hungry,
Would I could find a fine (...) would tell me
(...) from all parts o'th world, then would I make
A Carecke of a Cockle shell, and sail
By east and North East to the King of Pigmes,
For he tells fortunes rarely. Now my Father
Twenty to one is trust up in a trice
To morrow morning, I Will say never a word.
For i will cut my (...) coat, (...) above my knee, Sing.

And i will clip my yellow locks; an inch below mine eye. hey, nonny, nonny,
nonny,
He Is buy me a white Cut, forth for to ride
And i will go seek him, throw the world that is so wide hey nonny, nonny,
nonny.
O for a prick now like a Nightingale, to put my breast
Against. I shall sleep like a Top else.
Exit.
Scaena 6. Enter a School master. 4. Countrymen: and Baum 2. or 3. w^ches,
with a Taborer.
Sch. Fie, fie, what tediosity, and disensanity is here among ye? have my
Rudiments bin bi^abourd so long with ye? milkd unto ye, and by a figure even
the very plumbroth and marrow of my understanding laid upon ye? and do you
still cry where, and how, and wherefore? you most course freeze capacities, ye
jave Judgments, have I said thus let be, and there let be, and then let be,
and no man understand me, proh (...), medius (...), ye are all dunces: For why
here stand I. Here the Duke comes, there are you close in the Thicket; the Duke
appears, I meet him and unto him I utter learned things, and many figures, he
hears, and nods, and hums, and then cries rare, and I go forward, at length I
fling my Cap up; mark there; then do you as once did M^ager, and the Bore
break comely out before him: like true lovers, cast your selves in a Body
decently, and sweetly, by a figure trace, and turn Boys.


1. And sweetly we will do it Master Gerrold.


2. Draw up the Company, Where Is the Taborour.


3. Why Timothy.


Tab. Here my mad boys, have at ye.


Sch. But I say where is their women?


4. Here Is Friz and Maudline.


2. And little Luce with the white legs, and bouncing (...).


1. And freekeled Nel; that never faild her Master.


Sch. Where be your Ribands maid^? swym with your Bodies
And carry it sweetly, and deliverly
And now and then a favor, and a frisko.

Nel. Let us alone Sir.


Sch. Where Is the rest o'th Music.


3. Dispersd as you commanded.


Sch. Couple then
And see what is wanting; where is the Bavian?
My friend, carry your tail without offense
^r scandal to the Ladies; and be sure
(...) tumble with audacity, and manhood,
And when you bark do it with judgment.

Bau. Yes Sir.


Sch. Quo usque tandem. Here is a woman wanting


4. We may go whistle: all the fat's in the fi^e.


Sch. We have,
As learned Authors utter, washd a Tile,
We have been fatu^, and labored vainly.

2. This is that scornful piece, that (...) vy hilding
That gave her promise faithfully, she would be here,
Cice y the Sempsters daughter:
The next gloves that I give her shall be dog skin;
Nay and she fail me once, you can tell Arcas
She swore by wine, and bread, she would not break.

Sch. An Eele and woman,
A learned Poet says: unles by the tail
And with thy teeth thou hold, will either fail,
In manners this was false position

1. A fire ill take her; does she flinch now?


3. What
Shall we determine Sir?

Sch. Nothing,
Our business is become a nullity
Yea, and a woeful, and a pittious nullity.

4. Now when the credit of our Town lay on it,
Now to be frampall, now to piss o'th nettle,
Go thy ways, i will remember thee, i will fit thee,
Enter Iaylors daughter. The George allow, came from the South, from
The coast of Barbary a. Daughter.

And there he met with brave gallants of war By one, by two, by three, a
Well haild well haild, you jolly gallants,
And whither now are you bound a Cha^re and ^ooles ont.

O let me have your company till come to the sound a
There was three fools, fell out about an howles
The one sed it was an owl
The other he sed nay,
The third he sedit was a hawke, and her bells were cut away.

3. There Is a dainty mad woman Mr. comes in the Nick as mad as a march hare: if
we can get her dance, we are made again: I warrant her, she will do the
rarest gambols.


1. A mad woman? we are made Boys.


Sch. And are you mad good woman?


Daugh. I would be sorry else,
Give me your hand.

Sch. Why?


Daugh. I can tell your fortune.
You are a fool: rell ten, I have pozd him: Buz
Friend you must eat no white bread, if you do
Your teeth will bleed extremely, shall we dance ho?
I know you, y'a^ a Tinker: Sirrah Tinker
Stop no more holes, but what you should.

Sch. Dij boni. A Tinker Damzell?


Daug, Or a Conjurer: raise me a devil now, and let him play


Quipassa, o'th bells and bones.


Sch, Go take her, and fluently persuade her to a peace:
Et opus exegi, quod nec (...) ira, (...) ignis.
Strike up, and lead her in.

2, Come Lasle, lets trip it.


Daugh. I Will lead:

( Wind (...):
3. Do, do.


Sch. Perswasively, and cunningly: away boys, Ex. all but Schoolmaster.
I hear the horns: give me some
Meditation, and mark your Cuo:
Pallas inspire me.
Enter These. Pir. Hip. Emil. Arcite: and train.
These. This way the Stag took.


Sch. Stay, and edisie.


These. What have we here?


Per. Some Country sport, upon my life Sir.


Per. Well Sir, go forward, we will (...).
Ladies sit down, we will (...).

Sch. Thou doughtie Duke all hail: ^ll hail sweet Ladies.


These. This is a cold beginning.


Sch. If you but favor; our Country pastime made is,
We are a few of those collected here
That ruder Tongues distinguish villager,
And to say verity, and not to fable;
We are a merry rout, or else a rabble
Or company, or by a figure, Choris
That fore thy dignity will dance a Morris.
And I that am the rectifier of all
By title Pedagogus, that let fall
The Birch upon the breeches of the small ones,
And humble with a (...) the tall ones,
Do here present this Machine, or this fra^e,
And dainty Duke, whose doughtie dis^all fame
From Dis to Dedal^, from post to pillar
Is blown abroad; help me thy poor well willer,
And with thy twinc^ing eyes, look right and straight
Upon this mighty (...) -- of mickle weight
Is -- now comes in, which being glewd together
Makes Morris, and the cause that we came ^ether.
The body of our sport of no small study
I first appear, though rude, and raw, and muddy,
To speak before thy noble grace, this te^er:
At whose great feet I offer up ^y penner.
The next the Lord of May, and Lady bright,
The Chambermaid, and Servingman by night
That seek out sil^t ^ging: Then mine Host
And his fat Spowse, that welcomes to their cost
The gauled Traveller, and with a beckning
Informs the Tapster to inflame the reckning:
Then the beast eating Clown, and next the fool,
The Bavian with long tail, and eke long (...),
Cummultis aliijs that make a dance,
Say I, and all shall presently advance.

These. I, I by any mea^s, dear Domine.


P^r. Produce. Music Dance.
(...), Come forth, and foot it, ^nocke for ^choole. Enter The Dance.

Ladies, if we have been ^erry
And have pleased thee with a derry,
And a (...), (...) a (...)
Say the Schoolemaster's no Clown:
Duke, if we have pleased three (...)
And have done as good Boys should do,
Give us but a tree or twain
For a Maypole, and again
Ere another year run out,
We Will make thee laugh and all this (...).

These. Take 20. D^mine; how does my sweet heart.


Hip. Never so pleased Sir.


Emil. It Was an excellent dance, and for a preface
I never heard a better.

These. Schoolmaster, I thank yo^, One see'^ all rewarded.


Per. And here is something to paint your Pole withal.


These. Now to our sports again.


Sch. May the Stag thou (...) stand long,
And thy dogs be swift and strong:
May they kill him withoutlets,
And the Ladies ^ate his dows^ts: Come we are all ^de. Wind (...).
Dij Deaque omnes, ye have danced rarely wenches. (...).

Scaena 7. Enter (...) from the (...).
Pal. About this hour my Cosen gave his faith
To visit me again, and with him bring
Two Swords, and two good Armors; if he fail
He Is neither man, nor Soldier; when he left (...)
I did not think a week could have restord
My lost strength to me, I was grown so low,
And Crest-falne with my wants: I thank thee Arcite,
Thou art yet a fair Foe; and I feel my self
With this refreshing, able once again
To out dure danger: To delay it longer
Would make the world think when it comes to hearing,
That I lay fatting like a Swine, to fight
And not a Soldier: Therefore this blessed morning
Shall be the last; and that Sword he refuses,
If it but hold, I kill him with; it is Justice:
So love, and Fortune for me: O good morrow. Enter Arcite with (...) and Swords.

Arc. Good morrow noble kinesman,


Pal. I have put you
To too much pains Sir.

Arc. That too much fair Cosen.
Is but a debt to honor, and my duty.

Pal. Would you were so in all Sir; I could wish ye
As kind a kinsman, as you force me find
A beneficial foe, that my embraces
Might thank ye, not my blows.

Arc. I shall think either
Well done, a noble recompense.

Pal. Then I shall quit you.


Arc. Defy me in these fair terms, and you show
More then a Mistress to me, no more anger
As you love any thing that is honorable;
We were not bred to talk man, when we are armed
And both upon our guards, then let our fury
Like meeting of two tides, fly strongly from us,
And then to whom the birthright of this Beauty
Truly pertaines (without obbraidings, scorns,
Dispisings of our persons, and such powting^
Fitter for Girls and Schooleboyes) will be seen
And quickly, you^s, or mine: wilt please you arm Sir,
Or if you feel your self not sitting yet
And furnishd with your old strength, i will stay Cosen
And every day discourse you into health,
As I am spard, your person I am friends with,
And I could wish I had not said I loved her
Though I had did; But loving such a Lady
And justifying my Love, I must not fly from't.

Pal. Arcite, thou art so brave an enemy
That no man but thy Cosen's fit to kill thee,
I am well, and lusty, choose your Arms.

Arc. Choose you Sir:


Pal. Will thou exceed in all, or do thou do it
To make me ^pare thee?

Arc. If you think so Cosen,
You are deceived, for as I am a Soldier.
I will not spare you.

Pal. That Is well said.


Arc. You Will find it


Pal. Then as I am an honest man and love,
With all the justice of affection
I Will pay thee soundly: This i will take.

Arc. That Is mine then,
I Will ar^e you first.

Pal. Do: pray thee tell me Cosen,
Where gotst thou this good Armor.

Arc. It Is the Dukes,
And to say true, I stole it; do I pinch you.

Pal. Noe.


Arc. Is It not too heavy?


Pal. I have worn a lighter,
But I shall make it serve.

Arc. I Will buckl't close.


Pal. By any means.


Arc. You care not for a Grand guard?


Pal. No, no, we will use no horses, I perceave
You would feign be at that Fight.

Arc. I am indifferent.


Pal. Faith so am I: good Cosen, thrust the buckle
Through far enough.

Arc. I warrant you.


Pal. My Caske now.


Arc. Will you fight bare-armd?


Pal. We shall be the ni^bler.


Arc. But use your Gauntlets though; those are o'th least,
Prithee take mine good Cosen.

Pal. Thank you Arcite.
How do I look, am I fallen much away?

Arc. Faith very little; love has usd you kindly.


Pal. I Will warrant thee, I Will strike home.


Arc. Do, and spare not;
I Will give you cause sweet ^osen.

Pal. Now to you Sir,
Me thinks this Armo'rs very like that, (...),
Thou wor'st that day the 3. Kings fell, but lighter.

Arc. That was a very good one, and that day
I well remember, you out did me Cosen,
I never saw such valor: when you chargd
Upon the left wing of the Enemy,
I spurd hard to come up, and under me
I had a right good horse.

Pal. You had indeed
A bright Bay I remember.

Arc. Yes but all
Was vainly labored in me, you outwent me,
Nor could my wishes reach you; yet a little
I did by imitation.

Pal. More by virtue,
You are modest Cosen.

Arc. When I saw you charge first,
Me thought I heard a dreadful clap of Thunder
Break from the Troop.

Pal. But still before that flew
The lightning of your valor: Stay a little,
Is not this piece too (...)?

Arc. No, no, it is well.


Pal. I would have nothing hurt thee but my Sword,
A bruise would be dishonor.

Arc. Now I am perfect.


Pal. Stand off then.


Arc. Take my Sword, I hold it better.


Pal. I thank ye: No, keep it, your life lies on it,
Here Is one, if it but hold, I ask no more,
For all my hopes: My Cause and honor guard me.

Arc. And me my love: * Is there ought else to say? They bow several ways:
then advance and stand.



Pal. This only, and no more: Thou art mine Aunts Son.
And that blood we desire to shed is mutual,
In me, thine, and in thee, mine: My Sword
Is in my hand, and if thou killst me
The gods, and I forgive thee; If there be
A place prepared for those that sleep in honor,
I wish his weary soul, that falls may win it:
Fight bravely Cos^, give me thy noble hand.

Arc. Here Palamon: This hand shall never more
Come near thee with such friendship.

Pal. I commend thee.


Arc. If I fall, curse me, and say I was a coward,
For none but such, dare die in these just Trials.
Once more farewell my Cosen,

Pal. Farewell Arcite.

Fight. Horns within: they stand.
Arc. Lo Cosen, lo, our Folly has undon us.


Pal. Why?


Arc. This is the Duke, a hunting as I told you,
If we be found, we are wretched, O retire
For honors sake, and safely presently
Into your Bush again; Sir we shall find
Too many hours to dye in, gentle Cosen:
If you be seen you perish instantly
For breaking prison, and I, if you reveal me,
For my contempt; Then all the world will scorn us,
And say we had a noble difference,
But base disposers of it.

Pal. No, no, Cosen
I will no more be hidden, nor put off
This great adventure to a second Trial
I know your cunning, and I know your cause,
He that faints now, shame take him, put thy self
Upon thy present guard.

Arc. You are not mad?


Pal. Or I will make the advantage of this hour
Mine own, and what to come shall threaten me,
I fear less then my fortune: know weak Cosen
I love Emilia, and in that i will bury
Thee, and all crosses else.

Arc. Then come, what can come
Thou shall know Palamon, I dare as well
Die, as discourse, or sleep: Only this fears me,
The law will have the honor of our ends.
Have at thy ^ife.

Pal. Look to thine own well Arcite.

Fight again. Horns. Enter Theseus, Hipolita, Emilia, P^rithous and train.
Theseus. What ignorant and mad malicious Traitors,
Are you? That against the tenor of my Laws
Are making Battle, thus like Knights appointed,
Without my leave, and Officers of Arms?
By Castor both shall dye.

Pal. Hold thy word Theseus,
We are certainly both Traitors, both despisers
Of thee, and of thy goodness: I am Palamon
That cannot love thee, he that broke thy Prison,
Think well, what that deserves; and this is Arcite
A bolder Traitor never trod thy ground
A Falser neu'r seemed friend: This is the man
Was begd and banished, this is he contemnes thee
And what thou dare do; and in this disguise
Against this own Edict follows thy Sister,
That fortunate bright Star, the fair Emilia
Whose servant, (if there be a right in seeing,
And first bequeathing of the soul to) justly
I am, and which is more, dares think her his.
This treachery like a most trusty Lover,
I called him now to answer; if thou be
As thou art spoken, great and virtuous,
The true descider of all injuries,
Say, Fight again, and thou shall see me Theseus
Do such a Justice, thou thy self wilt envy,
Then take my life, I Will woo thee to it.

Per. O heaven,
What more then man is this!

These. I have sworn.


Arc. We seek not
Thy breath of mercy Theseus, It Is to me
A thing as soon to dye, as thee to say it,
And no more moved: where this man calls me Traitor,
Let me say thus much; if in love be Treason,
In service of so excellent a Beutie,
As I love most, and in that faith will perish,
As I have brought my life here to confirm it,
As I have served her truest, worthiest,
As I dare kill this Cos^, that denies it,
So let me be most Traitor, and ye please me:
For scorning thy Edict Duke, ask that Lady
Why she is fair, and why her eyes command me
Stay here to love her; and if she say Traitor,
I am a villain fit to lie unburied.

Pal. Thou shall have pity of us both, o Theseus,
If unto neither thou show mercy, stop,
(As thou art just) thy noble ear against us,
As thou art valiant; for thy Cosens soul
Whose 12. strong labors crown his memory,
Lets die together, at one instant Duke,
Only a little let him fall before me,
That I may tell my Soul he shall not have her.

These. I grant your wish, for to say true, your Cosen
Has ten times more offended, for I gave him
More mercy then you found, Sir, your offenses
Being no more then his: None here speak for'em
For ere the Sun set, both shall sleep for ever.

Hipol. Asas the pity, now or never Sister
Speak not to be denide; That face of yours
Will bear the curses else of after ages
For these lost Cosens.

Emil. In my face dear Sister
I find no anger to 'em; nor no ruyn,
The misad venture of their own eyes kill'em;
Yet that I will be woman, and have pity,
My knees shall grow to the ground but I Will get mercy.
Help me dear Sister, in a deed so virtuous,
The powers of all women will be with us,
Moft royal Brother.

Hipol. Sir by our tie of Marriage.


Emil. By your own spotless honor.


Hip. By that faith,
That fair hand, and that honest heart you gave me.

Emil. By that you would have pity in another,
By your own virtues infi^ite.

Hip. By valor,
By all the chaste nights I have ever pleased you.

These. These are strange Conjurings.


Per. Nay then I^o in too: By all our friendship Sir, by all our dangers,
By all you love most, wars; and this sweet Lady.

Emil. By that you would have trembled to deny
A blushing Maid.

Hip. By your own eyes: By strength
In which you swore I went beyond all women,
Almost all men, and yet I yielded Theseus.

Per. To crown all this; By your most noble soul
Which cannot want due mercy, I beg first.

Hip. Next hear my prayers.


Emil. Last let me entreat Sir.


Per. For mercy.


Hip. Mercy.


Emil. Mercy on these Princes.


These. Ye make my faith reelc: Say I felt
Comp^ssion to'em both, how would you place it?

Emil. Upon their lives: But with their banishments.


These. You are a right woman Sister; you have pity,
B^t want the understanding where to use it.
If you desire their lives, invent a way
Safer then banishment: Can these two live
And have the agony of love about 'em,
And not kill one another? Every day
The'yld fight about you; howrely bring your honor
In public question with their Swords; Be wise then
And here forget 'em; it concerns your credit,
And my oath equally: I have said they die,
Better they fall by the law, then one another.
Bow not my honor.

Emil. O my noble Brother,
That oath was rashly made, and in your anger,
Your reason will not hold it, if such vows
Stand for express will, all the world must perish.
Beside, I have another oath, against yours
Of more authority, I am sure more love,
Not made in passion neither, but good heed.

These. What is it Sister?


Ber. Urge it home brave Lady.


Emil. That you would never deny me any thing
Fit for my modest suit, and your free granting:
I tie you to your word now, if ye fall in it,
Think how you maime your honor;
(For now I am set a begging Sir, I am deaf
To all but your compassion) how their lives
Might breed the ruin of my name; Opinion,
Shall any thing that loves me perish for me?
That were a cruel wisdom, do men proyne
The straight young Bows that blush with thousand Blossom^
Because they may be rotten? O Duke Theseus
The goodly Mothers that have groand for these,
And all the longing Maids that ever loved,
If your vow stand, shall curse me and my Beauty,
And in their funeral songs, for these two Cosens
Despise my cruelty, and cry woe worth me,
Till I am nothing but the scorn of women;
For heavens sake save their lives, and banish 'em.

These. On what conditions?


Emil. Sweare'em never more
To make me their Contention, or to know me,
To tread upon thy Duke dome, and to be
Where ever they shall travel, ever strangers to one another.

Pal. I Will be cut a pieces
Before I take this oath, forget I love her?
O all ye gods despise me then: Thy Banishment
I not mislike, so we may fairly carry
Our Swords, and cause along: else never trifle,
But take our lives Duke, I must love and will,
And for that love, must and dare kill this Cosen
On any piece the earth has.

These. Will you Arcite
Take these conditions?

Pal. H'es a villain then.


Per. These are men.


Arcite. No, never Duke: It Is worse to me than begging
To take my life so basely, though I think
I never shall enjoy her, yet i will preserve
The honor of affection, and dye for her,
Make death a Devil.

These. What may be done? for now I feel compassion.


Per. Let it not fall again Sir.


These. Say Emilia
If one of them were dead, as one mu^, are you
Content to take the other to your husband?
They cannot both enjoy you; They are Princes
As goodly as your own eyes, and as noble
As ever fame yet spoke of; look upon'em,
And if you can love, end this difference,
I give consent, are you content too Princes?

Both. With all our souls.


These. He that she refuses
Must dye then.

Both. Any death thou can invent Duke.


Pal. If I fall from that mouth, I fall with favor,
And Lovers yet unborne shall bless my ashes.

Arc. If she refuse me, yet my grave will wed me,
And Soldiers sing my Epitaph.

These. Make choice then.


Emil. I cannot Sir, they are both too excellent
For me, a hair shall never fall of these men.

Hip. What will become of 'em?


These. Thus I ordain it,
And by mine honor, once again it stands,
Or both shall dye. You shall both to your Country,
And each within this mo^eth accompanied
With three fair Knights, appear again in this place,
In which I Will plant a Pyramid; and whether
Before us that are here, can force his Cosen
By fair and knightly strength to touch the Pillar,
He shall enjoy her: the other loose his head,
And all his friends; Nor shall he grudge to fall,
Nor think he dies with interest in this Lady:
Will this content ye?

Pal. Yes: here Cosen Arcite
I am friends again, till that hour.

Arc. I embrace ye.


These. Are you content Sister?


Emil. Yes, I must Sir,
Else both miscarry.

These. Come shake hands again then,
And take ^eede, as you are Gentlemen, this Quarrel
Sleep till the hour prefixed, and hold your course,

Pal. We dare not fail thee Theseus.


These. Come, I Will give ye
Now usage like to Princes, and to Friends:
When ye return, who wins, I Will settle here,
Who looses, yet I Will weep upon his Beer. Exeunt.

Actus Quartus.
Scaena 1. Enter Iailor, and his friend.
Iailor. Hear you no more, was nothing said of me
Concerning the escape of Palamon?
Good Sir remember.

1. Fr. Nothing that I heard,
For I came home before the business
Was fully ended: Yet I might perceive
Ere I departed, a great likelihood
Of both their p^rdons: For Hipolita,
And faire-eyd Emilie, upon their knees
Begd with such hansom pity, that the Duke
Me thought stood staggering, whether ^e should follow
His ra^h o'th, or the sweet compassion
Of those two (...); and to second them,
That truly noble Prince P^rithous
Half his own heart, set in too, that I hope
All shall be well: Neither heard I one question
Of your name, or his escape.
Enter 2. Friend.
Iay. Pray heaven it hold so.


2. Fr: Be of good comfort man; I bring you news,
Good news.

Iay. They are welcome,


2. Fr. Palamon has cleerd you,
And got your pardon, and discoverd
How, and by whose means he escapt, which was your Daughters,
Whose pardon is procurd too, and the Prisoner
Not to be held ungrateful to her goodness,
Has given a sum of money to her Marriage.
A large one i will assure you.

Iay. Ye are a good man
And ever bring good news.

1. Fr. How was it ended?


2. Fr. Why, as it should be; they that never begd
But they prevaild, had their suites fairly granted,
The prisoners have their lives.

1. Fr. I knew it would be so.


2. Fr. But there be new conditions, which you will hear of
At better time.

Iay. I hope they are good.


2. Fr. They are honorable,
How good they will prove, I know not.
Enter Wooer.
1. Fr. It Will be known.


Woo. Alas Sir, where is your Daughter?


Iay. Why do you ask?


Woo. O Sir when did you see her?


2. Fr. How he looks?


Iay. This morning.


Woo. Was she well? was she in health? Sir, when did she sleep?


1. Fr. These are strange Questions.


Iay, I do not think she was very well, for now
You make me mind her, but this very day
I asked her questions, and she answered me
So far from what she was, so childishly.
So sillily, as if she were a fool,
An Inocent, and I was very angry.
But what of her Sir?

Woo. Nothing but my pity; but you must know it, and as good by me
As by an other that less loves her:

Iay. Well Sir.


1. Fr. Not right?


2. Fr. Not well? -- Wooer, No Sir not well.


Woo. It Is too true, she is mad.


1. Fr. It cannot be.


Woo. Believe you will find it so.


Iay. I half suspected
What you told me: the gods comfort her:
Either this was her love to Palamon,
Or fear of my miscarrying on his escape,
Or both.

Woo. It Is likely.


Iay. But why all this haste Sir?


Woo. I Will tell you quickly. As I late was angling
In the great Lake that lies behind the Palace,
From the far shore, thick set with reeds, and Sedges,
As patiently I was attending sport,
I heard a voice, a shrill one, and attentive
I gave my ear, when I might well perceive
It Was one that sung, and by the smallness of it
A boy or woman. I then left my angle
To his own skill, came near, but yet perceivd not
Who made the sound; the rushes, and the Reeds
Had so encompast it: I laid me down
And listened to the words she song, for then
Through a small glade cut by the Fi^her men,
I saw it was your Daughter.

Iay. Pray go on Sir?


Woo. She sung much, but no sense; only I heard her
Repeat this often. Palamon is gone,
Is gone to the wood to gather Mulberies,
I Will find him out to morrow.

1. Fr. Pretty soul.


Woo. His shackles will betray him, he will be taken,
And what shall I do then? I Will bring a ^eavy,
A hundred black eyd Maids, that love as I do
With Chaplets on their heads of Daffadillies,
With cherry-lips, and cheeks of Damask Rofes,
And all we will dance an Antique fore the Duke,
And beg his pardon; Then she talked of you Sir;
That you must loose your head to morrow morning,
And she must gather flowers to bury you,
And see the house made handsome, then she sung
Nothing but Willow, willow, willow, and between
Ever was, Palamon, fair Palamon,
And Palamon, was a tall young man. The (...)
Was knee deep where she sat; her careless Tresses,
A wreake of bull-rush rounded; about her stuck
Thousand fresh water flowers of several colors.
That me thought she appeard like the fair Nymph
That feeds the lake with waters, or as Iris
Newly dropped down from heaven; Rings she made
Of rushes that grew by, and to 'em spoke
The prettiest posies: Thus our truelove's tide,
This you may loose, not me, and many a one:
And then she wept, and s^ng again, and sighed,
And with the same breath smiled, and ki^ her hand.

2. Fr. Alas what pity it is?


Wooer. I made in to her.
She saw me, and s^raight sought the stood, I saved her,
And set her safe to land: when presently
She slipped away, and to the Gi^ty made,
With such a ^ry, and (...), that (...) me
She left me far behind her; (...), (...),
I saw from far off cross her (...)
I knew to be your brother, where (...) staid,
And fell, scarce to be got away: I left them with her. Enter Brother,
Daughter, and others.
And hither came to tell you: Here they are.

Daugh. May you never more (...) the light, etc.
Is not this a fine Song?

(...). O a very fine one.


Daugh. I can ^ing twenty more.


Bro. I think you can,


Daugh. Yes truly can I, I c^n sing the Broom,
And Bony Robin. Are not you a tailour?

Bro. Yes,


Daugh. Where Is my wedding Gown?


Bro. I Will bring it to morrow.


Daugh. Do, very rarely, I must be abroad else
To call the Maids, and pay the Minstrels
For I must loose my Maydenhead by cocklight
Twill never th^ive else.
O fair, oh sweet^, etc. Singes.
Bro. You must even take it patiently.


Iay. It Is true,


Daugh. Good'ev'n, good men, pray did you ever hear
Of one young Palamon?

Iay. Yes wench we know him.


Daugh. Is It not a fine young Gentleman?


Iay. It Is, Love.


Bro. By no mean cross her, she is then distemperd
For worse then now she shows.

1. Fr. Yes, he is a fine man.


Daugh. O, is he so? you have a Sister.


1. Fr. Yes.


Daugh. But she shall never have him, tell her so,
For a trick that I know, you had best look to her,
For if she see him once, she is gone, she is done,
And undon in an hour. All the young Maids
Of our Town are in love with him, but I laugh at'em
And let 'em all alone, Is It not a wise course?

1. Fr. Yes.


Daugh. There is at least two hundred now with child by him,
There must befowre; ye^ I keep close for all this,
Close as a Cockle; and all these must be Boys,
He has the trick on it, and at ten years old
They must be all (...) for (...),
And sing the wars of Thesem.

2. Fr. This is strange.


Daugh. As ever you heard, but say nothing.


1. Fr. No.


Daugh. They come from all parts of the Dukedom to him,
I Will warrant ye, he had not so few last night
As twenty to dispatch, he will tickl't up
In two hours, if his hand be in.

Iay. She Is lost
Past all cure.

Bro. Heaven forbid man.


Daugh. Come hither, you are a wise man.


1. Fr. Does she know him?


1. Fr. No, would she did.


Daugh. You are mafter of a Ship?


Iay. Yes.


Daugh. Where Is your Compass?


Iay. Here.


Daugh. Set it too'th North.
And now direct your conrse to the wood, where Palamon
Lies longing for me; For the Tackling
Let me alone; Come waygh my hearts, cheerely.

All. Owgh, owgh, owgh, it is up, the wind's fair, top the
Bowling, out with the maine sail, where is your
Whistle Master?

Bro. Lets get her in.


Iay. Up to the top Boy.


Bro. Where Is the Pilot?


1. Fr. Here,


Daugh. What ken'st thou?


2. Fr. A fair wood.


Daugh. Bear for it master: take about:

Singes. When Cinthia with her borrowed light, etc. Exeunt.
Scaena 2. Enter Emilia alone, with 2. Pictures.
Emilia. Yet I may bind those wounds up, that must open
And bleed to death for my sake else; I Will choose,
And end their strife: Two such young hansom men
Shall never fall for me, their weeping Mothers,
Following the dead cold ashes of their Sons
Shall never curse my cruelty: Good heaven,
What a sweet face has Arcite? if wise nature
With all her best endowments, all those beuties
She sowes into the birthes of noble bodies,
Were here a mortal woman, and had in her
The coy denialls of young Maids, yet doubtless,
She would run mad for this man: what an eye?
Of what a fyry sparkle, and quick sweetness,
Has this young Prince? Here Love himself sits smyling,
Just such another wanton Ganimead,
Set Love a fire with, and enforcd the god
Snatch up the goodly Boy, and set him by him
A shining constellation: What a brow,
Of what a spacious Majesty he carries?
Arched like the great eyd Juno's, but far sweeter,
Smoother then Pelops Shoulder? Fame and honor
Mc thinks from hence, as from a Promontory
Pointed in heaven, should clap their wings, and sing
To all the under world, the Loves, and Fights
Of gods, and sueh men neere'em. Palamon,
Is but his foil, to him, a mere dull shadow,
He Is swarth, and meagre, of an eye as heavy
As if he had lost his mother; a still temper,
No stirring in him, no alacrity,
Of all this sprightly sharpenes, not a smile;
Yet these that we count errors may become him:
Narcissu^ was a sad Boy, but a heavenly:
Oh who can find the bent of woman's fancy?
I am a Fool, my reason is lost in me,
I have no choice, and I have ly'd so lewdly
That women ought to beat me. On my knees
I ask thy pardon: Palamon, thou art alone,
And only beutifull, and these the eyes,
These the bright lamps of beauty, that command
And threaten Love, and what young Maid dare cross 'em
What a bold gravity, and yet inviting
Has this brown manly face? O Love, this only
From this hour is Complexion: Lie there Arcite,
Thou art a changling to him, a mere Gipsey.
And this the noble Body: I am sotted,
Utterly lost: My Virgins faith has fled me.
For if my brother but even now had asked me
Whether I loved, I had run mad for Arcite,
Now if my Sister; More for Palamon,
Stand both together: Now, come ask me Brother,
Alas, I know not: ask me now sweet Sister,
I may go look; What a mere child is Pancie,
That having two fair gawdes of equal sweetness,
Cannot distinguish, but must cry for both.
Enter Emil. and Gent:
Emil. How now Sir?


Gent. From the Noble Duke your Brother
Madam, I bring you news: The Knights are come.

Emil. To end the quarrel?


Gent. Yes.


Emil. Would I might end first:
What sins have I committed, chaste Diana,
That my unspotted youth must now be soyld
With blood of Princes? and my Chastity
Be made the Altar, where the lives of Lovers,
Two greater, and two better never yet
Made mothers joy, must be the sacrifice
To my unhappy Beauty?
Enter Theseus, Hipolita, Perithous and attendants.
Theseus. Bring 'em in quickly,
By any means, I long to see'em.
Your two contending Lovers are returned,
And with them their fair Knights: Now my fair Sister,
You must love one of them.

Emil. I had rather both,
So neither for my sake should fall untimely
Enter Messengers. Curtis.
These. Who saw'em?


Per. I a while.


Gent. And I.


These. From whence come you Sir?


M^ss. From the Knights.


These. Pray speak
You that have seen them, what they are.

Mess. I will Sir,
And truly what I think: Six braver spirits
Then these they have brought, (if we judge by the outside)
I never saw, nor read of: He that stands
In the fitst place with Arcite, by his seeming
Should be a stout man, by his face a Prince,
(His very looks so say him) his complexion,
Nearer a brown, than black; stern, and yet noble,
Which shows him hardy, fearelesse, proud of dangers:
The circles of his eyes show fair within him,
And as a heated Lion, so he looks;
His hair hangs long behind him, black and shining
Like Ravens wings: his shoulders broad, and ftrong,
Armd long and round, and on his Thigh a Sword
Hung by a curious Bauldricke; when he frowns
To seal his will with, better of my conscience
Was never Soldiers friend.

These. Thou have well describde him.


Per. Yet a great deal short
Me thinks, of him that is first with Palamon.

These. Pray speak him friend.


Per. I guess he is a Prince too,
And if it may be, greater; for his show
Has all the ornament of honor in it:
He Is somewhat bigger, then the Knight he spoke of,
But of a face far sweeter; His complexion
Is (as a ripe grape) ruddy: he has felt
Without doubt what he fights for, and so apter
To make this cause his own: In's face appears
All the fai^e hopes of what he undertakes,
And when he is angry, then a settled valor
(Not tainted with extremes) runs through his body,
And guides his arm to brave things: Fear he cannot,
He shewesno such soft temper, his head's yellow,
Hard hayr'd, and curld, thick twind like Ivy tops,
Not to undo with thunder: In his face
The liverie of the warlike Maid appears,
Pure red, and white, for yet no beard has bleft him.
And in his rolling eyes, (...) victory.
As if she ever meant to corect his valor:
His Nose stands high, a Character of honor.
His red lips, after fights, are fit for Ladies.

Emil. Must these men die too?


Per. When he speaks, his tongue
Sounds like a Trumpet; All his lyneaments
Are as a man would wish 'em, strong, and clean,
He wears a well-steeld Axe, the staff of gold,
His age some five and twenty.

Mess. There Is another,
A little man, but of a tough soul, seeming
As great as any: fairer promises
In such a Body, yet I never looked on.

Per. O, he that is freckle faced?


Mess The same my Lord,
Are they not sweet ones?

Per. Yes they are well.


Mess. Me thinks,
Being so few, and well disposd, they show
Great, and fine art in nature, he is white hair'd,
Not wanton white, but such a manly color
Next to an aborne, tough, and nimble set,
Which shows an active soul; his arms are brawny
Linde with strong sine was: To the shoulder piece,
Gently they swell, like women new conceav'd,
Which speaks him prone to labor, never fainting
Under the weight of Arms; stout hearted, still,
But when he stirs, a Tiger; he is gray eyd,
Which yields compassion where he conquers: sharp
To spy advantages, and where he finds 'em,
He Is swift to make 'em his: He does no wrongs,
Nor takes none; he is round faced, and when he smiles
He shows a Lover, when he frowns, a Soldier:
About his head he wears the winners oak,
And in it stuck the favor of his Lady:
His age, some six and thirty. In his hand
He bears a charging Staff, embost with silver.

These. Are they all thus?


Per. They are all the sons of honor.


These. Now as I have a soul I long to see'em,
Lady you shall see men fight now.

Hip. I wish it,
But not the cause my Lord; They would show
Bravely about the Titles of two Kingdoms;
It Is pity Love should be so tyrannous:
O my soft hearted Sister, what think you?
Weep not, till they weep blood; Wench it must be.

These. You have steel'd'em with your Beauty: honored Friend,
To you I give the Field; pray order it,
Fitting the persons that must use it.

Per. Yes Sir.


These. Come, (...) go visit'em: I cannot stay.
Their fame has fired me so; Till they appear,
Good Friend be royal.

Per. There shall want no bravery.


Emilia. Poor wench go weep, for whosoever wins,
Looses a noble Cosen, for thy sins.
Exeunt.
Scaena 3. Enter Iailor, (...), Doctor.
Doct. Her distraction is more at some time of the Moon,
(...) at other some, is it not?

Iay. She is continually in a harmless distemper, sleeps
Little, altogether without appetite, save often drinking,
Dreaming of another world, and a better; and what
Broken piece of matter so'ere she is about, the name
Palamon lardes it, that she (...) every business Enter Daughter.
Withal, fyts it to every question; Look where
(...) comes, you shall perceive her behavior.

Daugh. I have forgot it quite; The burden o'nt, was down
A down a, and pend by no worse man, then
Girald, Emilias Schoolmaster; he is as
Fantastical too, as ever he may go upon's legs,
For in the next world will Dido see Palamon, and
Then will she be out of love with (...).

Doct. What stuff's here? pore soul.


Joy. Even thus all day long.


Daugh. Now for this Charm, that I told you of, you must
Bring a piece of silver on the tip of your tongue,
Or no feiry: then if it be your chance to come where
The blessed spirits, as the'rs a sight now; we maids
That have our Lyvers, perished, crakt to pieces with
Love, we shall come there, and do nothing all day long
But pick flowers with Proserpine, then will I make
Palamon a Nosegay, then let him mark me, -- then.

Doct. How prettily she is amiss? note her a little further.


Dau. Faith i will tell you, sometime we go to Barley break,
We of the blessed; alas, it is a sore life they have in the
The Other place, such burning, frying, boiling, hissing,
Howling, chattring, cursing, oh they have shroud
Measure, take heed; if one be mad, or hang or
Drown themselves, thither they go, Jupiter bless
Us, and there shall we be put in a Caldron of
Lead, and Usurers grease, amongst a whole million of
Cutpurses, and there boil like a Gamon of Bacon
That will never be enough.
Exit.
Doct. How her brain coins?


Daugh. Lords and Courtiers, that have got maids with
Child, they are in this place, they shall stand in fire up to the
Nav'le, and in ice up to the heart, and there th'offending part burns, and the
deceaving part freezes; in troth a very greevous punishment, as one would
think, for such a Trifle, beleve me one would marry a leaprous witch, to be
rid on it I Will assure you.

Doct. How she continues this fancy? It Is not an engraffed
Madness, but a most thick, and profound mellencholly.

Daugh. To hear there a proud Lady, and a proud City
wiffe, howl together: I were a beast and il'd call it good
sport: one cries, o this smoke, another this fire; One cries, o,
that ever I did it behind the arras, and then howles; the other
curses a suing fellow and her garden house.
(...). I will be true, my stars, my fate, etc.
Exit. Daugh.
Iay. What think you of her Sir?


Doct. I think she has a perturbed mind, which I cannot minister to.


Iay. Alas, what then?


Doct. Understand you, she ever affected any man, ere
She beheld Palamon?

Iay. I was once Sir, in great hope, she had fixd her
Liking on this gentleman my friend.

Woo. I did think so too, and would account I had a great
Pen-worth on it, to give half my slate, that both
She and I at this present stood unfainedly on the
Same terms.

Do. That intemprat surfeit of her eye, has distemperd the
Other senses, they may return and settle again to
Execute their preordaind faculties, but they are
Now in a most extravagant vagary. This you
Must do, Confine her to a place, where the light
May rather seem to steal in, then be permitted; take
Upon you (young Sir her friend) the name of
Palamon, say you come to eat with her, and to
Commune of Love; this will catch her attention, for
This her mind beats upon; other objects that are
Inserted tweene her mind and eye, become the prankes
And friskins of her madness; Sing to her, such green
Songs of Love, as she says Palamon has sung in
Prison; Come to her, stuck in as sweet flowers, as the
Season is mistres of, and thereto make an addition of
Some other compounded odours, which are grateful to the
Sense: all this shall become Palamon, for Palamon can
Sing, and Palamon is sweet, and every good thing, desire
To eat with her, crave her, drink to her, and still
Among, intermingle your petition of grace and acceptance
Into her favor: Learn what Maids have been her
Companions, and play-pheeres, and let them repair to
Her with Palamon in their mouths, and appear with
Tokens, as if they suggested for him, It is a falsehood
She is in, which is with fasehoods to be combated.
This may bring her to eat, to sleep, and reduce what is
Now out of square in her, into their former law, and
Regiment; I have seen it approved, how many ti^s
I know not, but to make the number more, I have
Great hope in this. I will between the passages of
This project, come in with my applyance: Let us
Put it in execution; and hasten the success, which doubt not
Will bring forth comfort.
Flourish. Exeunt.
Actus Quintus.
Sc^na 1. Enter Thesius, (...), Hipolita, attenda^ts.
T^s. Now let them enter, and before the gods
Tender their holy prayers: Let the Temples
Burn bright with sacred fires, and the Altars
In hallowed clouds commend their swelling Incense
To those above us: Let no due be wanting, Flourish of Cornets.
They have a noble work in hand, will honor
The very powers that love 'em.
Enter Palamon and Arcite, and their Knights.
Per. Sir they enter.


These. You valiant and strong hearted Enemies
You royal German foes, that this day come
To blow that nearenesse out that flames between ye;
Lay by your anger for an hour, and dove-like
Before the holy Altars of your helpers
(The all feared gods) bow down your stubborn bodies,
Your ire is more than mortal; So your help be,
And as the gods regard ye, fight with Justice,
I le leave you to your prayers, and betwixt ye
I part my wishes.

Per. Honor crown the worthiest.

Exit These^s, and his (...).
Pal. The glasso is running now that cannot finish
Till one of us expire: Think you but thus,
That were there ought in me which strove to show
Mine enemy in this business, were one eye
Against another: Arm oppressed by Arm:
I would destroy the offender, Coz, I would
Though parcel of my self: Then from this gather
How I should tender you.

Ar^. I am in labor
To push your name, your ancient love, our kindred
Out of my memory; and in the self same place
To seat something I would confound: So hoyst we
The sails, that must these vessels port even where
The heavenly Lymiter pleases.

Pal. You speak well;
Before I turn, Let me embrace thee Cosen
This I shall never do again.

Arc. One farewell.


Pal. Why let it be so: Farewell Coz.

Ex^nt Pala^n ^d his Knights.
Arc. Farewell Sir;
Knights, Kinsemen, Lovers, ye^ my Sacrifices
True worshippers of Mars, whose spirit in you
Expells the seeds of fear, and th'apprehension
Which still is farther off it, Go with me
Before the god of our profession: There
Require of him the heart^ of Lions, and
The breath of Tigers, yea the fearcenesse too,
Yea the speed also, to go on, I mean:
Else wish we to be Snayles; you know my prize
Must be dragged out of (...), force and great feate
Must put my Garland on, where she sticks
The Queen of Flowers: our intercession then
Must be to him that makes the Camp, a Cestron
Brymd with the blood of men: give me your aid
And bend your spirits toward him. They kneel^.
Thou mighty one, that with thy power have turned
Green Nepture into purple.
Comets prewarne, whose havocke in vaste Field
Vnearthed skulls proclaim, whose breath blows down,
The teeming Ceres foyzon, who do pluck
With hand armenypotent from forth blew clouds,
The ^asond Turrets, that both make, and break'st
The stony girthes of Cities: me thy puple,
Youngest follower of thy Dro^, (...) this day
With military skill, that to thy lawde
I may advance my Streamer, and by thee,
Be styled the Lord o'th day, give me great Mars
Some token of thy pleasure. Here they fall on their faces as formerly, and
there is heard ^langing of Armor, with a short (...) as the burst of a
Battle, whereupon they all rise and (...) to the Altar.
O Great Corrector of enormous times;
Shaker of ore-rank States, thou grand decider
Of dustie, and old tytles, that healst with blood
The earth when it is sick, and cursed the world
O'th pluresie of people; I do take
Thy signs auspiciously, and in thy name
To my design; march boldly, let us go^.
Exeunt. Enter Palamon (...) his K^ights, with the former observance.
Pal. Our stars must glister with new fire, or be
To day extinct; our argument is love,
Which if the goddess of it grant, she gives
Victory too, then blend your spirits with mine,
You, whose free nobleness do make my cause
Your personal hazard; to the goddess Uenus
Commend we our proceeding, and implore
Her power unto our party. H^ they kneel as formerly.
Hail Sovereign Queen (...), who have power
To call the feircest Tyrant from his rage;
And weep unto a Girl; that have the might
Even with an ey-glance, to choke Marsis Drom
And turn th'allarme to whispers, that can make
A Criple flourish with his Cr^ch, and cure him
Before Apollo; that may force the King
To be his subjects vassaile, and induce
Stale gravitie to dance, the pould Bachelour
Whose youth like wanton Boys through Bonfyres
Have skipt thy flame, at seaventy, thou can catch
And make him to the scorn of his hoarse throat
Abuse young lays of love; what godlike power
Have thou not power upon? To (...) thou
Add'st flames, hotter then his the heavenly fyres
Did scortch his mortal Son, thine him; the huntresse
All moist and cold, some say began to throw
Her Bow away, and sigh: take to thy grace
Me thy vowed Soldier, who do bear thy yoke
As t'wer a wreath of Roses, yet is heavier
Then Lead it self, stings more than Nettles;
I have never been foul mouthd against thy law,
Never reveald secret, for I knew none; would not
Had I kend all that were; I never practiced
Upon man's wife, nor would the Libells read
Ofliberall wits: I never at great feasts
Sought to betray a Beauty, but have blushed
At simpring Sirs that did: I have been harsh
To large ^onfessors, and have hotly asked them
If they had Mothers, I had one, a woman,
And women t'wer they wronged. I knew a man
Of eighty winters, this I told them, who
A Less of fourteen brided, it was thy power
To put life into dust, the aged Crampe
Had screwed his square foot round,
The Gout had knit his fingers into knots,
Torturing Convulsions from his globie eyes,
Had almost drawn their spheeres, that what was life
In him seemed torture: this Anatomy
Had by his young fair pheare a Boy, and I
Believed it was his, for she swore it was,
And who would not believe her? brief I am
To those that prate and have done; no Companion
To those that boast and have not; a defyer
To those that would and cannot; a Rejoycer,
Yea him I do not love, that tells close offices
The fowlest way, nor names concealements in
The boldest language, such a one I am,
And vow that lover never yet made sigh
Truer then I. O then most soft sweet goddess
Give me (...) victory of this question, which
Is true loves merit, and bless me with a sign
Of thy great pleasure.

Here Musicks is heard, Doves are seen to flutter, they fall again upon their
faces, then on their knees. Pal. O thou that from eleven, to ninety raign'st
In mortal bosoms, whose chase is this world
And we in herds thy game; I give thee thanks
For this fair Token, which being laid unto
Mine innocent true heart, arms in assurance They bow.
My body to this business. Let us rise
And bow b^ore the goddess: Time comes on.
Exeunt. Still Music of Records. Enter Emilia in white, her hair about her
shoulders, a wheaten wreath: One in white holding up her train, her hair
stuck with flowers: One before her carrying a silver Hynde, in which his
conveyed Incense and sweet odours, which being set upon the Altar her maids
standing a loofe, she sets fire to it, then they curtsey and kneel.
Emilia. O sacred, sh^dowie, cold and constant Queen,
Abandoner of Revells, mute contemplative,
Sweet, solitary, white as chaste, and pure
As windefand Snow, who to thy femall knights
Alow'st no more blood than will make a blush,
Which is their orders robe. I here thy Priest
Am humbled fore thine Altar, O vouchsafe
With that thy rare green eye, which never yet
Behe^d thing maculate, look on thy virgin,
And sacred silver Mistress, lend hine ear
(Which (...) heard scurrill term, into whose port
Never entered wanton sound,) to my petition
Seasond wi^h ho^y fear; This is my last
Of vestall office, I am (...) habited,
But mayd^n hearted, a husband I have poin^ed,
But do not know him out of two, I should
Choose one, and pray for his success, but I
Am guiltless of election of mine eyes,
Were I to loose one, they are equal precious,
I could doombe neither, that which perished should
Go to it unsentenc'd: Therefore most modest Queen,
He of the two Pretenders, that best loves me
And has the truest ti^ in it, Let him
Take off my wheaten Gerland, or else grant
The fyle and qualitiel hold, I may
Continue in thy Band. Here the Hynde vanishes under the Altar: and in the
place ascends a Rose Tr^e, having one Rose upon it.
See what our General of Ebbs and Flows
Out from the bowels of her holy Altar
With sacred act advances: But one Rose,
If well inspird, this Battle shall confound
Both these brave Knights, and I a virgin flower
Must grow alone unpl^ck'd. Here is heard (...) sudden twang of Instruments,
and the Rose falls from the Tree.
The flower is fallen, the Tree descends: O Mistress
Thou here dischargest me, I shall be gathered,
I think so, but I know not thine own will;
Unclasp thy Mystery: I hope she is pleased,
Her Signs were gracious.
They curtsey and Exeunt.
Scaena 2. Enter Doctor, Iaylor and Wooer, in habit of Palamon.
Doct. Has this advice I told you, done any good upon her?


Wooer. O very much; The maids that hept her company
Have half persuaded her that I am Palamon; within this
Half hour she came smiling to me, and asked me what I
Would cate, and when I would kiss her: I told her
Presently, and kissed her twice.

Doct. T was well done; twenty times had bin far better,
For there the cure lies ^inely.

Wooer. Then she told me
She would watch with me to night, for well she knew
What hour my fit would take me.

Doct. Let her do^ so,
And when your fit comes, fit her home,
And presently.

Wooer. She would have me sing.


Doctor. You did so?


Wooer. No.


Doct. It Was very i^l done then,
You should observe her every way.

Wooer. Alas
I have no voice Sir, to confirm her that way.

Doctor. That Is all one, if ye make a noise,
If she entreat again, do any thing,
Lie with her if she ask you.

Iaylor. Hoa there Doctor.


Doctor. Yes in the way of cure.


Iaylor But first by your leave
In The way of honesty.

Doctor. That Is but a niceness,
Never cast your child away for honesty;
Cure her first this way, then if shoe will be honest,
She has the path before her.

Iaylor. Thank ye Doctor.


Doctor. Pray bring her in
And let us see how she is.

Iaylor. I will, and tell her
Her Falam^n stays for her: But Doctor,
Me thinks you are in the wrong still.
Exit Iaylor.
Doct. ^oe, go: you Fathers are fine Fools: her honesty?
And we should give her physic till we find that:

W^. Why, do you think she is not honest Sir?


Doctor. How old is she?


Wooer. She Is eighteen.


Doctor. She may be,
But that is all one, it is nothing to our purpose,
What ere her Father says, if you perceave
Her mood inclining that way that I spoke of
Videlicet, the way of flesh, you have me.

Wooer. Yet very well Sir.


Doctor. Please her appetite
And do it home, it cures her ips^ facto,
The mellencholly humor that infects her.

Wooer. I am of your mind Doctor.

Enter Iaylor, Daughter, Maid.
Docter. You Will find it so; she comes, pray honor her.


Iaylor. Come, your Love Palamon stays for you child,
And has done this long hour, to visit you.

Daughter. I thank him for his gen^le patience,
He Is a kind Gentleman, and I am much bound to him,
Did you never see the horse he gave me?

Iaylor. Yes.


Daugh. How do you like him?


Iaylor. He Is a very fair one.


Daugh. You never saw him dance?


Iaylor. No.


Daugh. I have often.
He daunces very finely, very comely,
And for a Iigge, come cut and long tail to him,
He turns ye like a Top.

Iaylor. That Is fine indeed.


Daugh. He Will dance the Morris twenty mile an hour,
And that will founder the best hobbyhorse
(If I have any skill) in all the parish,
And gallops to the turn of Light a'love,
What think you of this horse?

Iaylor. Having these virtues
I think he might be brought to play at Tennis.

Daugh. Alas that is nothing.


Iaylor. Can he write and read too.


Daugh. A very fair hand, and casts himself th'accounts
Of all his hay and provender: That Hostler
Must rise betime that cozens him; you know
The Chestnut Mare the Duke has?

Iaylor. Very well.


Daugh. She is horribly in love with him, poor beast,
But he is like his master coy and scornful.

Iaylor. What dowry has she?


Daugh. Some two hundred Bottles,
And twenty strike of Oa^s; but he will never have h^
He lispes in's neighing able to entice
A Millars Mare,
H^l be the death of her.

Doctor. What stuff she utters?


Iaylor. Make curtsie, here your love comes.


Wooer. Pretty soul
How do ye? that is a fine maid, there is a curtsie.

Daugh. Yours to command ith way of honesty;
How far is it now to the end o'th world my Masters?

Doctor. Why a days Journey wench.


Daugh. Will you go with m^?


Wooer. What shall we do there wench?


Daugh. Why play at stool ball.
What is there else to do?

Wooer. I am content
If we shall keep our wedding there.

Daugh. It Is true
For there I will assure you, we shall find
Some blind Priest for the purpose, that will venture
To marry us, for here they are nice, and foolish;
Besides my father must be hanged to morrow
And that would be a blot in the (...)
Are not you Palamon?

Wooer. Do not you know me?


Daugh. Yes, but you care not for me; I have nothing
But this pore petticoate, and too corse Smockes.

Wooer. That Is all one, I will have you.


Daugh. Will you surely?


Wooer. Yes by this fair hand will I.


Daugh. We Will to bed then.


Wooer. Even when you will.


Daugh. O Sir, you would feign be nibling.


Wooer. Why do you rub my kiss off?


Daugh. It Is a sweet one,
And will perfume me finely against the wedding.
Is not this your Cosen Arcite?

Doctor. Yes sweetheart,
And I am glad my Cosen Palamon
Has made so fair a choice.

Daugh. Do you think he will have me?


Doctor. Yes without doubt.


Daugh. Do you think so too?


Iaylor. Yes.


Daugh. We shall have many children: Lord, how you are grown,
My Palamon I hope will grow too finely
Now he is at liberty: Alas poor Chicken
He was kept down with hard meat, and ill lodging
But i will kiss him up again.
Enter a Messenger.
Mess. What do you here, you will loose the noblest sight
That ever was seen.

Iaylor. Are they in the Field?


Mess. They are
You bear a charge there too.

Iaylor. I Will away straight
I must even leave you here.

Docter. Nay we will go with you,
I will not loose the Fight.

Iaylor. How did you like her?


Doctor. I Will warrant you within these 3. or 4 days
I Will make her right again. You must not from her
But still preserve her in this way.

Wooer. I will,


Doc. Lets get her in.


Wooer. Come sweet we will go to dinner
And then we will play at Cards.

Daugh. And shall we kiss too?


Wooer. A hundred times


Daugh. And twenty.


Wooer. I and twenty.


Daugh. And then we will sleep together.


Doc. Take her offer.


Wooer. Yes marry will we.


Daugh. But you shall not hurt me.


Wooer. I will not sweet.


Daugh. If you do (Love) i will cry.

Flourish Exe^t.
Seaena 3. Enter Theseus, Hipolita, Emilia, Peritbous: and some Attendants, T.
Tucke: Curtis.
Emil. I Will no step further.


Per. Will you loose this sight?


Emil. I had rather see a wren hawke at a fly
Then this decision every; blow that falls
Threats a brave life, each str^ake laments
The place whereon it falls, and sounds more like
A Bell, then blade: I will stay here,
It is enough my hearing shall be punishd,
With what shall happen, against the which there is
No deaffing, but to hear; not taint mine eye
With dread sights, it may shun.

Pir. Sir, my good Lord
Your Sister will no further.

These. Oh she must.
She shall see deeds of honor in their kind,
Which sometime show well pencild. Nature now
Shall make, and act the Story, the belief
Both sealed with eye, and ear; you must be present,
You are the victours meede, the price, and garlond
To crown the Questions title.

Emil. Pardon me,
If I were there, I Would wink

These. You must be there;
This Trial is as t'wer in the night, and you
The only star to shine.

Emil. I am extinct,
There is but envy in that light, which shows
The one the other: darkness which ever was
The dam of horror, who does stand accursed
Of many mortal Millions, may even now
By casting her black mantle over both
That neither could find other, get her self
Some part of a good name, and many a murder
Set off whereto she is guilty.

Hip. You must go.


Emil, In faith I will not.


These. Why the knights must kindle
Their valor at your eye: know of this war
You are the Treasure, and must needs be by
To give the Service pay.

Emil, Sir pardon me,
The title of a kingdom may be tried
Out of it self.

These. Well, well then, at your pleasure,
Those that remain with you, could wish their office
To any of their Enemies.

Hip. Farewell Sister,
I am like to know your husband fore your self
By some small start of time, he whom the gods
Do of the two know best, I pray them he
Be made your Lot.
Exeunt Theseus, Hipolita, Perithous, etc.
Emil. Arcite is gently visagd; yet his eye
Is like an Engyn bent, or a sharp weapon
In a sost sheath; mercy, and manly courage
Are bedfellowes in his visage: Palamon
Has a most menacing aspect, his brow
Is engraved, and seems to bury what it frowns on,
Yet sometime it is not so, but alters to
The quallity of his thoughts; long time his eye
Will dwell upon his object. Mellencholly
Becomes him nobly; So does Arcites mirth,
But Palamons sadness is a kind of mirth,
So mingled, as if mirth did make him sad,
And sadness, merry; those darker humors that
Stick misbecomingly on others, on them
Live in fair dwelling. Cornets. Trompets sound as to a charge.
Hark how you spurs to spirit do incite
The Princes to their proof, Arcite may win me,
And yet may Palamon wound Arcite to
The spoiling of his figure. O what pity
Enough for such a chance; if I were by
I might do hurt, for they would glance their eyes
Toward my Seat, and in that motion might
Omit a ward, or forfeit an offense
Which craved that very time: it is much better
(Cornets. a great cry and noice within crying a Palamon.)
I am not there, oh better never born^
Then minister to such harm, what is the chance?
Enter Servant.
Ser. The Crie's a Palamon.


Emil. Then he has won: It Was ever likely,
He lookd all grace and success, and he is
Doubtless the prim'st of men: I prithee run
And tell me how it goes.
Showt, and Cornets: Crying a Palamon.
Ser. Still Palamon.


Emil. Run and enquire, poor Servant thou have lost,
Upon my right side still I wore thy picture,
Palamons on the le^, why so, I know not,
I had no end in it; else chance would have it so. Another cry, and showt
within, and Cornets.
On the sinister side, the heart lies; Palamon
Had the best boding chance: This burst of clamor
Is sure the end o'th Combat.
Enter Servant.
Ser. They said that Palamon had Arcites body
Within an inch o'th Pyramid, that the cry
Was general a Palamon: But anon,
The Assistants made a brave redemption, and
The two bold Tytlers, at this instant are
Hand to hand at it.

Emil. Were they metamorphisd
Both into one; oh why? there were no woman
Worth so composd a Man: their single share,
Their noblenes peculier to the^, gives
The prejudice of disparity values shortness Cornets. Cry within, Arcite, Arcite.
To any Lady breathing -- More exulting?
Palamon still?

Ser. Nay, now the sound is Arcite.


Emil. I prithee lay attention to the Cry.
Cornets. a great sho^t and cry, Arcite, victory. Set both thine ^ares to the
business.

Ser. The cry is
Arcite, and victory, hark Arcite, victory,
The Combats consummation is proclaimed
By the wind Instruments.

Emil. Half sights saw
That Arcite was no babe: god's lyd, his richnes
And costlines of spirit looked through him, it could
No more be hid in him, then fire in flax,
Then humble banckes can go to law with waters,
That drift winds, force to raging: I did think
Good Palamon would miscarry, yet I knew not
Why I did think so; Our reasons are not prophets
When often our fancies are: They are coming off:
Alas poor Palamon.
Cornets. Enter Theseus, Hipolita, Pirithous, Arcite as victor, and attendants,
etc.
These. Lo, where our Sister is in expectation,
Yet quaking, and unsettled: Fairest Emily.
The gods by their divine arbitrament
Have given you this Knight, he is a good one
As ever struck at head: Give me your hands;
Receive you her, you him, be plighted with
A love that grows, as you decay;

Arcite. Emily,
To buy you, I have lost what is dearest to me,
Save what is bought, and yet I purchase cheapely,
As I do rate your value.

These. O loved Sister,
He speaks now of as brave a Knight as ere
Did spur a noble Steed: Surely the gods
Would have him die a Batchelour, least his race
Should show in the world too godlike: His behavior
So char^d me, that me thought Alcides was
To him a sow of lead: if I could praise
Each part of him to the all; I have spoke, your Arcut^
Did not loose by it; For he that was thus good
Encountered yet his Better, I have heard
Two emulous Philomels, beat the care o'th night
With their contentious throats, now one the higher,
Anon the other, then again the first,
And by and by out breasted, that the sense
Could not be judge between 'em: So it fared
Good space between these kinesmen; till heavens did
Make hardly one the winner: wear the Girlond
With joy that you have won: For the subdude,
Give them our present Justice, since I know
Their lives but pinch'em; Let it here be done:
The Sceane's not for our seeing, go we hence,
Right joyful, with some sorrow. Arm your prize,
I know you will not loose her: Hipolita
I see one eye of yours conceives a tear
The which it will deliver.
Flourish.
Emi^. Is this wynning?
Oh all you heavenly powers where is you mercy?
But that your wills have said it must be so,
And charge me live to comfort this unfriended,
This miserable Prince, that cuts away
A life more worthy from him, then all women;
I should, and would die too.

Hip. Infinite pity
That four such eyes should be so fixd on one
That two must needs be blind fort.

These. So it is.

Exeunt.
Scaena 4. Enter Palamon and his Knights pyniond: laylor, Executioner etc.
Guard.
There Is many a man alive, that has out lived
The love o'th people, yea in the selfsame state
Stands many a Father with his child; some comfort
We have by so considering: we expire
And not without men's pity. To live still,
Have their good wishes, we prevent
The loathsome misery of age, beguile
The Gowt and Rheum, that in lag hours attend
For gray approachers; we come toward the gods
Young, and unwapper'd not, halting under Cry^es
Many and stale: that sure shall please the gods
Sooner than such, to give us Nectar with 'em,
For we are more clear Spirits. My dear kinsemen.
Whose lives (for this poor comfort) are laid down,
You have sold 'em too too cheap.
1. K. What ending could be
Of more content? ore us the victors have
Fortune, whose title is as momentary,
As to us death is certain: A grain of honor
They not ore'-weigh us.

2. K. Let us bid farewell;
And with our patience, anger tottring Fortune,
Who at her certain'st reeles.

3. K. Come? who begins?


Pal. Even he that led you to this Banquet, shall
Taste to you all: ah ha my Friend, my Friend,
Your gentle daughter gave me freedom once;
You Will see it done now for ever: pray how do'es she?
I heard she was not well; her kind of ill
gave me some sorrow.

Iaylor. Sir she is well restored,
And to be married shortly.

Pal. By my short life
I am most glad on it; It Is the latest thing
I shall be glad of, prithee tell her so:
Commend me to her, and to piece her portion
Tender her this.

1. K. Nay lets be offerers all.


2. K. Is it a maid?


Pal. Verily I think so,
A right good creature, more to me deserving
Then I can quight or speak of.

All K. Commend us to her.

They give their purses.
Iaylor. The gods requight you all,
And make her thankful.

Pal. Adieu; and let my life be now as short,
As my leave taking.
Lies on the Block.
1. K. Lead couragiour Cousin.


1. 2. K. Wec'l follow cheerfully.


A great noise within crying, run, save hold: Enter in have a Messenger. Mess.
Hold, hold, O hold, hold, hold.


Enter Pirithous in haste. Pir. Hold hoa: It is a cursed have you (...)
If you have done so quickly: noble Palamon,
The gods will show their glory in a life.
That thou art yet to lead.

Pal. Can that be,
When Venus I have said is false? How do things fare?

Pir. Arise great Sir, and give the tidings (...)
That are most early sweet, and bitter.

Pal. What
Has wakt us from our dream?

Pir. List then: your Cosen
Mounted upon a Steed that Emily
Did first bestow on him, a black one, owing
Not a hair (...) of white, which some will say
Weakens his (...), and many will not buy
His goodness with this note: Which superstition
(...) finds allowance: On this horse is Arcite
Trotting the stones of Athens, which the Calkins
Did rather tell, then trample; for the horse
Would make his length a mile, if it pleased his Rider
To put pride in him: as he thus went counting
The flinty pavement, dancing as t'wer to the Music
His own (...) made; (for as they say (...) iron
Came Musickes origin) what (...) Flint,
Cold as old Saturn, and like him possessed
With fire male volent, darted a Spark
Or what feirce sulphur else, to this end (...),
I comment (...); the hot horse, hot as fire
Took Toy at this, and fell to what disorder
His power could give his will, bounds, comes on end,
Forgets school doing, being therein traind,
And of kind mannadge, pig-like he whines
At the sharp Rowell, which he freats at rather
Then any jot obaies; seeks all foul means
Of boystrous and rough Iadrie, to dis-seate
His Lord, that kept it bravely: when naught served,
When neither Curb would crack, girth break nor diffring plunges
Dis-roote his Rider whence he grew, but that
He kept him tweene his legs, on his hind hoofes on end he stands
That Arcites legs being higher then his head
Seemed with strange art to hang: His victoros wreath
Even then fell off his head: and presently
Backward the lade comes ore, and his full poyze
Becomes the Riders load: yet is he living.
But such a vessel (...), that floates but for
The surge that next approaches: he much desires
To have some speech with you: Lo he appears. Enter Theseus, Hipolita,
Emilia, Arcita, in a chair.

Pal. O miserable end of our alliance
The gods are (...) Arcite, if thy heart,
Thy worthy, manly heart be yet unbroken;
Give me thy last words, I am Palamon,
One that yet loves thee dying.

Arc. Take Emilia
And with her, all the worlds joy: Reach thy hand,
Farewell: I have told my last hour; I was false,
Yet never treacherous: Forgive me Cosen:
One (...) from fair Emilia: It Is done:
Take her: I die.

Pal. Thy brave soul (...) Elikium.


(...). I Will close thine eyes Prince; blessed souls be with thee,
Thou art a right good man, and while I live,
This day I give to tears.

Pal. And I to honor.


These. In this place first you fought: even very here
I sundred you, acknowledge to the gods
Our thanks that you are living:
His part is played, and though it were too short
He did it well: your day is lengthned, and,
The blissful dew of heaven does arowze you.
The powerful (...), well has graced her Altar,
And given you your love: Our Master Mars
Have vouched his Oracle, and to Arcite gave
The grace of the Contention: So the Deities
Have showed due justice: Bear this hence.

Pal. O Cosen,
That we should things desire, which do cost us
The loss of our desire; That naught could buy
Dear love, but loss of dear love.

These. Never (...)
Did play a subtler (...): The conquered triumphs,
The victor has the Loss: yet in the passage,
The gods have been most equal: Palamon,
Your kinseman has confessed the right o'th Lady
Did lie in you, for you first saw her, and
Even then proclaimd your fancy: He restord her
As your stolen Jewel, and desired your spirit
To send him hence forgiven; The gods my justice
Take from my hand, and they themselves become
The Executioners: Lead your Lady off;
And call your Lovers from the stage of death,
Whom I adopt my Frinds. A day or two
Let us look sadly, and give grace unto
The Funeral of Arcite, in whose end
The visages of (...) we will put on
And smile with Palamon; for whom an hour,
But one hour since, I was as dearly sorry,
As glad of Arcite: and am now as glad,
As for him sorry. O you heavenly Charmers,
What things you make of us? For what we lack
We laugh, for what we have, are sorry still,
Are children in some kind. Let us be thankful
For that which is, and with you leave dispute
That are above our question: Let Us go off,
And bear us like the time:
Flourish. Exeunt.
EPILOGVE.
I Would now ask ye how ye like the Play,
But as it is with School Boys, cannot say,
I am cruel fearful: pray yet stay a while,
And let me look upon ye: No man smile?
Then it goes hard I see; He that has
Loved a young hansome wench then, show his face:
It Is strange if none be here, and if he will
Against his Conscience let him hiss, and kill
Our Market: It Is in vain, I see to stay ye,
Have at the worst can come, then; Now what say ye?
And yet mistake me not: I am not bold
We have no such cause. If the tale we have told
(For it is no other) any way content ye)
(For to that honest purpose it was meant ye)
We have our end; and ye shall have ere long
I dare say many a better, to prolong
Your old loves to us: we, and all our might,
Rest at your service, Gentlemen, good night.
Flourish.

FINIS.

