THE ARGVMEN^ Of the PASTORAL of Florimen^ with the Description of the Scoenes
and Intermedij.

PRESENTED BY THE Queens MATESTIES Commandment, before the Kings Majesty in
the Hall at White Hall, on S. THOMAS day the 21. of December. M.DC.XXXV.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Walkley, near White Hall. 1635

The names of the Persons in this Pastoral.
FLorimene a shepherdess. Filene, a shepherd of Arcadia, disguised in the
habit of a Woman, calls himself Dorine, in Love with Florimene. Anfrize, a
shepherd in love with Florimene. Lucinde, a shepherdess in Love with
Aristee. Aristee, a shepherd, brother to Florimene, in Love with the feigned
Dorine. Lycoris a shepherdess of Arcadia, disguised in the habit of a Man,
in Love with Filene. Florelle a shepherdess, friend to Florimene. Damon a
shepherd, Friend to Filene. Filandre a shepherd, Friend to Anfrize. Diana, a
Goddess. Clarice, Diana's Nymph.
THE DESCRIPTION OF the Scoene.
THe Ornament enclosing the Scoene, was made of a Pastoral invention, proper
to the subject, with a figure sitting on each side, representing a noble
shepherd and shepherdess, playing on Rural instruments, over them Garlands
held up by naked Boys, as the prize of their Uictory.

Above all, ran a large Freese, and in it children in several postures,
imitating the Pastoral Rights and sacrifices, in the midst was placed a rich
compartment, in which was written FLORIMENE.

The curtain being drawn up, the Scoene was discovered, consisting of Groves,
Hills, Plains, and here and there scattering, some shepherds cottages, and a
far off, to terminate the sight, was the main Sea, expressing this place to be
the Isle of Delos.

Fame enters and speaks the Prologue to his MAJESTY. SHould I appear holding,
etc.

Exit Fame. The Jntroduction.
THe Scoene changes into a stately Temple, with a Portico of two rows of
Collumes, and in the midst on a Pedestall was raised the Statue of Diana, unto
whom this Temple was dedicated.

The Music enters, representing the Priests of Diana, with the Arch Flamine
and Sacrificers, who sing this Song. Solue du Solier Honneur, etc.

The while the Priests sings, the high Priest passes between them, and goes
into the Temple, all the Shepherds and Shepheardesses present their offerings
to Diana, after which is sung this song. Any devant nostre soliel, etc.

The Scoene returns to the Isle of Delos.

Actus 1. Scoena prima.
DAmon a Shepherd, dwelling in the Isse o^ Delos, having visited Filene a
young shepherd, one of his intimate Friends, living in Arcadia, persuades
Filene to go with him into his Country of Delos, to see the solemnity which by
the shepherds and shepheardesses, were to be celebrated in honor of Diana;
and being there arrived, Damon conducted him to the Temple, where after Filene
had well considered the beauty of all the shepheardesses, fell deeply in Love
with Florimene: He finds his Friend Damon, and tells him of his new flame,
which having never felt before; desires his help to ease his passion. Damon
promises him all favorable assistance: he knowing best the humor of
Florimene, being his Kinswoman, and his sister Florelle her daily Companion,
he persuades Filene to disguise himself in the habit of a woman, and call his
name Dorine, and promises him that his sister Florelle shall bring him to see
Florimine, to which Filene consenting, they go to find out Florelle.

Scoena 2.
ANfrize comes forth with his Friend Filandre, to whom he recounteth how much
the beauty of Florimene had ravished his senses, and that he can no longer
live without expressing his affection to her: Filandre who being free from the
passions of Love, counsels him to leave that fond inclination; but seeing he
could not divert him, promises to ^reat with Florimene's friends to that
purpose: Anfrize satisfied with that promise, gives him thanks, and then goes
forth.

Scoena 3.
FLorimene being yet free from any touch of Love, comes to seek some sollitary
place, where she might entertain her self with the pleasure of her free
thoughts: thither Damon and his sister Florelle immediately come, and espying
Florimene, Damon sends his sister to her to speak in favor of Filene, who at
that time was at her house, disguising himself in the habit of a woman:
Florelle comes to Florimene, and tells her there was a young Shepherdess,
lately come from an neighboring Island, to see the celebration of the great
feast which was prepared in honor of Diana, and that if she pleased to see
her, she should find her a Shepherdess accomplished in all perfections:
Floremene desirous to see her; Florelle willed her to stay at that Fountain,
whilst she fetches the strange Shepherdess.

Scoena 4.
ARistee a shepherd of the I Will of Delos, is followed by Lucinde a young
shepherdess, passionately in love with him, she tells him the pain she
suffers by his unkindnesse, but he contemnes her, and leaves her to her
plaints. Lucinde seeing her self despised, yet takes courage, and resolves the
more Aristee disdaines her, the more she will follow him, hoping in the end he
will love her, for her constancy.

The first Intermedium.
THe Scoene is changed into a snowy Land-schipe with leave-lesse trees, and a
dusky sky, and here and there some houses for shelter, expressing the Winter.

VVinter Enters. AN old Man, and sings some French Uerses in praise of the
King: after him follows four old Men leaning upon their staves; in habits of
the old fashion. They dance, and so go off.

Actus 2. Scoena 1.
The Scoene, the Isle of Delos. Diana discends in her Chariot. DIana out of her
affection to the Inhabitants of Delos, having left the Heaven, and descended
unto the Earth, to take the pleasure of hunting, to which effect she called one
of her Nymphs to follow her in that exercise.

Scoena 2.
FLorimene sitting at the Fountain, thinks that Florelle stays too long; but
seeing her coming with the young shepherdess (which was the disguised
Filene) hindered her further reprehension: Florimene seems well pleased with
the acquaintance of Dorine, and Dorine much joyed to be in the presence of
Florimene. Their salutations being past, Dorine speaks with Florelle,
embracing her with great joy; Florelle desires her not to show her self to be
transported, least Florimene might suspect some thing: after many complements
passed on both sides, Florimene desires Dorine not to take it unkindly, if she
leave her company so soon, and prays herto be excused because it is late, and
desires her to continue the affection professed to her, and promises to meet
her in the same place the next day, to have the honor of her conversation; and
so goes out: Dorine says to Florelle, they must go seek Damon, to tell him
of their success.

Scoena 3.
ARistee brother to Florimene, being hidden behind a Bush, the whilst his
sister and Dorine speak together, and taking Dorine for a woman, falls in Love
with her; and to the end he may discover his passion to her, he resolves to
be there the next day in the same place, and goes his way.

Scoena 4.
ANfrize meeting with his friend Filandre, demands of him what he has done,
who answers him, that it is not in his power to persuade Florimene from her
cruelty, but seeing how much pains Anfrize suffered; he tells him of a young
shepherdess which lodges at Damons house, who is so much in the good opinion
of Florimene, as he believes she can persuade her to be more gracious unto
him, if he do entreat her, to speak for him. Anfrize assuring himself of
the courtesy of that shephearnesse, goes to attempt that way.

Scoena 5.
LIcoris a shepherdess in love, and disdained of Filene puts her self into
man's apparel, and resolves never to leave him, until she persuades him to
love her.

The second Intermedium.
THe Scoene is varied, and there appears a spacious Garden, with walks,
perterraes, close Arbours, and Cypress trees, and in the farthest part stands
a delicious Villa, all which figureth the spring.

The Spring enters. And sings, after which enters three young couple of men and
maids, they dance and so retire.

Actus 3. Scoena 1.
The Scene; the Isle of Delos. DAmon having met with the fained Dorine, does
congratulate with him of the good success which his disguise had procured him
with his Mistress, and Councels him to loose no time, but discover unto
Florimene the affection he bears her: Filene having dissigned to follow his
Council, tells him that a young shepherd, called Anfrize, taking him for a
woman, has entreated him to speak to Florimene in his behalf, and under the
pretext of speaking for another, he hopes to dispose the thoughts of
Florimene, so well as to bring her to taste the power of love; he entreats
Damon not to leave him, for his presence would imbolden him to entertain
Florimeue with that subject, who presently comes in.

Scaena 2.
FLorimene seeing Dorine and Damon together, said to Damon, that without doubt,
he was in love with Dorine, and that she judged so by his melancholy
countenance: Damon marvailes to here her speak of love, which had always so
much disdayned it: Florimene answered, that love being a trouble to the
thoughts, and a depriving of liberty, she hated the very name of love: Dorine
taking her at that word, answers, that all things created had their being, and
their contentments from love, and then tells her of the great affection which
Anfrize had borne her, and seeing her well disposed to here her discourse of
him, she continues to speak further in his favor, until she was interrupted by
Anfri^e, who comes in.

Scoena 3.
ANfrize seeing Florimene, kneeles down, and desires her to hear him, he tells
her of the great pains, he has long suffered for her, which he never durst
presume to tell her, until now: Florimene having heard him speak, showed her
self to be very sencible of his pains, and tells him he may hope to be
rewarded for his long sufferance, and the more to assure him of her inclination
to love, she invites him to sit down by her under those Elmes, and Dorine to
come with her, who stays behind a while, exclaiming against fortune, and
blaming her own tongue, for having so well spoken for her rival: But resolves
to be revenged on Anfrize if he leaves not the love of Florimene.

Scoena 4.
ARistee comes to find Dorine, whom he verily believes to be a woman, and
speaks to her of the love he bares her, and as she refuses him, Lucinde who
is in love, but scorned by Aristee, comes in; who seeing him thus rejected by
Dorine rejoices to see him punished in the same kind as he disdained her:
Dorine being troubled with Aristees importunity, goes her way: And Lucinde not
able to persuade Aristee to love her, leaves the place: Aristee resolves to
gain the love of Dorine, and purposes to put on his sister Florimenes clothes,
unto whom he is very like, and being dressed like a woman, may be taken for
her, hoping by that means to sound the thoughts of Dorine.

Scaena 5.
CLarice a young Nymph comes to seek Diana, whom she thinks to be in the
woods, she discourses of the pleasure of hunting, and the discontentments
suffered by lovers.

The third Intermedium.
THe Scoene is turned into fields of Corn, meddowes with Hay-cocks, and shady
woods, showing a prospect of Summer.

Ceres enters Representing Summer, and sings, after her enters five reapers,
having sickles in the one hand, and ripe corn in the other: they dance and
then go forth.

Actus 4. Scoena 1.
The Scoene the Isle of Delos. DOrine comes to look for Florimene, to the end
she may tell her who she is, and discover her passions unto her; but she is
met by

Scoena 2.
ARistee, apparrelled in his sister Florimenes clothes, and he is so like her,
as Dorine takes him for Florimene, and in that belief, discovers unto him that
she loves Florimene, which has been the cause of her disguise: Aristee
astonished to here that Dorine is a man, goes his way without more speech,
Dorine seeing himself unkindely used: goes forth.

Scoena 3.
ARistee coms in again, much confused inknowing Dorine to be a man; and now
repents him of his disdain to Lucinde, and goes away with a resolution to
seek her out, and to tell all the world of the Imposture of Filene.

Scoena 4.
LIcoris a shepherdess of Arcadia who loved Filene having taken the habit of
a shepherd persevering in her love to him, and perceiving Lucinde to complain
of the ingratitude of her lover Aristee, she coms near her; and asks her if
she knows Filene, and tells her he is his elder brother; Lucinde says if he be
in that Country, he will not fail to come to that Fountain, where all the
shepherds do use to meet, and having well beheld Lycoris taking her for a
man, falls in love with him, and presently began to discover her affection, but
Lycoris not willing to abuse her, tells her the cause of her disguise, Lucinde
hearing that Lycoris was a maid, is ashamed, and went her ways, and Lycoris
goes forth to look for Filene.

Scoena 5.
ANfrize and Filandre speak together of the disguise of Filene: Anfrize fears
that when Filene shall discover himself, and asks pardon of Florimene, she
will forgive Filene, and disgrace him; and therefore to hinder that misfortune,
he desires Filandre, as his friend, to do his best to keep him in his
mistress grace.

Scoena 6.
FLorimene comes and knowing the desceit of Filene, complains of Florelle that
she did unkindly in not discovering unto her his disguise, being as she
conceives impossible, but she should know it, and forbids Florelle ever to
speak any more of him to her. The mean while Lycoris who heard all that was
said of Filene, was ravished with joy, and comes near to Florimene, and tells
her what she is, and that her love to Filene, caused her to leave her own
Country of Arcadia, and desires Florimene to speak to Filene in favor of her
who so much loves him, the which Florimene promises, and Filene comes in.

Scoena 7.
FIlene tells Damon, that he is much grieved that his disguise is discovered to
Florimene, not knowing how to remedy what is passed: he desires Damon to
council him; Damon advises him to speak to Florimene himself, and humbly ask
her pardon, which he doubts not but he may obtain; in the mean time Lycoris
draws near, and makes known to him the great pains which she has long
endured for him, and desires him to have pity on her. Filene says the same to
Florimene, and kneeling down, desires her pardon for his fault, and to have
pity of his long sufferance. But Florimene will by no means hear him speak,
but goes away with Floreble; that sudden departure, put Filene into
despairation; Damon seeks by persuasions to appease him; and Lycoris speaks to
him again of her love; but Filene will not give her any hope of his affection,
until she can obtain his pardon of Florimene: Lycoris promises him to do
what she can possible, and goes her way: Damon still comforts Filene with fresh
hope: they go forth.

Scena 8.
FLorelle shows unto Florimene the misery of Filene, whom she has put unto
despairation, Florimene beginning to relent; confesses she never hated Filene,
but has always affected him; wherefore she desires Florelle to go with her
to Dianes Temple, to pray the goddess that she may enjoy his love.

Scoena 9.
ARistee meeting with Lucinde desires him to forgive him his neglect of her
love; praying her now to accept him as her servant: But Lucinde rejects him,
and says that she cannot now love him, and so goes away; but he still follows
her, desiring her to have pity on him.

The fourth Intermedium.
THis Scoene becomes Hills of easy ascent, set all with Vines, the trees and
verdures, seeming somewhat faded, and in some parts are placed those vessels
fit for vintage, to express the propriety of Autumn.

Bacchus Enters. Representing Autumn, supported by two Satyrs and followed by
two Sileni, they sing; after them enterthree boon Companions; the first
attired like a Dutchman, having a bottle in his hand; the second like a
Soldier, with a Tobacco pipe and Bolonia Sausages; the third dressed in a
Fantastical habit, with a Gammon of Bacon, and other provision tied in a
Napkin; they dance, and then sit down to their Colation: When on the sudden,
four Satyrs come leaping in, at which affrighted, they run away, leaving
their Victuals behind them; the Satyrs strive for the Bottle, and then drink
one to the other, till being heat with Wine, they dance with wanton Action,
and so fall down a sleep: whilst they fleep, the Dutchman and the rest come
softly in, and steal away the Bottle of Wine, and their Meat.

Pan enters and dances, then awake the Satyrs; they kneel to Pan, as craving
pardon; they dance about him, and carry him out.

Actus 5. Scoena 1.
The Temple of Diana appears varied from the first; for no Scoene but that of
the Pastoral was twice seen. FLorimene being now enamored of Filene,
confesses her error in refusing the love of such an accomplished shepherd,
resolving that when she sees him, she will make known unto him how much she
loves him, whereupon Lycoris enters.

Scoena 2.
LYcoris comes forth to Florimene, and as much as she may with modesty,
desires her to admit Filene to see her, and speak with her, at first Florimene
seems to refuse her, but in the end she consents, and at that instant Filene
comes in: Lycoris goes to him, and tells him that she had obtained of Florimene
to hear him speak: so Lycoris goes her way, fearing to haere him protest more
love to Florimene then she desires to know.

Scoena 3.
FIlene aproaching near to Florimene, prostrates himself at her feet,
desiring her pardon, which Florimene willingly grants him, and moreover
promi^es him ever hereafter to love him; and that the jealousy of Anfrize, had
been the cause of her discourtesie toward him: Filene ravished with joy, to
find himself beloved of his Mist^esse, gives thanks to the Gods, that his
disguise had brought his dessignes to so good effect. During this discourse,
Filandre being hidden, hears all their talk, and goes to tell his friend
Anfrize, who presently comes in, in great fury, to reproach Florimene of her
inconstancy, just as Florimene and Filene were giving assurance to one another
of their mutual affections.

Scoena 4.
ANfrize seeing Filene so near to Florimene, begins to quarrel with him, but
Filene answered him so, that Anfrize became extreme furious, and passing the
bonds of civell respect, would have killed him with his dart, if Florimene had
not hindered him with her sheepe-hooke, telling him that for this indiscretion,
he must never pretend any part in her affection Anfrize kneeles down before
her, and desires her to excuse him, and that she would be pleased to remember
that he was the first that had the honor to love her, Filene kneeling down,
says as much for himself: But Florimene tells them both, they must go to the
Temple of Diana, and there pray Diana to declare which of them her deity would
appoint to be her husband, which she promises not to refuse after sentence
given by the goddess: when they are gone she prays her self to Diana, that
she may enjoy Filene.

Scoena 5.
ARistee continues his pursuit of Lucinde, who still contemnes him: Lycoris
comes in to look for Filene: Aristee comes to her, and prays her to speak to
Lucinde in his favor; but Lycoris could obtain nothing of her more then
himself. The mean while they are interrupted by the coming of the goddess
Diana, who enters, and they all kneel down.

Scoena 6.
DIana commands Lucinde to love Aristee, and to take him for her husband, and
then tells Lycoris, that Filene is her own brother, and that Montan is not her
father, as she has ever believed, but that he ^ooke her from Orcan, which had
saved her from the cruelty of a Satyr, which stole her from her Father Tytire
in Arcadia: Diana having ended her discourse, sees Filene and Anfrize,

Scoena 7.
WHo came to make their request to Diana, as Florimene commanded them, Diana
bid Anfrize speak first, who having recounted al his wealth and riches, which
he more presumed on then all other reasons, that he could allege for his
marrying of Florimene: then Diana commands Filene to speak, who could not
vaunt of his riches, but says, he had only his virtue to deserve her: Diana
pronounces her sentence in favor of Filene, and gives Lyeoris to Anfrize for
his wife, Florelle who has heard all this, wishes that her cousen Florimene
knew the news, At which

Scoena 8.
FLorimene appears; Florelle goes to her, and tells her the sentence of Diana,
concerning her marriage, with which Florimene was much joyed, she presently
perceives Filene with all the other shepherds and shepheardesses standing
before the Temple. Diana seeing Florimene, to confirm her joy, tells her she
must have Filene for her husband, and commands them both to continue their
affections, and bids Anfrize to content himself with that beauty which she
has appointed for him. They all give Diana thanks.

Here the Heavens open, and there appear many deities, who in their songs
express their agreements to these marriages. At which time the lovers and
their mistresses do protest one to another their mutual affections, and full
contentments: After which Diana dismisseth them.

FJNJS.

