A MONOMACHIE of MOTIVES in the mind of man: Or a Battle between VERTVES and
VICES of contrary quality. Wherein the imperfections and weaknesses of Nature
appear so naked, that any reasonable soul may soon see by what spirit he is
lead: Hereunto also, besides sundry devout prayers necessarily interlaced,
diverse golden sentences of S. BARNARD are annexed: and also a brief conclusion
of his upon this Theme, that Victory is obtained by resisting temptation.

Newly englished by Abraham Fleming.

James. 4, verses, 7, 8. 7 Resist the devil, and he will fly from you.

8 Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you.

Imprinted at London by H. Denham, Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

COMME IE TRUE.



TO THE Right Woorshipfull, Sir GEORGE Carey, Knight, Knight Marshall of her
Majesty's most Honorable household, Son and heir apparent to the right
Honorable Lord HENRY, Lord of Hunsdon, etc.
AND To the most virtuous and godly minded Lady, the Lady ELIZABETH his
wife, long life, and happy days.
OF AL THINGS under the sun (Right Woorshipfull (which are at greatest
disagreement, the motions of man's mind, by the judgment of the learned, are in
such a degree of contrariety, that they are said to be at mutual strife, by
reason of that same (...), which our corrupt nature, confirmed by evil
custom, does procure.

A proof hereof appears in the confession of that notable convert of Tarsus
in Cilicia, in whom (his apostolical vocation notwithstanding) this
opposition was so effectual, that he acknowleged a law in his members,
rebelling against the law of his mind, and leading him captive unto the law
of sin; whereupon he uttered this patheticall exclamation, O me miserum! Quis
me a corpore mortis huius vindicabit?

For doubtless, there is no reasonable creature consisting of soul and body,
in whose mind contrary motions are not encamped, making many a hot skirmish,
to amplify and enlarge the limits of their regiment; in so much that
oftentimes we see some soonke and swallowed up in seas of disquietnes, whiles
waiward will rages against right reason, Alternis ictibus sese mutuo
impetentes, and striving for superiority.

Hereunto are referred the good and bad lives of men, their thoughts, words,
deeds, and whole conversation, honest or dishonest: to the controlling of a
certain Greek proverb, supposed of some to be a doctrine void of all
contradiction, and thus cited of the Poet: (...); alluding to spirits, unto
whom they ascribed the full charge of man's life.

But to omit this controversy (Right Worshipful) so it is, that having read a
compendious discourse of a fatherly churchmans penning, entitled, V^rtutum
and vitiorum certamen, and seeing the same most lively describing the hidden
heart of man, and the variable state of the same, I found that it is nothing
else, but a continual temptation, and (as the patient Idume^an calls it)
Militia super terram: in consideration whereof, I have called this english
book derived out of latin, A Monomachie of motives in the mind of man, etc.

Which work written at the first in a foreign tongue, and for the common
behoof of well disposed people, turned into our own native speech, as
affoording very present remedies against the rebellious affections of flesh
and blood; I submit to your right woorshipfull protection, presuming of no
worsse acceptance, than my former labors have achieved, and for this and all
other offers of undeserved bounty, yielding no less thankefulnes, than my
bounden duty enioineth me to exhibit to so good a Patron.

Your Worships, by double duty bound, ABRAHAM FLEMING.

The names of such Vices and Virtues, as are specified in this book to be at
mutual hatred and strife: with the manner of their opposition or contrariety,
set forth in five Sections, and five and twenty several Combats, for order
sake.
The first Section of Assalts and Repulses, page 5.
Combat 1 Pride, page 5. against Humility, page 11. Combat 2 Vain glory, 17.
against Fear of God, 21. Combat 3 Hypocrisy, 26. against True religion, 32.
Combat 4 Disobedience, 37. against Submission, 42. Combat 5 Malicious envy,
48. against Brotherly agreement, 52. Five

The second Section of Assalts and Repulses, page 56.
Combat 6 Devilish hatred, 56. against Christian charity, 60. Combat 7
Excusing of sin, 66. against Due correction, 71. Combat 8 Wrath and rashness,
78. against Patience and forbearance, 84. Combat 9 Malapert controlling, 91.
against Mecknes or gentleness, 96. Combat 10 Swelling loftines, 101. against
Humble lowlines, 106. Five

The third Section of Assalts and Repulses, page 111.
Combat 11 Ungodly sorrow, 111. against Godly reioicing, 115. Combat 12
Slothful idleness, 123. against Virtuous exercise, 129. Combat 13 Loose
liberty, 135. against Contented staiednes, 140. Combat 14 Devilish
desperation, 146. against Faithful hope, 153. Combat 15 Insatiable couetosnes,
161. against Contempt of this world, 167. Five

The fourth Section of Assalts and Repulses, page 179.
Combat 16 Uncharitableness, 179. against Compassion, 187. Combat 17 Deceitful
dealing, 194. against Plain dealing, 201. Combat 18 Lieng and dissembling,
200. against Truth and equity, 213. Combat 19 Gluttony, 220. against
Temperance, 227. Combat 20 Excessive reioicing, 233. against Measurable
sorowing, 239. Five

The fifth Section of Assalts and Repulses, page 245.
Combat 21 Talkatiuenes, 245.Silence, 251. Combat 22 Dishonestie, 258. against
Honesty, 266. Combat 23 Filthy lechery, 275. against Chastity, 283. Combat
24 Whordome of heart, 291. against Cleannes of heart, 297. Combat 25 Love of this
world, against 306. Contempt of this world, 316. Five

A flourish to the several combats or conflicts following, being five and
twenty in number.
THere is a kind of persecution, both fierce and dangerous, within the bowels
of our own bodies which is enforced upon us, not by any material severity,
but by a certain contrariety of properties engendered in us by vice and virtue.

For, whiles pride and arrogancy do withstand lowlines and humility;
vainglory, the fear of Gods majesty; hypocrisy, true religion; contempt,
submission; envy, brotherly agreement; malicious hatred, mutual love;
reproachful slander, liberty of due correction; furious wrath, forbearing
patience; foolish frowardnes, commendable meekenes; irefull swelling,
satisfaction for proffered injuries; worldly pleasure, spiritual delectation;
slothful idleness, virtuous exercise; fugitive vagarantnes, or licentious
loosenes, steadfast stablenes and constancy; devilish despair, faithful hope;
greedy covetousness, despising of earthly vanities; hardness of heart, mercy
and charitablenes; deceit and robbery, plain dealing and innocence;
falsehood and lieng, truth and equity; insatiable gluttony, sparing
abstinence; unbridled reioicing, measurable sadness; excessive babbling,
discreet silence; filthiness and leacherie, chastnes and honesty; spiritual
whoredom, cleanness of heart; desire of this present world, love of the
celestial country. What are these, but a cruel and tyrannical persecution
of godly livers, for their virtues sakes?

O what a bitter battle! o what a sharp assalt is that of pride, which threw
Angels headlong out of heaven? which floong Adam and Eve out of Paradise? This
pride has other fellowe-souldiers assisting him in conflict, namely, vices of
sundry sorts, which we comprising in a brief sum, mean to discover.

But let us see what hard hold there is between the host of hell, and the host
of heaven, and how the weapons of Christ bear off, and break the blows of
the Devil.

The first Section, and first combat.
1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the vice ensuing,
PRIDE enters into thee, o man, through ignorance, because thou know not
thy self. And thus does ignorance engender pride; when thine own conceit
deceives thee, making thee believe, that thou art better than indeed thou art.
This is pride, this is the beginning of all sin, when thou art greater in
thine own eyes, than thou art in Gods sight, than thou art in truth, etc.

And therefore if thou will not be proud, o man, have knowledge of thy self; so
shall thou learn to be humble, lowly, and meek. Impenitencie follows
pride. For a proud heart waxes hard, past feeling, void of all godly remorse,
and parching dry through want of the deaw of spiritual grace. We know that
proud persons have no part nor fellowship with the Saints. Why then art thou
proud, o dirt and doong?

God spared not the Angels when they waxed proud, how much less will he
forbear thee, o rottennes and woorms meat? He did nothing; he wrought nothing;
he only conceived pride in his mind, and thought proudly in his heart;
whereupon, even in the twinkling of an eye, he was floong down headlong into
hell, with an irrecouerable fall. If an angel abode such bitter punishment,
only for the conceit of pride; what shall become of me dust and ashes, the
greatest part of whose life has been spent in pride? He sweld in heaven, I in
a doonghill.

Who will not judge that pride is more tolerable in a rich man, than in a
beggar, and yet both are abominable? Woe is me, that so mighty a power was so
sharply plagued, for having an high mind and hautie heart! What vengeanee
hangs over my head, for my daily practicing of pride, for my lofty looks,
and insufferable nicenes? Fly from pride, my brethren, as from a scorpion; and
embrace humility, wherewith God is much pleased, whether it be in Angels or in
men.

2 The ASSALT given by PRIDE.
O Man, how goodly a creature art thou? How excellent? How like to God
himself, who^ thou dooest represent as it were a steel glass, and of whom
thou art a lively image? yea, how near drawest thou to God in dignity,
ruling and governing all things in earth, as he does in heaven?

The very Scripture it self describes and sets forth thine excellency
in a wonderful manner, and says that thou art little inferior to Angels,
that thou art crowned with glory and worship, that thou have dominion and
lordship over all the works of Gods hands, that all things are in subjection
under thy feet, sheep and oxen, beasts and cattle, fowls and fishes, and
whatsoever else is contained within the compass of this wide world. Why then
should thou not glory in this so stately a title of preeminence, in this
so great interest of authority, in this thy divine prerogative?

Lift up thy self, O man, and think of this thine honor, how notable it is,
how singular, how universal. Heaven above does minister unto thee the sun
gives thee light by day; the moon by night; sea and land obeie thee; the one
for shipping and traffike, the other for ploughing and tillage. To conclude,
there is nothing, but it does service unto thee, as to their sovereign and
leege Lord.

In consideration whereof, O man, make much of thy self. For thou art an
excellent creature: yea, thou art peerless in all points of knowledge,
wisdom, eloquence, and counsel; in all kinds of riches, honor, estimation,
and possessions; in all degrees of consanguinitie, affinity, lineage, and
descent: finally, in all other gifts of body, and mind.

Thou have none better than thy self; none thy superior: none thine equal.
Thou art comely of person, amiable of face, pleasant of speech, commendable in
behavior, neat in apparel, and in all respects peerless. Thou have not one
like thee to be thy match; despise and contemn every body therefore in
respect of thy self; give place unto none, submit thy self to none; but
prefer thine own person before the best, esteeming all men thine inferiors
and underlings.

3 A Prayer against the former vice.
O Eternal GOD, which have directly spoken against the swelling sin of
PRIDE, sundry times in thy sacred Scripture, saying, that thou do detest
and abhor it: and have declared by the mouth of thy Prophet Esaie, that All
flesh is grass, and all the pride thereof like flower of grass: we beseech
thee root out of our hearts this most stinking and rank weed of wickedness,
which pulls us from heaven above, and presses us to hell below.

O give us grace we beseech thee, to be proud of nothing that we attempt, or
accomplish; but to ascribe all the glory thereof to thy divine majesty,
acknowledging that when we have done all that we can, even to the uttermost of
our strength, we are nevertheless unprofitable servants, and have scarcely
done so much as we ought.

Guide us we beseech thee by thy holy spirit, that we fall not into the gulf
of this odious sin; least the like heavy judgment be not only denounced,
but also executed upon us, as was upon Herod, whom thine Angel, by thy
commission, did smite, because in the pride of his heart he advanced himself,
and gave not thee the glory due unto thy name, insomuch that he was eaten up
of woormes. O Lord deliver us from this defiling offense, which wounds the
soul; so shall we, by thy grace preventing us, escape punishment, through
Jesus Christ our savior, Amen.

1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the virtue following.
ALL worthiness is unworthy of the very name of worthiness, if humility
be despised. If therefore, o man, thou art in authority, be notwithstanding as
an underling: if thou art a Governor, yet think not scorn of subjection.

Why art thou puffed up, o man? why swellest thou, why look thou aloft, and
bear thy self high without cause? The Lord alone is aloft, whom thou can
not be like by climing. His greatness is to be praised, but not able to be
followed. Be humble, o man, and thou have laid fast hold of him, for it is
humility alone which lifts aloft, and leads to life. This is the only
way, besides it there is none other: he that climeth by another ladder than
this, does rather come tumbling down, than clime up.

2 The REPVLSE given by HVMILITIE.
O Man, remember thou art but dust and ashes, rottennes and woorms meat.
Remember also, O man, that if thou art any thing, except thou abase and humble
thy self by so much, as thou art above and better than the rest, thou dooest
utterly loose whatsoever thou art.

What man! Look upon thy self, art thou higher than the first Angel? Art thou
brighter in earth, than Lucifer was in heaven? He through pride fell from the
higth of his glory, and will thou by presumption seek such advancement, as to
exalt thy self on high out of the doonghill?

Consider thine own estate and condition, for the term of thy life in this
world; examine what thou art by the words of the wise man, saying: A
corruptible body is heavy unto the soul, and the earthly mansion keeps
down that understanding, which museth upon many things.

With what thick and palpable darkness then, think we, is the dirt of pride
obscured and defaced here on earth: when a star, which rising in the
morning, and beautifieng the heaven with his brightness, lost the beams of his
light?

Hear therefore, O man, and listen for thy learning to the voice of truth it
self speaking unto thee, and saying: He that follows me, walks not in
darkness, but shall have the light of life. The same truth teaches elsewhere,
in what points we should follow him, saying: Learn of me, for I am meek and
humble in heart, and you shall find rest for your souls.

Harken, O swelling pride, harken, I say, to the master of humility and
meeknes: Every one that exalts himself, shall be brought low: and he that
humbles himself, shall be exalted.

Again, Upon whom does my spirit rest, but upon the humble and quiet man, and
him that trembles at my words and saiengs? Listen also, O swelling pride, what
the Apostle reports of this master of humility, exhorting men thereunto.
For he says expresselie thus: Let the same mind be in you which was in Christ
Jesus, who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with
God: but made himself of no reputation, taking on him the form of a servant,
and made in the likeness of men, and found in figure and shape as a man; he
humbled himself, made obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.

If therefore the divine Majesty abased himself with so great humility; the
infirmity, weakness, and vileness of man ought not to be insolent, proud,
arrogant, or presumptuous.

3 A Prayer for the former virtue.
O Almighty, and everliving God, which know better than we our selves, what
is most convenient for our condition and estate; we beseech thee to power into
the vessel of our hearts the pleasant and acceptable liquor of humility, which
is a virtue wherewith thou art so well pleased, as with nothing more: promising
to such as humble and submit themselves, the possession of eternal life,
according to the testimony of thy son Christ, saying, that Who soever
abaseth himself like a little child, he shall be called great in the kingdom
of heaven.

O grant unto us, we beseech thee, of thine unspeakable goodness, that we may be
enriched with this most heavenly virtue, knowing that the same makes us like
unto Christ Jesus, who came into the world, as he says of himself, to serve,
and not to be served, as appears by the washing of his Apostles feet, and by
taking upon him the shape of a servant, whereby he made himself of no
reputation, but was found and esteemed as a common and ordinary man, humbling
himself, and being obedient to the death, even to the death of the cross; for
the which God his father exalted him, and gave him a name above all names, that
to the Name of JESUS, every knee should bow, both of things in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth.

O teach us truly to humble our selves before thee, according to the example,
which Christ showed to his disciples, that our prayers being made in humility
and lowliness, may please thy divine Majesty, and that pearcing through the
clouds, they may not rest, till they come near; nor depart, till thou, o most
high, have had respect thereunto. Grant this for thine honor and truths sake,
o omnipotent God, and merciful Father, Amen.

The second Combat.
1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the vice ensuing.
VAINGLORY flies away swiftly, pearceth lightly, smites smoothly, but
wounds shrewdly, and kills quickly. Vainglory confounds sch as see
not, such as be blind, negligent, and lay open themselves unto it, such as run
upon it, as upon a rock, not viewing the mischief thereof, not marking or
considering it, not avoiding and forsaking it; and not weieng with aduisement,
how vain, transitory, frail, and perishable it is.

For, o man, if thou would look circumspectly into vainglory, and
esteem of it accordingly, it should be so far from killing thee, that thou
would rather kill, utterly destroy, and bring it to nothing.

2 The ASSALT given by VAINGLORY.
O Man, esteem of thy self as thou art, surpassing all other in every
respect. If thou do good, do it to thy commendation: bestow thy benefits
where thou may be praised. If thou be disposed to do any man a pleasure,
do it in such convenient place, and at such a seasonable time, as there may be
standers by, and lookers on to bear witness thereof, and to call thee by the
name of a good and pitiful man. It is lost that is done privily in corners,
where none beholding or seeing, can report of thee according to thy desert.

Do therefore thy good deeds in open sight, before the eyes of men, that they
may commend thee for thy devotion and holiness, praise thee for thy
mercifulnes, and reverence thee for thy goodness: that thou may be counted
one of Gods elect, that none may contemn thee, none despise thee, none speak
ill of thee: but that all may exhibit and do thee such honor and reverence,
as to thee by desert is due and apperteining.

3 A prayer against the former vice.
O Eternal God, unto whom all glory be longs, and nothing but shame and
confusion unto us because of our sins: we beseech thee of thine infinite
goodness and clemency, to kindle in us a detestation and mortal hatred against
all inward motions, rebelling and making war with the spirit. And specially, o
merciful Father, set us at defiance with all selfe-liking of our selves, all
self-love, and selfe-trust, but specialie with vain-glorie, which makes us
negligent and careless in giving thee the honor due unto thine holy name.

We know, and thou see it in us, that even the meanest and basest person
has some infection, little or much, of this poisonous humor of vainglory,
according to this saying of the Son of Sirach: The poor man glories in his
knoweledge, and the rich because of his goods and substance: but let him that
glories in his wealth, fear least he fall into want. O good Lord open our
eyes, that we may not only see, but also forsake this vanity, knowing that
so long as we savor thereof, we can not smell sweet in thy presence.

Let not any pomp or pride of apparel carry us away, o let us not fix our
delight in such shadows, knowing that thou disalowest it, and by thy servants
counsellest us to renounce the same, saying in express words: Be not proud of
clothing and raiment, and exalt not thy self in the day of honor. We know
and confess it, that against the proud vainglorious Pharisees, loving and
challenging the highest and chiefest seats in synagogues, and delighting to
be reverenced in frequented places, a bitter woe was denounced by thy son.
Whereby we are taught, in what contempt thou have this vile vice of
vainglory.

O give us grace therefore, we heartily beseech thee, not only to learn, but
also to follow the good and wholesome counsel of thine Apostle S. Paul,
exhorting us not to be desirous of vain-glorie, provoking one another, and
enuieng another. For if any man seem to himself that he is somewhat, when he
is nothing, he deceives himself in his imagination. Grant this, we humbly
beseech thee, for Jesus Christ's sake, our only mediator and advocate, Amen.

1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the virtue following.
THe FEAR of GOD is the water of wholesome wisdom, the well of life, and the
beginning of knowledge; excellently refreshing the soul boiling in noisome
desires, and able to quench all the fiery darts of the enemy. He which has
the fear of God alwaie before his eyes, his ways are beautiful, his paths
are peaceable, his footsteps are immovable.

Say not, o man, that he is wise, who is puffed up with his own knowledge.
For the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom; fear Gods justice, o man,
fear his power, fear his almightines, and thou art wise enough: because fear
is wisdom. Furthermore, wisdom makes wise, as skilfulnes makes skillful,
riches rich, valiantnes valiant, etc.

2 The REPVLSE given by the FEAR of GOD.
O Man, if thou do any good, do it in hope of everlasting honor, not of
transitory estimation; of an heavenly reward, not of an earthly recompense.
Hide and keep close that which thou do, as much as thou may. And it thou
be not altogether able so to do, yet let thy will and mind be to have it
unknown, so shall there be no rashness in thee of any vaunting what good deeds
thou have done: neither shall it be imputed unto thee for a fault, as time
serves to declare that, which thou wast willing should be always kept secret.

Thus doing, thou shall fulfill the two saiengs of our Savior Christ,
seeming contrary to themselves: In giving alms, let not thy left hand know
what thy right hand does; but let thine alms be in secret, and thy Father,
which sees in secret shall reward thee openly. Again, Let men see your good
works, that they may glorify your Father, which is in heaven.

Take heed at any hand, that the saying of our Savior to hypocrites agree not
with thee: They do all their works, that they may be seen and praised of men.
Verily the cause that many misdeedes, which otherwise might be withstood are
committed.

O Lord, arm us, we humbly beseech thee, that the whole course of our life
directed thereby, we may not miscarrie: being assured, that it is a welspring
of life, against the snares of death: that who so is filled therewith, shall
continue sufficiently fortified in the evil day: that it is riches, glory,
and life: gladness, mirth, and a crown of joy unto them: and that such as are
guided thereby, shall find favor in the day of death, perfect peace, and
everlasting life: which we beseech thee grant, o Father, for thy sons sake,
Amen.

The third Combat.
1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the vice ensuing.
HYPOCRISY is of this nature, o man, that it seeks after things
unaccustomed, od, singular, and unused, to the intent it might spread abroad a
zeal of it own liking, whose affection is estranged from Christ, and
delighted with vain commendations and praises.

The sorrow of hypocrisy is not in heart; but in face: hypocrisy is a sheep
in skin, a fox in subtlety, and a wolf in cruelty. It would seem good in
show, and is nothing less in deed; it would not be thought evil, and yet is
stark naught in all points. It is disguised with a pretended vizard of holiness
and innocence, that it might the more cunningly deceive the simple, and draw
weaklings to commit sin and wickedness.

2 The ASSALT given by HYPOCRISY or DISSIMVLATION.
O Man, because thou dooest nothing in secret, that is good; and art known to
be such a one, as none is the better by thee, least thou be hated and detested
of every body in all places: it shall be good for thee to play the
hypocrite, and to dissemble with God and the world. Counterfeit therefore thy
self to be such a one abroad, as thou art not at home: a devout almoner, a
godly protestant, a zealous Gospeller, and an upright dealer in all thine
affairs.

Make the world believe, by outward shows of good deeds, as going to the
Church, frequenting of sermons, daily prayer, fair speaking, keeping company
with preachers, and such like works of christianity, that thou art holy,
innocent, harmless, honest, charitable, and merciful; though indeed thou be
an incarnate devil, a blasphemer, a whooremonger, a slanderer, a covetous
miser, an extortioner, a usurer, and such like.

Thus shall thou get credit abroad among men, by counterfeting the young Saint,
and yet at home may play the old devil. By this means many have come to
promotion; and therefore do thou, as they have done, for thine own profit and
preferment.

3 A prayer against the former vice.
O Almighty and everlasting God, Father of our Lord JESUS Christ, whose will
and pleasure it is to be worshipped in spirit and truth: we beseech thee to
root out of our hearts all hypocrisy and dissembled adoration of thy divine
Majesty, all counterfeit service, and pharisaicall devotion, which are utter
enemies to true Christianity: least presuming to offer such an unclean and
defiled sacrifice in thine holy temple, we be adjudged with hypocrites to
feel the endless torments of fire and brimstone in the nethermost hell.

We know that it is not for us to dally with thee, who know our inward
thoughts: to halt before thee, who perceiuest our devises: to dissemble with
thee, who see out secret imaginations: knowing that the subtilest shift which
we can use, and the closest conueiance that we can invent, lies open before
thee bare, naked, and uncovered. For thou can turn us out of our cloak of
hypocrisy, and make us appear as we are, even to our own rebuke and shame.

It is an express commandment set down in thine holy word, o most merciful
Father, that whatsoever we think, say, or do, should savor of singleness
and vprightnes. And therefore in giving our alms, thou teach us what rule
we should observe; namely, that we should not do as hypocrites do, who cause
a trumpet to sound out their almes-deedes, in the synagogues, villages, and
frequented places, where they bestow their dole: to the end that they might be
honored of men.

In praieng also and in fasting, it is thy will and pleasure, that we should
show a simplicity and plain dealing, all dissembling with thee, o God, and
the world set apart. For though we may delude men, by an extrinsecall kind of
religiousnes and precisenes of life: yet can we not outreach the universal
wisdom of thee, o Lord, who can and wilt pull away the fig-leaues from our
filthiness, and discover our secret shame. O good God, we humbly beseech thee
therefore to keep and defend us from this detestable sin, whereupon depends
a most heavy judgment, prophesied by the mouth of thy servant Job, to light
upon all hypocrites and dissemblers: namely, that Their hope shall perish,
their confidence be cut off, and their trust decaie like a spiders web: that
they shall not once appear in thy presence, they shall be desolate, and fire
shall consume their dwellings: their joy shall last but a moment, their
excellency become as vile as doong, they shall vanish like a dream or vision
in the night: and their final reward shall be everlasting torments in hell
fire, where shall be weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth. From this sin,
o Lord, and the plagues due thereunto, deliver us for thy mercy sake, Amen.

1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the virtue following.
Meat sauoureth in the mouth, and the praise of God in the heart. It is to
small purpose to magnify the Lords name with the voice only, without any
meaning or intent of the mind. For God, from whom nothing is hid, that is
unlawfully done, requires not the shrilnes and cleerenes of the voice, but
the cleannes and pureness of the heart.

Will thou therefore worship God aright, do him true and alowable service, and
show thy self an imbracer of pure religion? Then worship him in spirit and
truth, with singlenes of heart, with a sincere and upright mind; visit the
fatherles, maintain the widows right, follow the example of Christ, and
keep thy self unspotted of the world. This is true worship, this is pure
religion.

2 The REPVLSE given by true WORSHIP, and pure RELIGION.
O Man, take heed in any case of counterfeting and forging thy self to be
that thou art not. For to seem before men otherwise than thou art, what else
is it but mere damnation? Remember therefore the words of our Savior Christ,
spoken to this effect: Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites, for ye
make clean the outside of the cup or platter, but within you are full of
robbery and uncleanness.

O thou blind Pharisie, first make clean the inside of the cup or platter,
that the outside of them may be clean also. And the words of our Savior
uttered in the very same sense, with an often repetition or rehersall: Woe unto
you Scribes and Pharisees, because you are like unto painted sepulchers, which
appear outwardly to the eyes of men gaie and beautiful, but are full within
of dead men's bones, and all filthiness.

Even so you likewise seem before men just and righteous, but within you are
full of hypocrisy and wickedness. Upon whom this sentence of our Savior is
verified: They come unto you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are
ravening woolues.

3 A prayer for the former virtue.
O Eternal God, without whose aid and assistance, all our actions are turned
into sin, because they are not seasoned with the salt of thy spirit, but
leauened rather with the dowe of the flesh: we beseech thee of thine entire
goodness, to teach us the true worship of thee, and the sincere service due unto
thy divinity. O suffer us not to be misled by the imaginations and traditions
of men, which highly offend thy Majesty; but vouchsafing to open the eyes of
our understanding with the keie of thine heavenly knowledge, direct us how and
in what sort we may walk religiously before thee.

Root out of our hearts, good God, all sinister service, and dissembled
adoration: lead us by the hand into thine holy temple, and make a passage for
thy spirit of sanctification into our dull and dark capacities: that being
reformed thereby, we may worship thee in spirit and truth: knowing that thou art
a spirit, and therefore wilt admit none other worship to be done unto thee, but
that which is true, unfeigned, sincere, and spiritual.

We know how thou have abhorred the hypocritical holiness of the Gentiles, of
whom thou complainest by thy Prophet Esaie, that they (...)

2 The ASSALT given by DISOBEDIENCE.
O Man, consider thine own dignity and worthiness. Thine estate is honorable,
and thou art better than the best. To serve and obeie is an abasing of thy
vocation, it is a sign of inferioritie and subjection. To be a master
carries some title of authority: but to be an underling or servant, is an
argument and token of an homely and course calling. Account of thy self
therefore, and of thy reputation. What art thou, that thou should do homage
to such as are worse than thy self?

It were more meet for thee to command and govern, and they to obey and be
ruled; considering thou art so excellent in all respects, that there is not one
to be found comparable unto thee, either in wit, policy, diligence, or any
other good quality. Cast off the yoke therefore of subjection, for to obeie is
servitude and bondage, slavery and thraldom: yea, to be inferior to such as
are not thy betters, is a token of a base mind, and a cowards heart.

Therefore esteem of thy self Lord-like, and not seruant-like: stoop not
unto any, cap not, crouch not: for a man is but a man: and thou being a rare
man and matchless, need not pass a point for the proudest pecocke, for all
his fine feathers, and trim tail. And rather than thou should be at
commandment like a servant, try maisteries for superiority, and get it by
usurpation. For a lofty look, and an hautie heart do best beecome a man.

3 A prayer against the former vice.
O Most loving Father, who hate all kind of disobedience, frowardnes,
stubbornes, rebellion, contumacie, obstinacy, and contempt: which are the
fruits of the corrupt flesh; and have declared also thy hatred by denouncing
most terrible plagues against so detestable sin: we beseech thee to plow up
the sandy soil of our hearts with the cultre of thy sanctifieng spirit, that
we may beecome tractable, mild, gentle, lowly, and obedient, as it becomes
us.

We know, by the information of thy holy word, that who so disobeieth thee,
is subject to many curses: and who so resists a judicial magistrate, is
punishable with death, even by thine own ordinance and law. We know that thou
detestest nothing more than the sin of disobedience, and transgression of thy
commandments; though the intent seem never so good, honest, and tolerable to
man's judgment and reason.

This is proved, o eternal God, in Saul, whom thou by the mouth of Samuel
did charge with a precise commandment, that he should kill Amalek, and make
a common spoil and havoc of all that came to his hands: who being incensed
with covetousness, spared the very best things, and converted them to his own
use and possession, contrary to thy will. But thou in thy justice did show
thy vengeance upon him, in not only rejecting and casting him out of thy
favor, but also in disgrading him of his dignity, and taking from him his
kingdom.

We beseech thee therefore, o King of glory, to root out of our hearts this
rank weed of disobedience, which in holy Scripture is reported to be as the
sin of witchcraft. O good Lord, dig it up quite, we pray thee, out of the
depth of out hearts, that there may no relike thereof remain, but that every
fiber and thread growing about it, may be plucked out and removed. For if it
be not utterly supplanted, we must needs look and make full account to
receive a just recompense and reward, according to the determinate sentence of
thy holy word. Deliver us, o Lord, from this heinous sin, and the desert due
to the same, for thy son Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the virtue following.
THE virtue of obedience, o man, does always march under the banner of truth.
Obedience directs our footsteps, orders our goings, and deserves the grace
or reward of holy conversation. For if a contrary law be in our members by
disobedience, who knows not that continency or staiednes is given by
obedience?

This is the virtue that can tell what belongs to mercy, this teaches thee
patience, this brings thee to the full and complete knowledge of thine own
condition. Learn of Christ, who submitted himself to his Disciples, the
Master to his servants, the Savior of the world, and very God, to miserable
men; the word and wisdom of the father, to mortal creatures. Blush o earth
and ashes, blush and be ashamed o dust and woorms-meate.

2 The REPVLSE given by SVBMISSION.
O Man, remember that if thou owe any duty to God, there is also a duty
required of thee to discharge toward men. For God must have his right, and
Caesar likewise his tribute. Do thou not know, O man, what the Lord
himself says in the Gospel? He that hears you, hears me: and he that
despises you, despises me.

It is convenient (thou will say O man) so to do, provided that he which
governs be of the Lords allowing and appointing. Listen, O man, to the words
of the Apostle deciding this case. There is no power, says he, but it is of
God: the powers that be, are ordained of God; whosoever therefore resists
(...)

O good Lord, be so favorable unto us, as to bring under and subdue the
unruly and rebellious motions of our mind, which oftentimes drive us to the
committing of many a wicked offense, not only in talk and communication,
but also in deed, life, and conversation: least shaking from our necks the yoke
of obedience and submission, and neglecting the true observation and fulfilling
of thy law; we fall into flat rebellion against thee, and so provoking thee to
anger, feel the force of thine outstretched arm, striking us in thy fury
with the sword of vengeance.

Direct us, good Lord, by thy spirit, that we may submit our selves to all our
governors and magistrates, without murmuring, grudging, or repining: knowing
that all authority, regiment, superiority, and countenance proceeds from
thee, who bestowest thy gifts according to thine own counsel, not looking
upon the person of the receiver, least thou might seem parciall in the
distribution of thy gifts.

Thou have said, and expresselie charged, that we should be subject to the
higher powers, yea, even to the Scribes and Pharisees sitting in Moses chair,
whom thou co^mandest us to hear, and to do according to their persuasion and
counsel: but not to make their course of life and trade of dealing, a pattern
for us to follow and imitate. Arm us therefore with true knowledge, that may
lead us to perfect and acceptable obedience, which thou esteemest more than the
fat of rams, or the smoke of incense. O suffer not any suggestion of Satan, to
withdraw us from doing our duty in this case, least by disobeiing, we
purchase to ourselves eternal death and damnation. Grant this for thy mercy
sake, Amen.

The fifth Combat.
1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the vice ensuing.
Desire thou, o man, to know a venomous eye, a wicked eye, a bewitching eye?
Consider envy. For what is envy, but a makebate? What is spitefulnes, but a
moouer of mischief? If the serpent had not been envious and spiteful, death
had never entered into the world by that vile vice.

Woe to thee, o wretched man, because thou did not fore-spie the envious
serpent. Let us do our very best to press down, and ouerswaie this sin,
whiles we live, if after death we would be loath to stand in fear of the worker
of so great wickedness.

And, o man, whosoever thou art, spite not at thy brothers prosperity, if thou
tender thine own. For if where envy is, there is death also; then doubtless
thou can not be spiteful, and live too. And therefore take heed of au
envious eye.

2 The ASSALT given by malicious EMVLATION and ENVY.
O Man, remember thy self, make much of thine estimation, and loose not one
inch of thy right. In what respect art thou not so good as this man, or that
man? Naie, wherein art thou not better? Why then art thou not equal with them,
or rather above them?

Thou art able to bring many things to pass, whereto they can not lay their
hands. And they are able to do nothing, but it is in thee to amend it, and to
go through stitch therewithal. It is not requisite therefore, that any should
be thy superior, or at least no more than thine equal.

3 A prayer against the former vice.
O Eternal truth, thou son of the living God, and wisdom of the Father,
which by thine Apostle Paul, that excellent preacher of thy Gospel to the
Gentiles, did teach the Romans, and in them all Christian people, to cast
away the works of darkness, to put on the armor of light, and to walk
honestly as in the day, not in drunkenness and gluttony, chambering and
wantonness, strife and enuieng: root out of our hearts, we beseech thee, all
corrupt affections, and specially wicked emulation and envy, the nurse of all
contention.

We know and confess; that so long as emulation, strife, debate, envy, and
grudging reign among us, we are carnal, and walk as men, in the corruption
of our own nature. And there is nothing truer, than that sentence of thine
Apostle S. James, that where enuieng and strife is, there is sedition, and all
manner of evil works. Wherefore, o thou comfortable Physician of sick souls,
deliver us from so foul and detestable a sin, least all our enterprises and
endeavors displease thy sacred divinity, and heap upon our own heads the hot
burning coals of vengeance and condemnation.

Now then, o thou pattern of love, thou treasure of all virtue, godliness, and
integrity, put into our minds Christian cogitations and thoughts, guide our
eyes from the view of vanities, hold back our hands from every injurious
deed, and consecrate all that is within us to thy self; that we may, as thou
have taught us, do good to our enemies, love them that hate us, and pray for
such as seek our destruction and undoing, referring the judgment of our
cause, and the reuengement of the same unto thee, who in thy good time wilt
redress all that is amiss: in the mean time, o Lord Christ, give us grace to
possess our souls in patience, for thy mercy sake, wherewith thou redeemedst
all mankind, Amen.

1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the virtue following.
THe best, and most approved mark that we are Christ's disciples, is this, if
we love one another, and agree together in unity like brethren. Which so long
as we do, no doubt we dwell in God, and God dwells in us.

For God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God. He loves us,
because he hates nothing that his hands have made; giving us an example how we
should love and tender one another, with singlenes of heart; which who so does
not, that man abides in death.

What? Have we not all one Father? Has not one God created us? Why then should
we despise one another, and not rather live in unity and concord, without all
kind of envy, and hartgrudge?

2 The REPVLSE given by LOWLINES, and brotherly agreement.
O Man, if thou excel all other in virtues of the mind, it will be more safe,
and less dangerous for thee, to keep thy self below, than to clime aloft.
For the higher room that a man coueteth, the sorer is his fall. Furthermore,
if some be thy superiors, that is, above and better than thou; or equal, that
is, as good as thou; what should that grieve thee, what should that hurt thee,
what should that vex and trouble thee?

Take heed, least whiles thou art envious at the high and honorable place of
thy brother, thou show thy self a scholar and disciple of him, of whom these
words are written: Through envy of the devil, death entered into the world,
and they that follow him take his part.

3 A prayer for the former virtue.
O Almighty and most merciful Father, which by the mouth of thy Prophet David
have highly commended brotherly concord and agreement, comparing it to the
precious ointment, which ran down upon Aarons beard, even to the borders of
his garments: and also to the dew of Hermon, which dropped and fell upon the
mountains of Sion: we beseech thee of thy goodness, to plant among us such and
so acceptable agreement, that bearing one another burden, we may live like
brothers begotten and borne of the same parents.

We know that thy son our Savior Jesus Christ, as of all other commendable
virtues, so also of brotherly agreement, gave us a special and infallible
example, in that for our sakes he betook himself to the suffering of most
exquisite torments, even the torments of death, that he might draw us his
adopted brethren to God his Father, and might place us in the land of Canaan,
as ioint-heires with him of everlasting blessedness.

Now therefore, o eternal God, let us not seem lightly to esteem and regard
so singular an example; but give us grace, we beseech thee, to consider that
notable speech of thy Prophet Malachie uttered for our learning, that Seeing we
have all one Father, one God, and one Maker, it is not meet nor tolerable
that we should despise one another: but every one of us bearing one another
burden, mutuallie to consent and agree in brotherly amity, vniue, and concord.

Sow in our hearts therefore, o good Lord, the seed of love and charity, that
thereby we may grow together like branches of one tree, being all of one mind
and heart, of one opinion and judgment, endeavoring as much as in us lies, to
do thy will, even thy will, o father, which dwell in heaven: which is, to
be knit one to another in brotherly agreement, and to draw all under one yoke
of obedience, which is the foundation of all godly love and mutual consent.
Grant this for thy sons sake Jesus Christ our only mediator and advocate,
Amen.

The second Section, and sixth Combat.
1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the vice ensuing.
THere is a commendable hatred, and there is an execrable or damnable hatred;
the one is allowed of God, but not used of men; the other is common among men,
and offensive to God.

The first is an hatred of sin and iniquity, and of this hatred the fear of
the Lord is a forerunner; and is conceived in the hearts of the godly, for
Gods sake, because he himself hates sin, and detesteth all wicked dooers.

The other hatred proceeds from the devil the author of dissension,
kindeleth in men a love of sin and ungodliness, a delight in all kind of
mischief, an utter misliking of agreement, unity, and reconciliation;
wherewith whosoever is poisoned, that man hates his own soul, and is an
enemy to his own salvation.

The ASSALT given by devilish HATRED.
O Man, forswear to love him, who is thy enemy in all things. Never, so long
as thy life lasts, agree with him, who is contrary and against thee in
every respect. Never shake hands with him, which takes from thee any jot of
thy right. Never give him fair look, never show him kind countenance, which
does outface thee, triumph over thee, scorn and scoff at thee, provoke thee
to vnpatience by wrongs and injuries.

Never like of him so long as thou live, which is always casting thy faults
in thy teeth. Never abide him, that does what he can to excel thee in words,
deeds, credit, and preferment. For, if he did not envy thee, is it like he
would in this sort seek his own advancement, above thee, which art his better?

3 A prayer against the former vice.
O Eternal God, in whose hands is life and death, sickness and health, poverty
and abundance, salvation and condemnation; direct us, we beseech thee in thy
faith, fear, and love, that we may feel the operation and working of thy
holy spirit in our hearts, leading us into all honesty, godliness,
righteousness, holiness, and innocence, that thy name may be magnified in our
life, and we our selves glorified after our death.

And because it is denied to us all of Adams lineage, unless we be circumcised in
spirit, sanctified, and regenerate by the influence of thy heavenly grace, to
attain to the sight of thee, which art the fulness of all felicity, the
sovereign blessedness, which endures for ever: grant us we beseech thee the
presence of thy knowledge, whereby we being conducted, may learn to purge out
of our hearts the old leven of maliciousnes, hatred, envy, and spitefulnes,
which hinder and stop us from having access to thy divinity.

We know, o eternal God, that hatred is so detestable a sin in thy sight,
that thou utterly abhorrest us for so heinous a sins sake, denieng the
participation of thy spirit, which is the peace of conscience, and the
assurance of everlasting life, to as many as are possessed therewith. In
consideration whereof, and because it is a natural inclination, bred and
continued in us, even from our cradles, to be at strife with them that speak
ill of us, and to hate such as bear us no good will: we beseech thee to alter
and change that devilish disposition, and to amend in us whatsoever is amiss.

We are taught, that there is a hatred, which thou requirest; namely, the
hatred of our selves, and of all things precious and dear in our own eyes:
but that hatred is as hard for us to digest, as was the doctrine of
regeneration to Nichodemus. O therefore thou comforter of thy chosen, and
lifter up of thy servants heads in the time of heaviness, instruct us in the
way of thy truth, and reform our hearts; make them new, o Lord, that they may
harbor no work of darkness, neither hatred, nor any other vice, which may
offend thee: thorough Christ our Lord, Amen.

1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the virtue following.
CHARITY is a goodly thing, yea it is a thing that will not shrink in any
tribulation, in any grief, injury, wrong, or abuse. In few words, what
think we comparable thereunto, seeing it is preferred before martyrdom, and
counted better than a faith that moves mountains?

By charity man dwells in God, and God in man. Charity brings liberty,
drives away fear, feels no toil, looks on no desert, requires no
reward.

Charity is the mother of men and of Angels, pacifieng and making atonement
between things in heaven, and things in earth. This is the virtue which
reconciled God to man, and brought man into the favor of God.

2 The REPVLSE given by true LOVE and CHARITY.
O Man, does it necessarily follow, that because many vices in thee deserve
well and woorthilie to be hated, that therefore the image of God in thee ought
not to be loved? As Jesus Christ nailed upon the cross, and there hanging,
loved his enemies, and before his death and passion admonished his disciples in
this manner, saying: Love your enemies, do good unto them that hate you: and
pray for them which persecute you, slander, backbite, and vpbraid you, that
you may be the children of your Father which is in heaven.

So likewise, by the mouth of Solomon and Paul, these words are spoken: If
thine enemy hunger, give him meat: if he thirst, give him drink. For in so
doing, thou shall heap coals of fire upon his head. Unto which sentence the
Apostle adds somewhat of his own, saying: Be not overcome of evil, but
overcome evil with good.

It is contrariwise thus written by S. John, against such as hate their
brethren: He that hates his brother, is a man-slear, and ye know that no
man-slear has everlasting life remaining in him. Again, He that hates his
brother, walks in darkness, and is yet in darkness, not knowing whither he
goes, because darkness has blinded his eyes.

But thou say, O man, It is enough that I love such as love me. For why
should I bear good will, or be beneficial unto them, that have deserved no
such thing at my hand? Hear, O man, the Lord speaking unto thee in another
tune: for, If you love them that love you, what reward shall you have? Do not
the Publicans the same?

What art thou able, O man, to object against this? Doubtless, He that hates
his brother abides in death. And he that loves his brother, abides in God,
and God in him. Spue up therefore all the bitter gall of hatred, and do what
thou can to swallowe down the sweet honey of love. For nothing is more
pleasant, nothing more happy and blessed.

Saint John says, God is charity. And S. Paul that excellent preacher of the
Gentiles affirms, that The love of GOD is shed abroad in our hearts, by the
holy Ghost, which is given unto us. Whereupon it is concluded, and not without
just cause, that love or charity is said to cover the multitude of our
brethrens offenses, as it is written: Charity covers the multitude of sins.

3 A prayer for the former virtue.
O Eternal GOD, which by the mouth of thine Apostle Paul have said, that
Although we speak with the tongues of men and Angels, and yet are void of
love, we are like to sounding brass, or as a tinkling cymbal: yea, albeit we
had the gift of prophecy, and knew all secrets: yea, if we had all faith, so
that we could remove mountains, and yet wanted love, we were nothing: hear
us, we beseech thee, and by the heat of thy love, set on fire and kindle our
cold and frosen love.

We confess, that the cause why iniquity and sin abounds, is the lack of
love, which in holy Scripture is called the bond of peace. We acknowledge also
that to love our neighbor as our self, is a sacrifice much more acceptable,
than burnt oblations and incense. We can not deny, but that the Apostle
speaks truth, saying: that, Who so dwells in love and charity, dwells in
thee, o GOD, and thou in him.

But because it is not in us to live in love and charity, knowing that they
are the works of light, unless thou assist us by thy grace; sanctify us, and
cleanse us from all intrinsecall and hidden corruption: we therefore bend the
knees of our hearts before thee, humbly beseeching thy divine Majesty, that as
thou art the fulness and perfection of love, yea love and charity it self, so
it would please thee to conform and make us like unto thee, which delightest
in nothing that is evil.

And because charity covers the multitude of sins, fulfilleth the law, is
the end of the commandment, and commended unto us as a most necessary
adiument and help to obtain and lay hold upon everlasting life: vouchsafe we
beseech thee, to plow up our stony hearts, and to soften them with the showers
of thy grace, that being mollified and soupled, they may be able to receive the
seed of love and charity, and thereby fructify in all good works, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

The seventh Combat.
1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the vice ensuing.
AS the confession of sin has the promise of remission, so the excusing and
cloking of sin is threatened with punishment. Again, it is no dissembling
with God, who abhors all sin, and much worse the excuse of sin, which is
more heinous than the sin it self.

As for slander, and flattery, I wish wise men to beware of both. Moreover,
whether to slander, or to give ear to a slanderer, be more damnable, I can not
easily tell. This is certain; that death enters in at our windows, so often
as we with our itching ears and tongues, contend and strive to drink one to
another out of the full poisoned and deadly cup of slander. The Lord save my
soul, that it fall not into the hands of slanderers.

2 The ASSALT given by the excusing of sin, and by SLANDER.
O Man, persuade thy self that thou art not the most heinous offender alive.
Thou have not been as other men be, an extortioner, a usurer, a turne-cote, a
merciless murderer, or such like.

There be sinners that have committed all these transgressions with greedines.
Who can lay to ones charge, or keep close the abominable deeds that such a
lewd fellow, and such a wicked person has done, but he that has been
accessarie, and given his consent thereunto?

To justify thy self, O man, the next way is to backbite and speak ill of
others, that none may seem so good as thy self. Thou must say, that such a
one is a common drunkard, a crafty knave, a keeper of another man's wife, a
haunter of harlots: and if thou perceive it will be for thy profit, spare not
thine own sister or brother, to call them by the names of naughtipackes, that
by reporting of them thus abroad, they may grow in contempt, and thou increase
in credit.

Stick not to backbite thy dearest friend, if it may be for thine advantage.
For, to say the woorst sometime brings no small commodity, and many have
come to shame and reproach by standing to the truth.

3 A prayer against the former vice.
O Almighty and everlasting God, governor of heaven and earth, which have
punished, even from the beginning, all such as having transgressed against
thee, sought notwithstanding to justify themselves: by casting a cloud of
excuse over their offenses committed: as namely, our great grandfather Adam,
who when he had done amiss, complained that the woman deceived him; and she
coveting to be blameless, turned the falt to the serpents subtlety: grant we
beseech thee, unto us an humble heart, truly to confess our selves before
thee, foul offenders, and vile abusers of thy goodness.

Thy word most manifestly declares, how horribly thou dooest hate this
offense, which by how much it is covered with an excuse: by so much it
deserves the sorer punishment: taking Saul for an example, who most
impudentlie defending his fault of disobedience, suffered a double punishment,
even deprivation of his roialtie, and an ignominious or shameful end. And
therefore, o Father of mercy, take not from us thy grace and holy spirit,
least we likewise offending, be semblably plagued.

Furthermore, o eternal God, because it is expresselie told us by thine
Apostle Paul, that neither whisperers, backbiters, slanderers, nor
consequently any sinner shall possess the kingdom of heaven; but shall have
their portion with Satan, that old devil, in the lake that burns with fire
and brimstone; and because also thine Apostle James likewise teaches us, that
he that slandereth and condemns his brother, slandereth and condemns the
law: root out therefore, we beseech thee, o Lord, from our hearts that
abominable sin of slander, against which thy servants make such vehement
outcries.

And open our ears, we pray thee, o Father, to hear; and our hearts also to
understand and comprehend that good and wholesome counsel of S. Peter, willing
us to cast away all maliciousnes, guile, dissimulation, envy, slander, as newborn babes, desiring the sincere milk of thy word, that we may grow thereby
from grace to grace, and taste at length how bountiful thou art to all such as
walk in the way of thy holy will, the final reward whereof is everlasting
life, through Jesus Christ our only mediator and advocate, Amen.

1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the virtue following.
THere is a rebuking, which is necessary; and a rebuking, which is vain and
ridiculous. The first causes amendment, if the rebuker be not culpable of the
same offense, whereof he reprooueth another: the other breeds obstinacy and
contempt, when the reprehender controlleth his brother for some fault, whereof
he himself is guilty. The first issues from wisdom, the second from
folly, or rather frenzy,

As for backbiting, whosoever uses it, he is a man-queller: and the tongue of
a backbiter is a venomous viper, stinging three at once to death, with one
deadly blast. It is a sharp, yea a very sharp spear, which goreth three at
once with one mortal wound: and it is a two, or rather a three edged sword,
hewing and hacking three at once with one blow; namely, the party slandered,
the slanderer himself, and him that hears the slander, and holds his peace.

2 The REPVLSE given by liberty in rebuking, and due correcting.
O Man, thy neighbors offenses ought not to be kept in silence, neither must
they have thy consent: but as brotherly love and charity moves thee,
reprove thy neighbor to his face, and slander him not behind his back.

If it be objected, that it is not for thee to rebuke thy brother to his face,
least thereupon he being moved, and out of patience, prove never the better
by that kind of correction; but be so far from amending, that he take
greater cause of offending: hear the holy Scripture, thus determining the
matter: Open rebuke is better than secret love.

Again, if thou shall neglect this Christian duty, and wilt rather choose to
slander and misse-report thy brothers fault, aggravating and making it worse,
though he be an offender, and worthy of correction: than otherwise to
reprove him to his face, that he may be ashamed of his sin, and endeavor to
amend; hearken to the voice of the Prophet speaking unto thee, and saying: Thou
satest, and spakest against thy brother; yea, and have slandered thine own
mothers son: and this is a sore offense. For a man takes more grief and
hart-burning by knowing him, of whom he is slandered; than by seeing and
hearing him, of whom he is reproved.

And because the misdeeds of offenders are for a time to be dissembled and kept
in secret, that in due season they may be reprehended for their faults;
therefore these words following are set down: These things have thou done, and
I held my tongue.

Furthermore, least backbiters and slanderers should grow into an exceeding
love and liking of themselves, by reason of this discreet silence, who covet
always rather privily and in corners to nick a man's good name and fame, than
to come forth in open place, and there to charge him with his offense, it
follows in these words: Thou thoughtest wickedlie, that I am even such a one
as thy self.

As if he had said, It is a wicked thing to think, that I am a slanderer, and
a backbiter, because I hold my tongue for a time, and keep silence, until I
spy due season, and fit choice of place to speak my mind by way of
reprehension.

Hereupon it follows by and by, I will reprove thee, and set before thee the
things that thou have done. As if he had said, Not secretly, after thy use and
custom: but openly, according to mine own manner and fashion; I will tarry a
convenient time, when I may thoroughly rebuke an offender, and charge him with
his misdeeds to his face.

But thou will say, O man, I do not hate, but love him, whom I thus reprove
privily in corners. And I say again unto thee, O man, that thou dooest hate
him so much the more, and not love him one jot, by how much thou backbitest,
and neglectest to rebuke him.

Now, what a detestable and accursed thing the slandering of our neighbor is,
the holy Scriptures in many places declare: as namely, by the mouth of the
Prophet David: Who so privily slandereth his neighbor, him will I destroy.
Again, He that backbiteth his brother, backbiteth the law. Again, He that
slandereth and backbiteth his brother, shall be rooted out. And again, Take
heed least ye be consumed one of another, whilst ye bite and devour one
another.

3 A prayer for the former virtue.
O Almighty and everlasting God, who induedst thy faithful servants the
Prophets, with such measure of thy spirit, that they discharged their duties
with all singlenes, truth, and vprightnes, checking and rebuking mighty kings
for their transgressions, according to the tenor of their commission: as
appears in Samuel sharply reproouing Saul for his rebellion: in Nathan
severely rebuking David for his adultery: in Ahiiah roughly reprehending
Jeroboam for his idolatry: in Elijah boldly checking Ahab for his apostasy:
in Hanani stoutly twiting Asah for his mistrustfulnes: in Jeremy controlling
Zedekiah for his disobedience, and so consequently in the rest of thy servants
both Prophets and Apostles.

O take from us all vain motions, which may withdraw us from rating them,
that most apparentlie offend thy divine Majesty; and not to seem blind, or to
wink at their offenses, least we be counted partakers of their wickedness:
knowing that thy son our Savior gives us this for a lesson to be learned
and followed, namely, when we see our brother commit any trespass, to rebuke
him, that he may repent and obtain forgiveness.

Also most merciful Father, we beseech thee so to direct and rule the course
of our life, that every member of our body may set forth thy praise. And
because the tongue, though it be but a small piece of flesh, is termed a world
of wickedness, and kindles much mischief, when it is occupied either in lieng,
forswearing, backbiting, or reuiling our brethren: we pray thee to root out of
our hearts all such weeds of sin and abomination, that the fruits of them may
not appear in our tongues: through Jesus Christ our Savior, Amen.

The eight Combat.
1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the vice ensuing.
A Dragon is a cruel and merciles monster, spitting out fire, and killing
every thing that it touches: not only beasts of the land, but also birds of
the air: by this dragon, I mean the spirit of wrath and fury.

Anger is a natural affection, but to them that abuse this gift of nature, it
is a grievous and lamentable destruction. Let us use it in things necessary
and convenient, least doing otherwise, it break forth outragiouslie into
unlawful and unprofitable deeds.

Be not angry or wrathful with such as spoil you of transitory goods, which
revile you, which punish and plague you, and do nothing else beside; but be
angry at that, which is able of it self so to wound you; that all these
things laid together can not cure you. And what is it? Even your own sin and
wickedness. For you shall not fear any adversity, if you be not ouerswaied
with iniquity.

2 The ASSALT given by WRATH and RASHNESS.
O Man, the wrongs that are done thee, thou must revenge, they are greater
tha^ thou may quietly put up. It is sin, patiently to suffer them. For
this is certain, that thy forbearance will never a whit amend the matter, and
therefore such injuries as are offered thee, requite to thine own contentment.

If thou be abused in speech, spare him not that has standered thee. If thou
be smitten, smite again. For it is no manhood, to be still and at peace with
such as thus offend thee. Do thou think that thy quietness will make thine
enemy the better? no; but rather the more fierce and furious.

Thou art taunted, thou art scoffed at, thou art reviled, thou art discredited,
thou art mistermed; one calls thee prodigal fool, another arrogant ass,
proud beggar, peeld peasant, with such like reproachful speeches. Are these to
be suffered? no.

And therefore to show thy manhood, seek him out by and by that has so abused
thee; and in the heat of thy wrath make him smart for his malapert sawsines.
Some use to bear and forbear so long, till they become stark fools and
idiots: be not thou in the number of them, but in defense of thine own
quarrel use both words and weapons.

3 A prayer against the former vice.
O Most merciful Father, whose property it is to be slow to anger; and have
taught us by the mouth of wise Solomon, that anger is cruel, wrath raging, and
envy irreconciliable: moreover, that it diminishes our days, hasteneth old
age, and shorteneth our life: again, that it opens passage to Satan; and
therefore have commanded by the mouth of S. Paul, that the sun should not go
down upon our wrath: we most humbly beseech thee, of thine infinite goodness
and clemency, remove from us this foul sin of wrath, which transformeth us
from the shape of Angels, to very devils and hellhounds.

We are not ignorant what a mischievous vice it is, and what inconvenience it
brings to the soul; being instructed by the words of wisdom, that it
stirs up strife, makes us prone to commit sin and villainy; to thirst for
blood, to be malicious and merciles: finally, that it is execrable and
accursed: and therefore have admonished us by thy servant James, to be slow to
speak, and slow to wrath; because wrath will not suffer thy righteousness to
be accomplished in us. And therefore, if we will not have thy work hindered in
us, we must be peaceable and modest.

O good Lord, open the eyes of our minds, that we may see the ouglines of this
monstrous sin, and seeing it may detest it, and detesting it may destroy it,
by the assistance of thy spirit, which is able to work in us a new creation;
and an exquisite mortifieng of all our fleshly members. Give us grace not
only to listen, but also to practice that wholesome counsel of the Preacher,
not to be swift to wrath, because wrath lodges in the bosom of fools: and to
put in proof the admonition of our Savior Christ, not to be angry with our
brother causeless, for fear of being culpable of judgment.

O Lord, pull us back from keeping company with the wrathful, and from
having acquaintance with the furious; least we learn their ways, and purchase
destruction to our own souls. And grant we beseech thee, that we may put
away from us all bitterness, anger, wrath, enuieng, evil speaking, with all
maliciousnes: and to become tenderharted, to forbear and forgive one another,
even as thou, o GOD, for thy son Christ's sake did forbear and forgive us,
Amen.

1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the virtue following.
TRue PATIENCE is to suffer and do contrary to ones lust, but not contrary
to the right of law. To abide and take poverty in good part, is the virtue of
patience. Patience is the safety of the soul, vnpatience the destruction of
the same. Who so has not hold of patience, shall loose righteousness, that is,
shall loose life, that is, shall loose his own soul.

Look upon the sufferance of the Lord, who being beaten with whips, crowned
with thorns, bored through with nails, hanged on the cross, and ouer-burdened
with reproaches, forgot all these greefes of his bitter agony notwithstanding,
and said; Father forgive them. Beware therefore, and take heed that thou perish
not through vnpatience; but suffer all things for Gods sake, because he
suffered extreme torments for thy sake, and thy patience shall not be
fruitelesse, void, or unrewarded.

2 The REPVLSE given by PATIENCE or forbearance.
O Man, if thou call to mind the passion of thy redeemer Christ Jesus, there
can nothing happen unto thee, be it never so hard and heavy, but thou shall be
able to bear and abide it with an humble and quiet mind. For Christ, as S.
Peter says, suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his
steps.

For he himself has thus spoken: If they have called the master of the house
Beclsebub, how much more will they so do unto them of the household? Again, in
another place: If they have persecuted me, they will likewise persecute you.

But what are our sufferings, in comparison of his passions? For he submitted
himself to bear reproaches, reuilings, mockings, scornings, buffetings,
spittings, whippings, a crown of pricking thorns, and the accursed cross: and
are we miserable slaves, weary with a word speaking, even to our own
confusion and shame? Are we discouraged? Are we thrown down and put to
silence with one sentence?

How think we of the saying of S. Paul: If we suffer not with him, we shall
not reign with him. And therefore the prouocations of wrath must be suppressed
and beaten down; as the danger thereof, which is damnation, ought to be
feared. For, he that is angry with his brother, is in danger of judgment.
And, He that says unto his brother, Racha, is in danger of a counsel: but he
that says unto his brother: Thou fool, is in danger of hellfire.

Now, where may a man find remedy against this deadly poison? The words
following do sufficiently show: If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and
there remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, leave there thy gift
before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy brother, and then
come and offer thy gift.

As if he had said: Power out no private prayer secretly in thy heart, except
thou have first made ame^ds to thy neighbor, whom thou have misvsed, and
brought him to quietness and contentation of mind. For prayer is the gift, which
we bring, and our heart is the altar. He that endeavors thus to do, as often
as he shall perceive a couple at strife and variance, by wrath and anger, does
not incur the danger of damnation.

But many there be, which will not forgive their offenders, albeit they submit
themselves, and seek pardon and atonement. Against those is the sword of our
Savior drawn out, to give this stroke: If you forgive not men their offenses,
your heavenly Father shall not forgive you your trespasses.

Thou will say, O man, He has misvsed me many ways, and oftentimes he
offends me. I say unto thee, O man; not I, but the Lord making this answer
to Peter's demand, and saying: Lord, how often shall my brother sin against
me, and I forgive him? Till seven times? Our Saviors answer is this: I say
unto thee, not seven times, but seventy seven times.

How many be there, which are very stowe and slack to release wrongs done
unto themselves: but very swift and hasty to set at naught such injuries as
they offer unto God? And sometimes it comes to pass, that under a pretense
of taking occasion to revenge injuries done to God, men are not ashamed to
revenge their own. Again, what shall we say of such as in the fury of their
blindness, break out into words of outrage, and fall a cursing? Against them
the Apostle concludes in this manner: Cursed speakers shall not inherit the
kingdom of God.

Which vice S. James detesting, to set it forth the more effectually, says:
No man is able to tame the tongue, it is an unruly evil, full of deadly
poison. Therewith we bless our God and Father, and therewith we curse men,
which are made after the similitude of God. Out of one mouth proceeds
blessing and cursing. My brethren, these things ought not so to be; does a
fountain send forth at one hole sweet water and bitter also? For this cause
it is said elsewhere: Death and life is in the hands of the tongue.

3 A prayer for the former virtue.
O Eternal God, which have set before our eyes the necessity of patience and
forbearance, by a view of the contrary expressed in a parable of an evil
debtor, whom his Lord and master remitted for compassion sake, because he saw
the man unable to make repaiment: yet he notwithstanding meeting with a fellow
of his, that ought him but a small sum of silver, void of patience, destitute
of mercy, far from forbearance, or any spark of pity, caught him by the
throat, and dealt with him in great extremity. Whose rigorous and cruel
behavior coming to the ears of his Lord, was accordingly punished.

Give us, we beseech thee, better grace, that we may see into our selves,
examine our own consciences, and turne-ouer the bills of dets, which thou most
favorably and mercifully have cancelled and cut in pieces, to the end that
we taking thee for an example, might acquit and forgive our brother, if there
were any thing between us: and patiently to put up injuries and wrongs,
though the flesh naturally do storm thereat, referring vengeance unto thee, o
Lord, unto whom properly it does belong.

O power into our hearts, we beseech thee, plenty of patience, whereof alas there
is great want in this our age, as appears by the coldness of charity and love,
whose property it is to be pitiful and long-suffering, to be gentle,
courteous, and full of tenderness: least being forward, irefull, rough, unquiet,
and greedy after reuengement, we hear this sentence denounced against us; Woe
unto you that have lost patience: because it is a necessary virtue, and
greatly to be regarded; that after we have done the will of thee, o father, we
might receive the promise, for Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

The ninth Combat.
1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the vice ensuing.
LET us watch and ward over all our works, least we ouerslip the doing of that
which God commands, we commit that which he forbids. Let us watch and
ward over our words, least in uttering them we offend God, or damnifie and hurt
our neighbor. For happy is he, who in all his communication and talk has an
eye to these two fears; the first of Gods Majesty, in whose hands it is
horrible to fall; the other of our brothers frailty and weakness, whom it is
the easiest thing of a thousand to offend.

For so long as we abide in this earthen vessel of flesh and blood, we can not
be free from offenses. And therefore, if thou remember that thy brother be
offended at thee, be not waiward, but humble and lowly to crave pardon. And
if thou have ought against him, be not malapert in controlling, nor hard to
entreat; but mild in reproouing, and gentle to forgive, and all shall be well,
and at peace.

2 The ASSALT given by waiwardnes, and malapert controlling.
O Man, is it meet that fools, senseless, and brutish beasts should be
smoothed and soothed with fair words? Or rather is it not more convenient,
that they should be roughly rebuked, and taken up with bitter and sharp
taunts, so often as they offend? For it is not mild speech that can prevail
with such as lack judgment and reason: and therefore to deal with them in
that order, it is labor superfluous. Take them up as one having authority,
for bear them not an inch, use such words in reproouing them, as are agreeable
to the manner of their dealing.

If a woman offend thee, bear not with her weakness: if an old ancient father,
yield nothing to his age or gravity: if a learned Doctor, esteem not of his
person: if thine equal, hold foul scorn at his sawsines: if thine inferior
and underling, check him, and make him hold his tongue: if thy parents,
allege thou art no child; and so turn their controlments upon their own
necks. Finally, be he better, or be he baser that rebukes thee, forbear him
not, but with stowtnes stand in defense of thy self.

3 A prayer against the former vice.
O Eternal God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which see our secret and
hidden thoughts, and the issue of every enterprise, before we our selves are
certain to what end the same will grow; remove from us, we pray thee, all
waiwardnes, and malapert controlling of our brethren for their offenses. And
whereas our nature is stout, rebellious, and impatient of reproof; in so much
that oftentimes we spurn at them that admonish us for our amendment, and
reward them, not only with counterchecks, but also with open wrong, and
manifest abuse: as Ahab did Micah; Manasses Esaie; Pashur Jeremy; Herod John
Baptist; and the Jews Jesus: root out of our hearts, good Lord, that wicked
custom, and let us not by refusing correction, double our offense, and so make
it the more odious.

Furthermore, most merciful Father, indue us with wisdom and discretion,
that we may be led with the eyes of understanding; to judge betwixt the sinner
and his sin, to observe due time and season of reprehending, to be mild and
gentle in reproouing such as be tractable, but sharp and rigorous to the
obstinate and wilful: otherwise we shall little prevail, in laboring to
supplant iniquity, and to reform the transgressor.

Teach us the true use of that wholesome counsel, ministered unto us by thy
son Christ; namely, that if our brother trespass against us, we go and tell
him his fault privately, between him and us; if that will do no good toward
the winning of him home, then to put other means in practice, before we
procure his open shame. This lesson o Lord, give us grace to learn; and not
only to learn, but also to remember; and not only to remember, but also to
exercise and follow: that the end of our labor bestowed according to thy will,
may tend to the glory of thy most holy name, the safety of repentant
sinners, and the discharge of our own conscience, through Jesus Christ our
only mediator and advocate, Amen.

1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the virtue following.
PResumption and obstinacy are the ways of devils; fly from them, o man,
least thine enemy triumph over thee. For in these sins he reioiceth
exceedingly, having made proof in himself, how impossible it is to recover,
and get out of such a gaping gulf.

Now I would not have thee ignorant, o man, what are the steps of this
downe-fall, or breake-necke: the first is the dissembling of thine own
weakness; the second the ignorance of thine own wretchedness; the third is the
excusing of thine own wickedness; and the fourth is open contempt and
perseuering in sinfulnes.

Which steps, if thou will not tread in, o man, nor be swalowed up in this
irrecouerable whirlepoole of destruction, despise not good counsel; disdain
not to be rebuked; but mildly and meekelie take warning when thou docest
amiss; and when thou art rebuked of sin and ungodliness, take it in good part
on Gods name, and bear it patiently with the spirit of softnes and gentleness.

2 The REPVLSE given by MEEKENES, or gentleness.
O Man, this persuasion may in no case be followed. For it is flatly against
the counsel and advise of the Apostle, who admonishing his beloved scholar
Timothy in this behalf, says: Rebuke not an elder, but exhort him as a
father: the yoonger men as brethren; the elder women as mothers; the yoonger as
sisters, in all chastity.

Again, The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men,
apt to teach, suffering evil, in meekenes instructing them that are contrary
minded. Again, Improoue, rebuke, exhort in all long suffering and doctrine.
This vice of waiwardnes, or malapert controiling, does more hurt to the baser
sort, than to the better; to the subject, than to the magistrate. For it
comes to pass oftentimes, that they contemn correction and reprehension,
used and uttered with mildnes, love, and charity: and against words spoken
with humility and lowlines, they will not stick to shoot the shafts of
shameless derision and scorning.

Hereupon it is thus written in Scripture: Who so reprooueth a scornful
person, gets himself dishonor. Again, Reprove not a scorner, least he
owe thee evil will. Contrariwise, of him which amendeth, when he is reproved,
and is the better being rebuked, it is thus spoken: Rebuke a wise man, and he
will love thee.

3 A prayer for the former virtue.
O Lord, which from time to time have placed among thy people meet and
convenient vessels to carry the message of thy word and will, that thereby
they might be instructed and taught, how damnable their state is, during the
time of their pilgrimage in wicked ways, and bypaths of impiety; and have
dispersed and sown among us plain tell troth Nathans, to reprove us of our
iniquities and sins: give us grace, we beseech thee, that the preaching of
the one, and the reproouing of the other, may work upon us, like new made
wax, apt to receive any fashion or form.

O plant in us a patient spirit, which may make us lowly in heart; and
reformable in will; that the words of the admonisher may not pass by us like a
sudden blast of wind, but rather work effectually in our hearts, even like
fire, which fineth silver by the virtue of his heat. Remove from us all
rebellious motions of the flesh, which are ever against the good suggestions of
the spirit: and direct us in the way of wisdom, that we may take and choose
whatsoever is wholesome for us, yea though the taste thereof be as bitter as
woormewood to the mouth of our carnal man.

We know, o Father, that to purge abundance of corrupt humors, which engender
evil diseases, the physician ministers bitter pills: and to an old sore, which
can not be cured with a gentle plaster, the surgeon applies a biting corsiue:
which medicines, though to the patient most grievous and painful; yet in
consideration that they are preparatiues to health, they are received, well
taken, and suffered. And therefore o Lord vouchsafe us the grace of thy holy
spirit, whereby we being guided, conducted, and governed, may not murmur at the
admonitions, reprehensions, and corrections of our brethren, though they
rebukes us sharply: but may most thankefullie take their reproves, knowing
that the end and scope of their labor so employed, is for the edification of
our souls in Christ Jesus, to whom be praise for evermore, Amen.

The tenth Combat.
1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the vice ensuing.
SWelling loftines is a selfe-liking of ones own excellency, and has
attending upon her two waiting maids broken to her own bow, the one is blind
pride; the other vain pride: whereof the first is a fault of the
understanding, the second of the will. For by that, the eye of reason is
deceived; and by this, the desire of will abused.

Blind pride makes a man believe he is better than he is; whereby he swells
in the opinion of his own excellency, boasting of himself, and giving no
glory at all unto God.

Vain pride bewitcheth a man in such sort, that he braggeth, not only in
that which he has, but in that which he has not; and is more delighted in his
own commendation, than in the praise of God. But why swellest thou, o dirt and
doong? Why art thou lofty? All flesh is grass, and all the glory thereof as
the flower of haie. He that planteth is nothing, nor he that waters. What
have thou that thou have not received, and why then art thou so lofty?

2 The ASSALT given by swelling LOFTINES.
O Man, if thou have any business to do, any affairs in the world to deal
in, any matter wherein to meddle, to it with a good stomach, and fear not the
face or looking on of any manner of person. Follow thine own counsel and
determination. For, another man's wit is not so good, but thine may be much
better.

And therefore abase not thy self, but compare with the best. Let not thine
opinion and judgment be schooled by another advise and consultation. What
should thou submit thy self to the censure of men? Have thou not God in
heaven an eie-witnes and ouerseer of thy dealings? Why then should thou
care, what men suspect and misdeeme of thee in earth?

3 A prayer against the former vice.
O Merciful God, cast the light of thy countenance upon us, which are nothing
but mist and darkness, that the same shining upon us, may illuminate us
outwardly and inwardly, to the sanctifieng both of our souls and bodies,
which thou have created to set forth the glory of thy most holy name.

And because, good God, there are many conueiances of vices in our hearts, and
many holes and corners for sins of sundry sorts to lurk in, the least
whereof deserves death and condemnation: we most humbly crave of thy divine
Majesty, that it would please thee to crush out of our entrails, as out of a
sponge, all such filthy and stinking defilings, as have, ever since the day
of our natiuities, lien there soking and soupling, to the utter putrifieng and
consuming both of soul and body.

Specially most merciful Father, be unto us so good a physician, as to
minister but one dram or scruple of thy grace, that swallowing the same down
into the stomach of our souls, we may vomit and spue out all swelling
loftines, which puffs us up like wind blown into a bladder. O heal us thou
most careful and cunning leach of mankind, which know, and only
understand what maladies are incident to this our mortality, and with what
medicines they are to be expelled.

Suffer not so dangerous an humor to abound in us, least ouer-ruling us, it
prevail, and carry us as it list, from worse to worse, till we be brought
at last even to the gates of hell: as Nemroth, Nabuchodonisor, Pharao,
Antiochus, Herod, and the rest of that ambitious and proud race were, even at
the very ripenes of their pomp, when they thought all things safe and in
perfect security. We crave it so much the more instantly, o Father, because
thou have threatened to cast down the high mountains, and to make them eeuen
with the low plains: to lop the tall ceders of Libanus, and to make them
equal with the base bulrush: that thou only may be honored in thine
excellency, and that all creatures stooping unto thee, may do homage and
reverence to thee their Creator. Humble me, o Lord, in this manner, and pull
down the pinacles of my proud heart, that my soul may be made a mansion for
thy Majesty to dwell in, thy Son to abide in, and the holy Ghost to
continue in: to whom be all honor and power for evermore, Amen.

1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the virtue following.
Follow after me, says Christ, pass through me, draw near to me: after me,
because I am the truth; through me, because I am the way; to me, because I am
the life. Again he says, Who so will come after me, let him deny himself,
take up his cross, and follow me.

Wherein he lays three things before us, bondage, baseness, and hardness.
Bondage in denieng himself, baseness in taking up the cross, hardness in
following Christ; whose life was tempered with no kind of worldly pleasure.

By this we are taught to humble our selves, and to be lowly in our own eyes;
to be reformed when we are rebuked; and not to hold scorn of correction, when
we are blame-woorthie. For the way to be perfect, is to learn how to amend
that which is imperfect: if we neglect this, we shall never come to that.

2 The REPVLSE given by humble LOWLINES.
O Man, thou must give no occasion of slander, or evil speaking, no suspicion
of privy whispering and secret talking: but if thou be guilty of such faults,
as thou art charged withal, confess them, that thou may amend when thou
art rebuked: if not, deny them with humble lowlines, and clear thy self by
the true protestation of an upright conscience: because the Apostle admonishes
thee, that thou ought not to give any occasion to the adversary of
speaking slanderouslie.

Which thing the Apostle detested even in them, that knowing the Christian
faith, sat down notwithstanding to eat meats offered unto idols. And
although they esteemed an idol as a toie, or a thing of naught: yet, taking
unto them, and tasting idolatrous meats, as altogether harmeles, and nothing
at all offensive, they did tie the weak consciences of their unstaid
brethren, to the damnable rites and ceremonies of idols, by this their evil
and unchristian deed.

3 A prayer for the former virtue.
O Almighty and everlasting God, which from the beginning of the world, have
thrown the thunderbolts of thy justice and vengeance at such, as obstinately
have continued in their sin, without remorse of conscience, or fear of thy
judgments; we most humbly beseech thee, to hear the prayers of us thy
servants, and to grant the petition of our lips. O deliver us not over into the
rule of Satan our ghostly enemy, least he make a spoil of our souls, and
feed on them, as a falcon upon a dooue, or as a woolfe upon a lamb.

Be thou the governor of our life, and the directer of all our deeds, that we
may walk in the ways of thy law, and tread the paths of thy commandments:
out of which when we wander and go astraie, neglecting the conduction and
leading of thy grace, we fall into the temptation of the devil, and beecome
outcasts from the Commonwealth of Israel, exiles and outlawes from the
testament of the covenant, and have our names scraped out of the register book
of everlasting life.

Let us entreat thee therefore, o most merciful God, by the mediation and
intercession of thy Son our Savior, to give us that which we ask, even an
humble submission of mind, which working in us effectually, may strike down
all kind of insolency, hawtines, vaineglorie, ambition, arrogancy, and
whatsoever else does hinder us from entering into thy heavenly kingdom.

We know, o Father, the commodities depending upon this blessing, to be not
only singular, but also manifold. For when we offend, it works in us an
inward sorrow for sin, a grief for dishonor done to thy Majesty, a care of
conscience, a purpose to amend, and a desire to be reconciled. When we are
rebuked, it makes us take warning gladly, think upon our offense sadly,
lament the same earnestly, repent in heartily, crave pardon vnfeignedlie, and
walk ever after more circumspectly: through Jesus Christ our only mediator
and advocate, Amen.

The third Section, and eleventh Combat.
1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the vice. ensuing.
HEAVINES is bred in man's heart sundry ways; and is an affection naturally
graffed therein, not blameable, if it be meaurable; but offensive, if it be
excessive. And therefore to torment thy self with too much sorrow, and to
refuse comfort for the loss of things temporal, which come and go like the
tide, is extreme madness. Away with that worldly and ungodly sorrow; for God
has no pleasure therein. If thou will know what sorrow pleases the Lord, I
tell thee it is sorrow for sin, which is engendered of repentance, and
begets righteousness.

The remedy against this sorrow, that it break not beyond the bounds of
moderation, and so degenerate into despair, is Gods unspeakable mercy; even
his mercy, which is above all his works. As for heaviness, procured by the
variable state of the world, and the inconveniences belonging to this life;
esteem of them, o man, as they are, outward chastisements and school-points to
train thee to amendment.

2 The ASSALT given by ungodly SORROW, or HEAVINES
O Man, thou have many occasions to be heavy and sad, and nothing in the
world whereat to rejoice or be merry. Not so much as thy neighbors and
friends, but are weary of thee; thine acquaintance have forsaken thee, and
thou have a weightier burden of cares and sorrows, than thou art able to bear.
Consider thine own heaviness and anguish, by viewing of other in the like case:
imagine what hanging looks, what lamentable countenances, what hollow eyes,
what thin cheeks they have, whom the passions of sorrows and cares do
oppress.

In this perplexity, where is thy comfort, where is thy consolation, thy
lightness of heart, and mirth of mind? It were much better for thee to forsake
all, and to die, that these torments might cease: than enioieng life, to suffer
a continual increase of such coresiue and eating cares. For he, whom grief
and heaviness has swallowed up, receiving no delight in any visible thing,
must needs look for a lamentable end.

3 A prayer against the former vice.
O Eternal God, in whose power it is to make the weak strong, the sick
sound, the poor rich, and the heavy merry: we know, and by experience have
fealt this to be true, that disordinate heaviness hinders that which is good,
and makes entrance unto that which is evil. And therefore the wise man's
advise is worthy, not only to be learned, but also to be followed: namely,
not to give our minds to heaviness, nor to vex our selves in our own counsel.
For as the joy of the heart is the life of man, and his gladness the prolonging
of his days; even so sorrow is his death, and heaviness shorteneth his time.

Again, Solomon tells us, that by sorrow of heart, the mind is made heavy,
the bones dried up, and the bowels consumed; as moths fret a garment, and
woormes eat into wood: yea, there is no plague like it, no vexation comparable
therewith, no anguish of greater torment: considering that it disquieteth the
conscience, and draws many a one into the pit of desperation: as appears
in Cain, Saul, Judas, and other reprobates, given over and cast out from thy
favor and grace.

From this heaviness, good Lord defend and deliver us; for it is the way to
endless woe, to perpetual tribulation, and irrecouerable misery. As for that
sorrow and heaviness, which thine Apostle Paul, by his preaching kindled in the
Corinthians, and reioiced that he had made them sad: we beseech thee make us
partakers thereof, that thereby we may be led to repentance, and draw nearer
and nearer to the benefit of our salvation. This sorrow, if it please thee to
stir up in our hearts, we shall be so much the further off from desperation
and death, as we are nearer unto hope and salvation; repentance taking effect,
and breeding in us a detestation of sin. Hear our prayers, o gracious God,
and grant our requests, for thy mercy sake, Amen.

1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the virtue following.
IN all the changes and chances of this life, which are many and diverse; in
all tribulation and anguish, it is thy part, o man, to hold fast the anchor of
hope, if thou will arrive at the port of peace. And if thou will live quietly
in Christ Jesus, make full reckoning to suffer affliction; and though thou be
sharply touched both in body and mind, yet persuade thy self, that after
long sufferance comes deliverance, and that these chastisements confirm thy
conscience, that thou art one of Gods household.

Rejoice in adversity, bear all casualties patiently, lament thy sin
sorowfullie, but beware of being heavy desperately. Comfort thy self with
the memory of Gods mercy, who in due time will give thee a Quietus est from
all these earthly troubles. Finally, when thou art most greeuouslie assalted
with sorrow, lighten thine heart with thinking upon these two notable
consolations; first, Christ's death and passion; secondly, the unspeakable
ioies of the life to come.

2 The REPVLSE given by godly reioicing, and spiritual COMFORT.
O Man, I know that of heaviness there are two kinds, the one works to
salvation, the other to damnation: the one draws to repentance, the other to
desperation. Thou art assaulted with one of them, not with that which works
unto life, but with that which works unto death. Thou may not be sad and
heavy, in such sort as thou art persuaded; but contrariwise, if thy sorrow and
heaviness spring from some external cause, as for that art envied and hated for
the truths sake, thou ought to rejoice in these thy greefes?

And why? Because thou not knowing to what issue they will grow, art
notwithstanding to be comforted by the voice of the giver of everlasting joy
and gladness, speaking thus unto thee: Blessed are you, when men shall revile
you, and persecute you, and lieng shall say all manner of evil saying against
you for my sake. Rejoice ye, and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven.

Remember also, O man, that the Apostles, the forerunners of this religion,
departed from the face of the Council, reioicing that they were counted
worthy to suffer shame and reproach for the name of Jesus. No place therefore
should be given unto grief and heaviness, where such joy and gladness insueth.

If thy sorrow and anguish, O man, proceed from the remorse of conscience for
thy sins, remember a multitude of offenders, that by repentance have obtained
mercy at Gods hands, according to the truth of his promise: In what day
soever a sinner does repent him of his sin and wickedness, I will put all his
iniquity out of my remembrance, says the Lord. Again, Though thy sins were
as red as skarlet, yet will I make them as white as wool: and though they were
as filthy as the menstruous cloth of a woman, yet will I make them as white as
snow.

Remember, O man, the merciful Semaritan in the Gospel, that powered wine and
oil into the sick man's wounds, set him on his own ass, brought him to an
inn, and paid for his necessaries. Remember the good Shepherd, that sought
the lost and wandering sheep, and having found him, brought him home to the
sheepe-fold upon his shoulders.

Remember the bountiful King, that making a sumptuous banquet, sent abroad his
servants, to bid guests of all estates and degrees unto the same. Remember the
kind and loving Father, that having an ungracious spend-thrift to his son,
fell upon his neck notwithstanding, at his returning sorrowful for his fault,
and put him in possession of the fullness of his favor again, which before by
his riotous behavior he had lost.

If thy heaviness, O man, proceed from the consideration of thy poor estate,
from the remembrance of thy losses by sea or land, from unthankfulness of
affinity and kindred, from frowardnes of children, from wilfulnes of wife,
from unfaithfulness of servants, learn patience of Job: The Lord gives, and
the Lord takes away, even as it pleseth the Lord, so let things come to pass.

Learn of thy Savior Christ to submit thy will to Gods will, and to say: Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Thus arming thee with spiritual
furniture, thou shall not be heavy either to desperation or damnation, but
sorrowful to repentance and amendment, and so consequently thou shall find
joy and comfort.

3 A prayer for the former virtue.
O Bountiful God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose eyes of mercy
and loving kindness are always open, and broad waking over thy servants,
ouerseeing them, that none inconvenience or evil thing invade them; not the
arrows of the hunter at noonday, nor the dangers of the darts of darkness at
midnight; we beseech thee of thine infinite goodness and clemency, to continue
thy fatherly affection and favor at all times, specially in the time of
persecution, trouble sorrow, need, and adversity, that we may not wax
heauie-hatred in our tribulations; but rejoice rather and be glad, persuading
our selves, that by the fire of afflictions thou triest thy children like
silver, and finest them, that they may be made fit and worthy coin to
receive the stamp of their Creator and King.

Give us patience, good Lord, to suffer whatsoever it shall please thy
heavenly wisdom to lay upon our shoulders; according to the example of thy
servant Job, who escaping no kind of adversity that might happen to the body
of man, his state, condition, credit, and ability, did not revile thee, nor
yet curse thee to thy face, although he was greeuouslie tempted of Satan by thy
permission, and sorelie assalted of his wicked wife, to renounce thee his
maker, and so to end his miserable life; but blessed and praised thy divine
Majesty, supposing it necessary to receive evil at thine hands, as well as
good.

Even so, o eternal God, and most merciful Father, if it be thy will at any
time to chastise us, either with sickness, poverty, or any other kind of
adversity, vouchsafe therewithal to arm us with contentation of mind,
quietness of conscience, and consolation of spirit, that we may be so far from
being discomforted in our tribulations, that we rather triumph, and be ioifull
in the midst of them, building our hope upon the promise of thy son Jesus
Christ our Savior, who prophesieng that in this world we should weep and
lament, mourn and be sorrowful, willed us notwithstanding to be comforted,
saying: that The time should come, when our heaviness should be turned into
joy, and that our joy should be full: which grace o GOD grant, for thy
mercies sake, Amen.

The twelfe Combat.
1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the vice ensuing.
IDLENESS is the mother of vice, and the stepdame of virtue, and therefore
eschew idleness, and enure thy self to labor and exercise, so shall thou
quickly feel an appetite or desire after such food, as may kill hunger, and
not deintie* or delicate in taste. For labor and exercise makes such things
toothsome, as slothfulnes makes loathsome.

Thou will be glad, o man, of many a morsel, after bodily labor and
exercise, which thou thoughtest scorn of, when thou were idle and unoccupied.
For idleness breeds lothsomnes, but labor ingendreth hunger: which hunger does
make diverse hard meats marvelous sauourie, that lothsomnes made unsavory.

Herbs, roots, beans, pease, crible bread, and thin water, are loathsome to an
idle person; but to the laboring man, they are delicates and i^nkets. So that
idleness is an enemy to the body, which while it attainteth, the mind can not
be kept undefiled.

2 The ASSALT given by slothful IDLENESS.
O Man, art thou called to be a churchman, and to live devoutly in praieng or
reading? I wish thee to favor thy self, and beware of such hurtful
exercises. For if thou accustom thy self to continual reading, remember the
danger depending thereupon. Thine eyes are but tender, and therefore if they
should be oppressed with too much looking upon books, they would quickly wax
blind. Again, if thou using devoutly to pray, should be touched with
sorrow, and so give thy self daily to weeping and shedding of tears, what
will sooner put out thine eyes than that?

If thou should fast, and thereby labor to bring thy flesh into subjection,
thou will be so weak and feeble, that before thou be old, thou shall be feign
to go with a staff. If thou should accustom thy self ordinarily to
watching; why that is such a pestilent thing, that in very short time thy
brains waxing light, and thine head out of quiet, thou will run stark staring
mad.

Again, if thou be called to the trade of a crafts-man or labourer, take heed
thou hurt not thy self with too much pain and travel, be not too earnest, be
not too quick, be not too careful, be not too diligent, be not too busy
about thy trade, least thou fall into some bodily infirmity and sickness,
whereby thou pining and consuming away, shall come in danger of death. And
therefore let spiritual exercises alone; and as for bodily business, meddle as
little therewith as thou may.

3 A prayer against the former vice.
O Loving God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, whose will and pleasure it
is, that we should not be weary of well doing, pluck out of our hearts, we
most humbly beseech thee, all manner of carnal and idle motions, counselling
us to the contrary. Specially, good Lord, remove from us the filthy vice of
slothful idleness, whereby we are made unfit for any Christian exercise,
withdrawn from praieng and fasting, which are the means to pull down and
tame the wantonness of this young heifer our flesh.

Suffer not so detestable a sin to regne in us, to bear swaie in our
earthly members, and to carry us headlong into security and carelesnes;
least whiles we be lulled asleep in the cradle of sensuality, and make full
reckoning that all is safe, we be overtaken in our sins, and suffer due
punishment.

Give us grace to follow the wholesome advise of our Savior Christ, given to
his disciples; namely, to watch and pray, which are means to prevent and
avoid temptations: taking him for an example to follow, whose life was nothing
else but a continual meditation of godliness, which if we could frame our
selves to imitate, we needed no better schoolemaister to instruct us in the
ways of righteousness and sanctification.

Let us be stirred up, we pray thee, by the due consideration of thy loving
kindness toward us, to praise and magnify thee incessantly, night and day,
in season and out of season, at home privately, abroad openly, secretly by
our selves, in company with others, at bed and board, in speech and
communication, in behavior and life, eating and drinking, riding, running,
sitting, going, walking, and working: that the whole course of our conversation
may be acceptable in thy sight, our thoughts, words, and deeds setting forth
the glory of thy name with one voice and consent.

That we may do this effectually, to the true worshipping of thy divine
Majesty, the benefit of thy people, and the consolation of our own souls;
vouchsafe to set strife between us and slothful idleness, that both our hearts
inwardly, our bodies outwardly, and so consequently, our whole man
diligently addicted to the discharge of our duties, both toward thee, o God,
and all the world, we may be reckoned at the last and general audit, even the
day of doom, among thy servants; not through our deserts, but thy sons our
Savior, to whom be praise for evermore, Amen.

1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the virtue following.
THis is the sum of virtuous and spiritual exercise; this is the form of
godly endeavor; wisely to dispose and order things present, penitentlie and
in the bitterness of thy soul to consider thy misdeeds past, and carefully to
provide and foresee things to come.

Live soberlie, justly, and godly, says the Apostle, in this world:
soberlie, in respect of the time present; iustilie, in respect of the time
past, which we must redeem, by making amends for the neglect of our former
thrift; and godly, in respect of the time to come, setting it as a sheeld to
defend us from all instant dangers, and hazards that may happen hereafter.

I would to God we were wise for the ordering of our life present; for the
amending of our life past; and for leading the rest of our life to come, in
unfeigned faith to Godward. For this is the thread of three twists, whereby we
are drawn to salvation: namely; an orderly conversation; an upright
judgment; and a faith unfeigned.

2 The REPVLSE given by honest and virtuous EXERCISE.
O Man, prolong no time, neither drive off from day to day, but whiles thou
have space do thine endeavor to live honestly, painfully, virtuously, and
devoutly. Follow thy vocation, whether it be secular or ecclesiastical;
appertaining to worldly affairs, or belonging to the spirit. Can thou tell,
O man, whether thou shall live till to morrow? Have thou a lease of thy life
from the Lord? Naie, mark what I speak; art thou able to say, that thou
shall live one hour to an end?

Is the saying of thy Savior Christ out of remembrance, mentioned in the
Gospel: Watch; for you know not the day nor the hour. Wherefore shake off
all slothfulnes of body, and all idle cogitations of mind: and let this lesson
be fresh in thy memory daily, that such as offer violence, and snatch at the
kingdom of heaven by force, shall have it in possession: it is none
inheritance for such as are lukewarm, neither hot nor cold, soft and
effeminate persons, wantous, nice, idle, and slothful.

Follow the counsel of the Apostle; to pray continually, to make
supplications unto GOD without ceasing: not forgetting this, that he which
stirs up such good motions in thine heart, is sufficient and able to give
thee strength and might to persevere in the same.

Be earnest in prayer, zealous, fervent, and continual. For, that which the
flesh accounts too much, the spirit contrariwise judges too little:
considering that Satan is tempting us daily and hourelie, to sift us as it
were wheat.

Who preserved the eie-sight of David, weeping and wailing for his sins? Who
strengthened the Niniuets fasting and praieng at the preaching of Jonas? Who
made Paul able to pass through his long peregrination in Asia? Did not the
Lord? Why then, O man, doubt not of thine eyes, of thy lims, of thy body, or
of thy mind. For God by his grace will work that in thee, which seems hard
and impossible to the nature of flesh and blood.

3 A prayer for the former virtue.
O Almighty and everlasting God, who have placed us in this world for two
special ends and purposes; firstlie, to glorify thee in our life and
conversation, directed by the rule of thy holy laws and commandments;
secondly, to do good one to another, as brotherly love and charitable
affection does move and exhort us: knowing that in these two points the two
tables of thy divine precepts do summarilie consist, according to the
testimony of thy son our Savior, who in few words did knit up the ten
commandments; namely, in loving thee, o Lord, with all our hearts; and our
neighbors as our selves. O vouchsafe us the assistance of thy holy spirit,
that we may exercise our selves day and night in the meditation of thy law,
and frame the course of our life according to the prescript rule of thy word,
and the good example of thy servants our predecessors.

Let thy grace ouershadowe us, yea Lord, let it fill us wholly and solie, that
we may tread in the footesteps of faithful Abraham, Tobie, Cornelius that
devout captain of the Italian band, whose continual exercise was in the fear
of thee, and the honor of thy holy name, whereunto also he trained all his
household, insomuch that from the highest to the lowest, they studied to set
forth thy glory: but he especially, who by his continual prayer, unfeigned
invocation, and charitable alms-deeds, grew in great favor with thee, and
received the assurance of salvation, by the testimony of a pure and undefiled
conscience.

We know, o Father of mercy, and God of all consolation, that thou requirest
a kind of divine service at our hands, proper and peculiar to thy Majesty,
which is, to worship thee in spirit and truth. This we are bound by duty to
exhibit and show thee: as also all other exercises of Christianity, consisting
in love and charity, we are charged in thy law to testify unto men. O give
us the grace, we beseech thee, to do it, for Jesus sake, Amen.

The xiij. Combat.
1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the vice ensuing.
O Holy soul, be solitary and alone, that thou may serve him only, and
keep thy self for him alone, of whom thou have made thy special choice above
all other. Refrain thy self from gadding abroad; refuse common meetings;
forsake thine own household; depart from thy friends and dearest acquaintance;
have nothing to do with the multitude: fly the company of men and women;
forget thine own people, and thy fathers house; so shall the King delight in
thy beauty.

Run not to Dan and Bethel; to Babylon and Egypt; but keep at home in Gods
city, even his Church and congregation; and meddle not with the heathen, the
infidel, the profane person and heretic, least by touching pitch thou be
defiled. Thou art solitary, and void of loose liberty, o man, if thou think
not of the ordinary affairs of the world; if thou covet not things present;
if thou despise that which many desire; if thou loath that which maine like;
if thou deal not with matters of strife; if thou remember none injury, and
revenge no wrong: doing otherwise, thou love loose liberty, and delightest
therein, albeit in body thou live solitary and alone.

2 The ASSALT given by wandering loose LIBERTY.
O Man, consider with thy self that thou art a creature borne to liberty, and
not to service: let thy mind therefore run upon choice and variety; tie it not
to one special place, or one proper practice. The world is wide, and full of
people, their customs are diverse, and their manners not alike.

Thou shall learn that abroad, which thou shall not see at home; the sundry
fashions of countries; their kind of government and Commonwealth; their order
of divine service and religion; and other observations not unnecessary. And
why then should thou not use the benefit of liberty, and passing from place
to place, see and learn, as well for thine own pleasure, as for others
example?

If thou believe that God is every where, that all the corners of the earth
are replenished with his greatness; why then dooest thou so precisely bind thy
self to one place, to one service, to one religion, to one custom, to one
tradition, to one order; and dooest not rather seek what is abroad?

3 A prayer against the former vice.
O Lord God, Father of light, we give thee most hearty thanks for thy great
love and clemency declared unto us, in stopping the swift course, which thou
by thy divine foresight perceiuedst us ready, not only to take, but also to
keep: humbly beseeching thee to kindle in our hearts an inward hatred against
loose liberty and licentiousnes, knowing the mischiefs thereupon depending to
be such, as that they do not only engender thy dishonor, but also our own
shame and confusion.

Examples hereof we have many in the sacred Scriptures, and specially that of
Dinah Jacobs daughter, upon whose wandering and straieng abroad to see the
pleasures of a strange land, and the fashions of young damsels; there dwelling;
not only the loss of her honesty, but also the shedding of much blood did
ensue. Let this, o Lord, be a sufficient warning unto us, that by liberty
there comes more evil than good: naie, rather no good at all. For it opens
a free passage unto many vices, which otherwise might be suppressed with
restraint.

What the cause should be of so many strange innouations and disguisings, not
only in apparel, but also in behavior, and not only in behavior, but
also in opinion and belief, thou know, and we confess to be nothing but
licentious liberty; whiles some not content with the customs, trades, manners,
affairs, vsages, and orders of their own native country, do let loose their
straieng affections with their wandering bodies, and learn in profane places,
among uncircumcised people, of polluted hearts and tongues, most abominable
abuses, tending altogether to the derogation of thy glory, the breach of
christian unity, peace and concord, the defa^^^tion of the Gospel, the
offense of many a weak conscience, and the utter confusion of a thousand
thousand souls.

Turn our hearts, o Lord, that we affect not, covet not, desire not this
detestable liberty, which though to the flesh, and the wild lusts of the same,
it be delectable and pleasant; yet to the soul it is most damnable and
noisome. Deliver us from it, o Lord, for it is the nurse of vanities: o deliver
us from it for thy mercy sake, and for thy beloved sons sake, our Savior
and redeemer Jesus Christ, Amen.

1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the virtue following.
THere is nothing more unstable and wavering, nothing more swift and flitting
in thee, o man, than thine own heart, which so often as it stumbleth at the
stone of evil thoughts, so often it offends God. Thy heart is vain,
variable, and unsearchable; and so often as it is led by it own will and
consent, so often it wants Gods counsel. It is like a bird flieng out of her
nest, like a ship lanching into the deep, like an arrowe shot out of a bow.
And what is the cause of this unstableness? even lack of trust in God.

Trust in God, o man, and continue in thy place; believe in him, affie thy
self on his goodness, and thou shall obtain contented staiednes. A fool
changes and alters like the moon, but a wise man abides firm and fast
like the sun: a fool wauereth like a reed, but a wise man stands still
like a strong oak: a fool is compared to the wandering stars, which are ever
moving; but a wise man is likened to the fixed stars, which keep their
appointed places. For the first the mist of darkness is prepared; for the second
the cleerenes of light is ordained.

2 The REPVLSE given by Christian contentment, and STAIEDNES.
O Man, if the case stand as thou say, and confessest, that God is
eueriewhere, then is it thy duty to keep thee where thou art, and not to
forsake that place, which thou would so feign change for another: because
God is in it, by his greatness, which fills every place. But thou will say, O
man, I seek for a better, and I find a better. But I answer thee, and say
thus again unto thee with boldness and truth: Thou seek a better place, but
dooest thou find a better, or such a one as thou know Lucifer and Adam lost?

Remember therefore that the first angel fell from heaven, and the first man
was banished out of paradise, and became acquainted with the troubles of this
world. Look upon Lot, who living among the thickest of the beastly Sodomites,
and seeing their filthy behauiours, remained holy notwithstanding and
undefiled: but when he came to dwell in the mountain, and had grown hard in
security, he became drunk, and fell into the filthiness of incest with his
own daughters.

Mark also, O man, what mischiefs followed loose liberty in Dina the daughter
of Jacob, who not contended to tarry at home, but desiring to see fine
fashions abroad, among the young women of Sichar, was intised to play the
whore: and thereupon insued slaughter and bloodshed by the hands of Simeon,
Leui, and their assistants.

There is beside this kind of loose liberty, another licentious wandering,
which works in the minds even of such as keep themselves in one place, and
withdraws their hearts from spiritual exercises, intangling them in affairs
of the world, or else finding them occupied in most vile and homely things,
contrary to the counsel of the Apostle in this case, who says: No man that
warreth, intangleth himself with the affairs of this life, that he may please
him, which has chosen him to be a soldier. And again, Pray without
ceasing, in all things give thanks.

3 A prayer for the former virtue.
O Everlasting GOD, the wellspring of all true wisdom and understanding, whose
will and pleasure it is, that we should walk in obedience before thee all the
days of our life, brideling the vanities of our minds, the ranging lusts of
our flesh, the concupiscence of our eyes, and whatsoever is at enimitie and
variance with thee: we beseech thee to beat down in us all wild and unstaid
affections, which wrestle against the spirit, and hinder us from doing that
homage unto thy divine Majesty, which we are inioined by the verdict of thy
most holy word.

And because experience teaches us, that no small mischief arises and
springs from loose liberty, whiles we not content with our native country
custom, hunt after not only foren fashions in outward manners, but also new
devised opinions in doctrine and belief: we beseech thee tie our hearts in one
unity of faith, as there is but one truth of thy Gospel: and expel and drive
out of our minds all desire of licentiousnes, which is the match to set on fire
the powder of fantasticalnes.

O let us not straie about to Dan and Bethel, suffer us not to go on pilgrimage
to Babylon and Rome: but let thy grace be a snaffle in our mouth, to keep us
within the walls of holy Jerusalem, there to worship thee in thy sanctuary in
spirit and verity. And as we crave an uniformity in matters of religion, so
Lord we beseech thee, to make us of one mind in manners and behavior, to be
content with a reverent and modest use of thy creatures, and not to abuse them
to the fulfilling of our own vain imaginations.

Of our selves we are like wandering weather cocks, as uncertain as the wind,
as variable as the weather, as mooueable as the sea: now inclined to this
vanity, now to that fantasy, never steadfast, but ever changable: and
therefore, good Lord, open our understanding, that we may see how irregularlie
and out of rule we walk: and seeing it, may be ashamed; and being ashamed, may
be grieved, and being grieved, may seek to be reformed; even by thy spirit of
constancy, which is able to work in us a continual and immutable
perseverance, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

The xiiij. Combat.
1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the vice ensuing.
DESPERATION breeds a ripenes, fulness, and perfection of all sin.
Desperation comes by the ignorance of God. If the ignorance of God have hold
of us, how do we believe in him, how do we hope in him, how do we trust in
him, of whom we are ignorant? We know also, that such as are desperate, have
no part or followship with the Saints.

But how does the ignorance of God engender desperation? Some man peradventure
coming home to himself, being discontented, and displeased at the evil deeds
which he has done, and purposing to repent, and turn back from all his evil
ways, and carnal conversation; if he be ignorant how good God is, how sweet,
how gentle, and how favorable to forgive; will not his conscience choked with
fleshly thoughts, reprove him, and say, What do thou man? will thou loose
not only this life present, but also the life to come?

Thy sins are exceeding great, and too too many, so that it is far above thy
reach to make amends for them any way: no, if thou would flea thy self,
and pull thy skin over thine ears; thou art not able to acquit thy self. Thy
flesh is tender and nice, thy life has been delicate and wanton, so that it
will be an hard matter for thee to ouer-maister custom.

At these and the like speeches, or suggestions, the desperate soul starts
backewrapped in woe, being utterly ignorant how easily the goodness of
almighty God, who will not the death of a sinner, can remedy all this:
whereupon follows impenitence, which is an heinous sin, and blasphemy
unpardonable.

Then the seely soul troubled in mind, and sore disquieted, is swalowed up
with an extreme heaviness of heart, and is carried headlong into so deep a
gulf of inward anguish, as he can not possibly recover himself, by the
ministry of any comfort: or else dissembling the matter, and flattering
himself, how wicked soever he be, with likely reasons, and pleasant
persuasions, he betaketh himself afresh to the world, enioieng all the
delights and vanities of the same, with full purpose never to be withdrawn
from it by any means.

Now when he says, peace and quietness, all is well, and without danger; then,
even then sudden destruction shall overtake him, as a woman with child, and he
shall not escape. Thus then of the ignorance of God, comes the fulness of all
iniquity, which is desperation.

2 The ASSALT given by devilish DESPERATION.
O Man, how heinous be the sins which thou have committed? How grievous, how
accursed, how abominable, how deadly, how damnable? Thine offenses are so
many, that they can not be numbered; and so great, that they may not be
pardoned. Thou have continued a transgressor all thy life long, and have not to
this day once thought upon amendment.

For behold, thine own conscience is a witness, that thou art tied with the
chain of evil custom to commit wickedness, and have not in thee the power to
be withdrawn. Thou striuest and strugglest to rise, but it is not in thee. And
why? The burden of thy sins is so heavy, and keep thee under so sore, that
thou fallest down again as soon as thou art half up. In this case what is
to be done?

The misdeeds whereof thou art guilty, the transgressions wherein thou art
filthilie fallen, the sins which have gone over thy head are so many and so
great, that thou art certainly damned already, without all hope of
redemption. This is the reward due for thine offenses past; as for thy present
faults, thou have not the grace granted thee to forbear or forsake them, unless
thou will loose the pleasures of this world, and look for the consolations of
the life to come, which thou art not like to obtain, because thou art secluded
from the seat of Gods favor, and therefore desperate, and in the state of
damnation.

3 A prayer against the former vice.
O Eternal God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which have planted us in
thy vineyard, to shoot forth our branches, and yield plenty of grapes; that is
to say, to lead a life so adorned and enriched with good works, as thou
thereby may be glorified: give us grace, we most humbly beseech thee, to
pull back and withdraw our feet from the wicked ways of the devil, the
world, and the flesh: and direct our steps in the paths of thy holy will,
which is the rule to righteousness, and the line to godliness and innocence.

And because, o Lord, it is thy nature and property to abhor sin, little or
much, considering the integrity and perfection of thy divinity, which is
commended in Scripture to be such, that the very heavens are counted unclean
in thy sight: grant unto us such light of true knowledge and understanding,
that thereby we may be lead as by a bright burning lamp, out of the dark lanes
of ignorance, wilfulnes, obstinacy, peruersenes, and such like.

Especially deliver us from falling into the deep dungeon of desperation,
whereinto the devil, by vpbraiding and casting in our teeth the horror of our
iniquities, does what he can to drive us; that by ingendering a conceit of
mistrust in thy mercy and compassion for the remission of our sins, we
should stumble at the same stone of reprobation, whereat Cain stumbled; who,
when he had imbrued his hands in the lukewarm blood of his brother, did so
vainelie think of thy greatness and goodness, that he could not contain
himself, but by the outcrie of his tongue, bewraied the mistrust of his heart,
saying that his sin was more heinous, than that thou could pardon it by
thy mercy.

O Lord, preserve and keep us, during the time of our navigations in the seas
of this troublesome life; least thou, who art the Pilot of the pinnesse,
wherein thy people pass through the narrow streights of death, withholding
thy hand, and forsaking us, we run against merciles rocks, and be cracked in
pieces like potsheards. Defend us from slipping into the pit of perdition with
Judas, that child of wrath and destruction: o save and rescue us, good Lord;
tender us as the apple of thine eyes: and from all sin, but chiefly from
desperation deliver us, and our posterity, from generation to generation, for
Jesus Christ's sake, our only mediator and advocate, Amen.

1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the virtue following.
THere is a place between fear and carelesnes, namely, hope, the golden
mean, wherein man's mind and conscience sleeps most sweetly upon the soft
bed of love, vnderlaid with patience. In hope we live, least we should faint in
afflictions present, looking for the ioies, which shall last for ever. God will
not disappoint them that hope in him, but will help and deliver them: why so,
and for what deserts? Because they hoped in him.

A sweet cause, very effectual, pithie, and past reuoking. Not to disappoint
them that hope in him, is a most comfortable reward, a rich gift, a bountiful
largess. For God refuses not to be the hope of the miserable, because he is
merciful: he disdaineth not to show himself a deliverer, but he will be a
protector and defender also of them that hope in him.

Behold man, reckon up thy tribulations by number, his consolations shall make
glad thy soul; if thou turn not to other by-helpes, if thou cry out unto
him, if thou hope only in him. For in all temptation, in all vexation, in all
time of necessity, the city of refuge is ready to receive us, the bosom of
the Father is wide open for us, the holes of the surest rock do gape for us
to run into, the bowels of Gods bottomless mercy are our sanctuary to
franchise us.

2 The REPVLSE given by faithful HOPE.
O Man, if thy sins and offenses come to reckoning, behold the description of
David, who being guilty of adultery and manslaughter, was notwithstanding,
through the mercy of God, delivered from the mouth of hell. Behold Manasses in
like manner an horrible, a filthy, and a most wicked offender, restored from
death to life.

Look upon Marie Magdalen, plaieng the common strumpet, and defiling the
vessel of her body with innumerable fornications: but afterward better
advised, she came with sorrow and anguish of mind to the fountain of godliness,
and washing the Lords feet with her tears, she wiped them with her hairie
locks, kissed, licked, and anointed them with ointment: by which her humility
she tasted the sweetness of Gods mercy, and obtained remission of her sins.

Look also upon Peter, who by denieng his leege Lord and master, tangled
himself in the cords of unbelief; but afterward touched with remorse of
conscience for so doing, he did untie the knots of those cords of
infidelity, with bitter tears and heart grief.

Look upon the thief given to quarelling and sedition, and guilty of
shedding the blood of his brethren; in one minute of an hour, and by one short
confession of his offenses, he did pass from the cross, where he hoong with
shame and infamy, to paradise, a place of endless joy and felicity.

Look upon Saul persecuting the congregation of God, breathing out
threatenings afresh against the flock of Christ, and imbruing his hands with
the blood of the martyrs: of a persecuter, became a preacher; of an apostata,
an apostle; and of a vassal to sin, a vessel of election and grace.

Seeing therefore, O man, so many examples of penitent sinners before thy face,
let not wicked speeches make place for desperation to enter into thine heart,
considering it is thus written in holy Scripture: In what day soever a sinner
does turn and forsake his sins, being sorry for them from the bottom of
his heart, he shall be saved. And again, I will not the death of a sinner,
says the Lord.

As touching conversation of life still wickedlie continued, and not changed
from the worse to the better, what should I say but this; that the thing which
a man neglects to do to day, let him be careful to do to morrow, whiles he
has life in him, and time to repent and amend.

Let him not prolong and drive it off from day to day; but having help of
God from heaven, and assisted with the spirit of sanctification, let him do
his endeavor daily to withstand the evil custom of sin, and let him say
with the prophet every morning and evening: Behold, I have now begun; the
right hand of the Highest has wrought this alteration and change.

3 A prayer for the former virtue.
O Pitiful Samaritan, which did so lament our distressed case, when we were
wounded with the inuenomed darts of sin, that thou vouchsafedst to heal us,
even by applieng the most comfortable plasters of thy heart blood to our
desperate sores: o hear the prayer and supplication which we power out before
thy mercie-seat; beseeching thee of thine accustomed kindness, o loving Joseph,
to make us rich in virtue and godliness: specially, bring our hearts into the
safe rode and harbor of hope, where lieng at rest, they can take no harm.

And although our sins, like hie grown seas, do swell and lift up
themselves over our heads; insomuch that with their violent rage, they seem to
threaten the renting in sunder of the gables of our anchor hold, and so to
sink the ship of our confidence, wherein we wish to be carried into the port
of thy promises, never failing them that repose their undoubted trust in thee,
which art yea and Amen to all the flock of the faithful: yet notwithstanding
we say, as that good King said: Thy mercy, o Lord, surmounteth all thy works:
and with the Prophet in his lamentations: It is thy mercy, o Lord, that we are
not consumed: and with the Apostle; Thou art rich in mercy, o God.

And because hope is so necessary, o sweet Savior, that without it we cannot
be saved, knowing that it is one of the virtues, which must advance and prefer
us unto thee, (for in faith, hope, and charity, consists the obteining of
perfect felicity) we beseech thy goodness to stablish and strengthen the same
in us, to sow it plentifully in the soil of our hearts, that it may shoot
forth and spread abroad like a palm tree, to the endless comfort of our souls
and consciences.

Thou being so gracious and favorable unto us, it can not be, but that in all
tempests of troublesome thoughts, raging in us through the sting of our sins,
and bringing us out of quiet; we shall presently apprehend thy promise,
encouraged by a lively hope; and running from wickedness, as from the ruin of
a rotten wall, be erected, supported, and underpropped with the firm
foundation of thy faithfulness, which never failest the constant believer,
trusting to thy word, and building thereupon, as upon a most firm and
vnshakeable foundation: but performest the uttermost of thy covenant, even to
the third and fourth generation of them that love thee, and keep thy
commandments: which to observe, and live thereafter, give us grace, o Christ,
for thy mercy sake, Amen.

The xv. Combat.
1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the vice ensuing.
COVETOVSNES has the chief rule and highest place in matters of robbery,
craft, deceit, and wrongful dealing: he rides in a wagon of four wheels, the
first base-mindednes; the second cruelty; the third contempt of God, and the
fourth forgetfulness of death.

Moreover, the beasts that draw this wagon, are hold fast, and catch all; both
which are ruled by one waggoner, whose name is desire to have more. For
covetousness being loath to ouercharge himself with hiring many servants is
content with one, though he be never so simple.

The waggoner is nimble at his business, and never complains of wearines:
having in his hands two whips, wherewith he yerketh the drawing-beasts; the one
called greedy of getting, the other fear of losing. This covetousness is one
of the princes or peers of the great and mighty monarch of the spiritual and
invisible Egypt.

2 The ASSALT given by insatiable COVETOVSNES.
O Man, be careful of thy self, and seek all the means thou can to increse
thy wealth; it is good husbandry to have a regard to thine own commodity and
profit. Have thou a stock of money? Put it out to usury; take for the loan,
not as the borrower is able to afford for his benefit, but for thine own
contentment and satisfaction.

Have thou houses and tenements? Let them out after such a rate, and upon such
conditions, that thou may be a great gainer by the bargain; and that the
tenant by thy fore exaction of rent, may be eaten out of house and home, and so
thy tenement return again into thy hands.

Have thou farms in the country, arable lands, pasture and medowe-ground? Put
it to other men's occupieng, and make money of all, paieng thee yeerli and
quarterly such round sums upon extreme covenants, as thou may be soon
enriched by such dealing.

If thou have cattle of thine own, let them feed on the common: for why may
not thou use that liberty, which is granted to another? Have thou sons or
daughters to bestow in marriage? Seek not after them that be poor, though
they be honest and virtuous; comlie and handsome; wise, sober, and modest; well
brought up, and of good behavior: but provide for thy sons, such wives as
have not only wealthy kindred, but also great dowries; and let the same care
be in thee for thy daughters in like manner.

Furthermore, if thou see a commodity, which thou art in love withal, and
think the same fit for thee, disburse so much money as will compass it, be it
office in court, city, or country, thou may make thy bargain again in
such sort, that thou need not loose the value of a rush.

Let nothing escape thee, if thou see it be for thy behoof. For this is no
covetousness, but careful provision, when a man has in store to serve his
turn in time of necessity. And better it is, that a thing in another keeping
and ill used, were in thy hands discreetlie to occupy, than to let such a one
have it, as knows not what belongs to such a commodity.

3 A prayer against the former vice.
O Eternal GOD, who of thy goodness openest thy bountiful hands, and fillest
all living things with the dew of thy blessing; we beseech thee to root out of
our hearts all doubt and misbeleefe of thy universal providence, which in
nothing so much, as in the horrible sin of covetousness appears; and
therefore, good Lord, weane us from it, as the nurse weaneth the sucking child,
hanging upon his breasts: least the venomous milk of so ugly and detestable a
vice, over long remaining and continuing within us, we grow full of infection,
and fall into the distressed state of the Jews; of whom the prophet
complaining, reports that from the crown of the head to the sole of the
foot, there was no sound place, but all over irksome, with scabs, ulcers,
biles, and running sores.

We know this vice, o Lord, to be a vice so derogatorie to the honor of thy
name, as none more. For, it makes them, in whom it has possession, idolaters,
and image-worshippers: whiles they having more confidence in corruptible
creatures, neglect in the mean time, that peculiar trust and assured hope,
which ought properly and alonelie to be reposed in the power of thy
providence. The punishment whereof was most sharply executed upon Achan, who
coveting, contrary to thine express commandment, excommunicate things, which
his greedy eye beheld in the spoil, was stoned to death.

But no example more terrible and fearful does the Scripture commend unto us,
than that of the traitor Judas, who became so vile a bond-slaue to the desire
of money, that after he had sold his master, even thy son our tender Savior,
into the hands of tormentors, griped and gnawne with the woorme of a stormy
conscience, he accused himself to have betrayed innocent blood, and thereupon
throwing down the siluerlings, he conuaied himself away in the vexation of
his mind, and desperately hanged himself.

Considering this sin therefore, o most merciful Father, that it is an
hinderer of us from possessing the kingdom of heaven, a procurer of violence,
oppression, and bloodshed, a gulf insatiable, and a thing not so much as to
be once named, or heard of among Saints, we most humbly beseech thee, to
deliver us from it, not for any woorthines or merits in us; but for the
passion of thy deerlie beloved son Jesus Christ, our only mediator and
advocate, Amen.

1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the virtue following.
THE deceitful pomp of this world is deservedly refused, and the glory
thereof woorthilie despised. It is the flower of haie; and a smoke that lasts
but a while. The best state thereof, whatsoever it be, does it not bring more
anguish and vexation, than pleasure or delectation? Whiles, o man, thou
purchasest, whiles thou vsurpest, whiles thou defendest, whiles thou
maintainest, whiles thou grudgest, whiles thou repinest, whiles thou
suspectest, whiles thou art always liking and loving that which thou have not;
and having gotten diverse things, still desire more with a greedy mind, what
rest is in thy glory? If there be any, the pleasure thereof passes away,
and is never like to return to thee; but the grief and anguish thereof
abides, and is never like to leave thee. Nevertheless, thou may see that
many lack it, and few set light by it: why? truly because need is in many,
and virtue in few.

O wicked world, which art wont so to bless and preserve thy friends, that
thou make them Gods enemies; and consequently, unfit for the fellowship of
Saints! For doubtless, he that will be thy friend, is made Gods enemy: and
therefore a friend of the world, is shut out from the company of Gods friends.
When the spirit is once tasted, the flesh must needs loose his savor; to him
that hungreth after heavenly things, earthly things are not toothsome; to him
that longs for eternal things, transitory things are loathsome. For all the
pleasure of this world, all the glory thereof, and whatsoever is desired and
sought for therein, is very little, in respect of that blessedness, of that
happiness, of that honor, of that glory; if it may be vouch safed to be
counted little, or rather nothing.

O ye sons of Adam, ye covetous and ambitious generation; give ear and
mark. What have you to do with earthly riches, and temporal glory, which
indeed are no true riches, nor yours to possess? True riches are not the
wealth of the world, but the virtues of a good conscience, which it bears
about, for the perpetual enriching of it self.

The shortness of the world is certain; but the end of the shortness thereof is
uncertain: oftentimes they forsake the living, and commonly follow the dead.
The pleasure, the delight, and comfort of the world is base, vile beggarly,
and good for nothing: yea rather (a thing much to be feared) it is a block or
let to true and wholesome comfort. For what is there in this life, but labor
and travel, grief, anguish, and vexation of mind?

Thou would feign eat, because hunger torments thee: they both are a pain
and labor; but because hunger is the greater and grieuouser, thou think
that it is no pain and labor to eat. But afterward when hunger is killed;
tell me then if thou countest it not a greater and grieuouser thing to eat,
than to be hungry.

In this case are all things under the sun, so that nothing is pleasant or
comfortable in very deed: but man will pass from one to another, to be
relieved by change. For the remedy of one labor or pain, is the beginning of
another. There is no wicked person in this world, that can have what he will.
The righteous man can not be satisfied with righteousness; the v^luptuous man
with voluptuousnes; the curious man with curiousnes; the ambitious and
vainglorious man with vain-glorie.

But woe be to them, that hunt after vain and flitting glory. For whiles they
seek to have joy and delight in transitory things, that joy and delight can
not but pass away, with the very things themselves whereof they spring. For
as fire fails, when wood is wanting; so vanishes the world, and the
concupiscence of the same: and no doubt the joy, pleasure, and delight thereof
dies withal. Let the worldling therefore see and understand; let him mark
and consider; because the end of his joy is mourning and lamentation. For this
is the meed of transitory pleasure; this is the fruit of temporal glory.

2 The REPVLSE given by the CONTEMPT of this WORLD.
O Man, these things are not brought to pass of worldlings, without great
danger and offense; because the more a man has, the more he coueteth: so that
he has no measure in his desires, whiles he makes haste to become a very
servant or slave to innumerable cares of this life. For as the Scripture
verifieth: A covetous man is never satisfied with money. And what a detestable
thing covetousness is, S. Paul declares in these words: Covetousness, which is
the worshipping of images, or idolatry. The same Apostle showing what a
mischeefous thing it is, says: They that will be rich, fall into temptations,
and snares of the devil, and many noisome lusts, which drown men in
destruction and perdition. The wise man also notes, how hurtful the vice of
covetousness is to them that be infected therewith, saying: There is nothing
more wicked, than a covetous man. And Saint James to the same purpose, uses
this speech: Go to now ye rich men, weep and howl in the miseries which shall
come upon you: your riches are corrupt, your garments are moth-eaten, your gold
and silver is cankerd, and the rust thereof shall be a witness against you, and
shall eat your flesh like fire.

Our Savior Christ also, seeing what mischief it is, would not in any case
scale up such a sin in silence. For these are his words written by the
Evangelist: It is hard for a richman to enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Again, It is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle, than
for a richman to enter into the kingdom of heaven. If therefore covetousness in
the hearts of worldlings, be such a plaguie and pestilent infection: what shall
we think thereof, if it be found in them that have taken their farewell of the
world, and bequeathed themselves wholly to the Lord? To such specially are the
words of our redeemer Christ directed in the Gospel, whereby the sickness of
covetousness might be cured. Be ye not careful (says our Savior) what ye
shall eat, or what ye shall drink, or what ye shall wear. For after all these
things do the Gentiles seek. But first seek the kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof, and all these things shall be given you. O blessed
lsaeing, void of care, and worthy to be embraced! For there is none living so
free from care, as he which desires to possess nothing beside Christ. For
under the condition of this promise, he is allowed to have all such necessaries
as he does lack. As S. Paul the poor, and yet rich Apostle says: As having
nothing, and yet possessing all things. All things, not for superfluity; but
for necessity, as he proves in these words: Having food and raiment, let us
be therewith content. But thou will say peradventure, O man, It is requisite
that religious and godly men should have more in possession (riches I mean,
and other vtensiles) than other private householders, considering that they
bestow them better, than the common people, in releeuing the poor and needy
members of Christ Jesus, and such like works of charity. I allow thy saying, O
man: but yet to pull up covetousness by the hard roots, as well out of the
hearts of the one as the other, I refer all estates to the example of Lots wife,
to terrify them from setting their minds upon such a vile sin. She
departing from among the Sodamites, and forbidden to look back, was turned
into a pillar of salt; and so gave up the ghost, because she did not as she was
inioined by commandment.

Whereupon Christ giving a watchword to beware of the like, says: No man
putting his hand to the plough, and looking behind him is fit for the kingdom
of heaven. To the same effect S. Peter uses these words: Better were it for
such never to have known the way of righteousness, than after the knowledge
thereof, to be turned from that which was delivered them by an holy
commandment. Unto these men agrees the old, and not so old as true proverb:
A dog returning to his vomit, and a sow to walowe in the mire.

The nature of this disease of cocouetousnes is such, that the readiest and
speediest way to overcome and killir, is continually to think upon death,
and every minute of an hour to consider, what shall be the state of a man
very shortly after he is laid in his grave. This was always fixed fast, and
deeply graven in his memory, that uttered this sentence: Man is but
corruption, and the son of man but a woorme.

This was never out of his mind who said: whatsoever thou take in hand,
remember the end, and thou shall never do amiss. To what purpose then does
the covetous worldling gather goods? They will stand him in no stead in the
day of wrath. Harken, O man, to the voice of Job: Naked came I out of my
mothers womb, and naked shall I go thither again. Listen also to the words of
the Apostle: we brought nothing into this world, neither can we carry any
thing out of the same.

3 A prayer for the former virtue.
O Eternal and immortal God, we beseech thee, that the life of thy deerlie
beloved son, and his disciples, during the time of their soiourning in this
earth, the very inn of iniquity, may be prouocations unto us, to spend the
remnant of our flitting age in singlenes of heart, innocence, and all virtuous
conuersations: that having before our eyes such lively examples of godliness,
we may declare in our deeds a fruitful imitation of them before the face of
all men.

And because it is a true saying of thy servant S. James, that Whosoever is a
friend to this world, is an enemy to God: and that of S. John, that The whole
world is set upon mischief; and that of thy Son Jesus Christ, that The world
knows thee not, neither can receive the spirit of truth, which is the holy
Ghost: therefore we most humbly crave this at thy hand, o heavenly Father,
that it will please thee to bestow upon us a due portion of thy grace, whereby
we may grow into a great contempt of the world, and a bitter detestation and
lothing of the vain delights thereupon depending; following herein the example
of thine Apostle Saint Paul, who counted the things that were vantage unto
him, mere loss for Christ's sake: yea all things but loss for the excellent
knowledge sake of Christ Jesus, for whom he esteemed all things little worth,
yea he judged them no better than doong, that he might win Christ.

And although the necessities of this life, be so urgent and manifold, that
oftentimes the world allureth us unto her love: yet vouchsafe us of thy mercy,
the light of sound judgment and reason, that we may hang wholly upon thy
providence, and use this world, as if we used it not: knowing that thy son
our Savior and redeemer, descended from heaven into the earth, was crucified,
dead, buried, rose again, and ascended into heaven, to the intent that he
might deliver, and set us free from this present wicked world, than whom we
have not a deadlier enemy to the salvation of our souls. Hear us for thy
mercy sake, Amen.

The fourth Section, and 16. Combat.
1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the vice ensuing.
WHAT is a hard heart? A hard heart is that only, which fears not it self,
because it feels not it self. It is even that which is not pricked with
remorse, touched with pity, moved with entreating, warned by instruction,
stirred with threatening, but worse by correction. It is unwilling to do
good, unthankful for benefits received, unfaithful in keeping counsel,
cruel in giving judgment, shameless in committing filthiness, desperate in
dangers, rude in men's affairs, rash in Gods matters, forgetting things past,
neglecting things present, not foreseeing things to come.

As for uncharitableness, it is void of all pity; it neither clotheth the
naked, lodges the houseles, feeds the hungry, refreshes the thirsty,
comfort the sorrowful, instructs the simple, forgiueth injuries,
forbeareth vengeance, or exercises so much as one work of mercy or
compassion. And therefore woe to the hardharted, woe to the uncharitable. For as
they have sown, so shall they reap.

2 The ASSALT given by hardness of heart, or UNCHARITABLENESS.
O Man, it is good thou were wise and sparing, niggardlie and saving. Many are
moved with mercy at the complaints of the poor and miserable, some are
pitiful to prisoners, some to spitties or hospitals, some to schools and
universities, some to societies or corporations: which relief they themselves
lack before they die, and learn, even with grief of heart, what a folly it
is to give a thing, which they themselves once had, and might have kept it: but
now when they would can not get it.

If thou should distribute in this sort, who would distribute to thee in thy
distress? Thy mercy will be counted but mere madness; and thine alms-deedes
utter folly. Do therefore as I teach thee, and thou shall be sure to have in
store for thy need against a dear year. Esteem of thy penie as much as
another will do of his pound; if the cries of the poor ring about thine
ears, pass by, and save that relief, which peradventure should be but ill
spent, or rather lewdlie cast away.

For the alms of some, is so vndiscreetlie bestowed, that it is not to be
counted a deed of charity; but rather a work of wickedness. And why? The very
end gives proof sufficient. Because a number seeking none other shift to
live, but trusting to the staff of others succor, are nourished in idleness
and sloth; neglecting honest trades, which if they were followed, would
maintain and find them sufficiency of all necessaries.

Learn this lesson therefore, O man, not to give at all; and so shall thou be
sure to play a wise part. For in giving, as well as in not giving, a foul
fault may be committed: and a little spared, is better than a great deal ill
spent. Again, thou must consider, that it is not for thee, having a charge of
children and servants, to be lavish or liberal. For thou may give so long,
that nothing will be left to maintain thy wife and family.

The sum of my counsel therefore is this. Though thou be well grounded in the
world, and have laid a good foundation of thy wei^h and substance; yet stay
not at that step, but go certain degrees further. For, to a building, though
the foundation be cheifest and most needful: yet there be other things
required, before it can grow to perfection, or merit to be called by the name
of a house.

Euenso, though by careful thriftines thou have gathered a good stock, and
art indifferently well provided for against the time of need: yet if thou have
not as great a regard to keep that, which thou have gotten, and to increase it
with continual diligence; all will consume and waste away like snow against
the sun.

Above all things therefore beware of giving, where nothing is to be restored
again: and let not thine heart be overcome with the cries and lamentations,
which enter in at thine ears, least it happen to thee as I have foretold thee.

3 A prayer against the former vice.
O Most tender and loving Father, we most humbly beseech thee, that we
remembering the words of thine apostle S. Paul, to wit, Whatsoever is written,
is written for our learning, may cast the eyes of our memory upon the mounting
sins of Sodom, which were pride, fulness of bread, abundance of idleness, and
contempt of the poor: and being terrified with thy heavy judgment powered out
of a full vial of thy vengeance, even to their utter desolation and consuming
with fire and brimstone, may hate and detest to the death, all kind of
iniquity, especially the sin of uncharitableness, against the which thou art
so mortal an enemy, as thou art a near friend to mercy.

O give us not over to the inordinate lusts and desires of our own depraved
nature, which is more prone to bring forth rank and venomous weeds, than good
and wholesome herbs. And let the bright morning star of thy grace so shoot his
beams of light into our mistie minds, that all filthy fogs of affections
dispersed and driven away; uncharitableness likewise, with the rest, may be
displaced, thrown out of possession, and trodden under feet: considering that
so long as we give so graceles a gest house-roome in our hearts, we can not be
touched with compassion of the poor: being void of compassion, we contemn
the poor: contemning them we stop our ears at their cry: stopping our ears,
we shut the bowels of pity against them: shutting the bowels of pity, what
do we but murder them most miserably?

The end and reward of which merciles entreating of the distressed, being
ouergrowne with uncharitableness, is, when we make our moan unto thee, o Lord,
not to be heard: and when we seek succor, to be sent away empty: o give us
grace to wax fearful at the example of the uncharitable rich man, whose want
of pity purchased unto him store of endless torments: hear us for Christ's
sake, and from all uncharitableness defend us and our children, to the third
and fourth generation, Amen.

1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the virtue following.
MERCY is an affection, which is neither restrained by will, nor subdued to
reason; because every body does not draw it to himself voluntarily at his
own pleasure: but mercy moves godly minds with a necessary affection to
have compassion of the sad, sorrowful, grieved, and distressed person; in so
much that although it were a sin to be merciful; do as much as I might, and
what my will forces me unto, yet I can not choose but be merciful.

Reason and will may indeed pull back somewhat from this affection, they may
hinder it a little, but are they able to root it out of the heart, to supplant
it, to quench it? Justice requires desert, but mercy beholds misery. True
mercy judges not, but takes pity; it stands not upon examining, but is
content with the present occasion. For reason is not looked for, where
affection draws. For the mind, which love has once ravished, and compassion
pricked, is not suffered to have rule over it self. It fears things which it
knows not, greeueth at things which behoue not, is more careful than it
would be, and for causes that it should not be: unwilling it suffers,
unwilling it pitieth.

Some are merciful in respect of things not belonging unto them; and these are
offended, because men give not abundantly to all; howbeit in such sort, that
they themselves in that modicum or little of theirs are not touched with
remorse; who if they were merciful, then ought they to show mercy by giving
their own; and if they be not able of their worldly mucke, yet should they
with a good will pardon such as have offended them, they should give sweet
dole, even a good word, which is the best gift that can be given, that their
minds may be moved to repentance. To conclude, they should not only have
pity, but also pray for all such as they know are in sin; otherwise, their
mercy is no mercy, and therefore they shall not obtain mercy.

2 The REPVLSE given by COMPASSION and MERCY.
O Man, if thou keep that measure in this respect of giving, which the Apostle
does prescribe, thou may both bestow upon the impotent, and also have
sufficient for the maintenance of thy family. And therefore to this purpose
the Apostle uses a pithie speech, very apt and convenient, saying: If there
be a willing mind, it is accepted according to that which a man has; and not
according to that which he has not.

Not that other be set at ease, and you burdened: but of like condition now at
this time, your abundance supplieth their want, that their abundance also may
supply your want, that there may be an equality, as it is written: He that
had gathered much, had nothing over: and he that had gathered little, had no
lack.

Hereupon a certain righteous father admonishes his virtuous son in this
sort: If thou have much, give plentifully; but if thou have little, give also
of that little willingly. To the same effect also the word incarnate (Jesus
Christ I mean) says thus: But rather give alms of those things which you
have, and behold, all things are clean unto you. Listen furthermore, O man,
what the scripture says: He shall have judgment without mercy, which shows
no mercy.

To the contrary whereof, the prophet uses these words, Break thy bread to
the hungry, and bring the poor and harbourles into thy house. When thou see
one naked, cover him, and despise not thine own flesh. Remember what heavy
doom happened to the rich man in purple and silk, who was not condemned
because he took from other men their own goods: but for that he gave not of
his plenty and abundance to the needy.

Was he not tormented in hell, and forced there to make even very small
requests, and yet could not obtain them; because whiles he lived in this life,
he denied trifles to the succouries? He denied the little crumbs falling from
his table, and therefore it was not granted unto him to have the tip of his
tongue cooled with cold water. He would not send his servants with a little
refreshing to the poor beggar; and therefore he could not get so much grace,
as to let his brethren understand his torments for their instruction and
amendment.

But mark, O man, the severe sentence of the just Judge, denounced and
thundered out in wrath and vengeance against the wicked goats on his left hand:
Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. For
I was hungry, and you gave me no meat: and so forth, as follows in that
place very justly and terriblie.

3 A prayer for the former virtue.
O Eternal and gracious GOD, who by severe reuengement executed upon the
unmerciful, have commended unto us the contrary virtue; we most humbly
beseech thee, that the divine admonition of thy son, that pitiful
Samaritane, who cast his eyes of compassion upon the wounded traveler, lieng
in the high way between Jerusalem and Jericho, after that a priest and a
Leuite had passed by, and ministered unto him not so much as one little mite of
comfort, given unto us in the Gospel, may work effectually in our hearts,
namely, to be merciful, as thou our heavenly Father art merciful.

And because the sacred Scripture teaches us: that With what measure we meat
unto others, the like they shall meat unto us again: vouchsafe that we
learning and following the sage and sound counsel of Solomon, may distribute
our temporal riches liberally with open hand; knowing that we shall be
recompensed with plenty: and may water abundantly, believing that we shall be
rewarded with store of seasonable rain: that is, for mercy, to receive
mercy, which thou requirest rather than sacrifice.

Let the examples of thy servants, and that principally of David, a man
according to thine own hearts desire, direct us to the full discharge of our
duty; who although he had opportunity to kill Saul, and was thereto incited
by the advice of his warriers, had compassion of him notwithstanding, refusing
to lay his hand upon the Lords anointed. Even so, good and gracious God,
grant us to deal with our enemies, that although they persecute us most
tyrannically, and most villanouslie entreat us; yet we may put up all
injuries patiently, praieng for their amendment, and referring vengeance unto
thee, whose it is by proper challenge.

Finally, most bountiful Father, what gift soever thou have bestowed upon us,
be it either wisdom, counsel, utterance, knowledge of tongs, or other
ornament of mind whatsoever, which any of our brethren wanting, may by the
imparting and using thereof reap some profit; vouchsafe us, that we may be so
far from denieng them our help and succor; that we may be well content to let
all that we possess be converted and turned into their benefit: so far
forth, as safety of conscience will suffer, and thy glory allow. This grant,
o good God, for Jesus sake, our only mediator and advocate, Amen.

The xvij. Combat.
1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the vice ensuing.
Crafty and deceitful dealing, commonly called cousenage, is to be abhorred
for three notable reasons: first, because it offends Gods Majesty
heinouslie, in so much that Solomon says, It is an abomination to the Lord,
Secondly, because it defraudeth and beguileth a man's neighbor with a show of
honest meaning; against which default David complains, saying: Their throat
is an open grave, they deceive with their tongs, the poison of aspes is under
their lips: again, They have made their words softer than oil, but indeed
they are sharp arrows. Thirdly, because the deceiuer is destroyed with his
own deceit: according to these words: Lo, he has traveled in sin, and
brought forth iniquity; he has dug a pit, and fallen into it himself:
again, Cursed be the deceitful.

As for theft, we ought to fly from it, as from a scorpion, and that for three
special reasons: first, because God forbids us, saying; Thou shall not
steal. Secondly, because of the danger depending thereupon, taught us in these
words: He that takes part with a thief, hates his own soul. Thirdly,
because of the punishment belonging thereunto; namely, threefold and
fourfold restitution, according to the law Leuiticall: and loss of life by
the sentence of the positive laws of sundry countries, besides the plague of
al plagues in the world to come, foretold by the mouth of the Apostle, that
Thieves shall have no portion in the kingdom of God. Where then? Even in hell
fire, the kingdom of the black prince of darkness.

2 The ASSALT given by crafty collusion, deceitful dealing, and theft.
O Man, observe the course of the time, and consider, that as every one is
bent to seek for his own advantage; so is it for thee likewise to use the
same liberty. Art thou called to be some noble, some worshipful, some rich
man's steward, secretary, chamberline, bailie, or surueier? use thy place in
such sort, as thou may gain extraordinarily besides thy wages.

Art thou in office in city or country? Dissemble the faults of them that
are wealthy for rewards: and be not too severe in the execution of laws and
penal statutes. For it is commonly seen, that the best Iusticiarie is not
best beloved: but he that can wink at the offenses of such as are of
countenance, he carries away credit and estimation.

Art thou an artificer, an occupier, a merchant, or of any kind of trade? I
counsel thee then to make thy wares, though they be stark naught, seem
exceeding pure and good: be it silk, velvet, cloth, or any other vtensile,
cause and procure them to be slightiie wrought, that although the price of them
be very hie, yet they may soon fret out, wear away, and do little service.

Art thou a master, and have a retinue of servants to maintain thine
occupieng? Use their stocks to thy benefit, and defraud them of some part or
parcel thereof, upon some crafty devise of charging them with untruth and
dishonestie in their service. A thousand subtilties there be, O man, which thou
may use with safety of conscience, to the enriching of thy self, if thou will mark the trade of the world.

Furthermore, art thou a tall fellow of thy hands, a keeper of company, and
have been brought up all thy life time, in doing nothing toward the getting
of thy living? I will teach thee how to shift, and maintain thy self like a
Gentleman. Seek acquaintance of such as use the sea, and learn to be skillful
in navigations: when thou art become expert therein, put this into the heads of
thy confederates, to practice piracie: for that is a thing which many have
venturouslie taken in hand, and in short space grown marvelous rich.

It that fail thee, and can not be so conveniently compassed, thou shall find
enough to take thy part on land, with whom thou may join in society, and get
many a good booty. Do this, and I warrant thee lack no living.

3 A prayer against the former vice.
O Almighty God, for so much as it is thy heavenly will and divine pleasure,
that we should like loving and obedient children, like relenting and buxsome
creatures, imitate and follow thee in holiness and pureness of life (which we
are sure then most specially to do, when with our uttermost endeavor, we
apply our selves in thought, word and deed, to observe thy commandments)
purge our affections, we pray thee, and try them seventy seven times by the
purifieng fire of thy sanctifieng spirit.

We know this for a truth, that except we resemble thee in quality, according
to thy son our Saviors admonition, exhorting us to be perfect and holy, as
thou our father art perfect and holy; there is no hope that we shall attain
to that incorruptible fruit of our heavenly calling. And therefore, good Lord,
let thy grace burn brightlie before us, like a lamp replenished with fresh
oil; that we seeing our way, may so order our steps in this troublesome
travel of ours in this wicked world, as thou thereby may be magnified.

The very instinct of nature teaches us, o Lord, besides thy commandment,
which binds us, that we should do to our brethren, as we would they should
do unto us: that no man should abuse the grace of his calling, by crafty
circumuention to procure his private profit, or by any sinister and indirect
dealing, to the detriment and hinderance of another, (a fault too too common in
this our age) but that contrariwise, we should bear one another burden in
charity, and Christian brotherhood.

Which law of nature nevertheless, being neglected; and thy precept, tending to
the same effect, not regarded: we beseech thee notwithstanding, to wink awhile
at the folly of men, to bear with their infirmities, and to mealt their
frosen hearts with the thawing heat of thy fervent spirit; that being ashamed
of abusing their vocation, and trembling at thy displeasure, they may pray for
grace to amend all that is amiss, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior,
Amen.

1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the virtue following.
WILL thou learn, o man, how to use true and plain dealing? I will tell thee
what thou must do. First see to thine inward eye, that it be single indeed,
whereto I think two things very necessary; namely, charity in the intent,
and truth in making thy choice. For if thou love that which is good, and choose
not that which is true, thou have a zeal of God, but not according to
knowledge: and I wot not how in the judgment of truth, plain dealing, and
double dealing may stand together.

Christ the truth it self, being disposed to train his disciples to true
plain dealing, wills them to be wise like serpents, and harmeles as dooues.
He sets wisdom before plain dealing, without the which he knew well
enough none could be a true plain dealer. How then shall the eye be single
indeed, with the ignorance of truth? It is evident therefore, that this
praise-woorthie plain dealing, commended of Christ, is not without these two
good properties: namely, well willing, and wisdom; that the eye (to wit) of
the heart, might not only be godly, and so utterly unwilling to deceive; but
also wary, as not able to be deceived.

Furthermore, as these two properties make the eye single; namely, the love of
that which is good, and the knowledge of that which is true: even so these two
contraries make the eye evil, to wit, blindness, or ignorance, which hinders
the knowledge of the truth: and frowardnes or wilfulnes, which causes a man to
love iniquity and wickedness.

2 The REPVLSE given by VPRIGHTNES, and plain dealing.
O Man, it is much better to be poor, and not able to give any thing at all,
than to indamage or hurt thy friend, thy neighbor, or thy brother by robbery
or subtlety. For he which unjustly takes away another man's goods, and
lives upon the spoil, he shuts the gates of the kingdom of heaven against
himself.

Heerevpon, that profound Preacher of the Gentiles reprooueth certain of the
Corinthians his hearers, saying: There is utterly a fault among you, because
you go to law one with another. Why rather do ye not put up wrong? Why rather
do ye not suffer harm? Nay, ye your selves do wrong, and do harm, and
that to your breethren. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
kingdom of God?

The same Apostle reckoning up a rabble of filthy sinners, that are excluded
from coming to Gods kingdom, adds these in the number, saying: Neither
theeus nor extortioners shall possess the kingdom of heaven. Again, in
another place, by way of exhortation, he teaches thee a lesson, O man, which
if thou will learn, it shall do thee great good, namely: that whatsoever
things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things pertain to love, whatsoever
things are of honest report, those things do; and the God of peace shall be
with thee.

This God of peace preciselie forbids theft, saying: Thou shall not steal.
And Christ Jesus the savior of thy soul speaks thus unto thee: Love thy
neighbor as thy self. To the same effect the Apostle gives thee counsel to
put off the old man with his works; in the number whereof, evil concupiscence
and covetousness are reckoned.

The last precept given in that place, is to do that heartily which we do, as
unto God, not to men; whereupon he infers this sentence: He that does
wrong, shall receive for the wrong which he has done. The same Apostle gives
this wholesome advise to the Colossians: To do their own business, and to
work with their own hands, that they might walk honestly, and lack nothing.

To conclude, if thou art commanded, O man, to abstain even from the very
appearance of evil; judge with thy self, and examine thine own conscience,
whether it be lawful for thee, either craftily to circumuent, or violently
to spoil thy Christian brother. Remember the last commandment: Thou shall not
covet that which is another, then learn to be contented with thine own.

3 A prayer for the former virtue.
O Jesus Christ, the lively and express image of the Father; for so much as it
is a lesson taught us in thy Gospel, that we should be simple as dooues,
loving as lambs, and innocent as little children, otherwise we can not enter
into the kingdom of heaven: we beseech thee by thy bitter death and passion,
to root out of our cankered and corrupt minds, all manner of evil
concupiscences, which like rank weeds ouergrowe and choke all kind of good
and godly affections in us; so that we can not think, much less do that,
which is acceptable to thy divine pleasure.

May it please thee therefore, o Lamb of God, that take away the sins of
the world, for thy bloody wounds sake, wherein my faults, and the offenses of
all mankind were buried, to plant in us, and in every one of us, a childish
and infant-like innocence, whereby we may utterly forget the falsehoods and
subtilties of wicked worldlings, wherein they are so deeply grounded, that
they make no conscience of any proffered injury, of any violent extortion, of
any devilish oppression, be it never so contrary to law and equity, be it
never so flat against Gods holy commandment, and Christian profession.

Let the world be like it self, and let worldlings wallowe in their woonted
filthiness: let the sworn enemies of true and faithful dealing, surfeit of
sin; and like dogs devour their own vomit: but to us thy children adopted,
or rather brothers and sisters assured, give such portion of thy spirit, that
as the members and lims of our bodies, by a natural inclination to love and
kindness, provide each one for another health and welfare: so we may seek, not
every man his own; but that which is another, to the knitting fast of the
knot of unity and concord, that in this life our joy may be continued in
hope, and performed in the life to come, with all fulness and certainty, by the
merits of thy death and passion, Amen.

The xviij. Combat.
1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the vice ensuing.
LIENG is a horrible sin before God, and hateful among men, which we ought to
defy to the death for these six special reasons. 1 Because God forbids us
to lie, saying: Ye shall not lie, nor one neighbor deceive another. 2 Because
it is a seed of the devils sowing, according to those words of Christ spoken to
the Pharisees: You are of your father the devil, when he tells a lie, he
speaks of his own, because he is a lier, and the father thereof. 3 Because
good men detest and abhor it, as Solomon says; A just man cannot away with a
lie. 4 Because wicked men use it, as is said: An evil man has a false tongue,
and a deceiuer is led with lieng lips: again, The bread of lieng is sweet to
a wicked man. 5 Because it deceives our neighbor, as it is said, Lieng lips
hide hatred, and a false witness tells a lie, yea even against his neighbor.
6 Because it confounds the lier himself in the end, as it is said;
Destruction shall light upon all them that speak lies: again, A lieng tongue
kills the soul. As for dissembling, the scripture cries out upon it,
denouncing a bitter woe against such as have a double heart.

2 The ASSALT given by LIENG and DISSEMBLING.
O Man, to speak truth, is very discommodious and unprofitable; and to deal
plainly in word and deed, yeldeth little advantage. I wish thee therefore to
eschew both, if thou meanest to avoid contempt and reproach in the world. For
who is regarded in these days? The honest man? The just man? The godly man?
The innocent man? No, but the contrary. And therefore, will thou have wealth
at will? Then learn to lie, to cog, to foist, to c^osen and counterfeit. For
there is more good gotten by a lie in a day, than by telling the truth in a
year. Again, by lieng many a one has saved his own life, and by
dissembling, diverse have escaped death. Will thou then neglect two such
commodious and beneficial things?

If time and place require, stick not, though thou be rich, to swear thou art
poor: though wise, to feign thy self a fool. For it may come to pass, that
by so counterfetting and facing, thou shall save such charges, as otherwise
thou art likely, by professing thy self either wealthy or prudent, to
undertake.

And though Preachers out of pulpits prate against this, and as many as use
it; yet esteem their words but wind, and count all they say, but table-talke.
For even they themselves, as holy as they seem to be, will not stick to
dissemble, lie, and do worsse for advantage.

Now, because there is cunning in dissembling and lieng, which must be gotten
by use and exercise, I counsel thee to make this thy continual trade and
custom; so shall thou prove marvelous expert in thine art, and therewithal
so perfect and ready, that none shall be able either to prevent and overtake,
or intercept and trip thee in thy profession.

3 A prayer against the former vice.
O Almighty and eternal God, for so much as the law, which is our
scholemaister unto Christ, has taught us this lesson, that he is accursed, and
in state of damnation, that transgresses the two tables of the ten
commandments: and the same is ratified also by the testimony of the Gospel,
which holds him guilty of the breach of every precept, who offends but in
one: we, even we damned and forsaken souls, through the assault of sin; but
heirs of the promise, by the cross of Christ; most humbly we beseech thee to
tender us poor weakelings, and to bear with our imperfections.

We know that lieng displeases thee, because thou art truth it self: we
confess that dissembling is a vice detested of thy divine majesty, which art
perfect righteousness: in respect whereof, and for that we have offended in both,
understanding nevertheless, that thou requirest the contrary; namely,
singlenes of heart and vprightnes in communication and conversation: we fall
down at the footestoole of thy tribunal throne of grace, repenting us of this
and all other defaults, whereby we are in justice become the children of Satan,
who is the father of lies, and has been a lier and dissembler from the
beginning.

Most earnestly suing unto thee, o merciful father, to remit that which is
past, to cross it out of thy counting book, and to discharge us of so great a
debt; that all former reckonings being cleared, we may look better to our
talents, and like faithful and wise stewards, bring in not only the gift it
self wherewith we were put in trust, but also the interest of the same, at
that great audit and general session, when all flesh shall be summoned to
appear before thee, the Judge of judges. Grant this for Christ's sake thy son
our savior, Amen.

1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the virtue following.
TRVTH in the inward parts, is the thing that God requires. Truth and equity
are the things which he loves. The devil was a manqueller from the beginning:
and why? because the truth was not in him. Truth is the fruit of light, as for
lieng, it is a work of darkness. Truth is to be honored, because it
overcomes all things; truth is to be embraced, because it defends from
shame; truth is to be advanced, because it endures for ever; truth is to be
regarded, because it is blameles; truth is to be obeyed, because it prevails.

As for equity, let this suffice thee o man in few words, that the greatest
equity that can be, is to behave thy self lowly to thine underling,
reverently to thy better, and lovingly to thine equal; to deal vprightlie,
to depart from evil, and do good. For the equity and justice of a
plaine-dealing man, shall direct his ways: and if thine eye be single, all thy
body shall be full of light; as for a double minded man, he is wavering in all
his ways.

2 The REPVLSE given by TRVTH and EQVITIE.
O Man, be not deceived, God is not mocked, neither can he be deluded. In
seeking to deceive him, thou deceiuest thy self. For the mouth of him,
whosoever he be, that speaks lies, be it with never such cunning and sl^nes,
slaieth the iouie; and all liers shall have their portion in the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone.

Do thou not remember, O man, the words of the Prophet David, comprised in
an answer to a demand of his making? Lord, says he, who shall dwell in thy
tabernacle, or who shall inhabit in thy holy hill? The resolution follows,
wherein, among other there mentioned, he that has used no deceit in his
tongue, nor done evil to his neighbor, is rehearsed to have his portion.

To this purpose serves the saying of the son of Sirach, A lie is a wicked
shame in a man, yet shall it be ever in the mouth of the unwise. A thief is
better than a man that is accustomed to lie, but they both shall have
destruction to heritage. The conditions of liers are dishonest, and their shame
is ever with them. By which words, O man, thou may, if thou have any grace
in thee, perceive what an odious and accursed sin lieng and dissembling is, and
what danger they run into that use them.

And therefore be warned to avoid such a rock, as makes shipwreck of the
salvation of thy soul: and though thou be assalted with the sweetness of the
same, yet take heed how thou put thy self in adventure to become acquainted
therwithall. To terrify thee the more from accustoming thy tongue to such a
pestilent vice, set before thine eyes the example of Ananias and Saphira his
wife, both possessed with the spirit of lieng and dissembling to the holy
Ghost, and therefore rewarded with sudden death.

O horrible judgment of the highest God! whereby, O man, thou may be
instructed, if thou will, that God is the author of truth and righteousness, the
lover of equity and innocence, and a detester of double dealing and
hypocrisy.

To conclude this matter, O man, follow the counsel of the Apostle given to
the Colossians his hearers: To put off the works of darkens, and to walk in
light: to leave lieng one to another, and to speak the truth every man to his
neighbor.

3 A prayer for the former virtue.
O God the Father of heaven, the beholder of all things, visible and invisible;
which see our inward and cloked thoughts, be they never so secret and dark:
yea, which see the issue of the^ before they are conceived; much more our
actions or deeds, wherein is greater manifestation and appearance: we beseech
thee first of all, to bind our manifold and innumerable sins in a bundell,
and casting them behind thy back, to drown in the bottom of the sea, that
they may sink, and never come again in sight.

Secondly, we crave at thy bountiful hands the spirit of understanding and
knowledge, which may lead us as it were by torch-light, or rather sunshine,
to the way of truth and equity; which ought to be the bounds and limits of a
Christian life. For we confess, as we can not otherwise choose in reason and
conscience; that we have not girded our loins about with verity, that we have
not spoken plain truth one to another, nor used interchange of upright dealing
in the necessary affairs incident to our particular vocations, as we are
exhorted by thine holy Apostle S. Paul.

And therefore, being sorry that we have showed our selves such past-graces,
partly through carnal weakness, partly also through want of spiritual
strength; but cheeflie through the subtlety of Satan, who incessantly
pitcheth his tents of treachery about the castle of our souls; we come home
again with wet and waterie cheeks, with our bosoms full of tears, with our
hearts rent and torn with the hooks of heaviness, with weary knees, weary yea
and weary again with wandering in wicked ways, bowing them before thy
mercie-seate, and beseeching thee to be good Father unto us ungracious and
froward children.

Hitherto indeed, yea hitherto in very deed we have neglected the rule of
obedience, and charity; the one toward thee, o Father; the other toward our
neighbors. And though we know that we ought to serve thee in truth, to
maintain nothing contrary to truth, to do nothing against truth; but all for
and in the behalf of truth: yet how far we have gone beyond these bounds,
thine is the judgment, o Father; thine is the understanding. As for us, we are
utterly ignorant and senseles; and therefore submit our selves to thy
merciful censure, craving gentle correction, though we have deserved sharp
chastisement, if it be thy pleasure to punish; or suing for remission and
forgiveness, though utterly unworthy of such grace and favor, if it be thy
good will to grant us pardon.

Finally, we humbly beseech thee, to increase truth and equity in us, that
being led and conducted thereby, on the right hand and the left, we may never
start aside like a broken bow; but keep on in a right course, till we come to
the kingdom of heaven: which grant, o Father, for his sake, whom thou love
best, Jesus the Savior of souls, Amen.

The xix. Combat.
1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the vice ensuing.
GLVTTONIE and leacherie serve the pleasure of the flesh. The air, the land,
the sea, do scarcely suffice gluttony. For gluttonies sake it comes to
pass, that poor people are spoiled, that robberies are committed, that
extortions are practiced, that the hunger of the needy is turned into the
fulness of the wealthy.

O ye sons of men, how long will you be heauie-hearted, by reason of this
your gross and quarrie bodies? Why do you love vanity so much, and care for
truth so little? The fatnes of the flesh, the deintines of the body, the
pampering of the belly, the cramming of the craw; all these shall leave you
before death, or else you shall leave them in death. Here thy flesh is
appointed to be meat for woormes, there thy soul is ordained to be food for
fire; and thou shall be partaker of their torments, with whose foul vices thou
have been acquainted. O deintie mouthed man! O delicate fellow! which being
hemmed in round about with fine fare, superfluous cheer, and abundance of
wealth, fear not confusion and death. The kingdom of God is not meat and
drink, it is not purple and fine silk. For the rich man, having plenty and
store of both, went down to hell in a prick of time, in a minute. What say
you to this you gluttons, and excessive worldlings, whose belly is your God,
and whose whole pleasure and trade is either for the belly, or that under the
belly, which have franked and fattened your hearts and bodies in superfluity
and leacherie. Hark hark; Meat for the belly, and the belly for meat, but
God shall destroy the one and the other.

Pride is the cup of devils, and so is slander, and so is envy, and so is
surfeting, and so is dronkennes; which when they have stuffed the mind and the
mawe, Christ finds no room to rest in. For as fire and water cannot agree
together in one place; even so spiritual and carnal deinties can not abide to
dwell together in one and the same body. Where Christ perceives the body to
belch with surfeiting and dronkennes, in the midst of full foming quaffing
cups, and dish upon dish; he does not vouchsafe to reach out his wine, far
sweeter than honey, or the honey comb, to the sotted mind. And where curious
choice of meats feed the body, the soul is kept fasting, and starueth for
want of heavenly bread.

2 The ASSALT given by EXCESS and GLVTTONIE.
O Man, the creatures of God are manifold, and why are they made, but to be
used? The scripture says, that he made all things clean, and how can it then
be, that thou by participating them, should be unclean? Furthermore, I
would not have thee so blind and blockish, as to think, that thou ought not
to take the benefit of Gods provision, even to thy satietie and fulness.

For this is a certain truth, that whosoever refuses to replenish himself
with the variety and choice of Gods creatures, when they are set before him;
and is deintie and delicate, coie and squemish in feeding, does what he can to
abuse and take in scorn the gifts granted and bestowed. To what end serve the
differences of flesh, of fish, of fowls, of fruits, of wines, and such like;
but to be enioied of thee, O man, in such plenty, abundance, and superfluity,
as becomes thine estate, which art placed in the rule, dominion, and Lordship
of all Gods handie works?

If therefore thou neglect to use them, when they are offered so liberally and
largely; if thou apply and bestow them not in such sort as thou may feel
thy self singularly comforted with them: I say unto thee, thou art unworthy
to receive so great benefits. Thy taste is a natural instrument, whose office
is, to take trial of that which is delicious and toothsome.

Be careful and curious, moderate and nice to touch, to taste, and what do
thou else, but defraud thine own self of thy due refection? Which to use to
thy full contentment, were a less offense, than to seem abstinent and sparing
in thy diet. Eat, O man, till thou be full, drink till thou begin to loath,
do both till thou surfeit; tut, when this world is done, farewell felicity:
keep good cheer, and play the merry companion to day, for to morrow thou
shall die.

3 A prayer against the former vice.
O Eternal and merciful father, we inueigh against our selves, and the foul
iniquities wherein we are fallen, through the absence of thy grace. We exclaim
bitterly against the disordered course of life, which we have continued, ever
since we have had liberty in following our own beastly lusts, and unbridled
affections; which being drawn as it were with cartropes, or rather small
twisted threads (so easily are we allured to commit sin even with greedines)
into the sink of many notorious enormities, and loathsome misusages, sauoureth
most strongly of one notable vice above the rest, wherein we are so deeply
plunged, that our recovery, without the help of thy grace, is desperate.

And what ouglie, monstrous, misshapen, and deformed sin this should be; thou,
even thou, in whose hands life and death are shut up, as in a hold, can tell;
though we should never so cunningly dissemble, or never so closely conceal
the same. Howbeit, we confess before thee, o Lord, what it is. For our very
souls have taken part of the poison thereof, by reason of the pestilent
infection of the same, spreading it self through every vein, limme, and
joint, and leaving no member of our whole body unattained.

O gluttony, gluttony, which transformest and changest the nature of
reasonable creatures, into ravenous beasts! Woe worth thee that ever we gave
thee houseroome in our hearts. For by fostering thee, we are swollen with thy
venomous sting, and puffed up like bladders with the heat of thy poison. Out
upon thee, that ever we were acquainted with thee. For thou have made us
bond-slaues to the flesh, whose servant thou art, and children of darkness,
whereof thou art a work.

But remembering our selves, and considering the dangerous or rather damnable
state wherein we are like to fall, we conjure thee in the name of the great God
of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, charging thee to depart from us, whose eyes it
has pleased the same God to open, whereby we see the nastines of our corrupt
nature, repent us of our former life, and crave the continuance of Gods grace,
that forsaking gluttony, and all sin, we may escape the punishment due to the
same, thorough Christ our Lord, Amen.

1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the virtue following.
SVrfetting and drunkenness is an outward taking of pleasure excessiuelie, and
an inward fostering or maintaining of curiosity foolishlie: contrariwise,
temperance and sobernes is an outward brideling of pleasures measurablie, and
an inward keeping under of curiosity prudentlie. So that a man is well said to
live soberlie, justly, and godly in these three several respects.

Soberlie, concerning himself; when he keeps his body in temperance, and
abuses not the good gifts of God to wantonness and wastfulnes, which are to be
used reverently, and thankefullie; considering that they are given for
sustenance sake, and not for gluttony. Justly, concerning his neighbor, with
whom he ought to deal plainly, vprightlie, and charitablie. For these
properties are the first framers of justice, and the last finishers of the
same. Godly, concerning God, not presuming too much of our selves, but
believing faithfully and unfeignedly in God, that through him we may out-growe
all the hindrances and stumbling blocks of this wicked world.

2 The REPVLSE given by TEMPERANCE and SOBERNES.
O Man, one of the parts of thy speech is true, and also agreeable to reason.
For ^o, to the intent that thou should not be famished and hunger-bitten to
death, it pleased the Lord God to make all things fit for food, pure and
clean. But on the contrary again, that thou might not show thy self
immoderate in eating and drinking, a paunch pamperer, and a belly god, he
enioined and laid upon thee the commandment of abstinence.

Furthermore, O man, mark for thy learning, that Sodom, among the rest of her
horrible sins, came to destruction and ruin, through the fulness of bread; the
Lord Jesus giving witness hereunto, when he spoke of Jerusalem, and saying,
This was the iniquity and sin of thy sister Sodom, even fulness of bread.
Wherefore it shall be good and necessary for every man, to come and take his
meat and other sustenance, as the sick patient receives physic: namely,
not for delectation or pleasure, but for necessity sake. Heerevpon says the
truth, that became flesh, Jesus Christ I mean, in the holy Gospel: Take heed
that your hearts be not heavy with surfeiting and dronkennes. Again, S. Paul
the Apostle speaking against the Jews insatiable devouring and greedines,
uses these words; Many walk, of whom I have often told you, and now tell
you weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ, whose belly is
their God, and glory to their shame, which mind earthly things. Again, Meat
for the belly, and the belly for meat, but God shall destroy both the one
and the other.

Now will I teach thee, O man, who he is that falls not into this vice of
gluttony; but resisting the same, overcomes and conquereth it. Even he,
which in receiving his food and nourishment, is not only parciall, moderate,
and of a contented mind, whereby he is able to rule and temper his appetite,
when he feels himself assalted with hunger: but he also which despises fine
fare, delicate dishes, plenty, or rather superfluity of cates; except it be
so that his body being weak, feeble, and impotent, cannot brook gross or
strong meats; or that upon occasion of entertaining his friends, he must
needs, for the avoiding of the suspicion of covetousness, and miserable
niggardnes, prepare such banqueting cheer, as may seem agreeable to the
persons assembled.

3 A prayer for the former virtue.
O Almighty and immortal God, thy word teaches us, that thou art careful
even over little sparrowes, which have their food from thee: how much more
merciful, favorable and tender over us, whom thou have made possessors of all
thy blessings, powered out in full and ouerruning measure upon the earth? In
consideration whereof, assist us with thy good spirit, that we may reverently
receive them, to that end whereunto they were given us: not abusing them to
wantonness and fleshly pleasure, or to any such heathenish vanity; knowing,
that is to kindle the fire of thy fury, to consume us utterly both body and
soul: but using them rather to the comfort of our own bodies, their relief
over whom we have charge, and the sustentation of the poor distressed members
of thy Church; that thus doing, we may live in so much the less blame, in
respect of thee, whose glory we are bound in conscience, above all things to
prefer.

Which course of life, because it is impossible for any natural man to keep,
unless he receive extraordinary grace from above, and have such helps as may
tedder and tie in his wandering affections: we beseech thee to have regard to
our present state, and to furnish us with that virtue, which thou know most
necessary in this behalf; even the virtue of temperance, whereby we may
observe a decent order, not only in our diet, and daily refreshing: but also
in our apparel, and all other exercises, which we take in hand: that thy name
thereby may be magnified, and the inward hope of our holy calling established,
through the merits of Jesus Christ our Savior, Amen.

The xx. Combat.
1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the vice ensuing.
THREE reasons there be, which may restrain thee, o man, from foolish and
excessive reioicing. The first, because it is vain, and as Solomon says, such
mirth shall be mingled with moorning, and the end of such joy shall be
lamentation, and therefore it is vain. Secondly, because it is wicked, and
therefore the wise man says, It is better to go into a house of moorning, than
into a house of banketting and merrie-making. For in the one thou art put in
mind of the end of all flesh; and being alive, bethinkest what is to come:
besides that, where excessive reioicing is, there is the heart of fools, in so
much that, even in laughter, he works wickedness. Thirdly, because it is
dangerous, and as the Evangelist says, Woe be to them that laugh now; for they
shall weep and wring their hands, their laughing shall be turned into
lamenting, and their joy into heaviness. Let thy reioicing therefore have these
two properties; first, that it be honest, which God allows, saying, Go thy
ways, and eat thy bread with gladness, and drink thy wine with joy, for thy
works please the Lord; secondly, that it be fruitful, which God, approoueth
likewise by the scripture in these words, A merry and light heart makes a glad
countenance: again, There is no joy above the joy of the heart.

2 The ASSALT given by foolish and excessive REIOICING.
O Man, consider with thy self, that there is no part or member of thy body,
but serves to some end; the ear to hear, the eye to see, the tongue to
taste, the nose to smell, the fingers to feel, the throat to swallowe, the
stomach to digest, the secret parts to engender, the legs and feet to carry
the body from place to place, and the heart principally to perceive, think,
understand, devise, and meditate upon sundry matters.

The case standing thus, it shall be good for thee to let sorrow and grief
go, remembering that a heavy heart hasteneth the day of death, but a merry
mind prolongeth life. What cause have thou, O man, to be pensive and sad; naie,
what occasion have thou not to be exceeding ioifull and glad? Thou want no
kind of delight that may be devised, and therefore it were folly for thee to
show thy self otherwise affected, than thou art moved by necessary occasion.

Two things there are, which kindle the senses, and set their dulnes on edge;
namely, wine and music: accustom thy self unto them, and thou shall have
both a merry conceiving head, and also a reioicing heart. Furthermore, if thou
have in thy brain any pleasant toies, that may move laughter and sport, hide
them not; but get thee abroad among thy companions, and make them partakers of
thy delight.

Esteem not that vain saying of Solomon, which condemns a man given to
laughter, for a fool. For I tell thee, that as reason and communication are
proper unto men, even so to take laughter from them, is to make them brutish,
and of a beastlike nature.

3 A prayer against the former vice.
O Almighty God, which know that in our reioicing there is great danger; as
in the highest grass a venomous serpent is soonest to be feared: our request
unto thy goodness is, that it will please thee to vouchsafe us such measure of
true and sincere understanding, as thereby we may atteine to that discretion
and ripenes of judgment, which is able to teach us the differences of
reioicing, and the perfect use thereof; in such sort, as our selves may thereby
be relieved, and thy most holy name in no respect or condition dishonored.

Above all things, most merciful Father, banish as far from us as the East is
distant from the West, all counterfeit and damnable reioicings of the world;
whose greatest part and portion is tempered with the leaven of iniquity: the
baits whereof, although they be delectable and toothsome; yet the operation,
working, and effects of the same are detestable and irksome: yea, damnation
depends thereupon, and no less destruction than betideth a silly fish,
deceived with the fishers hook; yea, a far greater desolation a thousand fold.

To thee therefore, o eternal God, we betake our selves, beseeching thee to
pitch about the ruinous cotages of our mortal bodies, the vnshakeable walls of
thy grace and power, that in prosperity we may rejoice in thee, in adversity
be glad in thee, in tribulations triumph in thee; yea, even in life and death
comfort our selves in thee, abandoning all transitory pleasures as mere
toies, and turning out of the wicket of our hearts, which ought to be kept fair
and clean for thee to dwell in, all kind of foolish reioicing, either in word,
work, or otherwise. Grant this, we beseech thee, for his sake that dearly
bought us, Jesus Christ thy son our savior, Amen.

1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the virtue following.
SORROW is of two sorts, good and bad; both which are no less discernable by
their effects, than the tree by the fruit. Good sorrow is of such a working,
that it brings profit with it: and therefore the Apostle having made the
Church of Corinth pensife and sad with the Epistle which he sent them, says
plainly that he repents not a whit thereof, but rather reioiceth; and why?
because he made them sorry to repentance, this sorrow can do no harm to him
that falls therinto.

As for evil sorrow, which commonly offends in excess: as it hinders
that which may do good, (for it refuses the comfort of counsel, and the
comfort of prayer) so also it hasteneth that which is evil, even death and the
grave: and therefore says the wise man, Give not thy heart to sorrow, but drive
the same from thee. If thou be heavy, keep a mean: if thou be merry, use
measure: pray in the one, sing psalms in the other.

2 The REPVLSE given by measurable SOROVVING.
O Man, what is the cause of this thy so great and excessive reioicing? Have
thou of late vanquished Satan the devil? Have thou escaped the pains of
hellfire? Have thou recovered thy banishment, and come to thy country? Have
thou gotten security by thine election or choice? Peradventure the saying of
thy Savior is out of thy memory, The world shall laugh and rejoice, but you
shall be heavy and sad; nevertheless, this your sadness shall be turned into
gladness, and pour grief into joy.

Peradventure also thou have forgotten the words of thy redeemer, Woe be unto
you which now do laugh, for ye shall weep and lament. And Solomon says, The
heart is sorrowful even in laughter, and the end of mirth is heaviness.
Furthermore, although it be affirmed by the same prudent king, that a merry
heart is the life of the body, yet is not immoderate reioicing allowed by his
words. For thy savior and redeemer speaks thus to the contrary, Blessed are
they that moorne, for they shall be comforted.

Remember, O man, the saying of Solomon the wise, That no man knows whether
he shall deserve to be loved or hated, and why? because all things are kept
doubtful and uncertain for the time to come. And therefore, O man, use a
measure in thy reioicing, which is but vain and foolish, because thou can
not say yet thou have escaped the danger of damnation and hellfire.

Is not he judged a mad fellow, which lieng in prison with irons upon his
legs, has his head full of iollie robbins, as though he enioied the fulness and
perfection of true felicity? Even so, if thou shall set thy mind so much upon
mirth, vaine-pleasure, and delight, which may move pastime and laughter, not
thinking upon the estate of another life hereafter, I say unto thee, O man, I
doubt of thy salvation.

For a certain note and mark to discern Gods servants by, is affliction of
body, and tribulation of mind; which thou can not be counted worthy to
partake, unless thou cast away that ill custom and acquaintance, which thou
art grown into with immoderate reioicing, and foolish delight.

3 A prayer for the former virtue.
O Almighty, and everliving God, for so much as the burden of our sins being
heavy and importable, forces us to groan under the weight thereof, and diverse
times pricketh us with the good of inward grief, whereby we are beatdowne, and
kept under with consuming anguish, and brought almost even to the pits brinke
of desperation: we beseech thee to power into our hearts but one little drop of
thy good and gracious spirit, which may fortify and make us strong against all
the enemies of our souls health; and that we may be sorry and grieved for our
misdeeds, but yet (Lord) to our comfort and amendment, not to our overthrow
and confusion.

Moreover, because this frail and wretched life of ours, lies wide open, like
a city without a wall, or as a vineyard without a hedge, to the invasion of
many calamities, whereof some touch our own estate, othersome our friends,
many our dear children and kindred, not a few our goods and substance, an
infinite number our bodily health, which is sundry times shaken with many a
sharp surge of sickness: vouchsafe us in respect of these necessary and
unavoidable afflictions allotted to this life, a relenting heart, and a grieved
mind; knowing that our sins have let in all these, and a thousand miseries
more, to increase and aggrauate our torment.

The example of thy son, o merciful father, lamenting the death of Lazarus,
and bewailing the ruin of Jerusalem, which he prophesied before it came to
pass, teaches us how we should be affected and minded in the execution of thy
corrections and chastisements on others, or on our selves: which being a
principal pattern, and so sound in all assaies, as a better or more
available cannot be thought upon, much less followed, we crave the assistance
of thy grace to prevent us in all our actions and attempts, so shall we be
sure to be trained unto that sorrow, which to thy Majesty is allowable, and
to our selves most profitable. Hear us sweet Father, and grant our suit, for
Jesus sake, Amen.

The fifth Section, and 21. Combat.
1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the vice ensuing.
WHO is able to number the great enormities, which the tongue, a very little
member, does procure? Who can tell how many times double the filthiness and
uncleanness is, which lies thickened and tempered in uncircumcised lips? Who is
able to show what great harm and danger is shut up in an indiscreet and foolish
mouth?

The tongue is liberal to lash out idle words largely; the tongue is bawdie,
and also boasts: the first whereof bewraieth dishonestie, the other
arrogancy. The tongue is deceiptfull, and also slanderous: deceiptfull in
lieng, and deceiptfull in flattering: slanderous in open reuiling, and
slanderous in privy backbiting. So that now, if men of every idle word
proceeding out of their mouth, shall give accounts to God in the day of
judgment; how much more streightlie of every lieng, biting, wounding,
wrongful, proud, bawdie, flattering and slanderous word?

How true is the sentence my brethren, that much babbling cannot be without
sin; and a talkatiue tongue no better than a biting serpent, that a man full
of tittle tattle shall be abhorred, and he that labors his lips become
hateful? Besides that, if by thy words, o man, thou shall be justified, and by
thy words also condemned; take heed to thy tongue, look well to thy
communication.

Set not light by thy time misspent in vain babbling. A word passes away, and
cannot be called in, if it be once out: the time flitteth away also, and cannot
be recovered, if it be once gone. A fool does not perceive this, and he that
has no understanding, marketh not what he has lost. I would to God we might
be excused for the loss of our time only in idle talk, and busy bibble
babble! But many suffer loss even of their life, by using vain and
unnecessary words; and not only that, but rob and spoil their brethren of
theirs. Wherefore keep thy tongue, and keep thy life.

2 The ASSALT given by talkatiuenes, or much BABBLING.
O Man, thou have a treasure, which very few beside thy self do possess;
and that is a ready, an eloquent, a smooth, and a sweet utterance. Thou
excellest an infinite number of people in the world, in this singular and
notable quality. Many preach out of pulpits, many plead at the bar, many
go in embassage about their princes affairs, in whom there ought to be, and
is, a quicknes and finenes of speech, differing from ordinary use and custom
of the multitude. But yet (I speak it to thine own commendation, and to the
better loving and liking of thy self) they come not near thee by many
degrees.

And therefore, as thou art endued with a rare ability; so I wish thee to use
it to thine own praise and renown. If thou hear a report, never rehearse
it in company, but deliver it readily, enlarge it cunningly, continue it
eloquently, and end it orderly. In all thy communication and talk, use many
words, and spare not as occasion serves, to tell two or three untruths, to
make thy matter good. If thou be earnest in reasoning against any man,
oppress him with multitude of speech, so shall thou outface him, and
constrain him to keep silence.

A number there be, which hold him wise, that speaks little; but I count him
a fool. For a ready tongue is an argument of a quick wit, and of a well
instructed mind. And therefore, unless thou will be thought and taken for a
dumb idol, use liberty of speech in what company soever it be thy chance to
come.

3 A prayer against the former vice.
O Fountain of all wisdom, we beseech thee to drop into the rotten and
barren stocks of our old withered hearts, the sap of thy holy spirit, whereby
we may come to the feeling of our selves, whom our imperfections have kept long
in a trance.

And because we are charged to speak nothing, but that which may edify, and
not offend; the gift of utterance being given us to that intent, and the use of
our tongues granted for that purpose: we beseech thy divine goodness to direct
our minds, that we may think nothing, but that which is honest and necessary:
and to govern our mouths, that we may refrain from all fond and vain
babbling; knowing that it is a singular argument of extreme folly, to
accustom our selves to much talkatiuenesse, and superfluous speech.

Besides this, thy truth teaches us, that we shall give accounts at the last
day, of every idle word proceeding from us: which ought to kindle in us a
greater circumspection and carfulness concerning the use of our tongues, that
we give them not liberty to lash out what they list, or whatsoever the
cogitations of a corrupt heart shall suggest and minister thereunto; remembering
what thine Apostle blessed James reports thereof, that it is a small member,
but yet troublesome, and in deed (as he terms it) a very world of wickedness.

Grant unto us, o merciful Father, wisdom and discretion, by whose direction
we may order our talk, and speak in due season, with regard of the time, the
person, the place, and all other necessary circumstances: that none be
offended at our folly, bewraied in immoderate, excessive, and inordinate
babbling, nor forced by our intolerable tatling, to judge us busybodies, and
so consequently peace-breakers, who are curssed by thine own mouth; as the
contrary are blessed. From this enormitie, and all other, whereto this sinful
flesh of ours is subject, deliver us we beseech thee, o gracious God, for thine
infinite mercy sake, which indureth for ever, Amen.

1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the virtue following.
SILENCE is blameles, yea it is praiswoorthie. Good silence forbeareth to brag
vainelie. Good silence forbeareth to blaspheme boldly. Good silence forbeareth
to murmur curstlie, and good silence forbeareth to backbite lewdlie: then let a
vaine-boasting tongue, a bold blaspheming tongue, a cursed murmuring tongue, and
a lewd backbiting tongue be silent in us; because it is good in this fourfold
silence, to wait for the saving health of our Lord.

Howbeit, o man, I wish thee to be silent in such sort, that thou hold not thy
peace quite, least by such silence thou cause the Lord to be silent. Speak
unto God in confession, against vaine-boasting; that thou may have pardon for
the time past. Speak unto him in thanksgiving, against murmuring; that thou
may find the greater favor in the time present. Speak unto him in prayer,
against mistrust; that thou may obtain glory in the time to come. Confess
I say thy misdeeds past, give thanks for things present, and hereafter pray
more devoutly and heartily for the ioies to come, that God may not be silent
from forgiveness, from bountifulnes, nor from the performance of his promise.

2 The REPVLSE given by discreet SILENCE.
O Man, in speaking much, it may be thou shall utter that which is good. But
what of that, seeing it happens oftentimes, that communication well and
honestly begone, in continuance may become evil, filthy, and wicked: the
holy scripture giving authority hereunto, and saying, Where much babbling
is, there must needs be offense.

I grant, O man, that among innumerable words, and infinite talk, such heed
may be taken, that filthy and dishonest speeches may be well enough avoided:
but I pray thee tell me, is it possible to use no idle, vain, and
unprofitable words, whereof we are forewarned to render an account? Examine thy
self, and determine of the matter accordingly. Of thy words thou shall be
justified, and of thy words thou shall be condemned, says the scripture. Now
judge if thou had not need set a hatch before thy tongue, that thou offend
not in the same.

The wise king Solomon reputeth that man discreet, which hides his knowledge,
and makes no vaunt thereof: contrariwise, he terms him a fool that is
blabbing many things without discretion or judgment. In much babbling, O man,
there cannot choose but be great abuse; and the danger of the tongue is so
pestilent, that it had need to be prevented by prudence, gravity, and
sobernes. He that keeps his mouth, keeps his life; but who so rashly
opens his lips, destroieth himself. What a heavy case is this, that
destruction should depend upon the tongue; and yet, O man, thou will not leave
thy vain babbling.

Who so keeps his mouth and his tongue, the same keeps his soul from
troubles. In this sentence Solomon commends silence, and condemns much
babbling; the one necessary and fruitful, the other needles and hurtful. To
conclude, in speaking thou must use a measure; yea sometimes it is good for
thee to forbear profitable speeches; according to the example of the Psalmist,
I kept silence, yea even from good words.

It should seem by sundry speeches of the same blessed Prophet David, that by
much babbling, which is the peculiar exercise of the tongue, great mischief
does grow. For, not all in vain, he says thus; I said I will take heed to my
ways, that I offend not in my tongue. I will keep my mouth as it were with a
bridle. Do thine endeavor, O man, after his example, to temper thy tongue; so
shall thou be sure to be found blameles of that vice, whereof thou art guilty.

3 A prayer for the former virtue.
O Wel-spring of all virtue, teach us how to frame our speech and communication
to the glory of thy name, the benefit of our brethren, and the comfort of our
own souls; wishing rather with silence to show some point of wisdom, than by
rash talk and much babbling to declare our doltish folly.

And for so much as we are taught by the mouth of Solomon, that a word spoken
conveniently, and as just occasion moves, is like apples of gold with
pictures of silver, thereby commending silence unto us, as a property
praise-woorthie in the prudent, which must be kept as time and place requires:
we most humbly beseech thee, of thy woonted clemency and bountifulnes, which
never denied or withheld any lawful thing required of faithful suitors, to
chalk out before us a ready way to that sober silence, which so often is
commended in thy holy word, and so seldom used in the world.

Lighten our hearts, and by the bright appearing of the sun of knowledge,
disperse and drive away from the eyes of our minds, the mistie and palpable
clouds of ignorance, that we may have our feet set in that right path, which
may conduct us unto him, in whom we may learn a most notable and excellent
lesson of silence, even Christ Jesus thy son, who in all his sufferings,
passions, and agonies; in all the villainies, reproaches, and contumelies of his
enemies, opened not his mouth, gave not twite for twite, rebuke for rebuke,
check for check: but like a sheep before the shearer; or as a lamb led to
the slaughter, put up all these injuries, and gave his adversaries not one
foul word.

In him we see the singular silence, which every Christian is bound in
conscience to imitate and follow; though not so exactlie, because our Savior
was not attainted with sin, which poison has infected our bodies and souls;
yet proportionablie, according to that measure of grace, which we have reciued
from above. Guide us thereunto, o merciful Father, by the illumination of thy
spirit, that framing our selves after the example of thy son, the perfect
pattern of all virtue, both moral and intellectual, we may please thine
eternal Majesty with our obedience, wherein thou art more delighted, than in
any burnt offering, or fuming incense. This and all other necessaries toward
the leading of a godly life, grant us for thy mercy sake, Amen.

The xxij. Combat.
1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the vice ensuing.
UNCLEANNESS of life, although it spring first of all in the heart, yet it
brancheth and shoots out of every member of the body. For the eyes with
wanton looking, the tongue with unchaste talking, the lips with dishonest
kissing, the hands with filthy touching, the body with beastly abusing; and
finally every limme, with committing wickedness is become unclean, and by
that means the whole life of man is a mere muckhill of uncleanness. Will thou
then learn to reform this offensive mischief?

Mark what I say, and bear it in mind. First of all labor thou to kill
concupiscence, which is a sore and a grievous sin, yea such a sin, that it
ouergroweth both the inward and outward man, filling them so full of maladies
and diseases, that from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head, there
is no sound place; concupiscence causes such an universal infection. A hard
matter it is to intermedle therewith, and to overcome it; nevertheless keep thy
body in temperance and sobernes, and pray continually, for the spirit of
mortification.

2 The ASSALT given by dishonestie, and uncleanness of LIFE.
O Man, as thou have the lordship and dominion of all things, committed and put
into thy hands, so it is thy part to take thy pleasure and hearts delight, even
to thy full satisfaction and contentment. What should thou need to fear the
forbidding of fornication and adultery in the law? I will tell thee, God
showed himself too too seueare and unjust, in giving that commandment. For,
is it possible to live in such chastity, as is prescribed in scripture? No
man, since the creation, has been so honest and upright of life; but, in
consideration of his nature, which is carnal and fleshly, has been assalted
with concupiscence and lust.

Art thou more innocent than Lot? He committed incest. Art thou more holy than
David? He offended in adultery. Art thou wiser than Solomon? He transgressed
with the multitude of his wives and concubines. Art thou stronger than Samson?
He was too feeble to encounter with his paramour. So then, thou see, O man,
that these men, being mirrors of the world, for the rarenes of their gifts and
ornaments, were notwithstanding subdued and overcome with the spirit of
iniquity. And therefore make it not a matter of such conscience, to follow the
lust of thine eye; and to satisfy the desire of thine heart. Dooest thou see a
fair woman, and art tempted with the view of her beauty? Why serve thy feet,
but to convey thy body to the place where she is resident?

Wherefore have thou a tongue, but to utter and declare the passions of thy
mind? What is the office of thine arms, and why were they given thee by
^^ture, but to embrace thy beloved? The case standing, as it seems; thou
shall be guilty of the greater crime, and bewraie the more folly, in offering
to resist the motions of concupiscence, to the fulfilling whereof thou have
sundry bodily abilities; than in accustoming thy self ordinarily to the
same.

Tut, a point; what is carnal pleasure, but a natural disposition, and
inclination bred in us, even in our cradle and infancy? One beast desires the
company of another; so is it among birds, so is it among fishes, so is it
among serpents, vermin, and flies. Why then should not thou, O man, which
have all things in subjection under thee, enioie as large liberty; naie,
another manner of privilege?

As I give thee counsel to follow and content the lusts of thine eyes and
heart; so I wish thee to use thy weapon like a man, that if thou be
injuriously abused, thou may revenge thine own wrongs, without appealing to
any magistrate or judge. And if it so fall out, that thou may not take
vengeance in thine own cause, procure notwithstanding one or other to do
that, which thou desire to have dispatched.

For, no law is so straight, but it may be mitigated with a gift: no statute
so rigorous, but it may be appeased with a bribe: no penalty so great, but
there may be means found to pay it. And therefore, the fulfilling of thy mind
upon thine enemy, is a felicity above all felicities, and such a thing, as
thou must not stick to run through fire and water to bring it to perfection.

What though thou have carnal knowledge with thousands? What though thy hands
have shed much blood? Is it such a heinous matter? Dispensations or pardons may
be granted from princes, by friendship and other means: as for the eyes of
God, whom a company of profane people, possessed with the spirit of lieng,
term the searcher of hearts and reins, and the ouerseer of all men in their
trade of dealing: I say he is otherwise occupied in heaven, in the government
of his celestial hierarchy, and has no leisure, neither once vouchsafes so
much to abase himself, as to mark and note the behavior of men upon earth.
And therefore follow my counsel, if thou would be at rest; for then
ensues quietness of mind, when the heart has his desire.

3 A prayer against the former vice.
O Most just judge, and righteous rewarder of iniquity: we beseech thee to
have mercy upon us miserable wretches, plunged over head and ears in the
puddle of pollusion, and by stretching out thy right hand of saving health, to
draw us out of the clammie claie of corruption, wherein we stick fast even to
our utter ruin and decaie, except thou of thy goodness and favor vouchsafe in
time to rescue us, and of thy free benevolence set us at liberty, and purify
us by the spirit of sanctification; that we may avoid the traps of Satan, and
approach to thy holy temple in newnes of life and regeneration.

Give us grace, good Lord, to follow the wholesome admonition of blessed
Paul, exhorting us to be so far from fornication and all uncleanness, that it
be not so much as once named among us, much less committed: knowing this, and
being well assured thereof, as the faithful of their salvation: that no
whooremonger, nor unclean person, has any inheritance in the kingdom of
Christ: but shall be excluded and shut out, as judged to have their portion in
the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death: the
just reward of all such as delight in the works of darkness.

Hear us, most merciful Father, making our moan unto thee, without whom all
the world, and every thing therein contained, is a very sink of uncleanness:
and assist us with thine holy spirit, that by the virtue thereof, we may
mortify our earthly members: namely, fornication, uncleanness, inordinate
affection, filthy fleshlines, evil concupiscence, and whatsoever sets
shoulder against thine holy law, which ought to be our only direction, in
leading an holy, honest, chaste, and clean life. This grace, good Lord, and
all other graces necessary for our souls health, we beseech thee to grant
us, for our Savior Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the virtue following.
AN honest and clean life is that, which we commonly call continency. By
this chaste continency, or continent chastity, all the defilings of lecherous
dishonestie are cleansed, and quite washed away. By this virtue, honest and
clean continency, the body is brideled, and kept short from gadding after
the deadly delights of the flesh. He that commits carnal filthiness,
offends against his own body, spoiling it of a special honor; and
disgracing it with reproachful shame; in that he takes the member of Christ,
and makes it the member of an harlot.

It is not my meaning only, that we should forbear from a sin so
abominable; but also from all pleasure and delight of the flesh. For the holy
Ghost will not tarry there, where any uncleanness rests. Furthermore, that
honesty or continency of life, which hunteth after the praise of men, has no
reward at Gods hands. And therefore it is needful for us to have a pure and
undefiled intent or purpose, whereby our minds may covet to please God, and be
able also to cleave fast unto him.

To cleave fast unto God, is nothing else but to see God; which is granted
only to such as be clean hearted. And truly, then is the virtue of
continency perfect, when we living together with our neighbors in the unity
of faith, keep our selves from committing sin and wickedness, not for fear
of punishment, or for desire of men's commendation; but only for the love,
which we bear to God, under whose safeguard we rest: because continency is
not able to withstand the mighty and manifold assaults of the tempter, unless
it be defended and vndershored with his grace.

2 The REPVLSE given by honesty and cleannes of LIFE.
O Man, look into the glass of Gods most holy word, and thou shall see from
the beginning to the ending of the same, what terrible threatenings,
maledictions, and cursses, are thundered out against all unclean persons:
contrariwise, what benedictions and blessings are promised to the obedient
obseruers of the law.

The Lord himself, by the mouth of Moses, says unto his chosen people the
Jews; and unto thee, O man: If thou walk in mine ordinances, and keep my
commandments (meaning indeed, if thou abhor idolatry, break not my
sanctified sabboths, honor thy superiors, lead an honest and clean life,
(...) not thy (...), which was given thee pure and unpolluted) I will send thee
rain in due season, increase of thy land, fruits of thy trees, plentiful
thresshing, an abundant vintage, quiet dwellings, universal peace, sound
sleep, victory over thine enemies; I will be thy God, and thou shall be my
servant.

On the other part, if thou neglect the keeping of the Lords law, look for
none other reward, but the contrary cursses to these blessings. And therefore,
O man, if thou will live in Gods favor, and avoid the heat of his wrath, take
heed how thou acquaintest thy soul with sin, which stingeth unto death, if it
obtain place to enter.

Not without great cause is uncleanness cried out against in the scripture, and
most horrible punishments denounced against it, that thou might be
terrified, and become fearful to fall into such a foul offense. Do but
look upon the curssed waters, which the adulterous woman, in the time of Moses
law, was enioined to drink; whereby her belly most irkesomlie did swell, and
her thigh rot, as it hoong upon her body; to declare that God is highly
displeased with such filthiness.

An example of his indignation against his peculiar people, thou may see in
the scripture, and learn to detest all uncleanness, specially that beastlines
of the flesh. The Israelites abiding in Sittim, began to commit whooredome with
the daughters of Moab; whereupon they grew to be idolatrers and
image-woorshippers, contrary to that which they were commanded. What followed?
Were not all the heads of the people commanded to be hanged against the sun?
And were not Zamrie the Israelite, and Cosbie the Madianite, both of them
descended of honorable houses, thrust through even in the very committing of
carnal lust and uncleanness, with the iaueling of Phinees, the son of Eleazar.

If examples may withdraw thee from doing such wickedness, thou have store of
them in the scripture: if precepts and admonitions, thou can not so soon
open Gods book, but thou shall find plenty for thine instruction and
learning. If neither of these can work with thee, but that thou continuest at
a stay; O then woe be to thee, O man: for thou art sold over unto sin, and
there is little or no hope of thy recovery.

Consider the words of Saint Paul, and imprint them in thy memory: the same
counsel that he gave the Corinthians, I give thee; not to be an idolatrer, not
to be a murmurer, not to be lead by lust, not to be a dronkard; and to
conclude, not to be a fornicator, or unclean person. The same Apostle
elsewhere, uses words well worthy to be marked and remembered. Know ye not
(says he) that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not
deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate,
nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor
dronkards, nor reuilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God.

Here thou see, O man, all uncleanness condemned. Thou see also how the
workers of wickedness are rewarded. And therefore, follow the good advise of
the same Apostle, to keep thy vessel pure in holiness, and by no means to
make thy members the members of an harlot, seeing thy whole body is appointed
to be the temple of the holy Ghost, where he will not vouchsafe to dwell, if
thou suffer the same to become filthy and unclean.

3 A prayer for the former virtue.
O Father of mercy, and God of all consolation; we most humbly beseech thy
divine Majesty, to give us grace to take heed to our selves, that we exceed
not the bounds of honesty, nor keep company with such as are counted
dishonest and lewd livers; by whose evil example, all good inclination
naturally graffed in us is choked, godly motions pliable to Christian
purposes perverted, the whole course of our life corrupted, our virtues
blemished, our vices cherished, our bodies abused, our souls defiled, and thy
glorious name dishonored.

Power into us the spirit of chastity, which abounded in Joseph; which
ouerflowed in Susan; that being therewith harnessed, as with complete armor,
we may gainstand, repel, and award all the blows of temptation, sent from
Satan the prince of this world, to assault us, and with sundry subtle and
sugared assaies to circumuent, and undermine us, to the end we might, by his
malicious means, pollute our vessels with the dregs of filthiness; which thou,
o Father, have commanded us to keep holy and undefiled, for thy self to
inhabit and dwell in.

Mortify every member of us, both inward and outward, with the sword of thy
spirit, which is thine eternal word, whereby we may be sanctified, and
withdrawn from all kind of affections sauouring of uncleanness (than which
nothing is more odious and abominable in thy sight) and not like the Scribes
and Pharisees, scowre and cleanse the outside of the cup or platter, leaving the
inside furd as it were with filthiness: but washing and wiping even our very
hearts from evil thoughts, our mouths from lewd speech, our eyes from viewing
vanity, and all the parts of our bodies from stinking nastines; that being
clean within and without, we may in due time approach to thee, o God, and see
thee face to face: which grant we beseech thee for his sake, whose blood has
made us clean, even Jesus Christ thy beloved son, and our blessed Savior,
Amen.

The xxiij. Combat.
1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the vice ensuing.
LECHERY or unclean life is a mighty prince of the spiritual and invisible
Egypt, riding in a chariot or wagon of four wheels: namely, bellie-cheere,
fleshly lust, costly bravery, and drowsines. This wagon is drawn with two
horses: the first prosperity of life, the second plenty of all things. These
two horses are ruled by two riders: the first lasie idleness, the second
faithless carelessness.

For plenty breeds idleness, and according to the Scripture, the prosperity
of fools is their own destruction; for none other reason doubtless, but
because it makes them secure and retchles: insomuch that when they shall say,
Peace, peace, all is well, and there is no dread of danger; then, even then
shall they be overtaken with a sudden overthrow. These two riders have no
spurs on their heels, nor whips in their hands; n^r any such like thing to
drive the horses withal: but in stead of them, they use a canopie to cast a
shadow, and a fan to gather wind withal. This canopie is dissimulation,
casting a shadow against the scorching heat of cares.

For it is proper to a soft, tender, nice, and delicate soul, even to
dissemble and be ashamed of necessary cares; the parching heat whereof that
they may not feel, they hide themselves under the shroud of dissimulation. The
fan is franknes or spend-all, gathering the wind of flattery. For bawdie and
lecherous persons are very frank and free, sparing for no cost, and buieng
wind for gold at the ears of flatterers. This boiling lust of lechery rises
of a wicked and lewd cause; and truly, unless it be presently quenched and
quailed, it will suddenly ouerswaie all the body, set it on fire, and burn
it. At the first it tickleth the flesh a little with touching; afterward it
poisoneth the mind with filthy delight; and last of all, by consenting to
sin, and willingness to work wickedness, both body and soul are subdued and
overcome.

2 The ASSALT given by filthy LECHERY.
O Man, never cast this stumbling-blocke before thy conscience, that leacherie
is a deadly sin, and deserves damnation. Why may thou not without any
remorse or care, use thine own body to thy hearts delight? Such plesures as
are ordained for thee to possess and enioie, it is reason thou should,
without let or hinderance, have them in fruition. Have thou opportunity of
time, and due season to serve thy desires? Take it then, and neglect not such
convenient offers. For time passes, and it happens in an hour, that happens
not in seven year.

The eye must be satisfied with seeing, the ear with hearing, the tongue with
talking, the lips with kissing, the arms with embracing, and other parts of
the body must have their due recreation; otherwise, unquietness will ensue to
the disturbance of the very heart, with melancholy and madness. Many have
been busy to bridle their lusts and fleshly affections; but they have been
glad to give over their enterprise. For the concupiscences of the heart are
wild bears to bind, and fierce monsters that refuse to be tamed.

That which is natural in thee, O man, and not dishonest, seek not by
sinister means to suppress; and take this lesson for thy learning, that to
undertake the maistering of such motions as are bred in thy bones, and will
never be rooted out of thy flesh, is to wrestle with the wind, and to cast
water into the sea. Again, be persuaded by counsel and reason, if thou be
wise and prudent. For the lust of body is neither to be discommended, nor yet
condemned; though some both rashly and falsely lash out lies, saying, that it
is a sin which shuts thee out of heaven. That can not be so. For can any
creature see further into the nature of things, than the creator himself? But
the creator himself would not prohibit or forbid thee, O man, the pleasure of
the flesh in carnal copulation, which a company of dizzards call the sin of
leacherie, when in deed it is no sin; because it begins with love, and
ends with repentance: and therefore why should any one beside him, attempt
to persuade, or exhort thee to the contrary?

It is certain, that God denied not that delight unto thee, because he gave no
express commandment to forbear it: and he allowed it, because he suffered
the same to be enioied before-time, even in the beginning: he permitted and
misliked it not, but rather thought it very needful and convenient, that man
should have his peculiar delectation with his woman, as well as other creatures
in their proper kind; or else he would not have made them he and she in the
general creation.

And therefore, O man, esteem it no matter of conscience to use thy body to
pleasure, and to satisfy thy flesh, when it is kindled and set on fire with
the concupiscence and lust of that which it likes and loves. For to do
otherwise, breeds a pensiveness and molestation of mind, and a disquieting
of every member.

3 A prayer against the former vice.
O Almighty God; we, even we, who a long time have sat in the seat of
sinners, followed the trace which we found fore-troden, and set our selves
aworke in doing diverse things utterly against the law of thy commandments,
do here humble and throw down our selves, vile dust, ashes, and
woormes-meate, at the footstool of thy mercie-seate, beseeching thee to pardon
all our misdeeds and follies past, at the greatness and greeuousnes whereof, we
quake and tremble; to banish them out of the borders of our hearts, where they
have harbored long, and to put new tenants in possession, even clean thoughts,
holy talk, honest deeds, and whatsoever else may stand with the credit of
Christianity.

O Lord, give us not over to the lusts of the flesh, least through frailty and
want of grace, we commit sin with greedines, and so denieng thee in our
lives, whom we profess with our lips, heap upon our own heads hell and
condemnation. Let not lechery keep us in bondage, o let not so ouglie and
deadly a sin reign in our mortal bodies, let it not take root in us, o let
it not bloome and blossom in our earthly members, least we burgening and
growing like rank weeds, bring forth in fine the fruits of endless confusion.

A detestable vice it is, o Lord, we know right well; the dangers thereupon
depending are deadly, the miseries lamentable, the temporal plagues irksome,
the eternal torments insufferable, all which considered, with the dread of thy
judgment, oftentimes executed with sudden vengeance; shall we be so
graceless, as to make our bodies brothell-houses of Satan, cages of unclean
birds, nests of venomous serpents, and indeed very dens of devils? O God
forbid! Deliver us, sweet Lord, from this desperate downe-fall, hold us up with
thy hand, that we stumble not, and at all assaies assist us with thy spirit,
that thereby as with a sharp syeth, we cutting in pieces that poisonfull
scorpion lechery, may not fear her sting any more, which wounds unto
death. From this sin, and all sins noisome to our souls and bodies, set us
free for thy mercy sake, o almighty GOD, Amen.

1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the virtue following.
Unspotted CHASTITY is the only jewel, which in this mortal life
represents unto us a certain state of eternal glory. Unspotted chastity
is the only thing, which at the solemnities of marriage sets before us a
form of that blessed country, where we shall not marie, nor be married:
giving us in this our earthly booth a proof of that same celestial
conversation, which we shall lead in the life to come with the Saints.

This vessel which we bear about is brickle, frail, and many times in
danger: howbeit chastity keeps and preserves it for sanctification, yea
like most sweet smelling balm it perfumeth our carcases, making them trim and
sauourie, as if they were seasoned with the purest spice.

Unspotted chastity brideleth the senses, and snaffleth the lims, least
otherwise they might soke in idleness and ease, run a rioting after lewd
desires, and beecome rank and rotten with the pleasures of the flesh. But yet
for all this, chastity, how beautiful and amiable so ever it seem in show,
is nothing worth, without charity: it is of no value, of no price, of no
estimation, void of credit, merit, and desert. And no marvel. For without
charity what good thing can be undertaken, had, or obtained? Faith: yea but
that avails little, though it move mountains. Knoweledge: yea but that
profits little, though it speak with the tongues of men and angels.
Martyrdom: yea but that helps little, though I offer my body to be burned.
Chastity void of charity, is a lamp lacking oil. Take away oil, and the
lamp is not lightsome: take away charity, and chastity is not delightsome.

2 The REPVLSE given by unspotted CHASTITY.
O Man, I would not have thee ignorant what thy reward shall be after this
life. For if thou live chastely and holilie, thy joy and happiness shall be
everlasting: if dishonestlie and wickedlie, thou shall have thy portion in
eternal torments of hellfire. Furthermore, it is meet also, O man, that thou
endeavor to live the more chastely, because thou can not tell how soon the
acceptable time of grace and repentance will pass away.

And although God in the beginning of the world, made man and woman, to keep
company, and the one to take pleasure of the other, yet thereby it was not his
godly meaning to approve or allow licentiousnes of life, but rather to
establish and confirm matrimony upon earth, that such as had not the gift of
virginity and chastity, might with safety of conscience presume upon that
present remedy of marriage, which the Lord in his own person ordained and
established.

As for the filthy sin of lechery, fornication, or adultery, none may be so
bold as to commit them, for fear of peril following here upon. And that it
is no sight sin to defile thine own body, learn by the words of the Apostle.
For dooest thou not mark, O man; or dooest thou take that for a vain toie,
which S. Paul speaks to leacherers, and lusters of strange flesh? Fly
fornication my brethren (says he:) for every sin which a man commits, is
without the body, but he that plaieth the fornicator; offends against his
own body.

If thou esteemest this for a thing of naught, listen unto that which will make
thee lament and weep, if thou have any drop of grace in thy heart or
entrails; Neither adulterers, nor fornicators, nor abusers of themselves with
mankind, shall inherit the kingdom of God. Again, the same Apostle setting
down a rabble of fleshly works, does not omit this filthy vice, and
concludes as before saying: The works of the flesh are adultery, fornication,
uncleanness, wantonness, wrath, strife, enuieng, murders, gluttony, dronkennes,
and such like; of the which I told you before, and tell you now again, that
even they, which do such things, shall not inherit the kingdom of God.

And yet further in this matter, he spares not to express his mind
elsewhere, saying: As for fornication and all uncleanness, let it not be once
named among you, as it becomes Saints; neither filthiness, neither foolish
talking, neither jesting, which are not comely. And why? Because no
whoremonger, neither unclean person, etc. has any inheritance in the
kingdom of Christ, and of God.

To conclude therefore, I put thee in memory of the sentence of S. John,
describing the holy city of God, new Jerusalem, and the glory of the same,
into the which he affirms flatly, nothing that is unclean shall enter: for
without shall be dogs, inchanters, whoremongers, murderers, idolatrers, liers,
and such like.

By these contraries, O man, and their reward, thou may judge what a precious
thing it is to keep thy body chaste, to live honestly, soberlie, and
acceptablie before God and men, that thy walking may be after the example of
Christ Jesus thy savior, whom if thou imitate and follow with unfeigned
affection, thou can not do amiss.

3 A prayer for the former virtue.
O Eternal GOD, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who by the mouth of thy son
our Savior Jesus Christ, have told us of three kinds of chastity: the first
naturally ingraffed, the second artificially procured, and the third
celestiallie obtained; each one whereof shoots at a certain mark, is
undertaken for a special end, and rises of some material cause; as of
infirmity, necessary policy, and desire to serve thee with free liberty;
which is a very beneficial kind of chastity, drawing with it the complete
and full duty of Christianity; we crave of thy gracious goodness the entire
practice and perfect use of the last, holding our selves content with the bare
knowledge of the second and the first.

Also most merciful Father, because this is the chastity, which proceeds
from thy divine influence (in comparison whereof, the two former are but
flourishes as it were and shadows) which many of thy Saints have embraced for
the kingdom of heavens sake, that being furthest off from all transitory
concupiscences, of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, and feeling, they might
be the nearer to true and eternal felicity, which is then most likely to be
obtained, when we renounce the world, and all trifling vanities.

Therefore, even therefore, o Lord, even for the participation of thy kingdom,
and the ioies thereof, whereat thy Saints have directed their lives, by the
just line and level of unspotted chastity, keeping their vessels pure and
sanctified for the honorable service whereto they are appointed: we crave at
thy hands the selfsame ornament and rich ouch of innocence, the selfsame
jewel of spotless virginity, the selfsame tablet of true temperance: that
treading the trace which they trod, and not mistaking our aim given us by
their good examples, we may obtain the reward of our chastity; even the white
siluerlike glistering robes of Saints and angels, with them to live
everlastingly and world without end, in the heaven of heavens, whereto he
bring us speedily, that bought us deerlie, Amen.

The xxiiij. Combat.
1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the vice ensuing.
WHOORDOME of the heart, or inward fornication is nothing else but
concupiscence, which busieth the mind with unlawful desires, and poisoneth all
the lims of the body with venomous baits. Hereof springs itching of the
ears, wanton winking with the eyes, pleasant smelling with the nose, delicate
and curious tasting with the tongue; finally, a marvelous nicenes of all the
senses, wherewith the whole man being at length ouergrowne, is no more a
vessel of sanctification, but rather a tumbrell of all abomination.

That this whordome, though it be privy; and this fornication, though it be
secret; is odious in the sight of God, and flatly. forbidden: harken, o man,
to the wisdom of the holy Ghost, and learn how dangerous an infection it
is. S. James says, that God tempts no man to wickedness, but it is the work
of concupiscence, which brings forth sin, and sin when it is ripe,
ingendereth death. So that in respect of Gods justice and righteousness,
between inward fornication and outward, there is no difference touching the
punishment; albeit in the cies of man the ods is far unlike.

And therefore in consideration of the danger depending thereupon, and
foreseen by the wisdom of God, thou art thus taught out of Gods book, not
to gaze on a maid, least thou be allured to lust after that, which is precious
in her: not to look narrowly upon a woman's beauty, least thou be intised to
wantonness and daliance, when love is once kindled, and flameth like a fire. To
conclude, abhor this sin, o man, so much the more, because Christ himself
has avouched, that Whosoever lusts after a woman, to work wantonness, and
commit folly with her, has played the adulterer in his heart, and by that
means is fallen into the gilt of fornication.

2 The ASSALT given by inward fornication, or whoredom of the heart.
O Man, if thou have any light of reason, any spark of judgment and
understanding, tell me this in conscience and truth; if he that consents to
lust in his heart, and commits not the actual deed of concupiscence, offend
in such sort as to deserve damnation? I think no, and I will avouch no less
than I speak. For, why should he that conceiueth a thing in his mind, and
puts neither hand nor foot to the accomplishment of the same, be judged an
offender. All law is against it, all equity disaloweth it, conscience
misliketh it, and justice will not agree unto it.

If thou see a fair house, a beautiful woman, a fruitful vineyard, a
pleasant garden, and wishest in thine heart to have real possession, not
giving the attempt by any outward action apparent to the eye of shine inward
lust, who shall be so bold as to come forth, and accuse thee of offense? If
thou can be charged with no misdeed, why should thou be counted guilty?
if void of crime, why condemned?

Follow my counsel therefore in this manner and form as I set it before
thee. Dooest thou see her whom thine eye highly pleases? Is she a
Gentlewoman, is she so many degrees above thy base estate, that all and the
only delight which thou art like to have by her, is in viewing her
amiablenes? Well, content thee therewith, and feed thy fancy with a firm and
fast fixed conceit of her favor; let her be deeply imprinted in thy thought
and cogitation, and suppose thou have by her as much pleasure and
voluptuousnes, as by a meaner woman.

For, where action is hindered by occasion of some circumstance, there
cogitation may have liberty to run at randon.

And though the members of thy body, by isntrumental touching may not be
admitted to do their office; yet it shall be free for thee to feed thy wanton
eye, to suffice thy ticklish fancy and unbridled lust. Spare not so to do,
for it is no offense; the secrets of thy soul are known to none but thy
self, and therefore none being able to accuse thee, thou shall need none to
excuse thee.

3 A prayer against the former vice.
O Almighty and eternal God, for so much as we are led by the privy and
unspied desires of our corrupt hearts, into many an outrageous and ouglie
sin; naie rather floong headlong into full seas of most accursed crimes: for
that they are the sparkles, whereby the flames of many a foul abuse are
kindled, which also gathering force by degrees, must needs in time violently
burn, according to the wise sentence of Solomon, that no man can carry fire in
his bosom, and his cloths vnsindged; nor go upon hot coals, and his feet
vnblistered: therefore we beseech thee, guard us about with thy grace, against
this spreading poison.

O suffer not the souls of thy servants to become sinks of unclean lusts, by
whose noisomnes whatsoever portion of thy spirit we possess is quenched, and
all goodness utterly consumed. Let not us, whom thou have vouchsafed to partake
the fruits of thy deerlie beloved sons death and passion, serve like slaves
under the banner of the flesh. For what an intolerable apostasy and reuolting
were that, to forswear and renounce the truth of the promise, which we made to
thee in our baptism; that we would forsake the devil, the world, the flesh,
with all the pomps, vanities, and abominations of the same? Out alas! better
had it been for us never to have been borne, than to be convinced and found
guilty of such an unpardonable trespass.

And therefore Lord, for that love sake, wherewith thou so louedst us, being
thine enemies, that thou gave thine only begotten son to die for our
justification; for that loves sake keep us in the due execution of thy will,
in obedience to thy law, in reverence and dread of thy commandments, in love
of thy mercy, in fear of thy judgments, and finalie in mindfulnes of death:
so shall we be sure, not only to mortify and kill all the lusts of
uncleanness, but also to walk before thee with a pure heart; which grace, o God,
grant us, Amen.

1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the virtue following.
WILL thou learn, o man, what inward chastity and cleannes of heart is; then
consider the contrary, that by the vileness of the one, thou may learn the
excellency of the other. It is naturally graffed in every reasonable
creature, to fancy the best things, and still to covet more, though he have
enough: yea, suppose that whatsoever he has, be pure and good; yet so ravenous
are his desires, and so insatiable his heart, that he thinks better of other
men's, than his own. For doubtless it is a thing impossible, to tedder and tie
in concupiscence, or to appoint it much or little, till it be satisfied, till
it be filled, till it have got wherewith to be contented. As for example. He
that has a fair wife, wishes a fairer in his heart, and is bewitched with a
wanton eye. He that goes gorgeous and gaie, sets his mind upon costlier and
brauer attire. He that swimmeth in wealth, hunteth after more, repining at him
that is richer. The moniemonger will never say, I have enough. The
whooremonger will never say, I have enough. The bloud-thirstie murderer will
never say, I have enough. The ambitious vainglorious man will never say, I
have enough: and so of the rest.

What is the cause of this insatiablenes, which has no end, which has no
botome? Even an unclean heart, a corrupt heart, a defiled heart, an unchaste heart,
which runs a whoring after other men's goods, and will in no wise be content
with his own. A clean and pure heart is the dwelling house of Christ. In such
a heart reason is so far from error, that it agrees with man's will. For man's
will loves such a reason, and such a reason man's will. Let thy will be void of
uncleanness, because right reason allows such a will.

Cleannes of heart causes quietness of conscience. For if the heart be chaste, the
conscience is not troubled; because such chastity and cleannes is a mortifieng
of the earthly members, a taming, a bringing down, and a keeping under of
corrupt affections, which are the torches that set the towe of evil deeds on
fire. To the clean hearted, blessedness is promised; to the unclean hearted,
cursednes is threatened: the one shall dwell in the Lords tabernacle; the other
in the devils dungeon: the one shall rest in Gods holy hill; the other in the
vallie of death: the one shall live with the Lamb everlastingly; because they
are chaste virgins: the other with the Got (Satan I mean) because they are
rank harlots.

2 The REPVLSE given by inward CHASTITY, or vndefilednes of heart.
O Man, thou art a grievous offender, if thou keep not the chastity and
virginity of thy soul. For mark what the author of perfection, innocence,
and cleannes utters in the Gospel; Whosoever (says he) looks upon a woman
to lust after her, he has committed fornication with her already in his heart.

To the contrary whereof, that patient man Job has this speech; I have made a
covenant with mine eyes, that I should not so much as think upon a woman. For
how great a portion shall I have of God from above, and what inheritance of the
almighty from on high? Is not destruction prepared for the wicked, and some
strange thing for the workers of iniquity?

Furthermore, if there were not deadly danger, even in concupiscence of the
eye and the heart, it is not like that he would have burst out with vehemency
into these speeches; If mine heart has walked after mine eyes, if it has
been deceived by a woman, or if I have laid wait at my neighbors door, then
let my wife grind unto another man, and let other men lie with her.

It is good for thee therefore to have the petition of the Prophet David
always fresh in memory: O Lord turn away mine eyes, that they behold not
vanity. Embrace the wholesome counsel of wise Solomon, Lust not after a
woman's beauty in thine heart, least thou be taken with her fair looks.

Moreover, if it were not so, that the very thought of consenting to wickedness
did not displease the Lord thy Creator, this sentence of the Prophet Esaie had
never been uttered; Away with the evil and wickedness of your thoughts from my
sight. Again in the Gospel, the Lord uses these words to the Pharisees; why
do ye think evil in your hearts? Neither would the blessed Apostle S. Paul
have spoken in this manner; Their thoughts accusing or excusing one another, at
the day when God shall judge the secrets of men, according to my Gospel.

Among many vices, which Jesus the son of Sirach recites, exhorting us
therwithall to be ashamed of them, he omitteth not looking upon another man's
wife, using many trifling words with a maiden, or standing by her bedside;
because they be as it were ladders to clime up to greater mischiefs, and
therefore ought most advisedly to be shunned.

To knit up my meaning in brevity, O man, I would have thee walk after the
example of Christ in holiness and innocence, not deluding thine own soul with
any false and lieng persuasion of the devils suggesting; as though it were the
actual deed, which displeased Gods majesty, and that thy thoughts and
cogitations are not to be called to a reckoning.

I tell thee, O man, that as the sun ouer-looketh all things with his
cleerenes; so the Lord sees into the very secrets of thy heart. No thought
may escape him, no imagination be hidden from him, no word be unknown to him,
neither any deed, though never so closely wrought, fly from before his face.

How then can thou deceive him, who will not be deceived? Or how dare thou
conceive, that thou have shifts to ouer-shoote the Lord, before whom thy heart
and reins stand stark naked and discovered? Beware therefore, O man, of
inward lusting; for even thereby thou fallest into the transgression of the
law, and (if Gods mercy do not reform thee) stand in state of damnation.

3 A prayer for the former virtue.
O Almighty and everlasting God, we fall on our faces at the feet of thy
Majesty, before whom our hearts are as bright as glass, so that thou see
even the smallest spot and stain of the same, much more the great blemishes,
which are not to be hidden; beseeching thee, that whereas we have started like
broken bows, from the fealty whereto we swear; and have most lewdlie and
looselie followed the liberty of our lusts, committing against thee such sin
and iniquity, as thy blessed Apostle S. Paul admonished us ought not once to
be named among us; to pardon that is past, and to accept our present
humiliation and repentance, in token of a full purpose to lead a godly and
reformed life hereafter.

Which that we may the better do, for that of ourselves we cannot so much as
conceive one good thought; much less utter one good word, or exercise one good
deed; we crave at thy bountiful hands an utter rooting out and supplanting of
all concupiscence in us, whereby we are drawn to sin, as it were with
cartropes, and entangled therein as flies in a spiders cobweb. O kill all
uncleanness in us, quench it quite, put out the heat thereof utterly by the
working of thy spirit; that being purged within from all pollusion and
filthiness, we may become new creatures, addicted to the true service of thee,
and enamored with the glory of thy name.

Sow in us most plentifully the seed of a clean heart, which may foster and
cherish with the heat thereof godly and Christian thoughts, holy and honest
affections, pure and undefiled consultations, that the fountain and wellhead
of our nature being void of uncleanness, all the appurtenances of the same may
be clean and unstained: remembering the saying of Christ our Savior, that
nothing defiles a man, but that which breaks out of a man; meaning the heart,
which is a treasury of things good and bad. This grace, and all other graces
necessary, bestow upon us for thine infinite mercy sake, o almighty and
everlasting God, Amen.

The xxv. and last Combat.
1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the vice ensuing.
TO love this world is a double madness; first, because it is variable and
deceitful: secondly, because it is but the place of our pilgrimage. This
world passes away, and the glory of the same dies in a moment: therefore to
love this present world is a varitie of vanities. this world and the glory of
the same, is like a star, which glittereth in the firmament, and with a sudden
glanse loses his light. It is like a spark of fire, which is quickly
quenched and turned to ashes, and therefore to love this world, or the pomps
thereof, is a wonderful folly.

Consider thine own state, o man, the miseries thereupon depending, and the
uncertainty of thy best ioies, the shortness of thy life, and the unknown
coming of death: consider these things well and thoroughly, so shall thou
soon see in what a frenzy he is that loves the world. Tell me, I pray thee
o man, what is become of all the lovers of this world that lived in former
ages? There is nothing left of them but dust, ashes, and woormes meat. Weigh
well what they have been, and what they are, even men as thou art. They have
eaten and drunk, they have laughed and made merry, they have enioied all the
pleasures of this world, they have spent their lifetime in peace and
hartsease, but what is befallen them now?

Are they not gone to their long home, even their grave, in the very twinkling
of an eye, waiting for a second doom, much more terrible by a thousand
degrees, than this temporal judgment, that has passed upon them? What does
vainglory avail, flitting ioies profit, worldly pomp warrant, fleshly
pleasure, delight, deceitful riches help, great kindred comfort in such a
case; albeit these are the special things for whose sake men love this present
world? After laughing, coms lamenting; after pleasure, pain; after
prosperity, misery, after delights, torments: if not in this life, yet in the
life to come. And therefore what wise man would love the world, unless he will
needs be at defiance with God, and lose his own soul?

2 The ASSALT given by the love of this present WORLD.
O Man, cast thy rouing eyes round about thee, and take a view of this present
world, whereof thou have the lordship and dominion. Look before thee, behind
thee, above thee, beneath thee, to the right hand, and to the left; and tell me
in truth and conscience, if any thing can be more beautiful, more comely,
more handsome, more lovely, or more delectable, than that which we see daily
before our face in this life?

O how wonderful is the glory of heaven, in the pleasant air, in the light
of the Sun, in the increasing and diminishing of the Moon, in the variety,
course, and order of the stars? O how comfortable is the earth, with flowers
of the field and garden, fruits of orchards, pleasantnes of meadows, and fresh
rivers, plentifulnes of corn, and all kind of grain, fruitful vines
garnished with leaves and clusters of grapes, woods casting cool shadows from
green trees; sundry kinds of creatures serving thy use, as horses for
riding, kine for milking, hounds for hunting, spaniels for hawking, oxen for
plowing, asses and mules for burden, hearts and hinds of the forest, pheasants
and peacocks, goodly birds to behold: houses hoong about with clothes of
arras, wrought roofes, painted walls and seelings, iuorie beds, couerlets of
silk and needle work, sheets of the finest linen, pillowes of the softest
down: great choice of sweet music, upon the organs, the regals, the
recorder, the virginals, the timbrell, the citterne, the vials, the cornets,
the lute, the harp, and sundry sorts of tunable instruments, yielding most
heavenly harmony: marvelous fair, beautiful, gallant, and personable
women, having faces, forheads, and eie-browes like glistering glass, eyes and
cheeks most comely and amorous, lips and chins deintie and delicate, noses
and tongues worth abundance of treasure, necks and breasts adorned with
chains and ou^hes, wrists and fingers decked with bracelets and rings set
about with pearls and precious stones, besides the inestimable pleasures of
their neat and fine bodies?

I cannot reckon up the rich ornaments, and variable recreations of this
present world, which thou enioiest, O man, after thine own desire, living like
an Angel in the midst of Paradise, or rather a God in all felicity and
happiness. And therefore set thy heart at rest whiles thou art in the world:
thou have but a time, spend it in such manner as thou may be comforted: for
if thou die, there is none of thy pomp will follow thee, but thou must leave
all behind thee.

This is the place where thou must build, plant, set, sow, graffe, mow,
reap, thresh, grind, bake, brew, cate, drink, and make merry; which I would
with thee daily to do. For after this life, there is none other to be looked
for; and how long thou shall live, thou can not tell: according therefore to
the dominion and lordship which thou have over all creatures, command them to
serve thee every one in their degree, quality, and nature.

It is a grief to thee, O man, to lose that which thou love. Have thou a
tewell of inestimable value, and exquisite workmanship? It will grieve thy
heart to part from it, either at thy friends importunate begging, or at thy
foes rigorous and violent wresting. Have thou a horse trained up for thine
own saddle and proper riding? Thou will be loath to lend him, least he
miscarrie, and so thou suffer loss.

If thy heart be so fastened upon one private thing, as a jewel, a horse, a
ring, a dog (for sometimes thy fancy will be fixed thereupon) that it is a
sore vexation and anguish of mind to be dispossessed of them, since they are
thy joy and delight; then it stands with reason, that the whole world, with
all the furniture of the same, being in thy possession, and winning thine
inward affections and outward senses unto them, would utterly kill and take
thy life from thee, if thou should but a short time be forced to take trial
of such a crooked chance.

And therefore love the world, and the pleasures of the same; for by them thou
must be defended from all misfortunes. It is thy pauilion, thy tent, thy
taberuacle; and it is that necessary provision, wherewith thou art to be
maintained in the state of prosperity.

3 A prayer against the former vice.
O Almighty God, the giver of all goodness, from whom, as from a full sea,
plentiful redemption does flow and gush out most streminglie; we beseech thee
to bow down thine eyes, and to behold us thy children, living among a viperous
generation of atheists, epicures, infidels, and I wot not what workers of
iniquity, whose whole delight is in this world, and the transitory vanities
of the same: o give us grace to esteem of it, as it deserves, yea so baselie
and homely to repute of it, as of very dirt and doong; if for none other
cause but only this, which is a cause of causes; namely, for that it is set
upon mischief and wickedness, given to unrighteousness and maliciousnes; but
chiefly, for that it is at enmity and strife with thee. Thine Apostle James
has taught us, that to be in amity and league with the world, to love it, to
delight and take pleasure in it, is to be at defiance with thee, o Lord God
almighty, to hate thee, to contemn and despise thee. And S. John has told
us, that the world knows thee not, nor the true light Christ Jesus thy son,
whom thou sentest with saving health into the same, but persecuted the king of
glory, even to the shameful death of the cross. Besides this, we know that
it is accursed for our sakes, since our parents Adam and Eve fell from the
state of innocence, and committed sin through pride of mind, which is
delivered and made over unto us by tradition.

Moreover, we are taught that the fashion, the beauty, the love and glory of
this world vanishes, and all the pleasures of the same perish. We have learned
that it is to be consumed and burnt to ashes with fire, and that all the
riches, treasures, pomp, pride, renown, and whatsoever else it contains,
shall be converted and turned into nothing. Alas then for pity, that we, whom
thou, o Lord, have crowned with excellency above all creatures, should rejoice
in a thing of naught, should dote and be fond over a thing that shall be wasted
in the twinkling of an eye, should set our minds on that, which is curssed for
sin, which is a friend to iniquity, a foe to innocence, and to conclude, a
flat enemy to God.

Out alas that we should love that which hates God and his son Christ, who
in the tender bowels of compassion, was content to be crucified for the world,
and yet had not where in the world to lay his head. O monstrous unkindness of
the creature to the creator! o unnatural dealing! o tiger like cruelty
retalied for such lamblike lowlines! Grant us better grace, most merciful
father, and suffer not satan to cast so thick and dark a mist of blindness
before our eyes, that thereby we should be allured to love the world; but rather
arm us with faith whereby we may overcome the world, and triumph over the
same in victory, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

1 S. BARNARDS golden sentence of the virtue following.
THE contempt of this world, o man, if it were common, as it is but rare, would
be a means to draw thee unto God, and to a longing fo the life to come. Thine
own miserable and helples estate in this vale of wretchedness, were enough to
bring thee to an utter misliking and despising of this world. For what art
thou, o man? no more than a man, yea a bare and naked man, a poor man, and a
distressed man: a man lamenting that thou art a man, ashamed that thou art
borne a naked man, repining that thou art borne to labor, and not to honor: a
man borne of a woman, and through the guilt of sin living but a while, and
therefore fraught with fear, stuffed with misery, and wrapped in woe; yea, many
and many woes, woes of body, woes of mind, woes in sleeping, woes in waking,
woes on all sides, which way soever thou look, and castest thy tooting eyes.

How then can thou find in thy heart, o man, to love the world; and not rather
to hate and have it in contempt, knowing that it is the furnace where all these
afflictions are forged? Thou art one of Adams sons, descended of his loins,
borne in sin, brought up in wickedness; and therefore thou can not live in
this world without labor, without sorrow, without anguish, without misfortune,
and infinite casualties day by day ebbing and flowing, whereunto thou art so
much the more subject, because thou love the world, which thou ought to
contemn, and utterly mislike. Again, in loving the world, thou art in league
with sin, and in fee with death. Why then will thou love the world? why will thou desire his friendship? why will thou hunt after the delight of the same?
the longer thou live in it, the greeuouser is thy transgression, the
heinouser thy wickedness, the more in number thine offenses. Love this world the
less, and sin the less: contemn this world the more, and rise to
righteousness the more: for the killing of the one, is the quickening of the
other. Set not thy mind, o man, upon this present wicked world, nor the vain
pomps and transitory trishtrash of the same; for it shall wax old as a
garment, and all the beautiful bravery thereof shall vade like a blossom.

Look aloft, o man, to Jerusalem the city of the great king, who will
satisfy thee with the finest flower of wheat, and cherish thee with
comfortable streams of running rivers. There is no measure nor weight, there
is no scale nor balance, there are no bounds nor marks; but plenty and
abundance, fulness and store, freedom and liberty. There is no fear nor
trembling, because God has established peace in his kingdom; no enemy
enters in, no friend goes out of that city: there are no temptations; there
are no troublesome thoughts; because he that is always one, and never
changes, has set every thing in a steadfast and inuariable order. There is no
power of tempting, no cause of disquieting, no ablenes of hurting, no doing
against gods holy will, and no transgressing; but happy peace, and peaceable
happiness; perfect pleasure, and pleasant perfectnes; one will in God and us, so
that whatsoever pleases him, the same pleases us. There is clear light,
which we shall behold with clear eyes. There is the sovereign good, even the
treasure of treasures, which we shall not only see, but also enioie, I mean
life everlasting, which is the fulness of time, the length of days, yea, the
true day, which knows no sun setting, the high noonetide, the abundance of
perfect glory, everlasting truth, and true euerlastingnes.

The continuance of that city has no end, the brightness of that city has no
dimnes, no decaie. The fulness of the ioies of that city has no lothsomnes. O
true mid-daie, o glistering light, o clear sunshine, o driuer away of dark
shadows, o drier up of fens and marshes, o cleanser of noisomnes and stinkes!
O temperate springtide, o beautiful summer, o plentiful harvest, o calm and
quiet winter, o safe dwelling, paradise I mean: o sweet food of life, God
almighty! Long o man with a godly longing after these everlasting ioies laid
up in heaven, where thou shall see God face to face, who is the light of the
enlightened, the rest of the exercised, the country of the sore traveled, the
life of the living, and the crown of conquerors.

2 The REPVLSE given by the contempt of this present world, and the love of the
world to come.
O Man, if the things which thou see under heaven so much delight thee; if a
very prison and gaile seem so beautiful in thine eyes: what affections
should the country of countries, the city of cities, and mansion of mansions
breed in thy heart? If strangers and forreners are in love with such vanties,
how precious are those things which children and heirs shall possess, even to
their full co^tentment? If mortal and miserable men are so enriched in this
life, how shall immortal and blessed saints be rewarded in the life to come?

Wherefore I counsel thee, O man, to shake off from thee the love of this
present world, wherein no reasonable creature is so borne, that he should not
die, and take unto thee in place thereof the love of the world to come, where
all are so revived and quickened, that they cannot die again: where no
adversity troubles, no necessity pricketh, no molestation vexes, but
eternal reioising reigns.

But thou will ask me, what else should be there, but continuance and
euerlastingnes of such and so great blessedness? I can not answer thee
otherwise than thus, that what good thing soever is, there it is to be found:
and what evil thing soever is, there it is not to be found.

Thou will yet ask me further what good thing that is? I tell thee, O man, it
is needles to ask. The Prophet Esaie, and the Apostle Paul teach thee in few
words, saying: The eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, neither has it
entered into the heart of man, what things God has prepared for them that love
him.

Zealous David, guarded about with all the glory, pomp, and riches of this
present world, gasped and groned after this felicity, when he said: What have
I in heaven but thee? and there is nothing upon earth that I desire in
comparison of thee. God is the strength of my heart, and he is my portion for
ever. The same good King David, in the abundance of his sumptuous banketing
dishes, and costly fare,uses these words; I will behold thy face in
righteousness, and when I awake, I shall be satisfied with thine image.

Again, My soul thirsts for God, even for the living God: when shall I come
and appear before the presence of God? And yet again, How are the days of my
pilgrimage prolonged? How long shall I dwell on earth? But Paul much better, I
desire to be loosed, to be set at liberty, to die, and to depart cut of this
world, that I may be with Christ.

By which godly men's examples, written for thine instruction, O man, that thou
might increase in knowledge, and express the points of thy holy calling; I
would wish thee to be schooled, to be weary of this world, to loath the
vanities of the same, to esteem the pleasures thereof as smoke, which
vanishes with the least blast of wind that does blow: to repute of riches,
honors, dignities, offices, promotions, lands, possessions, beauty, favor,
eloquence, wisdom, policy, strength, manhood, valiantnes, kindred,
affinity, lineage, petigree, parentage, and whatsoever else may be named as
they are; even mere vanities, according to the sentence of the preacher, who
beheld and considered all things under the sun, and lo, all was vanity,
vanity of vanities, and nothing but vanity.

The counsel of blessed Paul offers it self in convenient place to be
embraced, who no doubt had a perfect view of the vanities reigning in this
world; vanity in eating and drinking, vanity in speaking and thinking,
vanity in writing and inuenting, vanity in apparel and clothing, vanity in
buieng and selling; vanity in heart, vanity in tongue, vanity at home,
vanity abroad, vanity on sea, vanity on land, vanity in most, vanity in
least, vanity in rich, vanity in poor, vanity in wise, vanity in fools,
vanity in strong, vanity in weak, vanity in fair, vanity in foul;
finally, nothing but vanity vanity, which way soever a man casts his eyes,
up or down, on this side or that side, behind, before, or round about.

And therefore S. Paul (I say) wills us (whose advise I wish thee O man to
follow and put in ure) that such as weep, should be as though they weep not;
they that rejoice, as though they reioiced not; they that buie, as though they
possessed not; and they that use this world, as though they used it not. And
why so? For (says he) the fashion of this world wears away, and all the
pleasures, recreations, delights, and whatsoever thing passes other in
excellency, is but mere vanity.

Here, O man, thou can do no good deed, but it has an imperfection; the
devil is so busy about thee to ouer-swaie thee in thy works; yea, when thou
art best occupied, even in praieng to God the father for supply of something
which thou lackest, or praising him for benefits and graces received, or
confessing thy faults when thou have offended or suing for pardon by the virtue
of Christ's death and passion. Wh^^ thou art reading the scripture for thine
instruction and comfor^ earnestly, hearing the word of God preached with (...)
attent^ue ears diligently, re^^^nine in points of religion, for (...)
increase of spiritual knowledge desirouslie.

To conclude, when thou art goodliest disposed and given, then, even then the
devil sends out his angels, even wicked thoughts, idle imaginations,
fantastical toies, and a thousand impediments, to withdraw thee not only
from doing well, but also from thinking well.

O man, this busy devil, who seeks to make a divorce between Christ and
thy soul, whom he has married to himself, and chosen for his spouse; he,
even he is the prince of this world; he is the prince of darkness, and
therefore this world, which is his princedome, must needs be darkness: for
whatsoever is at strife with God, who is the father of light, the same is
darkness; but such is the world, therefore the sequeale is proved, and
stands iumpe with truth.

Now, O man, buckle thy self to encounter with this world, the pomp, pride,
statelines, and iollitie thereof. Let faith, David's chief weapon against
Goliath, be thy chief armor, let righteousness and light be thy furniture, and
not only that, but the complet harnes which S. Paul exhorts the Ephesians
to put on; namely, the vainbraces of verity girt about thy loins, the
breast plate of righteousness claspt close to thy heart, the preparation of the
Gospel of peace for shoes on thy feet, the helmet of salvation to cover thy
head, the shield of faith to hold in thy left hand, and the sword of the spirit
in thy right.

Thus prepared, O man, fear not the force of any foe: for thou shall de able
thus armed, to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked, to stand fast against
satan's assalts, and the invasions of his ministers. Look about thee, bestir
thee.* have an eye before, behind, above, belewe, on thy right hand, on thy
left, and round about thee, that thou be not betrayed, supplanted, overcome,
and subdued. Handle thy weapon circumspectly, fight it out manfully, and give
not an inch of ground to thine adversary; for thou dooest not wrestle against
flesh and blood only, but against principalities, against powers, and against
worldly governors, the princes of the darkness of this world, against
spiritual wickednesses, which are in the high places.

Go to then in Gods name, set forward in faith, Gods grace is thy guide, fear
not the world; for Christ has overcome the world. Thy life on earth, O man, is
a continual warfare, thou shall be in one conflict or other, so long as thou
drawest breath: and therefore pray always, with all manner of prayer and
supplication in the spirit, and watch thereunto with all perseverance, so shall
thou be succored at all assaies, and not destitute of help in time of need.

So fight therefore, O man, not as one that beats the air; but as one that
would be counted a good soldier, and tread under feet the love of this
world, withstand every thing that comes not of faith, for it is sin: endure
all, suffer all, bear all, hazard life and all for the love of the life to
come, persuading thy self, that thou art blessed (as S. James says) when thou
subduest the temptations of thy disordered appetites, urging thee to sin. For
when thou art tried, thou shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord has
promised to them that love him; the crown of glory, even an incorruptible
crown, which shall be set upon thine head, at the appearing of Jesus Christ,
the great and universal shepherd of thy soul.

Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer. Behold, it shall come to
pass, that thou shall be tried ten days; that is, many times: be thou
faithful and wise unto the death, and thou shall surely be rewarded with the
crown of eternal life, promised by Jesus Christ thy savior; to whom be all
laud, praise, honor and glory, for evermore, Amen.

3 A prayer for the former virtue.
O Eternal God, father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which by the mouth of thine
Apostle blessed John, have given us this wholesome counsel and admonition;
that we should not love this corruptible world, neither yet the things that are
in the same. And why? even because the love of God the father is not in him
that loves this world. For, says thine Apostle, all that is in the world; as
the lust of the flesh, which is to live in pleasure; the lust of the eyes,
which is wantonness; and the pride of life, which is ambition, and haughtines,
is not of the father, but of the world, and therefore wicked and damnable. In
consideration whereof, o almighty God, breed in us we beseech thee, by the
virtue of regeneration, a hatred of this present world, and a love of the world
to come; that by how much we are separate and distant from the one, by so much
we may be knit and coupled in neerenes to the other; wishing rather by trial
of many tribulations in this life, to arrive in the end at the port of
perpetual peace, and endless tranquillity, than by enioieng all this present
worlds goods, and the variable pleasures of the same, which are but
momentanie, to receive eternal torments in the lake of restles pain, and
incessant misery.

Now therefore, most merciful father; for that we have here in this world no
continuing city, but look for one to come; not of duty by deserts in our
selves, but of mercy by the merits of thy son: we beseech thee most
earnestly to weane us from the love of this world; o weane us Lord, that we
may be like children weaned from their mothers teates, that as they giving over
to suck milk any more, which is a food for sucklings, are fed with stronger
nourishment, as they grow in years: so we withdrawing our selves from loving
the vain toies, and vading smokes of pleasures attending on this life, which
are the ioies of worldlings, may betake ourselves to the meditation of
heavenly blessedness, fall in love therewith, and long after life everlasting
daily more and more, the nearer we draw to our graves.

For we do believe, o eternal king, and universal emperor, that the least
joy in heaven, if it might be peised in a pair of scales, would weigh down
all worldly delights by thousand thousands; yea, though they had the vantage
of the balance: and therefore no doubt they are exceeding great, wonderful,
and out of measure; yea such, as no eye could ever atteine to see, no ear be
able to hear, no heart conceive or understand, and no tongue utter or declare.
Then Lord, of thy woonted goodness, give us grace to hate this present world,
with all the pomps and vanities of the same; that we may love the world which
shall ever last, even heaven, the house of thee, o thou most high God; and may
daily and hourelie groan and braie after it, praieng continually for the
time, when it shall be revealed, and saying with feruencie of spirit; Thy
kingdom come Lord, thy kingdom come, for the consolation of the elect, and
the confusion of the reprobate.

Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, and make no tarrieng; that the ioies of the
faithful may be fulfilled. O hear our prayers, most holy, blessed, and
glorious Trinity, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, one God in unity; to whom
be all praise, power and majesty, Amen.

The winding up of this work, containing a brief conclusion upon this theme;
That victory is obtained by resisting temptations. Drawn out of S. Barnard,
and englished for the agreement of the matter comprised in this book.
WE bear about us our own snare, we carry with us to and fro in every
place our own enemy, I mean this flesh ingendered and bred of sin,
nourshed and fostered in folly, corrupted and defiled with lewd and wicked
custom. The most subtle serpent uses this flesh to ouerswaie us, having none
other desire, none other meaning, none other purpose, none other endeavor, none
other business whereabout to be occupied, but to shed the blood of souls. This
is he that always intends mischief against us. In our musings he talks
with us wittily, he eggeth us cunningly, and deceives us craftily: he
sets venomous thoughts on fire in our hearts, he stirs up strife,
maintains hatred, allureth to gluttony, provoke to lechery, spurreth
forward to the lust of the flesh, provides occasions of sin, and cease not
to tempt men's hearts with a thousand mischievous wiles, and dangerous devises.

This is he, which binds our hands with our own girdles; that the flesh,
which is given unto us for an help and succor, might be made a snare to
entrap us, and a downfall to break our necks. But in us it lies, if we will
be vanquished, if we will be overcome: and never a one of us shall be
overthrown in this combat against our will. Thine own concupiscence, O man;
thine own lust, I say, is subject unto thee, and thou may, if thou will,
overrule it with reason. Thine adversary may kindle the fire of temptation,
but it is in thine own choice to blow the cole of consent; that is, either to
yield thereunto or to withstand it.

It is in thine own power, and thou may, if thou will, make thine enemy thy
servant, thine adversary thy vassal, thy fo thy drudge; that all things may
be done for the best in thy behalf. For so, the enemy kindeleth in thee a
desire of meat: he casts into thy mind thoughts of vanity and vnpatience:
he stirs up in thee a tickling and itching of lust: only give not thy
consent to such remptations: and how often thou do gaine-stand them, so
often thou shall be crowned.

I do believe all this verelie, if we have the grace quickly to perceive these
thoughts in our hearts, and suffer them not to tarry long with us; but have
our mind moved with a vehement spirit against them. For then our enemy shall
depart quite confounded, and shall not so willingly return to assalt us
again. Neither must we yield, give over, or shrink any whit, albeit the
grievous rage, and extreme heat of temptations afflict and trouble the state
of our outward and inward man: let us rather choose to burn than to turn, to
smart than to yield.

The devil is well known to repine at the temporal and spiritual
prosperity of mankind; he does what he can to defraud him of both felicities;
namely, of heavenly and earthly, but a great deal more of the dew of
heaven, than of the fatnes of the earth. Hereof we ought at no hand to be
ignorant, to wit, what a rebellious troop of enemies come down upon us
forcibly; whom it behooves us so much the more diligently and carefully to
withstand, by how much we see our selves moved thereunto by great need; and
then to lay on load, when all the weight of war presses upon us, when the
whole strife is come to handblowes, whereby the conquered get shameful
captivity, and the conquerours gain triumphant glory and victory.

For the devil is known to grudge at our good estate, and pininglie to have
spite at our heavenly happiness; howbeit, not for his own sake, that he
himself might enioie it, because he lost it without recovery: but for the
poor souls sake, raised out of the dust and dunghill, that he might not
approach and come to the possession of that place, from whence the devil
himself, being created in glory, fell shamefullie, past hope of rising
again. Heereat he grudgeth most maliciously, and takes on too too
vnpatientlie, that man's frailty should get that which it deserved not to have.

And if peradventure he go about to procure some bodies loss of temporal
things, or having procured it, do rejoice and triumph thereat; this the devils
doing tends wholly to this point, that the outward loss might be an occasion
of the inward. For all this wrestling and fighting against us, is of spiritual
wickednesses, that they may seduce or misleade us, that they may bring us into
their own ways, that they may conduct and guide us to the purposed and
appointed end, which is prepared for themselves; namely, to hell and utter
damnation.

It is the devils drift to assault us with evil temptations, to egg us to the
committing of sin; it is our duties not to consent thereunto, not to yield to
the woorking of wickedness. For how often as we gaine-stand the devil, so
often we overcome him, so often we make the angels of heaven to rejoice, so
often we do God our Lord honorable service. For it is his will and
commandment, that we should fight manfully; he helps us, that we may get
the upper hand, he ouer-looketh us fighting, he succoureth us fainting, he
crowns us ouercomming. To him therefore be all honor and glory, world without
end, Amen.

FINIS.


Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in Pater noster row, being the
assign of W. Seres. 1582.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


