A BRIGHT Burning Beacon, forewarning all wise Virgins to trim their lamps
against the coming of the Bridegroom. Containing A general doctrine of
sundry signs and wonders, specially Earthquakes both particular and general:
A discourse of the end of this world: A commemoration of our late Earthquake,
the 6. of April, about 6. of the clock in the evening 1580. And a prayer for
the appeasing of Gods wrath and indignation.

Newly translated and collected by Abraham Fleming.

The sum of the whole book follows in fit place orderly divided into
Chapters.

Matthew. 25, 6. And at midnight there was a cry made: Behold, the Bridegroom
comes: go out to meet him, etc.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Sir William Cordell Knight, Master of her
Majesty's rolls: as much health, wealth, and happiness as heart would wish.
TWo years (right worshipful) and somewhat more are now expired, since I,
upon the appearing of a blasing Star in the South west, the 10. of November
1577. presented unto you a general doctrine touching that matter. Which work
if it shall please you at your leisure to confer with the events that have
insued, you will say that the translation was necessary, and the publishing
not unprofitable.

A learned and expert man commorant and abiding in this City, comparing the
effects following that Comet, with the significations aforegoing, and finding
them strange, wonderful, and memorable, thought it not amiss to commit a
matter of such importance to the consideration of his native Country, in a
brief treatise called by the name of (A view of events etc.) wherein he
deciphereth such issues within the compass of one year, namely, from November
1577. to November 1578, as are not superficially, but advisedly to be noted.
Which work of his worthy the reading, because I am sure your worship has
seen and perused, (as no book can escape your hands, if it savor of learning
and judgment) I pass over with a bare remembrance.

So (Right Worshipful) the late Earthquake which happened the 6. of April,
about 6. of the clock in the Evening 1580. to the astonishment of the
inhabitants of this City dispersed in sundry places for their recreation, set
me (as many more) a musing: and tossing a thousand thoughts in my head, I
found in my self a quicker inclination to wonder at Gods works, than to
write the opinions of man's wit. Stayed nevertheless at last, it was my luck,
looking among such books as I have, not many in number, nor great in value,
to light upon a discourse so fit for the time, that I thought I should highly
honor God, and do great good to this land, if I undertook the translation
of the same.

Persuaded hereunto in the end, I did mine endeavor, with all diligence, to
bring my business about: and still finding, as I went forward, the work both
weighty and worthy: besides that, so apt for this our age, as if it had been
penned of purpose upon our late Easter Earthquake: I lost no labor, and spent
no time, till I had done my task, which grown to some bigness, as your
worship sees, I finished in few days space, and procured the same to be
presently printed.

Performed therefore, I am bold, upon hope of your wonted favor, to make it
dedicatorie unto your worship: the rather, because the general doctrine of
Blasing stars, of my rude translation, was published two years past under your
protection: and this of Earthquakes, of the same Authors penning, and my
homely Englishing, does not crave choice of a new Patron.

Which that it will please you to accept, with no less encouraging
countenance, than you have vouchsafed my former trauelles: though I suspect not
the contrary, yet to beseech you it is my bounden duty. Praieng almighty God
to lengthen your worships life, with increase of health, strength, wealth,
worship, and whatsoever may make you fortunate: and when the date of your
dwelling here on earth is don, to garnish you with the garland and garment of
glory, in heaven his own habitation: where you may, to the fulfilling of all
perfect happiness, behold the face of Jesus Christ, by whose blood all true
believers are put in possession of that unspeakable blessedness.

Your Worshippes by duty bound Abraham Fleming.

The Contents of this treatise, set down in a summarie, as they lie orderly
in every Chapter.
1 THat our Ancients doubted of the cause of Earthquakes, and disagreed in
opinion. Chap. 1. 2 Whereupon Earthquakes engender and grow for certeintie.
Chap. 2. 3 What inconveniences and mischiefs do follow after Earthquakes.
Chap. 3 4 Where and when Earthquakes do commonly happen, and how long they
last. Chap. 4. 5 That there are differences of Earthquakes. Chap. 5. 6 What
things Earthquakes do prognosticate and signify. 6. 7 What mischiefs and
evils Earthquakes threaten and denounce. Chap. 7. 8 How long wonders and
strange appearances defer and put off those effects whereof they are
significations and tokens. Chapter 8. 9 Why more strange wonders appear in these
latter days, than have done in other former times. Chap. 9. 10 At what day and
hour the end of this world shall certainly be, as some hold opinion. Chapter 10. 11
What all and every one ought to do, seeing the end of this world approach.
Chap. 11. 12 A contemplation of wonderful accidents, and principally of
Earthquaks, as well particular as general, which have happened in the realms
of England, Ireland, and Scotland, from the time of K. William the Conqueror,
to the reign of our sovereign Lady and gracious Queen Elizabeth, etc. Chapter
12. 13 A prayer for repentance, being the only thing that must mitigate the
wrath and indignation of God, which how hot and heavy it is, the signs and
wonders above mentioned are forewarnings. Chap. 13.
The writers names, whose reports of our late Easter Earthquake, etc. are
printed and published.
1 Francis Schackleton. 2 Arthur Golding. 3 Thomas Tvvine. 4 Thomas Churchyard.
5 Richard Tarleton. 6 John Philippes. 7 Robert Gittins. 8 John Grafton. 9
Abraham Fleming.
That our ancients doubted of the cause of Earthquakes, and disagreed in
opinion.

Chap. 1.
WHat contrariety of opinions sprang among the old Philosophers touching
earthquakes, there needs no discourse to testify: seeing that one only place
of the By suppressing the Poets name, it appears yt he ouershot himself
through uncertainty: But I think he means Palingenius, in whose works I
have read ye like words in effect.
Poet, wherein he reckons up in a row certain particulars of Philosophy, as
it were in a table, does not altogether pass over the question of Earthquakes
in silence, saying:

But first, all other things above,
Ye Muses whom I serve and fear,
And won with an exceeding love,
Your balmd oblations boldly bear,
Vouchsafe my senses up to rear,
And show to me the ways of Heaven,
The course of Stars and Planets seven:
The lack of light which dims the Sun,
The labors of the Moon likewise,
In their Eclipses when they run,
And of what causes Earthquakes rise,
What thing such forces does comprise,
To make the Sea with calmness still,
And straight with storms the same to fill.
This said the Poet both learnedly and skilfully, as all things else which he
wrote. Among the profound Clarks of old there was great disagreement about the
reason of Earthquakes. And as for the common sort of men, it passed their
capacity and knowledge to reach to the cause of such a secret: nay shall I
tell you, natural Philosophy sets down no sure ground or determinate
sentence in this doubtful matter.

Hereupon (as Aulus Gellius affirms) the ancient The Heathen and Pagan people
may teach us what belongs to our duty.
Romans, a people marvelous precise and circumspect in all their affairs of
life, and specially in cases of religion, as also in devout service and
sacrifice to their Gods: so soon as they either perceived by feeling, or
understood by folks talking, that an Earthquake chanced: they commanded by
proclamation, that the people should solemnly keep holiday, and betake
themselves to the Temple.

Now, because they worshipped many Gods, and therefore ignorant unto what one
God above the rest to dedicate their service, they provided that by not naming
any one certain God, all their Gods should be honored: least by choosing one
specially to celebrate, and so taking one for another, the people should be
deluded, and the God that wrought the wonder not a whit exalted. Which
ceremony, Marcus Varro says was observed by the decree of the high Priests:
because it is doubtful and uncertain, which of the Gods or Goddesses, by the
virtue of their power made the earth to tremble.

By this custom of old Romans, The Translaters application of this Hethenish
denotion, for our instruction.
a people in their kind religious, we are taught what to go about in such
casualties. For though they, through the multitude of their imagined Gods, knew
not unto which of them chiefly to offer the fruits of their devotion: and yet
fearing that some offense by them committed was the cause of so sudden an
Earthquake: they discharged their duties (as they thought in conscience) that
by seeking to please all the Gods generally, no one God should rest unappeased
severally.

Then to apply this to our selves, that their superstition might teach us true
devotion, considering that we live not in Heathenisme, as did they, requisite
it is, that as we are the sheep of one shepherd, and the people of one God, so
in all troubles, be they never so terrible, though earthquakes, though famines,
though battles, though plagues, etc. to have recourse unto him, as to the God
from whom they come, being tokens of his further judgment upon us in these
later days, wherein The measure of our sins runs over, and cries out for
vengeance against us.
sin is grown to a full measure, and cries out for vengeance.

Whereupon Earthquakes engender and grow for certainty.

Chap. 2.
ALthough this be the opinion of the Babylonians (as Pliny writes) that
Earthquakes, gapings of the ground, and all other fearful tempests issue and
come from the force and influence of Stars: yet I am of belief, that sometime
the earth is shaken and made to tremble, by reason of water included and kept
within it: which water being moved, the earth also is made to move by the
moving thereof, as we may see in tubbes of water, or other vessels. Hereupon
Neptune had his name, to be called Terriquasso, and Tellurimotor, Earth shaker:
as some have held opinion.

I think in like manner, that the earth is made to quake by the violence of
Winds the cause of Earth quakes, in what sort and manner.
winds shut up and kept close in the hollow places of the same, which winds
by their stirring, do stir the earth, and so make an Earthquake. Unto which
opinion Pliny long ago gave assent, supposing that nothing more than the
winds, nay the winds alone to be cause of earthquakes: and that the earth is
never wont to quake, but when the sea is so calm, and the air so still, that
nether ships can sail, nor birds fly: all the winds being gotten into
certain veins, holes, and caves of the earth, and there move by there
secret rusling.

Now, these The generation of an Earthquake, and the effects which it works
at that instant.
winds thus shut up, seeking a vent here and there to break out, and trieng by
all means they can make to have passage, that breaking out of prison (as it
were) they might be set at liberty, and blow at large, whiles this is
intended, the earth trembles, rocketh, and reeleth as though it would fall,
stones crack in sunder, towers bend forward, castles sink, houses totter to
the ground, etc. An example hereof we have of our own wind and breath stopping
or staieng in our breast, and not having recourse in and out by interchaunge of
turns, we perceive and feel thereby, that our very soul, or life being
assalted, the limbs and members of our bodies are taken with a trembling,
there is stirred up within us a kind of strife or wrestling, and all the
outward parts of our body, thorough fear fall a quiuering: till this wind
or breath having gathered force sufficient, find a way to avoid, and the pipes
wherein it was kept burst open, it issue out with a vehement and great noise.

Hereupon say some, that The opinion of some concerning the sudden trembling of
the earth.
trembling in the earth, is nothing else but that which thunder is in a cloud:
and the gaping of the ground none other thing, than when as lightning bursteth
forth with violence, the air which is in the cloud resisting, and trieng
maisteries to get out and be at liberty.

Notwithstanding these reasons The Translators admonition upon these
coniecturall reasons.
carry with them a countenance and show of credit, and therefore may the
less be gainsaid: yet least by seeking to become too wise in the secret works
of God, and referring that to the course of natural causes, which come to
pass by the providence of his judgment, we fall into security, from
security into incredulity, from incredulity into atheism, from atheism
into open blasphemy: my counsel and advise is, that our ears tickle not to
hear every vain Philosophers fancy descanting upon matters of great
importance, and thereby pull from God the cause of his justly conceived
indignation against the wickedness of the world, and made apparent before hand
by signs and wonders, lest any living soul should find fault with his too
severe proceeding in judgment.

The next way to breed in the minds of men The denial of Gods divinity
insueth the derogitation of the property of his works.
a denial of Gods deity, is to derogate and take from him the property of
his works: to tie that to natural reason, which depends upon his heavenly
wisdom: to ascribe that to Philosophy, which is the work of his divinity:
into which follies whiles the Gentiles fell, they were near to falsehood, but
far from truth: apt to err, but rude to go right: at peace with the
devil, but at defiance with God: neighbors to hell, but strangers from
heaven.

This I speak not to control the favorers of Philosophy, or to discredit
the professors of so sacred a science: but that I would have the The wit of
man mere vanity, if it be not tempered with the deaw of Gods spirit.
wit of man esteemed as it is, as light as smoke, if it be not tempered with
the deawe of Gods spirit: that Arts and sciences have their grounds and
principles, in some points undoubted, in some uncertain, and in some
fallible: Divinity only deceives not, which teaches the true God, and that
he by his power shakes the foundations of the earth: and yet all this while, I
afford every profession, with their professors, that reverence which
belongs unto them by duty.

What inconveniences and mischiefs do follow after earthquakes.

Chap. 3.
How unhappy and unlucky earthquakes are, what hurt they have done diverse
ways in diverse places, there is great store of examples, no less horrible to
hear, than terrible to tell. Old writers record, that with an The effects
which have followed after Earthquakes, declared by examples.
Earthquake the whole city of Lacedaemonia was so shaken, that it fell and
soonke. That with an Earthquake, the greatest part of the huge and mighty
mountain Taigetus, was riuen and rent away, in form and fashion like a
ship, and that with the fall of the same was caused a grievous slaughter.
That with an Earthquake twelve cities of Asia, within the dominion of Tiberius
Caesar were laid flat upon the ground in one night. That with an Earthquake,
in the reign of Lotharius the son of Ludouicus the first, all Italy was
sore shaken, and diverse cities and mountains in diverse places overthrown:
in the year after Christ's birth 1344. That with an Earthquake, in the reign
of Frederike the second of that name, the hills Salnij were so shaken, that
to the number of two thousand persons perished: in the year of our Lord 1214.
That with an Earthquake, in the reign of Frederike the third of that name,
many cities and towns in the kingdom of Naples were ouerturned, and with the
falls of houses and other buildings of timber and stone, to the number of
thirty thousand persons lamentably killed: the fairest and most gorgeous
places and palaces rent and torn in sunder. The memorable Earthquakes that
have chanced in our age, and in the days of our forefathers, Maximilian being
Emperor, in what great danger of ruin all Italy in a manner was like to
fall, I pass them over untouched.

There The Translatours illation upon the particulars before going.
is no evil, that is to say, no punishment for sin, but it is sent from him
that abhors wickedness, and cannot at any hand away with iniquity. As for
the mischeefes which fell upon the places above mentioned, by Earthquakes or
otherwise, we ought so to impute unto natural causes, that we deny not Gods
justice and righteousness, in recompensing offenders according to their
merits. The plagues which fell upon Jerusalem, Judah, Babylon, Samaria, Egypt,
Tire, Sidon, and other populous cities and regions, after the Prophets sharp
denuntiations and terrible threatenings, were they by fire, famine, sword, or
otherwise, may warn us, that Whatsoever calamity falls upon any nation, it
is sent from God as a punishment for sin.

And surely, of this opinion am I, that none stand more in the defense of their
We do after a sort justify our selves, when we refer the signs of Gods
judgments to sin^ster causes.
own righteousness, than such as seeming too wise in the contemplation of
mysteries, refer to the conjunction and opposition of such and such stars,
to winds, to vapors, to exhalations, and to I can not tell what, any kind of
casualtie though never so wonderful, forgetting in the mean time themselves
to be offenders, and so consequently derogating from God the glory proper to
his eternity, preach unto the world their own justification.

If any thing chance contrary to common course and order, The presumption of
man in seking after the secret counsels of God.
up starts one or other wisard, and he by his knowledge will be busy to bolt
out the mystery which God has reserved to his own secret counsel. This
comes to pass (says one) of such and such a cause: the reason thereof
notwithstanding unknown to them: and yet because their blind conjectures have
in them some probabilities, the ruder sort of people are ready to give credit:
and thus between both, the forewarnings of Gods heavy judgment are
neglected, his fatherly chastisements contemned, induration of heart
ingendered, obstinacy in sin procured, a desperate security fostered, and
the gulf of voluntary destruction opened.

If This reason of contraries is certain and infallible.
the remembrance of Gods correction be a means to keep us under obedience,
then the forgetfulness of such favorable dealing is the next way to wilful
stubbernesse: and if obedience be the sacrifice which he inioyneth us to offer
in his temple, what shall we think of our contumacie and rebellion, our
looseness of life, our daily violating of his law? Do not these, being
monstrous, make us horrible in Gods sight?

It is a great argument that the For God uses a mediocritie and proportion in
the execution of his judgments.
sins of the people are heinous, when the plages which God sends are
grievous: that their offenses are foul and filthy, when the tokens of his
wrath are strange and extraordinary. And therefore to conclude this illation,
let us bow our bodies and souls under the scepter of Gods grace, least that
neglecting the acceptable time of love, the day of wrath approach, and he come
with the iron rod of his power and beat us all to powder.

Where and when Earthquakes commonly happen, and how long they last.

Chap. 4.
SUch places as lie near the Sea are most of all shaken with Earthquakes: and
as for hilly countries, they are not altogether void of this trembling: for
in Autumn and in the Springtime they are most commonly subject to these
casualties. Hereupon some conjecture, that nether France nor Egypt are
troubled with this tempest, because Summer will not suffer it in the one, nor
Winter in the other.

We have also learned by observation, that Earthquakes chance oftener by night
than by day: and that they The ceasing of winds in y^ hollow caves of the
ground causes Earth quakes to cease.
cease so soon as the wind, which was the cause of their generation, is let
loose and set at liberty, the time of their continuance to have been forty
days, before they stayed: and yet there have been Earthquakes that have
lasted the space of one whole year or two, saving that now and then they have
ceased for certain hours and days.

For about the year after the birth of Christ 471. in the reign of the
Emperor Anastasius, we read of an Earthquake that lasted in Constantinople
The continuance of Earthquakes proved by experience.
full four months without ceasing: and stayed at the length, when the voice
of a little infant was heard, saying: Holy, holy, holy, o mighty and
immortal God have mercy upon us. Again, in the year after the birth of
Christ 1094. in the reign of Henry the fifte of that name, there happened an
Earthquake in Italy, which continued in sundry places the space of forty
days, as our elders have truly reported.

As (thanks be to almighty God) The Translators collection by the former
doctrine.
we have not been greatly terrified with Earthquakes: so have we no cause to
complain of their continuance. Other countries have felt the calamities of
them, we behold it, and are not a whit amassed. In that we are taught by example
of foraine people, what overthrows have insued Earthquaks, how long they have
lasted, forty days, two months, a twelve month, two whole years, etc. to
the astonnishment of that age which saw and felt them: I gather, that the
mercy of God was more mighty than his justice, his love above his wrath, his
patience surpassing his vengeance.

For The sudden and short visitation of God sent upon us by an Earthquake,
forewarneth us of sharper tribulations.
that little quiuering of the earth, that small rocking of our houses, which
lasted not either for a year, or a month, or a week, or a day, or an hour:
yea, but a moment, may put us in mind that God has an eye upon our trade of
life, he looks down from heaven and sees our conversation, and passing by
with a gentle forewarning, calls upon us, that by repentance and amendment of
life we might fly the terror of his judgment.

A Father having an untoward child, first by counsel and then by correction
seeks his reformation: when neither of these serve, he casts him out of his
favor, and withdrawing all natural affection does quite give him over: so is
it like to fare with us, unless we purge out of our hearts the old leaven of
corruption, and become new dowe of regeneration: unless we retire home to the
sheepefold of our God, from whom we have gone astray: unless we leave plaieng
the unthrifts, and look in our reckoning book how go our accounts: unless we
hear the wholesome counsel of the Prophets, and stop our ears at the
persuasions of the men of By whom is meant all such as lay blocks in the way
of the people, to stop them from coming unto God.
Anathoth: unless we take in our hands the glass of the Gospel, and labor by
lamentation and contrition to scowre away the blemishes of our souls.

Let it be enough for us to have felt the mother of us all tremble, and though
it had continued but the twinkling of an eye, as it lasted but a moment: yet if
we have understanding hearts, let us relent, and every one of us turning over a
new leaf forget our old lesson. For if we shall pass so great a wonder as
this lightly over, making a small matter thereof, and esteeming Gods threatening
as a toy: shall we not heap upon our heads the fiery coals of his consuming
fury: shall we not turn his patience into vengeance, even in bitterness to
plague us, that we shall have no shifte to escape his heavy hand?

Are we in Gods fight like By these speeches of comparison, the righteousness
and integrity of God in judging all offenders is declared.
Gilead, are we like the head of Lebanon, are we the signet of his right hand?
The people whom he so accounted he spared not in his justice, but fed them
with wormwood, and gave them water of gall to drink. And shall we presume
upon his long sufferance, tempting him by our continuance in sin to hasten
his fury, utterly to consume and lay us waste like fire in a forest? I
conclude here, with a Prouerbiall watchworde, Hereafter commes not yet,
Forbearance is no quittance.

That there are differences of Earthquakes.

Chap. 5.
IT is not unknown to the learned, that in the kind of moving and shaking
there is great difference: for the earth may quake many ways. Now it is
Earthquakes some more dangerous and dreadful, some less perilous and
fearful.
a dangerous and fearful Earthquake, when as the earth is rolled to and fro
like a wave of the Sea: or when it bears it self wholly to one side as it
shakes. Contrariwise it is not so perilous, when with quaking, the frames of
houses and buildings crack with shrinking: and when the earth swells at a
sudden, and anon falls again: as also, when houses meeting together, ratle
and knock one against another, by reason of interchangeable moving, the one
resisting and withstanding the other. Such an Earthquake, and yet not lightly
to be thought upon, happened of late in this famous Where he was Preacher at
that instant, before he was called to be Bishop.
city of Mentz, in the year of our Lord 1528. the 17. of February, about
two of the clock after midnight, and we all, even broad waking, felt it, with
no small amasement of mind.

This The Translators comparison inferred upon the premises, for our private
admonition.
may serve us for a looking glass, wherein to see a representation and likeness
of our late Earthquake, chancing upon the 6. of April about 6. of the clock at
night 1580. For as the reverend Father says of such Earthquakes as he has
last named, that some are more dangerous, some less perilous: setting down
the manner of both: so say I in like case: for there was no such violent
moving, no such terrible shaking, no such ruinous renting, either of houses or
Churches, no such overthrowing of Mountains, etc. that any general calamity
(God be thanked) did ensue.

Nevertheless seeing that it pleased the Lord, in one, to show what he was able
to do in all: it is wisdom so to think of Earthquakes (notwithstanding the
former reasons) that the death of A particular example, a general warning to
beware.
one put us in mind of a general danger. This judgment God showed upon a
lad, that we of riper years should fear his omnipotency, and confess that
the very same might have happened unto us. This judgment God showed in a
Church, where the congregation was assembled in the honor of his name, to teach
us what his outstretched arm can do in profane places, among an
uncircumcised multitude. This judgment God showed on the week day, that we
might see his long suffering, in sparing us on the Sabbath, when he might as
well have smitten: but that mercy vpholdeth his throne.

Tremble The sound of a watch word, or Alaru^ bell, to all prophaners of Gods
sacred Sabbath, and specially to players, plaiemakers, and all such as favor
that damnable faculty.
and quake therefore O ye shameless breakers of Gods Sabbath, which display
your banners of vanity, selling wind for money, infecting the tender minds of
youth with the poison of your prophanations, and kindling in them the fire of
inordinate lust, to the wounding both of body and soul. Does not God see your
filthiness, or think you that your trade of life depending wholly upon those
your Heathenish exercises, are not offensive to his Majesty? Will he wink at
such wickedness, and keep silence at such filthiness as is continually concluded
upon and committed in your Theater, Curtain, and accursed courts of
spectacles?

O how glorious a work should that be! how happy a day! how blessed an
hour! wherein the people of God might see As much is God glorified in the
pulling down of polluted places, as in the building up of holy temples.
all such abominable places dedicated to Gentilisme, or rather Atheism, (for
who can directly say, that either God or the devil, heaven or hell, is once
thought upon in the prosequuting of such shameful shows?) utterly torn up
from the foundations, rent in pieces the timber from the stone, wasted with
fire, laid even with the ground, and no appearaunce thereof remaining. And thus
much touching Comoedies and Comoedians, by way of digression, an enormitie
often cried out against of Gods ministers, and in a Christian Commonwealth
altogether insufferable.

What things Earthquakes do prognosticate and signify.

Chap. 6.
IT remains that we consider, what good or ill is foreshewed to ensue or
follow after Earthquakes: a thing which all in a manner have desired to know
and understand, but none have certainly noted: many demanded the question, but
few given the onset to make answer. As for me, I cannot but be persuaded,
that Earthquakes, how soever nature put to her hand as a joint worker in their
generation, are not to be thought trifles, or to come to pass of Something is
meant by the happening of Earthquakes, though it pass our capacity to comprise.
nothing: but having in them an hidden meaning and secret reason, foreshewe
somewhat to follow either good or bad: a huge multitude of examples left in
writing to verify this matter.

And principally, to begin with the cheifest, that everlasting truth of
almighty God, our Savior Jesus Christ, the maker and Lord of every creature,
yea of nature it self, he (I say in whom all treasures of wisdom and
knowledge are reposed) affirms, that There shall be Earthquakes, and all
these things (says he) are the beginnings of sorrows, etc. Giving us to note
by an undoubted conjecture, that before the last day of this world, there
shall be Earthquakes, which are foretokens of universal woes to come upon all
the world, and specially upon the wicked, whose torments shall be exceeding
sharp and grievous.

And thus we are taught even out of Gods word, that Earthquakes happening unto
us, not simply of custom, but of purpose, do signify somewhat to ensue,
Earthquakes are denuntiations and threatenings of gods wrath against us.
and denounce against us the wrath of almighty God, therewithal admonishing
us to amend our evil life, to reform our wicked conversation, to be renewed
in the spirit of the inward man, and to be heavenly minded: otherwise such
sorrows are like to light upon us, as shall turn to our most miserable
overthrow and lamentable destruction: and here upon it came to pass, that
when our Lord Jesus Christ was crucified, the earth quaked and trembled.

But of what sorrows to come are Earthquakes foretokens? First, to begin, of
Wars* fimine, and pestilence the effects of Earthquakes.
wars, whereby it is most certain pestilence and famine are ingendered:
pestilence by the air poisoned with the stinch of dead carcasses lieng
unburied: famine by reason of husbandry, when plough lands lie unmanured:
besides other calamities full of fear, horror, and desolation.

Uerie The Translatours confirmation of the words above written.
religiously have the Saints of God always thought of Earthquakes, albert the
wisdom of this world, which is foolishness before God, dream of natural
causes. And surely, such as are well affected, and have in them any feeling or
taste of Gods gracious spirit, after the happening of an Earthquake, will say
with the Prophet David, Come and behold the works of the Lord, acknowledging
in heart, that the blessings of God follow the righteous, as peace and plenty,
tranquillity of mind, with other his good graces: contrariwise, his curses
pursue and chase the wicked, as war and scarsitie, horror of conscience, and
infinite tribulations.

We Reasons of comparison, to prove that Earthquakes are not always to be
referred to natural causes.
see that the rainebow appears in the clouds every year at diverse times:
touching the generation whereof reasons (I grant) may be given: but we know
that the rainebowe being appointed by the ordinance of God, has continued ever
since it was first made, as a witness to the world that God will never destroy
it again with water, for the truth of which word and promise, he has left
us the rainebowe.

Of Eclipses we know, there may be natural causes alleged: but let us
remember that he, which in their creation made them glorious, in token of his
mercy: by their defection and loss of light what else does he thunder
against us, but his justice and vengeance? For the good works of GOD are made
as it were to The creatures of God mourn over us for our sins which deserve
a heavy day of visitation.
mourn for our sakes, who being wilfully blind, cannot see how near the day
of our visitation approaches. Again, the words of our Savior are true, The
Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light: and the
stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be shaken. With
which words of our Savior Christ the saiengs of the Prophets accord, The
stars of Heaven and the Planets thereof shall not give their light: the Sun
shall be darkened in his going forth, and the Moon shall not cause her light
to shine. Another Prophet says in the person of God, I will cover the Sun
with a cloud: And a third Prophet says, The Sun and Moon shall be darkened,
and the stars shall withdraw their light.

Of Earthquakes also and other visions of fire, there may natural reasons be
brought: but as the controversy can be decided by no wiser moderator than
Christ our Savior, and the Prophets his forerunners: so is it our parts to
take their authority for truth, and not to hunt after the vain speculations
of Philosophy. Before the end of the world come (says Christ) iniquity shall
abound, there shall be rumors of wars, there shall be Earthquakes reckoned among ye
number of signs that shall be seen before the end of the world.
Earthquakes, there shall be famine and troubles: all which if they be but the
beginnings of sorrows, alas what calamities will follow?

The Prophet says that Before the great and terrible day of the Lord come,
wonders shall be seen in the heavens and in the earth, blood and fire, pillars
of smoke, the Sun darkened, and the Moon turned into blood, etc. So that
beelike Nature has little to do in such secret matters: and as for the
counsels of God, men ought rather to wonder at them, than presumptuously to
scan upon causes supernatural: with whose foolishnes I end this confirmation,
aduising them to take heed how they meddle in Gods high mysteries, least they
be destroyed by the power of his Majesty.

What mischiefs and evils Earthquakes threaten and denounce.

Chap. 7.
THat the case stands as we have already said, ye shall understand by a
few circumstances, which we have found and proved, partly by use and
experience, partly by study and reading. Did not (I pray you) after Particular
examples drawn out of the Canonical Scripture touching this necessary
doctrine of Earthquakes.
Earthquakes and tempests, which Mardochaeus the son of Iaer saw in a dream,
all nations rise in an uproar to make war among themselves: and did there not
follow a day of darkness and danger, of tribulation and anguish, of sorrow and
heaviness, besides an exceeding great fear over the earth?

Did not likewise the earth tremble and shake out of measure, when Ozia the
king of Judah, in the pride of his mind, had taken upon him the office and
charge of Namely the Priests, whose charge it was only to burn incense, Ozia
taking ye office upon him.
another, wherewith it became him not to meddle: and then insued the just
vengeance of God against him, whereof there was a foretoken given by the said
Earth quake, when he was smitten with a leprosy, and growing ouglie and
loathsome was compelled to resign up his royalty, and in the end miserably
dieng he was buried but in a homely place, even in the field, apart by
himself from the sepulchers of his predecessors the kings of Judah: and this
was his reward for dealing so irreverently in Gods service and Temple.

The accurssed Jews in like manner, even to their great smart have fealt, what
meaning there should be in Earthquakes: yea, they have tried by their own
misery most worthy of memory, what calamities are like to follow after
earthquakes: the subversion of the renowned city Jerusalem herein giving
proof, the destruction whereof was so lamentable, that no pen can express
it, nor tongue declare it to the purpose. Of which their overthrow they were
oftentimes warned, as with many strange sights and wonders, so among the rest
with Among all other warnings from God to the Jews, of their destruction,
Earthquakes was in ye number.
Earthquakes, that they might be sorry for their sins, and by repentance
escape the rod: which because they neglected to do, neither believing that the
plagues would come upon them whereof those wonders were foretokens: nor
redressing themselves in that wherein they were awrie, but returning to the
filthiness of their vomit, and of wilful blindness and obstinancie setting Gods
threatenings from Heaven at naught: therefore were they overtaken with the
bitter day of their sharp visitation.

What (I pray you) was foretold to Lucius Martius, and Sextus Julius Consuls of
Rome, by an Earthquake? Even that notable war (without controversy) which
took the name to be called civil, than the which war a more dangerous and
deadly was never heard of in the land of Italy. The wars of the
Carthaginians, were they not foreshewed by Earthquakes, many days ere they
came to pass?

Furthermore Examples of later time, setting forth the fearful effects of
Earthquakes.
what great mischief and misfortune an Earthquake happening in the time of the
Emperor Lotharius did signify, the French men and Italians to their great
pain and peril have learned. Then were kindled between the Emperor
Lotharius and his brethren sore dissentions and disagreements, and not long
after meruellous great wars insued thereupon: the Normans ouerrunning and
laieng wast all Aquitania, spoiling Abbeys with fire and sword, and making
havoc of certain towns in France by murder without mercy.

In the time of the Emperor Frederike, the second of that time, what
casualties Earthquakes foreshewed to come to pass, as it is terrible to tell,
so is it horrible to hear. Not long after, as records do testify, the This
continued course of examples, bids us by others harms to take heed.
whole country of Frisland was almost drowned with waters, which issued out of
certain rivers and maine streams near unto the sea. The Tartars invaded
Scithia, Georgiana, and Armenia the greater, laieng them in manner even with
the ground. Poland and Hungary also felt the force of their fierceness to
their no small hurt and detriment. Hereunto I may add the utter overthrow of
Jerusalem by the power of Cardirius the son of the great Saladinus, the fifth
time attempted and achieved: the temple of the Lord, and his Sepulcher only
and alone left vnspoiled, at the prayers and supplications of the Christians.

An Earthquake also happening in the time of the Emperor Frederike the third
of that name, was a foretoken of that lamentable slaughter and most worthy of
memory, which chanced at Constantinople: and of the conflict or battle
between the Christians and the Turks at the town Taurinus: a hole and a
horrible battle. I say nothing all this while what He posteth over many
examples untouched for y^ avoiding of tediousness.
mischeefes and miseries happened in the time of the Emperor Maximilian, even
within the compass of our memory: huge heaps of misfortunes were seen and
fealt in those days: and after that not long, the Church abounding with all
kind of abuse and enormitie day by day diminished, etc.

I am the more tedious and fuller of words in this case, without rebuke, that
we might fall a reckoning, what this last Earthquake in our quarters should
signify: and there is none but may easily guess, even by the observation of
that little which we have written, and by the like estate and condition of this
our age and time, that Little good follows after Earthquakes, as by the
events of them in times past has been observed.
little good is to be looked for. The signification thereof I leave to every
ones particular judgment, knowing that Christian godliness and perfect religion
has utterly cast away that vain and superstitious observation of the ancient
Romans, and other Heathen nations, touching signs and wonders: and refers
all things both wisely and godly to the providence of the Almighty.

To the which providence submitting my self, I suppose every Christian reader
sufficiently resolved and staid in mind, if with me they ascribe that to Gods
providence, which the vain idle dotage of our Elders superstitiously observed
otherwise: and avouch with lively voice, that there is nothing done either in
Heaven above, or in the earth beneath, but either All things come to pass
either at the commandment of God, or by his permission and sufferance.
at the commandment of God, or by his sufferance: and that almighty God,
according to his unspeakable wisdom, whereby he orders all things aright,
yea even in such wonders as we see come to pass by the course of Nature, as
also above the course of Nature, and against it in like manner: that God I say,
every way has a secret counsel, and does nothing, either by commandment or
sufferance, but to some end: setting before our eyes, by sundry spectacles,
more than one or two, his patience and long sufferance, his anger and
vengeance: calling and bidding us, whom he has created to life and salvation,
not to death and damnation, unto the banquet of repentance.

This God therefore which foretold us of Earthquakes hereafter to come in
diverse quarters, as signs and tokens of his wrath against us, and according
to his foreknowledge sends them at times appointed, uses this kind of
visitation to this end, The profitable doctrine which we have to gather by
Earthquakes happening in former ages.
namely to teach us, that he will not destroy all mankind at once, but that he
will judge them by parts and portions, now some and then some, still leaving
place to repentance, and time to convert and amend. Now, if neither by
earthquakes, nor other plagues, which are the beginnings of sorrows, we will
be redressed, no doubt it shall go worse with us in the end. For, if we
continue in the custom of sin, which we are grown into by the trade of our
life, we shall be sure that such vengeance is like to light upon us, as is due
and answerable to such a wicked wont.

And this is it which the Lord him self spoke of, fortelling what things
should chance before the coming of Doomes day, saying, Signs of the end of
this world uttered by the mouth of our Savior Christ himself.
Ye shall hear of wars, and rumors of wars, be ye not troubled: for such
things must needs be, but the end shall not be yet. For nation shall rise
against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and there shall be earthquakes
in diverse quarters, and there shall be pestilence and famine. These are the
beginnings of sorrows. Which one only warning teaches us, what the
Earthquake which we lately had, forsheweth herafter to come to pass among us,
if we manifestly seeing and feeling the wrath of God kindled against us,
neglect to be penitent and sorry for our sins.

Seeing The Translators exhortation touching the contemplation of the
particular examples before specified.
that the Author of this treatise, of mere love (as it seems) has uttered
his mind, still beating upon this above the rest, even sin, sin, as the
crieng cause of all calamities which happen unto man: and for that more cannot
be said in that matter, than he has already mentioned, unless by annexing
later examples, which have chanced since the time of his death: I account them
gracious, that by others harms can learn to take heed.

And if sin be the cause, as it is in deed, (so does the holy Ghost report
in the sacred Scripture, always after the denouncing of any plague adding the
provoking cause) if sin I say be the cause of so many miseries, meet and
convenient I judge it be, that we Repentance the means to appease Gods wrath
conceived against us for our sins.
come home again with the lost child, and cry mercy for our time misspent,
Father I have sinned against heaven and against the, etc. That we seek after
our salvation in whom it is to be found, namely Christ Jesus, not in the
morning only, that is to say, not in our flourishing years: nor yet in the
evening alone, that is to say, in our decrepite and stooping age: but every
hour and moment, both at midnight, at the cockcrowing, and at the dawning of
the day, that having oil in our lamps, we may be ready to enter with the
bridegroom as bidden ghestes to his heavenly banquet.

To rehearse the examples, which are already touched, and more pathetically or
effectually handled, than I can by skill comprise: it were superfluous. A good
thing cannot be too much perused, and though all sweet things, be they never
so toothsome, by their often use are made loathsome: yet the reading of this
with deliberation, and the marking thereof with due aduisement, shall increase
The double profit that shall redound unto us by the diligent reading and
considering of the premises.
desire to begin again when it is once passed over: and a comfort to see the
judgment of God poured out upon a few, that many might amend: two special
means to cut off the very conceit of satietie and loathing.

The late casualties that have been seen and felt, both in this city, and in
sundry places in this land, villages and towns, both East, West, North, and
South, yea beyond the Seas, do threaten unto us some heavy judgment of God,
and tell us, that Our sins are written with the point of a Diamond, and with
a pen of iron. It is no time now to go a gadding to the weather wise: the
season serves not, the reason suffers not.

For now we ought all of us to look about, seeing that The sundry and
manifold means which God from age to age has used to put England in mind of
her visitation.
God has spoken unto us these many years so many ways, by the troubles of
his Church, by the slaughter of his Saints, beginning correction at his own
house, by monstrous birthes, by strange shapes, by inundations of waters, by
contagions of the air, by fire in the Element, by foreign wars abroad, by
tumults at home, and now of late by an Earthquake, at one instant shaking the
whole Realm, as may be coniectured by the report of travelers to and from
sundry coasts of this land.

And not only on this side, but By which reason it is probable, that this last
earthquake in our time 1580 was general thoroughout all this land, and like
enough universal over the whole world.
beyond the Seas, as I have heard reported, this Earthquake has happened, with
the very quiuering thereof doing much harm, and far greater than any that
has chanced among us. Seeing then this Earthquake so universal ( for I
believe the Lord did shake the foundations of the whole earth, and it was his
mercy in that we were not all utterly undone) I may conclude that it was
supernatural, and being supernatural the more wonderful. For neither wind
nor water could have the force, with a general moving of the whole land, to
terrify the peoples hearts.

Let us be resolved, that there remains nothing now, but the day of our
visitation. The Lord will come in his wrath, to judge and punish us, The
neglect of Gods mercy, is the hastening of his justice.
whom in mercy he spared, and yet we the worsse. For what should we look for
now, but a terrible revenger? We have had the Prophets of God, we have had his
law, we have had his Son, his Apostles, his Evangelists, and Disciples, we
have had his Preachers, we have had the Elements, we have had even dombe
creatures preaching unto us repentance: strange sicknesses, sudden deaths, and
I cannot tell what chances, whereunto this changeable estate of ours is
subject, have forewarned us to amend: we nevertheless, forsaking the waters of
the well of life, are contented to wallowe in the puddles of our own pollusion
and filthiness: and being lepers, regard not to be cleansed.

What remains in this case, but that the Lord perform that in his severe
judgment, which he has spoken in his wrath against Jerusalem, saying: Who
Apply this threatening (O England) to thy self, and be ashamed and sorry for
thy sin.
shall have pity upon thee o Jerusalem? or who shall be sorry for thee? or who
shall go to pray for thy peace? Thou have forsaken me and gone backwards,
therefore will I stretch out mine hand against thee, and destroy thee. For I am
weary with repenting. The proof whereof God grant we avoid. The effect of all
is this, that others destruction be our instruction.

How long wonders and strange appearances defer and put off those effects
whereof they are significations and tokens.

Chap. 8.
BEcause we are taught by many proofs and trials, that The definition or
description of an eclipse, either in the Sun or the Moon.
Eclipses, (for so they call the diminishing of light in the Sun and the
Moon, happening at set times, seasons, and places appointed by nature, when
the Sun by the interposition of the Moon, and the Moon by the interposition
of the Sun, are so covered and hidden, that they are suddenly darkened)
prolong their effects and operations, sometimes more, sometimes less space:
hereupon rises a question, how long wonders are said and thought to defer
their effects and workings?

Unto which demand this answer may be made: namely, that it is The effects of
signs and wonders at ye pleasure and appointment of God.
at the will and appointment of almighty GOD, without whose commandment and
sufferance, those things come not to pass, be they either by nature, contrary
to nature, or above nature. For God, by the same power wherewith he created all
things, by the self same power he governs all things, seeing he is the author
and maker of al things, and able by his omnipotency, either to hasten or delay
all things according to the pleasure of his will. For (says the Prophet) he
has made all things, whatsoever he would, in Heaven, and in Earth, and in all
deepes.

But now, that same pleasure of Gods will touching the effects of wonders, and
their appearances, are so hidden and unknown to us, that this is all we can
do, and nothing he houeth us so well, even devoutly to cry out with S. Paul,
We are taught, having S. Paul for a pattern, to stand rather amassed at the
wonders that God works, than curiously to search out the reason of their being.
o the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his judgments? and his ways past finding out? For who has
known the mind of the Lord? or who has been of his counsel? or who has
given ought to him first, and it shall be given and paid him back again?
Because of him, and through him, by him, and in him is all in all, etc.

Now, because it is manifest, that many wonders have their cause and original
even of nature, in such sort and manner, that the very course of nature, does
thoroughly teach, as well the set seasons, as also the appointed places of such
wonders: (For it has pleased GOD to leave unto this course of nature, God
vouchethsafe to use the ministry and service of Nature, in sundry things yt
come to pass.
whose ministry and service he vouchethsafe to use oftentimes in natural
things, her conditions and qualities, her operations and workings: and he
suffers nature to bear rule over natural things, and natural things to
incline and yield unto nature, himself winking thereat, and looking upon as
it were through a lattesse:) Hereupon it is possible, that a man may by
certain conjectures and ghesses gather, or by certain causes and reasons
attain unto the knowledge both of the times and places when and where the
effects of such and such things, seem they never so strange and wonderful,
shall come to pass.

To confirm this, I bring for example Some Astronomers fail not in the
prognostication or foreteliing of things to come.
Astronomers skillful and cunning in their profession, who many times know
before hand, and forshewe likewise the seasons and effects of Eclipses, never
failing in their prognostications: and yet there are some that hold opinion,
that an Eclipse is a meruellous matter, and such a thing in deed as is
monstrous, strange, and contrary to the common course of nature. Howbeit,
there is no cause why we should wonder thereat more than needs, as though it
were a rare thing and not to be believed: seeing it is a plain case, that the
very natural eiesight of man does behold and comprehend as well the causes as
the signs appearing above him, as he does the firmament of the Heaven, and
the Spheres of fire and air.

The Scripture in deed affirms, that * The stars of heaven were appointed
Stars discern the seasons, ye times, the days, and the years, so that upon
them depends a necessary doctrine.
to be signs for the difference and discerning of seasons, times, days, and
years. Which to be true and credible, we find by use and custom. For we see,
that by them the husbandman does give a guess what shall follow: and by the
set seasons of the year understands what he should do by day, and what by
night, learning in like manner at what time it is best plowing, sowing, and
reaping, which benefit he has chiefly by being cunning in the changeable and
wandering course and compass of the Sun and Moon.

By The Sphere of fire and air have a contiguitie or neerenesse.
the Sphere of fire also, and of the air, by reason of the neerenesse each to
other, it is given unto them of the country to conjecture this and that:
whiles (as we know) flames of fire in the air, lightnings and thunders, winds
and rain, hail and other tempests have their issue from thence: the
foreknowledge of which things is greatly in use among husbandmen, shepherds,
and mariners. These signs and appearances as they are natural, and their
causes natural, so their effects being natural may be forknowne of certentie.
For the knowledge of the one is the knowledge of the other.

But to come to Wonders supernatural are wonders in deed, and come not of
causes natural.
wonders supernatural, of which kind are all such wonders as are to be
counted very wonders in deed, the matter peradventure goes far otherwise:
because that as the causes of such wonders are above our reach, even so the
effects and operations much more. Again, all wonders, though supernatural,
are not like, but diverse: this also overthrows the knowledge of man. For the
more difference, the more doubtfulnes. If this be so, who will not confess,
that the effects and operations of such wonders are uncertain, both at what
time, and in what place they shall come to pass? Concerning which matter,
because some effects happen sooner, and some later, no certeintie able to be
known, there can be no infallible and perfect rule given.

But to touch some signs and wonders appearing in the Heavens, this is a flat
truth, that such were seen the very same year that Jerusalem was destroyed,
Sometimes the effects of wonders do follow after, and sometimes they happen
at the instant: so yt their event is doubtful and uncertain: this is proved
by examples.
the effects whereof were prolonged a years space. So in Genua, at what time a
spring there very straungly bubbled blood, the city it self was assaulted of
the Sarracens, taken, and wonderfully afflicted. In Lucania, what time it
rained iron, the very next year following the Soldiers of that country were
all slain, with their Captain Crassus, in Parthia, and not one mothers son
left alive. So, a little before the time that C. Caesar was murdered, it was
found true by proof, that his horses would eat no prouender, but pining
themselves, there fell tears from their eyes so plentifully, that it was
wonderful to behold. So, after the sightes and visions which Daniel saw in the
heaven, and told the meaning of them, there followed an overthrow of the
Persian Empire, and the famous victory of Alexander.

By all which examples, as also by certain wonders appearing at Vienna in
Austria, not many years past, we are taught, that there can no undoubted The
doctrine touching the time and place, where wonders work their effects, is
doubtful.
doctrine be set down touching the time when, and the place where, the
effects of such wonders should come to pass: although the busy heads of the
Heathen, no less vainly than superstitiously, have dealt in that matter.
Which fashion of theirs we utterly forsaking, refer all things (as we have
oftentimes said) unto the providence of almighty God.

Why more strange wonders appear in these latter days, than have done in
other former times.

Chap. 9.
ALthough the wonders which have been seen in former times, are many, as
Chronicles and faithful records verify: yet notwithstanding (as most men
hold opinion) More strange signs and wonders never appeared in any age, than
now in these our dangerous days: the Lord have mercy upon us.
there never chanced more nor oftener than in these our latter days, as we may
manifestly perceive, by examples already rehearsed. Howbeit, we have gathered
but a few out of many, and neither the commonest but the chief and
principal. In which collection, we have not been so precise and
superstitious, as to be afraid to make mention of any, but only such as had
in them an evident apperance and show of strange wonders: nor again so rash
and unadvised, that what sightes so ever happened, and had any likeness of a
wonder, by and by to catch it by the end, and put it into our reckoning: for
then we might be cast in the teeth, and not undeservedly, that whatsoever we
could hit upon, had it never so little strangeness, we took it for a wonder:
as Midas thought every thing that he touched to be straight ways turned into
gold.

And hereof it is, that we are certainly assured, many wonders heretofore to
have happened, whereof Many wonders have happened in the world which never came
to our knowledge.
we are ignorant: and better known unto others than unto us: which although
we had been able, upon knowledge to report, yet for tediousness sake it
were needelesse to repeat them in this place. For they may be so many
peradventure, that it would prove an easier piece of work to find where to
begin, than where to make an end: and we have had more regard in the rehersall
of examples, to keep a measure, than to seek after plenty and store in this
behalf.

Now there be some, that hearing me speak as I do, put out this question, A
question why more signs are showed unto us in these later times, both from
heaven and upon earth, than have been seen in the days of our forefathers.
why in these our days, rather than in former times, more wonders have been
seen in every place of the world? Is not this thing of it self a wonder? I
make answer, that it is wonderful enough, and not without some monstrous
meaning. For so many and so great wonders happening in these our days, do
certainly foretell, that the end of this world is at hand, and that this age
wherein we live wears away, and sees as an eye witness, by the wonders and
signs which continually appear, that Death draws nighe, yea stands
watching at the entry door.

For seeing that This world compared very fitly unto a man, whereby the state
thereof is lively represented.
this world, in all respects, is compared unto a man: and man also him self
contrariwise likened unto the world, he being called and named Microcosmus, A
little world: reason concludes, that as it fares with man, so it fares with
the world. Now man, being a little world, is subject to decay, diseases may
attach him, misfortunes may fall upon him, one infirmity or other hanging upon
him, may consume him, though not his whole body at once, yet the parts
thereof, though not suddenly and at an instant, yet by degrees of times: whereby
in the end, the disease waxing stronger, and he weaker, that fearcer and he
fainter, he may fall sick every where, and at the last give up the ghost.

Now there are diseases incident to the world, as we think: and what are
they, but The effects denounced and threatened by strange signs and wonders,
are the sicknesses yt shall wast and consume ye world.
such effects as are denounced by signs and wonders to happen unto the world?
namely, Earthquakes, ouerflowings of waters, fieres in the element, famines,
pestilences, and any other of this sort: which are none otherwise foreshewed,
either presently to happen, or hereafter to come to pass, than the sicknesses
whereunto men are subject, and foretold them by certain signs and tokens: as
namely by their water, and other excrements.

For Physicians (as we our selves have also proved) by observation of Stars
and Planets, can attain unto the foreknowledge of diseases in the bodies of
men, be they either present, or be they to come, and that without superstition:
they can also prognosticate and foretell by the inclination of complexions, and
dispositions of bodies, by the set seasons, and four quarters of the year,
they can (I say) foretell of health and sickness. For seeing the The air
altered and semblably affected as the Sun departs from or draws near to
us. etc.
condition and quality of the air, which compasses our bodies round about,
is very much altered and changed, by the Sun drawing near or going far
from us, by the increasing and diminishing of light in the Moon: it comes to
pass, that having rule over our bodies, there may be conjectures made of many
things, which shall happen unto us, and which they, by their influences,
together with the air, may work in these our bodies.

Hereupon they give counsel to open the veins, and let blood, when the Moon
increases, at which times our natural abilities are more strong and lively,
and the state of our bodies replenished with more good moisture and juice: they
forbid boxing, least because it violently draws and sucketh, the The humors
of our bodies abound and are spread through every part and member of our bodies
at the beginnings of Months.
humors of the body abounding and spreading throughout all parts at the
beginnings of Months, more matter may be voided, than behooves, etc. And
thus (I say) may Physicians foretell something to come, not to any manner of
person, but to such as have not their perfect health, but are evil affected,
and apt to fall into one or other strange infirmity and sickness.

Even so, by Ephemerides or calculations many things are foretold concerning
the qualities of seasons, and touching the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon:
howbeit none otherwise than when such causes work their force in the The air
subject to the influences or operations of ye Sun Moon and Stars.
air wherewith we are encompassed, and according to the inclination whereof,
be it good, be it bad, be it wholesome, be it noisome, will we nill we, we are
ruled and ordered. Many prognostications of Physicians both of Arabia, and
Graecia, may be reduced and brought for the proof of these causes: and not a
few notes out of Aristotle's Problemes.

By the state, conditions or qualities of men's bodies also may tokens of life
and death be gathered: all which, or the greater part of them, agree in this
point, that Signs in the sick, whereby to know, whether he shall live or die.
look what they see in the sick lieng in his bed, that makes a dead corpse
hideous and ghastly, it is a sign of death drawing on. Contrariwise, if they
perceive in the diseased such seemelinesses as set forth the state of a sound
man, they are conjectures of recovery and health. The like we may read in the
particular prognostications of Hippocrates, and in the second book of
Cornelius Celsus, entreating of Physic.

For Hippocrates, to make the Physician cunning in foreknowing and also
foretelling of such issues in the sick, counsels them to mark diligently
the face and countenance. For Undoubted tokens either of death, or of extreme
sickness, or of life and recovery in the diseased according to the rules of
Hippocrates.
if their eyes be hollow, their ears cold and shroonke together, their
foreheade dry and withered, their color green, leaden, or black, their
courage calm and consumed, their spittle abounding, heir knees and limbs
fainte and feeble, their heat more fervent and vehement than was wont to be,
their sleeps heavy, their dreams troublesome and unquiet, they shall be
signs, that the patient will either be extreme sick, and so escape very
narrowly, or else that there is no way with him but one, even death.

To apply this to our purpose, when we see such wonders in the world, as are
strange and fearful, when we see them often in such manner as has not been
in former times, it is an undoubted token that the world is not well, but
infected with certain sore sicknesses, and like shortly to die, or else to fall
into great danger: so much the rather, because signs and wonders, monstrous
appearances, and strange sightes, have their generation herehence, From whence
strange sights and monstrous shapes, etc. have their generation and being.
either because particular nature fails, or through the default of the matter
it self which resists, or else by reason of the weakness of the agent or
worker. Which is thought to be a token that the world is sick after the manner
of a man, who is therefore called a little world.

Hereunto may be also added, that woonders of this sort, specially such as
appear from heaven, or (to speak plainer) that are meteors and impressions,
do happen, when nature is somewhat disordered, as when the generation of
cattle, the fructifieng of trees, the conjunctions and moouings of stars
come to pass, but not altogether at their due and ordinary times: neither do
these impressions keep always one and the self same place, nor yet hold one
proportion still in respect of the patient (as I may say) the matter whereof
they are made happening to and fro.

By that therefore which we have already declared it is doubtless, that such
signs and wonders as we have last named, do prove unto us, that The more
strange sights and appearances, the more strange significations and meanings.
stranger and rarer sightes appearing have their significations: namely the
sickness of this world, and the neerenesse thereof to death: and to be tokens so
much the rather of these things, by how much more often they happen. As truly
we see in these times of ours, which in the Scriptures are therefore called
The last days, wherein shall be the end of this world, foretold by signs and
wonders to be at hand, by the deadly diseases which they denounce to the
world, as means to bring upon it the last consummation and final end.

For it cannot be denied, that Wonders have been seen, even since the very
beginning of the world, in a manner.
such signs have been seen ever since the creation of the world almost, in
sundry countries and nations, of diverse people, either to the destruction of
some, or to the overthrow of all, even as many as viewed them with their eyes.
In time, the whole world, by reason of the parts thereof crasie and ill at
ease, began day by day to be sicker and sicker, because of the miserable
maladies and pitiful issues which followed after the sight of such strange
wonders: so that by little and little it is like to fail and to decay, and the
whole body thereof in short space to perish, seeing that there are but a few
members or parts thereof, beside the heart, but have both felt and seen the
calamities and ruins which have come to pass, after the appearing of certain
strange signs and wonders in all places, not only in our forefathers days,
but also within the compass of our memory.

The case standing thus, we must needs grant this, when all the members of
the body are smitten with sickness, that For the heart cannot safely consist
without the ministry and due service of the inferior members, though it
self be the principal.
the heart being the principal part, is like to be in danger, which when it
once fails, the whole body sinketh down, and consequently the universal
world: the destruction whereof to be nie, these so many and horrible wonders
chancing in our age, do certainly foreshew. For, the truth it self, by a
foreknowledge of things to come, speaks of these and the like signs,
prophesieng of the end of this world, and saying, There shall be signs in the
Sun and in the Moon, etc.

For, seeing that this world may well be compared unto The stare of y^ world
comparable to the state of Egypt, for what reasons and considerations.
Egypt, in sundry considerations, and manifold cases, it comes to pass,
that as in old time there were sights and wonders seen, whereby the overthrow
of Egypt was threatened should come: so in this last end of the world signs
and tokens are strangely seen in the four elements, which give understanding
to all the inhabitants of the earth, that the end is at hand. Now, for that we
see in these our days, such signs and tokens multiplied, how can we doubt
that the end of the world is nie? Specially, because we see things that have
increased, diminish: and things that flourished, vanish: and at length die and
come to an end.

Which The change of this world set down by contemplation of other countries.
alteration of the world, and the diminishing thereof we shall perceive to be
come, if we think upon the days of old, and consider with our selves, how
many countries, nations, and Islands, in so few years have perished and come
to naught: and how all the elements are grown out of course, quite contrary
to their first nature, and being meruelously changed in themselves, keep not
their accustomed condition and quality in due time and season, as at the
first: and that the earth has lost much of her wonted fruitfulnes, how
painfully so ever it be plowed, as we have plentifully declared in our A work
so entitled and named, and of this Authors own writing.
Catholics dedicated to the right renowned Charles the fifth, and Ferdinand:
which to repeat again in this place, were labor superfluous.

It must therefore be confessed, that these so sundry and strange wonders
happening in our days, foretell us, that the end of the world approaches, and
prophesies against it some lamentable destruction: as certain tokens
appearing in the body of man, foreshew the danger either of sickness or death.

At what day and hour the end of this world shall certainly be, as some hold
opinion.

Chap. 10.
THat the end of this world is at hand, there is none that can justly deny,
because that, beside the reasons specified in the last Chapter, we see nothing,
but it foretells us that the same is like very shortly to be. For we may
behold, according to the prophesies of Christ our Savior, The alteration and
change of this world declared unto us by particular circumstances.
that there is an alteration and change of the state of all things in a
manner, that the world waxes worsse and worsse, and that with the prevailing
of wickedness: it is like to be ouerturned: that in these days of ours,
iniquity and sin is grown to the highest degree, that equity is rare,
ungodliness, covetousness, concupiscence and lust common, the good a pray and
spoil to the wicked, and every where molested and troubled, that evil men are
rich and wealthy, virtuous men in poverty and contempt, all judgment
confounded, laws overthrown, and Men must hold fast now a days, many times
more than their own, such is the iniquity of these times
that which a man has, be it little, or be it much, it must be gotten and also
kept by maine strength, that boldness and violence have possession of all
things, that there is no faith, no truth, no conscience, no honesty among
men, no peace, no meekness, no shame, no rule in themselves nor rest from
mischief: that the whole earth is in an uproar and tumult, that wars do
rage in all places, that all nations are in armor, and assault each other, and
that Cities nie adioining are at strife between themselves. If this be so,
that these (as the Lord himself bears witness) are forewarnings that the
world is at an end, what remains but that we believe and look when it
shall be?

Now, because I think there is not a man so shameless, that will gainesay
this, it needs not that I use many words in this matter, considering that we
have discoursed at large hereof, in our Works of his own compiling and so
named, as is declared before.
Centuries and Catholics. It rests therefore that we make answer in this
place, to the objection of some, which demand the question, not so necessarily
as curiously: At what day and hour the end of this world shall be, whereof the
scriptures of God have so profoundly spoken? Although I make answer, that it
is not unknown to me, that some there are which have taken in hand to tell by
account of years, when the end of this world shall be: of which sort some have
said, that four hundred years, some that five hundred years, some that a
thousand years should pass and run out, between the ascension of the Lord,
and his last coming to judgment, before the world should be at an end: yet
notwithstanding, I They are confuted and put to silence, which by co^putation
of years gather the certain end of the world.
deny that there is any man able to know, or to show, either the hour, or
the day of the end of this world: as also I hold opinion, and certainly
believe, that there is not a man living, that knows the end of his own
life, as the scripture testifies, unless he be instructed and taught from above
by some singular revelation.

And therefore, upon this certain belief I boldly affirm, that the end of
this world has always been, and ever shall be, altogether uncertain: and
that it is not for mortal men (as the Lord says) to know the times and the
seasons, which the Lord has put in his own will and power: yea, that man
cannot comprehend the same by any natural knowledge, as the truth it self
proves, saying: All ye knowledge of ye end of this world quite cut off in
man, by the testimony of Scripture.
Of that day or hour no man knows, no not the Angels of heaven, nor the
Son, but the Father: because the day of the Lord (as the Apostle says)
shall come like a thief in the night. For when they shall say peace and
quietness, then shall sudden destruction come upon them, as the sorrow of a
woman in travel, and they shall not escape.

By which words we are warned, that the last ruin and end of this world
shall come so suddenly upon men, that when the state of things seems to be
amended, and grown from worsse to better, famine turned into plenty, war
into peace, pestilence into security: then, even then, in the twinkling of an
eye, it shall be consumed with fire. Behold a spectacle in Sodom. And this is
the reason, as I take it, why the Lord does exhort us every where to watch,
because that as An argument or reason drawn from the lesser to the greater.
no man is certain of the end of his own life, so much more ignorant and
doubtful of the end of the whole world. Take heed (says our Savior) watch
and pray, because ye know not when the time shall be. For you know not when
the Lord will come, in the evening, or at midnight, or at the cockcrowing, or
in the morning, least when he comes suddenly, he find you sleeping.

It is Gods will, that as well the end of our own life, as also the end of
the world, should be hidden from us, that we might evermore be careful
thereof, and setting our minds upon it, be ready at his coming. For An
allusion made to the example which Christ himself uses in the Gospel.
the suspicion which the Goodman of the house has of the coming of the
thief, is very profitable, though it keep him waking, when peradventure
otherwise he would fall asleep. And surely, if it were good for us to know
this secret, would the Lord have made such a short answer to his Disciples,
when they put out the question to him their Master? For they held not their
peace in the presence of him, but put forth their demand, saying: Lord, will thou at this time restore the kingdom of Israel? But he spoke to them again,
and said, It belongs not unto you to know the times, which the Father has
put in his own power. This answer had they, not asking the question of the
hour, or of the day, or of the year, but generally of the time.

Uaine therefore are such, seem they never so wise and learned in the eyes of
the world, which make their vaunt that they know the end of their own life,
and are The shamelesnes of some which upon no sure ground will warrant ye
certeintie of things most uncertain.
not ashamed to profess, though seduced by signs of birds flieng, by
opinions of the weatherwise, by the doctrines of Magicians, and such like
sinister means, that they can tell when the world shall be at an end. But is
not these men's labor lost, whiles they go about to reckon and cast account,
how many years are to come, before the world shall end? Seeing we have
heard, even from the mouth of truth it self, that it is not in us, nor for us
to know it, and that it passes our ability, whatsoever we are, to atteine
to the certeintie of a secret, which God the father has reserved unto
himself alone.

And here I can not sufficiently muse at * C. Lactantius, and diverse
Lactantius and others of his opinion reproved, for their precise computations.
others not a few, men I confess deeply learned in matters touching the
Church, and very well practiced in those points, that some of them
notwithstanding affirm, that four hundred years, some that five hundred
years, and some that a thousand years should be accomplished and fulfilled,
from the ascension of our Lord, until his last coming at doomes day. Wherein
they are found false, and out of the way, as very children can tell. And
therefore I think it not worth pains taking, to declare in this behalf, upon
what reasons and proofs each of them build their opinions, both because I have
confuted them already in place convenient, and also for that they lean wholly
to conjectures of man's wit, not bringing in any thing that is vpholden by
authority of Canonical scripture.

He (says S. Augustine) who spoke these words, A notable speech, whereby all
Calculators and Reckoners of years, thereby to come to ye knowledge of the
worlds end, are controlled.
It is not for you to know the times, which (...) Father has put in his own
(...) all Calculators and (...) to hold their (...) meddle no further in this
(...) A number of triflers therefore, very rash and presumptuous busy
bodies, are to be laughed at, or rather to be contemned, a sort of foolish
Heretics and Scismatikes (I mean) in this our age, which seducing the simple
people, dare openly affirm, and teach, both at what time, and in what moment,
the end and consummation of this world shall be: notwithstanding the voice of
the Gospel, which these men have always in their mouths, does prove the
flat contrary, saying, Of that day, or of that hour no man can tell, neither
the Angels in heaven, nor the Son, but the Father, etc.

It shall suffice us therefore to know this, that there is nothing more
certain, than as time passes away, so this world shall perish: and that For
the Lord as the Scripture testifies, has reserved this to his own counsel
and secret knowledge.
nothing is more uncertain than the time wherein it shall decay. Which end of
the world to be at hand, and even at the doors, not only by the holy
Scriptures is manifest, (for as well the preachings of the Prophets, as the
sermons of our savior Christ have said, that it shall be shortly,) but also by
the signs and wonders which have gone before it, and appeared to all the world
in every place, as most assured warnings of the last day, and proclamations
(as it were) from God unto us, as we have already declared by many examples,
is most clear and evident.

Now, after what manner this consummation or end of the world shall be, and what
shall become thereof, whereto the glory and pomp of the same shall grow, who
so is disposed to Search the Scriptures, and be answered.
search the Scriptures shall easily find. But there are Preachers in the
world, whose voices agreeing with the cries of the Prophets, tell us plainly
that the end and ruin of althings will come to pass, and that after a while,
painting before our eyes the last age of the world, as it were weary and
ready to fall. I think it not necessary also, particularly to repeat those
things which have been foretold by the Prophets hereafter to happen, before
the end come upon us, considering that I have omitted none of them in the
work of our Works and treatises of his own penning and entitled by the name
of Centuries.
Centuries, whither I refer the Reader for the fuller declaration hereof,
intending, God being my guide, with a few words more, to make an end of this
matter.

What all and every one of us ought to do, seeing the end of this world
approach.

Chap. 11.
For So Much as it is certain, after the rehearsal of so many testimonies
worthy of credit, and warranted by the things themselves which are now done
in the world with such confusion and disorder: beside that, very manifest,
even by the signs and wonders which have appeared both in heaven and in earth,
that The most terrible and fearful day of the Lord is at hand, and the end
of this world very nie, even at the door: we see that there remains nothing
else but this, if we regard our own safety: namely, The mutual service and
duties required of us, and thought most convenient for us to prosecute in these
latter days of the world.
to exhort one another by all means that we may, not to abuse the good grace
of almighty God, not wilfully to wink, when we see such great store of light,
but to have our eyes open, and to behold the strange sights and wonders, which
we have seen even within the compass of our memory: knowing for a
certeintie, that these and such like are as it were proclamations made unto us
from almighty God, whereby he calls us to repentance, and therefore not to
be contemned, as nothing pertinent or belonging unto us.

For it is as true as the Gospel, that God is long suffering, exceeding
patient, and full of forbearance, doing what he can by these signs and wonders
to soften the hardness of our heart: and he had rather show us the terrors of
his judgments, and the threatenings of his right hand, than lay the same upon
us in his vengeance. Let us not flatter our selves, because we are Christians,
therefore God will forgive us though we do not repent. No no: he Herein
appears how just and vnparciall a judge God is, in the execution of his
punishments.
spared not the Angels, but when they had transgressed, he thrust them down
into hell; and therefore doubtless he will not spare or forbear us in our sins.
Again, let us not deceive our selves, supposing peradventure that such
sorrows as are to come, are not so horrible, as we have set them out in this
behalf. For God himself has foretold and said it should be so, who neither
does lie, nor can lie, swearing with an oath, that it should so come to pass:
Verily verily I say unto you, heaven and earth shall pass, but my words shall
not pass.

Neither let us, to be brief, cocker our selves too much, and become careless,
because the woes whereof we are forwarned will not come yet, it will be long
first ere they take effect. For Examples of Gods judgments powered upon vnrepen.
so did many use to say of the flood in Noes time, of the fire and brimstone in
Lothes time, of the destruction of (...) dust and ashes? Do you not think
that they themselves, if they were able to speak, would say thus to us? A
supposed or imagined speech.
Alas wretches, what mean you to run up and down from place to place after
the vanities of this world? Alas why do you ouerwhelme your selves in the
seas of sin and wickedness? Look upon our bones, and let your own greedines
grieve you, your own misery make you afraid. We were once as you be now: and
as we are, so shall you be.

And therefore, to return thither from whence I have straied, let us wey with
careful consideration, and in weieng, let us tremble at the fearful end of
this world, and having the day of our own death continually before our eyes,
let us hasten, as much as we may, to amend our life missed. Let us not neglect
the time, because our good God forbeareth us vile offenders, and his anger
comes forth but slowly to take vengeance: for this slownesse shall be
recompensed with greeuousnes of punishment, and his lame leg (if I may so
speak) shall never leave, till it have overtaken the swift running sinner.
This is doubtless, that how much the longer God looks for amendment at our
hands, and we regard it not, so much the more grievous shall his judgment be
against us: which to be so, the Scripture by many examples has not slenderly
proved.

Now, if we think (which thought be far from us) that The danger of this
cogitation is set forth in a parable of the Gospel, by our Savior himself,
to show what a shrewd sin security is.
it will be long ere the end of this world come, and thereupon every one of us
set at naught the consideration of our own falls, who are more miserable? Are
we not (I beseech you) suddenly smitten with death, and our souls taken out of
our bodies, we looking for nothing less, whiles we very willingly and in the
pleasure of our minds, are well content to tarry in this forsaken world, and
determine with our selves of matters of long continuance? But who are happy?
Even they that always have before their eyes, either their own death, or the
end of this world, and that make have to be found in a readiness when that
hour comes.

Let us therefore be mindful one with another, that we walk in the mids of
the snares of the Devil, and in consideration thereof let us always The
furniture which S. Paul sets down by parcels in the 6. chapter to ye
Ephesians, is necessary for every Christian in this case.
be provided, that whenever the Lord lays his commandment upon us, being
set free from all blottes and blemishes of sin, we may enter into his rest.
Let us not persuade our selves, that the time is long which we have to wear
out in this world. For it may be, that God will call us upon such a sudden,
that we shall not have an hours respite given us to repent. Alas, let us
remember the words of our Savior, saying, Verily verily I say unto you, the
hour is come, when all that are in their graves shall hear the voice of the
Son of God, and they which have done well, shall come forth into the
resurrection of life: but they which have done ill, into the resurrection of
judgment.

Now therefore let us take our choice, and determine with our selves what to
do in this life, that according to our deserts, we may either rejoice with
the godly, or be tormented with the wicked worlds without end. Whole some
admonitions, if we have the grace to follow them: which y^ Lord God grant unto
us.
If rewards will not win us to beecome better, let punishments make us
affraide to wax worsse: and if it be not in our power to despise this present
world, and to cease from the custom of sinning: yet let us at the least do
what we can to redress our selves by righteousness. If we have wandered like
wantons in our youth, let us now repent and be reformed in our age: and the
evil deeds which we have done in sinning, let us renownce and forsake by
amending. For behold how the world, not by little and little, but (as I said)
altogether begins to come to ruin and decay: yea, it has failed already
many ways, and at this present it draws nearer and nearer to his last
destruction: as we have been taught by many tokens, al which with one consent
agree upon that matter: and every thing that we see vanishes like a cloud,
and passes away like the evening shadow.

Behold the events of things which were foretold us long ago by the very truth
it self, are now in these days of ours more than apparently perceived.
Manifest proofs of ye latter day to be at hand, and nearer than we think. The
Lord God amend us, that we be not overwhelmed in our wickedness and sin
upon the sudden.
All goodness (as we plainly see) is taken away and banished, all mischief
and evil, day by day, does more and more abound, in such sort and manner, that
there is not a man able to open his mouth, and so bold as once to gainesay,
that the last times are come upon us, considering that the works and fruits
of these dangerous days are so rise among us, and in continual use and
practice. For in the latter days (says the Apostle) shall be perilous
seasons, and men shall love themselves, they shall be covetous, high minded,
proud, blasphemers, stubburne against their parents, unthankful, mischeeuous,
void of love, without peace, faultfinders, accusers, dishonest, unkind,
cruel, traitors, froward, ambitious, lovers of pleasures more than of God,
having a show in deed of godliness, but yet utterly denieng the force and power
thereof in their life.

Is Very children in comparison can say no less, the iniquity of these our
days are so spread through out all places.
not every place of the earth (I pray you) full of such men? Do not all
corners of the world swarm with them, in such manner, that the words of the
Lord are more verified in us of this latter age, than of any people of old:
saying, All have gone back and started aside, all are become unprofitable,
there is not one that does good, no not one? For now doubtless is that hour
come, according to the testimony of eternal truth, wherein Iniquity does
abound, and the charity of a great many is waxed cold. For which cause, the
Lord threateneth against us his kindled wrath and indignation, and foretells
us by horrible signs, strange wonders, marvelous visions, monstrous shapes,
and such like fearful appearances, as it were by proclamations made from
heaven, that he is coming to judgment, and admonishes us earnestly to repent
and amend, still shaking his right hand of reuengement over us, but sparing to
smite: telling us nevertheless, that except we repent, we shall all perish.

And God grant The Authors conclusion of this necessary treatise, written for
the benefit of us in this age: God give us grace well to use it.
that having so many warnings, both in heaven and in earth, by the voices and
outcries of such strange wonders, we would at length shake off sloth, and
awake: not setting at naught the soundes of these trumpets, these true
proclamations from heaven, and heavy threatenings of God, whereby we are called
and compelled to repent. God grant we may so do, to whom be all laud, praise,
dominion, power and majesty now and evermore.

Amen.
A contemplation of wonderful accidents, and principally of Earthquaks, as
well particular as general, which have happened in the realms of England,
Ireland, and Scotland, from the time of William Conqueror, to the reign of
our sovereign Lady and gracious Queen Elizabeth, etc. Also a commemoration
of our late general Earthquake the 6. of April, about 6. of the clock in the
Evening. 1580.

Chap. 12.
Having waded thus far in the due description of Earthquakes, their
generation, their instant and consequent operations, and yet not sufficiently
persuaded, that this my present and unpolished treatise will answer the
expectation of the Reader, if I leave it lame and halting upon one leg: The
determination and purpose of the Translator, in this 12. Chapter, being the
conclusion.
I have determined in this twelfe Chapter, which shall be the conclusion, to
leave foreign countries and their wonders: and coming nearer home, to offer
unto the view of the inhabitants of this land, the horrible Earthquakes that
have happened as well in particular places of this Realm, as generally
through the whale region: that we may see how the Lord, from age to age, has
given testimonies to the world of his omnipotency.

And because admonitions, which consist but in words, uttered either by voice,
or expressed by pen, prevail not so much (as were to be wished) in this
wicked world, as do Examples represent unto us the good or bad estate of our
forefathers.
examples, which are lively representations of the heavy chances, whereunto
our predecessors have been subject: neither yet the threatenings of God in his
wrath, by the mouths of his Prophets, terrify the hearts of evil livers, as
do the dreadful signs and wonders which he vouchethsafe to give, as tokens
of his hot indignation: hereupon (as sorry that we which have so long lived
under grace, should become graceless, and utterly void of that spirit which
should conduct every Christian) I have undertaken to recapitulate or rehearse
unto you, according to my promise and purpose, the times when, and the places
where Earthquakes have happened, as I find them truly recorded in Chronicles,
which I have searched diligently: to report justly to the people of this land,
that This is not the first time that God has spoken unto us by Earthquakes.
God has spoken unto us many years past, even by such means as of late he
used, wherein his long sufferance appears, upon the which I counsel no man
over boldly to presume, by security in sinning, least judgment and confusion
fall upon him suddenly. And first we will begin at London the Metropolis of
this land, and by degrees of years proceed to declare what Earthquakes have
chanced in other cities and shires of this our native country.

It is recorded in the Scottish Chronicles, that in the reign of king
Eugenius, it rained blood at York, that in sundry places trees were blasted,
and thereby withered and died: but (O wonder!) that the market place, or rather
Many houses swallowed up and sunk in Cheapside by a gaping of the earth.
Cheapeside in London did open and gape, so that a great hole appearing in the
earth, many houses were swallowed up and sunk: neither is it to be thought
that no harm, in such an exceeding danger, happened to the inhabitants.
Think we, the same God, who wrought that wonderful work in this City, was
not able with the late Earthquake to have done the like here in London? Yes,
yes, his almightinesse is perpetual, his will remains unchangeable, and his
arm is not shortened.

Again, in the time of king William the Conqueror, in the year after the
birth of Christ 1077. there happened in March a A general Earthquake over ye
whole realm of England.
general Earthquake throughout all England: and in April next and immediately
following, a terrible blasing star appeared to the horror of the beholders.
Although this Earthquake now named, shook the foundations of all this land:
yet, in so much as there is no mention made that it chanced in other
countries, thereby we may gather, that being inferior unto this our late
Earthquake in universality, (for so far as I can understand, both by
travelers beyond the Seas, and by strangers borne, it is supposed that it was
general, and that the whole frame of the world trembled therewithal, far
greater harms happening there, than here, the Lord be thanked) it could not
import or foreshew such a plague as this threatens against us, nor include in
it so secret a meaning. The Lord in mercy deal with his people, for in
judgment none shall be able to abide his presence.

Again, in the time of the said king William the Conqueror, in the veare after
the birth of Christ 1084. there chanced an Earthquake, which although it was
but A particular Earthquake and yet supernatural: the reason may be read in
the rehearsal of the history.
particular, yet may it seem to be supernatural. For, at such time as king
William, among all other cruelties executed upon English men, pulled down
whole towns, villages, churches, and other buildings, thirty miles compass,
to make thereof a forest, which at this day is called by the name of New
forest, it pleased God, beside the lamentable outcries of afflicted people
ringing about the Tyrants ears, to give a token by the earth, which at that
instant shook and rored, of his indignation against that unnatural destroier
for his accursed dealing.

As for him, who by his power might presume somewhat further than a private
man, I think he was not so merciless a spoiler, but that in this our age
there may be found, millians I fear (I would to God I did lie) which excel
him by many degrees. For the world is grown unto this abomination, in these
days, that The craftiest man accounted the wisest, as the world goes now a
days.
the craftiest man is counted the wisest, and he that has most circumuentions
in him to ouershoote his brother, is had in estimation. As for simplicity and
plain dealing, it is so little thought upon, as if it had never been in the
world. No marvel then, though God by universal signs sent throughout all
corners of the earth, foreshewe the sharpnes of his sword, wherewith he
means to come girded, and wound us in his wrath, our iniquities are so
outrageous, so manifold, and detestable.

Again, in the reign of King Henry the first of that name, in January, in
the year of our Lord 1165. there happened a meruellous Earthquake, in the Isle
of Elie, in Northfolke, in Suffolk, and other places, the vehemency whereof
was such, that with the trembling of the same, men had not the power to stand
upon their feet: buildings also were sore shaken, and steeples so rocked,
that the belles knolled therewithal.

And in the reign of King Henry the second of that name, at Oxenhale within
the Lordship of Derlington, in the year of our Lord 1179. the These examples
may be loking glasses for us, if we had any grace.
earth did lift up it self on high like a mighty tower, and continuing so
from nine of the clock in the morning till the evening, it fell down at
length, with a horrible noise: and swallowed up with the sudden and violent
sinking of the same, left a deep pit in place thereof, as a witness to the
posterity of that strange wonder. These documentes or lessons as they are not
usual, so ought they not negligently to be thought upon: and therefore, woe to
the wicked, that are grown so senseles and void of feeling, that no judgment
of God can soften their stony hearts.

To proceed in our examples, for we mean to tell you of later Earth quakes,
some in the days of our grandfathers, our fathers, and our own. On Monday the
week before Easter 1185. in the reign of the said King Henry the second,
there happened The second general Earth quake that I read to have happened in
England.
a general Earthquake thoroughout all England, yea such a one, as the like had
not been heard of in this realm, since the beginning of the world. This
Earthquake was so violent, that stones which were couched fast in the earth,
and driven in with rammars, were removed out of their places, buildings of
lime and stone ouerturned, houses of timber shaken in shiuers: and among the
rest, the great Church of Lincoln was rent from the top to the bottom.
After this Earthquake there followed a universal Eclipse of the Sun, and
such terrible thunder, lightening and tempests, that both men and beasts were
destroyed, houses burned up, and much harm done very lamentable to report.

Our A brief note given of our Earthquake, 1580. by way of digression.
Earthquake chanced on Wednesday in Easter week, about the same time of the
year, whereby though the like dangers fortuned not as by the other: yet being
more general, (for the frame of the whole earth, as it is thought, trembled
therewith) I may not so boldly as truly affirm, that the like was never heard
of since the creation. The events of which Earthquake we leave to the secret
counsel of God, to bring to pass by his providence, beseeching him to power
into our hearts, the spirit of true repentance, that by converting and turning
from our wicked ways, we may escape the plagues which otherwise we are like
to feel.

Moreover, in Scotland, at what time king William surnamed Lion, ware the
crown, from the Twelftide till February, in the year of our Lord 1199. there
chanced continual and terrible Earthquakes incessantly day by day: and not
only there, but elsewhere, to the great ruin of many buildings, besides
diverse other inconveniences, which may be presupposed to follow such
tremblings. But to come nearer home, in the reign of King Henry the third, in
the year of our Lord 1222. there was A view of wonders in Warwikshire and
elsewhere.
an Earthquake in Warwickshire, a general thunder throughout the whole realm,
a blasing star, and great dearth of corn, all which plagues concurring and
running together, into what perplexities the minds of people were driven, I
leave to the contemplation of the well advised reader. Again, in the reign of
the said King Henry the third, there happened in diverse places of England,
and namely about London, in the year of our Lord 1247. a terrible Earthquake,
wherewith (as in such chances is commonly seen) houses went to wrack, etc. A
little before this Earthquake, the sea, by the space of three months together,
ceased from ebbing and flowing: and shortly after this Earthquake in like
manner, such unseasonable weather insued, that the quarters of the year did
vary from their natural and ordinary course, the Springtime unpleasant and
changed into Winter.

Furthermore, to knit one to another, and so to make an end of these tragical
reports, in the West country, about An Earthquake at Bath and Wells in the
West country.
Bath and Wells, there was such an Earthquake, that some buildings were turned
topsie turuie, and some sore shaken, the tops specially and upper parts of
steeples, turrets, chimnies, etc. came tottering down: this Earthquake was in
the reign of the said King Henry the third, in the year of our Lord 1248.
Again, in the reign of the self same King Henry the third, in the year of
our Lord 1250. there happened An Earthquake at S. Albons, and the quarters
there aboutes: also, terrible thunder and lightenings upon Christmas day, etc.
an Earthquake at S. Albons, and the quarters there abouts, with a great noise
and rumbling under the ground as though it had thundered. In which very year
(a note worthy the marking) even upon Christmas day, it thundered and
lightened out of measure in Northfolke and Suffolk.

Here you see, in the reign of one King four Earthquaks, particular and
general, whereunto if I should ad the innumerable wonders that appeared
otherwise, the miseries that followed after, and the outrageous troubles which
were in his days, I should meddle with a long and a wearisome labor, and
lament to behold the calamities which have fallen upon this land. Moreover, I
find that in Ireland, in the year of our Lord 1266. there chanced an
Earthquake which did not a little hurt to that country: and more harm in
process of time did ensue thereupon, than was done at the instant. For,
besides the present perils, within a while after, the very effects of
Earthquakes, and the plagues whereof they are foretokens, fell upon the
people, namely, dearth and mortality.

To come a step or two forward, in the reign of King Edward the first of
that name, in the year of our Lord 1274. An Earthquake with other strange and
fearful sightes, to the astonishment of people: * also, a third general
Earthquake over all England.
there chanced such an Earthquake in diverse places of England, such terrible
lightening and thunder, the vision of a burning Drake, and a blasing Star,
that the people being at their wits end, thought Doomes day to have been
come upon them: and the year next and immediately ensuing, being 1275. there
happened * a general Earthquake throughout all this realm, wherewith, among
other hurts that were done, the Church of S. Michael on the hill without
Glastenburie was thrown down to the ground: not long after which chance, it
rained blood in the country of Wales, a bloody token of bloody battles,
which shortly after followed.

Again, in the reign of King Richard the second, in the year of our Lord
1382. it is recorded, that in one week two Earthquakes happened in sundry
places of this realm, and namely in Kent: the first being so vehement, that it
ouerthrewe Churches and other buildings of timber and stone: the second so
violent both An Earthquake and Waterquake, both at one instant.
upon land and water, that even ships in havens by knocking one against
another, were so bruised, that the repairing of them cost much money. Thus
far we have run through the reigns of the Kings of this land, and we see
still by contemplation, that God has never withheld his hand from working
wonders in the world. Now let us mark what Earthquakes have been heard, felt
and seen of late memory, even since the fortunate advancement of our most
gracious sovereign Lady ELIZABETH, by the grace and providence of almighty
God, of England, France and Ireland Queen, etc. Gathering by them such
necessary doctrines, as may redound to the benefit of us all.

In the The great plague wherewith this city of London was lamentably visited.
time therefore of the great plague, when God with the broom of his justice
swept many a house in this city clean, not leaving so much as an innocent
child alive, such was his wrath against us for sin, when the pestilence was
so common and contagious, that in one years space there died twenty
thousand, three hundred, three score and twelve persons, even then, beside
other crosses, which it pleased God to lay upon us, as dearth of victuals, and
poverty, then I say, A particular Erthquake in the reign of our gracious
Queen Elizabeth.
an Earthquake happened in diverse places of this realm, specially in the
shires of Lincoln, and Northampton, where (as in such chances we see come to
pass) much harm could not choose but be done. Shortly after, in comparison,
from the first of December, till the twelfth of the same month, it thundered
and lightened continually: but on the last day at night so terribly, as no man
living yet no place can comprehend it: that our posterity, if it please God to
prolong their pilgrimage in this life, may tell their offspring what woonders
GOD has wrought in these times, and that he is able, when it is his blessed
will, to do greater things among the people and nations of the earth, I will
register this wonder.

To A leap from London to other places of this realm, where ye Earthquake was
forceable.
leave London therefore as needelesse to be named, the falling of chimnies, the
cracking of houses, the shaking of windows, the trembling of tables, the
quiuering of channels, the maruelling of men, the wondering of women, the
astonishment of both, the talking of Gods judgments, the fearing of his
vengeance, the suspecting of great danger, the prophesieng of Doomes day, the
confessing of sin, the blaming of all estates, the complaining against pride,
the exclaming against envy, the crieng out against the abuse of the Sabbath
day, the finding fault with a thousand enormities, (for the peoples mouths
were full of common places at that instant, but alas that sudden zeal being
vehement, could not be permanent, devotion died when danger ceased, and We
wonder no longer at Gods worke^ than whiles we see them present.
all was counted but a nine days wonder) the inueieng against diverse
disorders in these days, the wishing of all well, some saying Lord have
mercy upon us, some Jesus save us, some praieng in the Church, some plaieng in
the fields, some merry at home, some sporting abroad, some busy about their
affairs, some looking over their accountes, some leaping, some dansing, some
tumbling, some vawting, some piping, some singing, some bowling, some dicing,
some carding, some shooting, some wooing, some surfeiting, some sleeping, some
eating, some drinking, some ieasting, some gibing, some scoffing, some
taunting, some bralling, some fighting, etc. that I Our unreadiness if God had
come to judgment, at that instant, when he fraid us with an Earthquake.
think if the general day of judgment had come upon us, as this was but a
forewarning of it, we had all been found no less unprovided, than were they
in Noes flood, we had all stood in the state of condemnation: and therefore
exalt and magnify Gods mercy, which is above all his works, and endures
from generation to generation.

To be certain of this Earthquake, how far it was effectual, to what
Countries it stretched, what people it amazed, I have had conference with
diverse, some saying that it was general, some that it was extraordinary,
some that it was in Cales, Antwerpe, and Brabant, some that it was in sundry
places of Flanders, some that it was in Northfolke, and Suffolk, some that it
was at the The Isle of Elie shaken, notwithstanding yc round compass of
waters about it.
Isle of Elie, a soil as it were cut off from all the Country, by reason of
waters lieng round about it, and yet coming thither it shook all the towns,
and made a stone or two of great bigness, to fall from the Minster: some that
it was general, some that it was supernatural, some that the like was never
seen, (and I am of that opinion) some saying this, and some that, according as
they were moved upon the sudden chance. Among a number that have complained
what hurts their houses have sustained, some that XX. pounds, XXX. pounds,
nay an C. pounds will not repair the ruins of the same, I cannot hear of
one that lamenting the decay of conscience, equity, righteousness, honesty,
charitablenesse, etc. does one good deed toward their restitution. A strange
oversight, or rather a senseless security among men.

Here I could largely discourse upon the particular enormities of this our
wicked age, as Some crieng sins of England named, by them to judge the
abomination of the residue.
pride, ambition, covetousness, extortion, usury, dissension, oppression,
injury, blasphemy, slander, fornication, briberie, subtlety, evil talking,
and worse walking of all degrees in their calling: but because this point is
already touched in place convenient, and diverse diversely have discoursed upon
this our late and sudden Earthquake, whose names are rehearsed in the beginning
of this book, one among all sufficient to report the truth of so terrible a
trembling, but all jointly, though many, yet too too few, by pen and ink to
set out so marvelous a matter to the world, that the hearing of Gods
wonderful works might breed a fear of his heavy judgments, I conclude
with this prayer following.

A prayer for repentance, being the only thing that must mitigate the wrath
and indignation of God, which how hot and heavy it is, the signs and wonders
above mentioned are forewarnings.

Chap. 13.
O This prayer is necessary for every private housholde^, ^o use with his
family.
Almighty God, thou just judge and severe punisher of sin, which have not
spared thine own people, being the lot of thine inheritance, but have for
their transgressions executed thy sharp and bitter judgments upon them,
sometimes by sword, sometimes by samine, sometimes by pestilence, sometimes by
captivity, according as it pleased thee, under whose rod of correction they
often lay groaning, we the sinful people of this realm of England, perceiving
by most apparent tokens, that thou art highly displeased with us, and by the
remembrance of thy manifold visitations in times past called to an
acknowledgment and confession of our sins, our vile sins, our abominable
sins, our damnable sins, beseech thee with all submission to have mercy
upon us, and not to proceed in judgment against us: for alas we are then
utterly undone.

We are not able to answer in our own behalf We cannot excuse the least
sin yr we have committed.
for the least offense which we have committed, there is no pleading before
thy Majesty for our excuse, thou will admit no shift, thou will allow no
proof, whereby to maintain our own cause: for thou art righteous in thy
judgments, vncorrupt in thy proceedings and unvariable in pronouncing
sentence. Lo (most merciful Father) we wretches For the reward of sin, as
S. Paul says, is death, and except that Gods mercy set in foot, eternal
damnation.
subject unto death and damnation through sin, fall prostrate before thy
face, and being penitent and heavy for our misdeedes, most humbly beseech thee
to be favorable unto us, and upon trial of our amendment by the assistance
of thy spirit, to withdraw the whippe of thy wrath, wherewith thou forewarnest
us we are like to be scourged. We have kicked up the heel against thee, like
unbroken Coltes, the Ox has known his masters stall, and the Ass his
owners cribbe, we have not regarded thy way, but far inferior unto them in
due performance of service, have neglected all care of obedience to thy
Majesty.

Our Here would be reckoned up all such sins, as our own consciences cast
before us. with a set purpose to amend.
unthankfulness (O Lord we confess) is wonderful, our contempt unmeasurable,
and our security monstrous: nevertheless, thou that have power to renew our
secret cogitations and thoughts, to make that straight which is crooked, the
hard soft, the rough smooth, the sour sweet, the sick sound, the dead alive,
vouchsafe to turn this ingratitude, and unthankfulness of ours, into the
contrary virtue: our contempt into obedience, our security into carefulnes,
that seeing the signs of thy wrath and indignation kindled to consume us, we
may be sorry for our sins and be saved.

It is not The names of the idolatrous Gods, whom the superstitious Gentiles
worshipped.
Adrammelech nor Anammelech, whom we have offended: it is not Ashima nor
Ashtaroth, whom we have dishonored: it is not Baalim nor Chemosh, whom we
have provoked: it is not Dagon nor Milcom, whom we have despised: it is not
Molech nor Nergal, whom we have forsaken: it is not Niohaz nor Nisroch, whom
we have contemned: it is not Succot-benoth nor Tartak, whom we have renounced:
finally, it is not any abomination of the idolatrous Gentiles, whom we have
displeased: we abhor and utterly detest all such fornication and uncleanness
of the Heathen. But it is thou (O almighty GOD, whose seat is the Heaven, and
whose footestoole the earth) against whom we have transgressed: thy laws we
have violated, and not lived within the compass of thy commandments.

Our This confession must be made with a zeal and fernencie of spirit.
bodies we have defiled with the filthiness of concupiscence, and every member
and part of it has been accessarie to the committing of many an outrageous
sin: our very souls also (O Lord) we confess, are defaced, and have lost
their glory through the stains of our infinite transgressions: so that both
within and without we are polluted, poisoned, and like to perish, except the
Mithridatum of thy mercy, which is a present and sovereign salve against all
sores, preserve us from this peril.

Thou (O most merciful Father) as tendering the estate of us thy children,
have vouchedsafe by sundry signs and wonders, as foretokens of thy plagues
prepared for our punishment, to call us to repentance. Our The mercy of God
has showed it self by sundry signs to all ages.
forefathers have not wanted these warnings, and we are not without them, so
meruellous is thy mercy. From Heaven thou vouchsafedst to visit us, and have
commanded the earth to call upon us: visions of fire have declared thy
judgments, blasing Stars thine indignation, mortal plagues thy vengeance.
Our progenitors have lien groaning under the yearks of thy sharp rod, that we
their posterity, by their chastisement might be drawn to amendment.

O the unmeasurable mercy of thee our almighty God! O thy long sufferance! O
thy fatherly kindness! O thy unspeakable pity and patience! Thou It is the
mercy of God and his long sufferance, that we have not been destroyed in our
sins.
have forborne us even in our wilful offenses, and have spared us when we
deserved justly to be smitten. Thou have powered plenty upon us, and prolonged
our peace, and yet (ungracious children) we will not obey thy voice. O Lord,
bear with our imbecillitie (we beseech thee,) for thou know we are but dust
and ashes, frail and feeble, unconstant and variable, corrupt and mortal. It
is not in us to direct our own ways, but the working of thy spirit in us: and
therefore we acknowledge our own vileness, and falling flat before the throne
of thy presence submit our selves, both bodies and souls, to thy good pleasure
and will.

O Lord look upon our humility, behold our submission, regard our heaviness,
despise not our contrition, hearken to our prayers, and ponder our
supplications, which we power forth before the throne of thine
incomprehensible Majesty. And though Our offenses and misdeedes are more than
the hairs of our heads.
we have been startbackes, though we have been stubberne, though we have
been rebellious, though we have been merciles, though we have been covetous,
though we have been murderers, though we have been deceivers, though we have
been hypocrites, though we have been contemners, though we have been liers,
though we have been blasphemers, though we have been riotters, though we have
been wantons, though we have been dronkards, though we have been irreligious:
finally, though we have been never so bad (as we cannot brag of one sparkle
of good in this lump of frail flesh) yet we beseech thee to cast an eye upon
our accurssed case, and vouchsafe to raise in us the virtue of repentance, of
true and unfeigned repentance, of sincere and hearty repentance, of Christian
and perfect repentance: that we may sobbe and sigh at the sight of our sins,
which are so many and so grievous, that the remembrance of them strikes us
down into desperation, unless thy mercy shine from Heaven upon us sinners
sore distressed, and minister due consolation.

O Lord God must be heartily prayed unto, for in him it rests only to
reform all disorders in us: who of our selves are able to do nothing that is
good.
God most mighty, most gracious, most bountiful, most righteous, the giver of
all good gifts, the welspring of all felicity, the treasure of everlasting
blessedness, create in us a new heart, and plant in us a right spirit, reform
that which is amiss in us, and make us that are carnal spiritual: lighten
our minds with the lamp of thy grace, that we may through repentance, which we
most humbly beseech thee to establish in our hearts, for sake our former
conversation, and begin to lead a new life, both we and our families, wives,
children, and servants, endeavoring by the good government of thy spirit, to
bridle the wildness of our wandering desires, that they exceed not the
limits of thy law: to amend our manners, to put off our old disguised
garment of uncleanness, and to cloth our selves with a suite of new raiment,
namely, of regeneration: whereby The means and ways to be reconciled unto
God, out of whose favor and love we are fallen.
being renewed, we may honor thee our Lord GOD almighty, Christ thy Son
equal with thee in deity, and the holy Ghost the third person in Trinity:
obey our governors, reverence thy preachers, love our neighbors, succor the
comfortles, help the widows, maintain the orphans, offer no wrong, but
deal justly in all our affairs: that by our conversation thus reformed, we
may be reconciled unto thee (O our good God) again, and escape the plagues
which thou have denounced against us, by strange signs and wonders.

We are frail, fleshly, corrupt, sinful, and without the assistance of thy
spirit unable to bring forth the fruits of the Gospel. In consideration
whereof, we exaue at thy hands (O heavenly father) the gift of thy grace,
which may sanctify our souls, and purify our bodies, that both our souls
and bodies may be made acceptable and sweet smelling sacrisices, to offer unto
thy divine Majesty. Put away from us, by the For the word of God, beside
temporal blessings whith it brings to them that follow it in life and
conversation, is the savor of life unto life, etc.
fruitful preaching of thy word, all kind of enormities unseemly for our
vocation: and (as nothing is impossible unto thee) vouchsafe that this our age
upon whom the ends of the world are warranted by undoubted forewarnings to
be come, may see those happy days, which have been prophesied by the mouths
of thy messengers: that the Woolfe should dwell with the Lamb, and the
Leoparde lie with the Kid: the Lion and the Calfe keep together, the Cow and
the Bear be at agreement: the sucking Infant play upon the hole of the Aspe,
and the wained Child put his hand into the Cockatrice nest: that thy spirit
reforming us, and knitting our hearts with the knot of mutual charity, we may
live in love without dissembling, and favor each other without grudging,
casting off all cruel affections, which transform men into monsters, in whom
thou (O God) have vouchsafed to express the image of thy Majesty.

The end of all is this, which we beseech thee (O merciful father) to
establish in us: namely, For in these two points consists the sum of the
law, and so by sequel the fruition and enioieng of everlasting life.
the fearing of thy name, and the keeping of thy commandments: for hereupon
depends the whole duty of man: knowing that thou (O Lord) wilt bring every
work unto judgment, and every secret thing, even our very thought, whether
it be good or evil, to account.

These blessings we beseech thee (O gracious God) grant us, with the increase
of thy love and favor, for his sake in whom thou art well pleased, Jesus
Christ the just, to whom with thee (O Father) and the holy Ghost, three
persons, and one immortal, invisible, incomprehensible, and only wise God, be
all laud, praise, honor, power, majesty, and dominion, world without end.
Amen.

Give GOD the glory.
FINIS.
1580.

OS HOMINI SVBLIME DEDIT



Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, dwelling in Pater noster row at the
sign of the Star.


