An Epitaph, or funeral inscription, upon the godly life and death of the
Right worshipful Master William Lamb Esquire, Founder of the new Conduit in
Holborne, etc. Deceased the one and twentieth of April, and intumbed in S.
Faiths Church under Povvles, the sixth of May next and immediately follovving.
Anno. 1580. Devised by Abraham Fleming.
ALl flesh is grass, the (...)
Scripture says, and vadeth like a flower,
And nothing to be permanent, can vaunt it has the power.
The fairest and the foulest thing, that any man can name,
Has but a time to live and die, in honor or in shame.
No artificial workmanship, no notable devise,
No valiant act, no noble deed, no puissant enterprise,
But as in time triumphantly, it challenges renown,
Even so in time from honors hight, at last it tumbleth down.
The doubtful state of mortal man, an argument may be,
That nothing is perpetual, which glansing eye does see,
But transitory, frail, and vain, as time demandes his fee.
The Sun and Moon (...)
shall have their change, though gloriously they shine,
The glistering Stars in firmament, from brightness shall decline,
The scattered clouds, like winding worm, or scortched parchment scroll,
Shall shrink together, as in skies they are constraind to roll.
Then, since eclestiall creatures state, so alterable is,
That vain we count each earthly thing, I judge it not amiss.
We see the seasons of the year, successively ensue,
First nipping Winters blustering blasts, with frosts as stiff as glue,
Then pleasant Spring with colors clad, of yellow, green, and blue:
Next which comes ripening Summer in, and then does follow fast,
Quick Harvest for the husbandman, t'acquite his charges past,
No time has this prerogative, for evermore to last.
Lo thus in circle runs the year, with compass round about,
And his appointed age the world, by portions wears out.
Count what we can most excellent, needs must it have an end,
Against decay there is no force, nor fortress to defend.
How (...)
many Cities stately built, of timber, lime and stone,
Are come to naught, and in their place a desert left alone?
Pomp makes not perpetual, although it bear a port,
A Maigame I may name it well, a pastime and a sport,
Whose glory glides and slips away, whose pleasure is but short.
Like Plaiers in an Interlude, upon a common stage,
One representing lusty youth, another crooked age,
One royal Principality, another Courtly state,
One like a Judge does sit on bench, another begges at gate,
Thus counterfeit they all degrees, until the play be done:
Even so is man upon the earth, since first his stock begone.
For Adam, though he lived long, yet dead he was at last,
The Patriarchs and Prophets old, their pilgrimage have past:
Kings have resigned up their crowns, and titles of their thrones,
And many a politic Governor in grave has laid his bones,
This prove the (...)
sundry writings set, on their Sepulcher stones.
The wisdom of the wise is vain, the strong man's strength a toy,
If they by them as instruments, seek length of life t'enioy:
And as for wealth, it is but wind, for riches have no hold,
The monied man must think to die, if once he waxes old.
Lo, lo, a present pattern here, all you that list to learn,
By viewing of this corpse corrupt, what you shall be discearne.
Sometime he was, as others be, a quick and living man,
But wounded with the dart of death, revive him nothing can.
His youthful years, as others have, this good Esquire has had,
And crooked age by creeping on, with weakness sick and sad,
In winding sheet at head and foot, fast knit his corpse has clad.
Rich in his life, For I have heard it credibly reported, that he left little
or nothing vndistributed.
poor at his death, a steward of the Lords,
His talent Christianly laid out, with Gods good will accordes.
And as in the Acts, Cornelius deeds, bear witness of his faith,
(For outward works before the world, belief within bewraith:)
So this religious Gentleman, a Patron to the poor,
In allies and in lanes abroad, at home in th'entrie door,
In open street, in holy Church, in many a corners crook,
(Where, for the poor and impotent, whom kith and kin forsook,
With charitable zeal inflamde, this lowelie Lamb did look,)
His alms he has distributed, and given as he saw need,
Cloth for the back, meat for the mouth, the hungry soul to feed.
As loving as a Lamb he liud, and verifide his name,
He was an eye unto the blind, a leg unto the lame,
A comfort to the comfortles, a succor to the sick,
A father to the fatherles, whom nipping need did prick,
A husband to the desolate, and widow left alone,
A favorer and a friend to all, an enemy to none.
Now Poor people shall sone feel the loss of this Lamb by the lack of
their relief.
such as had his wool to wear, lament of him the lack,
His flesh did fill their bellies full, his fleese kept warm their back,
His pence and pounds preserved them, from many a wringing wrack.
No miss of mercy was in him, for jointly heart and hand,
Were pliant to supply the wantes, of many in this land.
For this he knew, by giving them, he lent unto the Lord:
His humblenes no homelines, of sickly soul abhord.
So that I may conclude of him, as needs conclude I must,
If works may simply of themselves, make righteous men and just,
(Which I deny, for unto faith this office is assinde:)
Then is he sanctifide from sin, and cleansd in heart and mind.
The fruits of faith which flourished, in him whiles he did live,
His diverse distributions, and gifts which he did give,
The monuments which he has left, behind him being ded,
Are signs that For Christ will repay y^ a thousand fold, which is given to ye
succourles.
Christ our Shepherd has, unto his sheepfold led,
This loving Lamb, who like a Lamb did meekely in his bed:
His body buried in the ground, there to consume to dust,
His soul in Abraham's bosom restes, in quietness I trust:
A place allotted unto Lamb^, there to possess in peace,
Such blessings as this Lamb enioyes, whose like the Lord increase,
For Jesus sake the spotless Lamb. And here my pen shall cease.
SACRIFIZIO AGNELLO SALVAZIONE MVNDO



As Evening shadow slides,
And Seas do vary tides,
So all the pranking prides,
Of worldly glory glides:
Gods word, the guide of guides,
For evermore abides.


Imprinted at London by Henry Denham, for Thomas Turner, and are to be sold
at his shop at Guild Hall gate.


