A brief request or declaracion presented unto Madame the Duchess of Parme.
etc. Regente of the low Country of Flaunders: By the Lords and Nobility of
the same Country, with the Answer and Reply, and other writings. Englished
by W.F. 1566.

Imprinted at London, by Ihon Kyngston, for Thomas Humble, dwelling at the
sign of the George in Lumberdstreate.

To the Reader.
BEfore we set forth the declaracion of the Nobility, we have thought
good to express the copy of the letters of Madame the Duchess of Parme,
Regente. etc. sent to the Governors and Counsaillors Provincial of the low
Country of Flaunders. etc. Also the extracte of the letters of the King our
sovereign lord, sent to the Provinces of the low country, the which have
been published alredie in some places, and are meant to be published throughout,
which thing has given occasion to the nobility, to present the said
declaracion, te^ding to the hinderance of the execucion of the said letters.

Margaret by the grace of God Duchess of Parme, and of Plaisance. etc. Regente
and Gouernesse.
RIght dear and well-beloved, although that from the beginning of the reign of
the King, my Sovereign Lord, of the Countries on this side, as well by the
renuyng and publishyng of the Placardes and ordinances of the Emperor
Charles, my sovereign lord of most high memory deceassed (whom God have in
his glory) touching the state of Religion, ratified and confirmed by his
royal majesty, that the same which has since been written you, eue^ at his
last departure from thesaid Countries, for his Kingdom of Spain, you might
always know the good zeele and most holy affeccion of his said majesty, to
the conseruacion of our old true faith and catholic Religion, and to the
weedyng out of all sects and heresies, in these said Countries on this side:
Notwithstanding this, as it has pleased his said majesty for certain
occasions, to renew again unto us his most holy intent, by his last
letters, we have thought good by express charge thereof, to represent that
which his majesty has written unto us, which is thus in effect: That his
Majesty desiryng nothing more then the conseruacion of of thesaid Religion,
and of his good subjects on this side, in good tranquillity, peace, unity,
and concord, and to preserve them from the inconveniences, which have been
seen to chance in many places of Christendom, for the chaungyng of the said
Religion: His said majesty wills and intends, that the said Placardes and
Ordinances, of his Imperial majesty deceassed and his predecessors, be kept
and observed in all poinctes, as it is also the intent of his said majesty,
to cause to be well and straightly observed that which is decreed by the holy
Council of Trente, and the Provincial congregacions, especially as touching
the reformacion of the Clergy, without resistyng the said decrees in any
thing, to the end that punishing the heresies, the manners also may be
corrected: Also that all favor and assistaunce be given to the Inquisitors,
of the faith and the erecucion of their offices, and that the Inquisicion be
made by the said Inquisitours, as it has been made heretofore, and as
apperteineth to them by divine and humain right, the which thing his Majesty
also expressly commands, by his said letters. And following this writing of
his said majesty, and to obey thereunto, in a thing so holy and favorable, we
could not omit to write this unto you, for to pray you, require you, and of
the behalf of his said majesty to command you very expressly, to call and
guide your selves herein, according to the ordinance of his said Majesty,
without gainstandyng it in any poyncte or article, and that you cause the same
to be understood to the officers, and those of the law, of the principal
Tounes of the Country and County of (...) to the end that they may order
them selves thereafter, without dissimulacion or couine, under the penalties
contained in the same Placardes. And so much the better to have knowledge of
it, that ye appoincte and assign a Counselor of your College (who
notwithstanding may be changed from half year to half year, to the end that
one alone be not always charged) and he to do none other thing, but to have
regard to the said Country of (...) for the obseruacion of the decrees of
thesaid holy Council, and to advertise you always of that which shall be
needful to be provided for, according to the intent of his said majesty.
And to the end that we may always know the state of the said Religion, as
is aforesaied, we desire and command you as aforsaied, that from three
months to three months, ye write unto us the success particularly, making
your recourse to us in matters of difficultee, or to them of the privy
counsel of his said majesty, that report may be made unto us, whereas
likewise we will appoinct some Councellor, who shall take the charge
particularly, and shall confer with you, and him that shall be sent by you. And
to the end that upon all this before said, you might so much the better se
the express pleasure of his said majesty, we have caused to be joined
hereunto, the chief poinctes of the letters and other writings of his said
majesty, concerning this matter, to the end to order and guide your selves,
according to the form and tenor of the same without defaulte. And thus most
dear and well-beloved, the Lord have you in his keeping.

Written at Brussells the.xviii. day of December. Anno Dn^i.1565. H. Vt
underneath was written Margarita. And lower then that the Seal of Ouerlope.
Upon the back was moreover written, to our right dear and well-beloved, the
President and people of the Counsel of the king in.
An extract of the last letters and writings sent by the King to Madame the
Duchess, with the last dispatche, concerning the state of Religion.
First of all, as concerning the Placardes and Ordinances as well old as new,
touching thesaid state of Religion, that his Majesty understanding the estate
wherein the affairs of Religion now stand on this side, it is not convenient
to make, as touching the said Placardes and Ordinances any change, but that
the said Placardes of the Emperors Majesty deceassed, and those of his said
Majesty be also executed. And his Majesty has perceived the cause of the
evil which has chanced, and of that it is so augmented and gone so far, to
have been by the negligence, slothfulness, and dissimulacion of the Judges.
And that if there be any Judges, which dare not or will not execute them, for
fear of any tumult, then let his Majesty thereof have knowledge, to the end
that he may provide other of stouter heart and better zeal, to the excucion
thereof, whereof there can be no default in those said Countries, seeing there
be so many Catholics, and men desirous to serve God and his Majesty, and that
doing this, and executing thesaied Placardes, it is to be hoped that by that
means, the hurt which is done may be the better and sooner remedied.

For the second, as concerning that which touches the Inquisitours of the
faith, his Majesty charge her highness, to help that thesaied
Inquisitours be favored in that, which touches the execucion and
administracion of their charge, in asmoche as is convenient for the profit and
sustentacion of the Religion, being the intent of his Majesty, that thesaied
Inquisicion be made by thesaid Inquisitours, as it has been until this time,
and as to the^ belongs by divine and human right, and that this is no new
thing, seeing that it has been always done so in the time of the Emperors
Majesty deceassed, and of his majesty also. The inconveniences which are to
be feared, being much more apparaunt, more nigh, and greater, when there is
not provision made for the said Inquisitors, of that which apperteineth to
their office, and that they are not assisted. And because her highness does
understand what this imports, his Majesty charge her as much as she may
to do whatsoever shall be necessary thereunto, and that she do not consent,
that any other thing be entreated of, her highness knowing how much his
Majesty has the heart, desire, and contented that it shall thus be.

For the third, his Majesty commands her highness, that seeing that the holy
Council of Trent was already published, that there rested nothing but that
which touches the execucion, which belongs to the Bishops, her highness
should cause them to make all speed and assistance possible, to the end that she
enforce her self as behooves. Also that the same be executed, which the said
Council of Trente has decreed, as concerning the reformacion of the life and
manners of the spirituality, his majesty chargyng as well her highness, as the
officers of his said Majesty, to give all the favor and encouragyng that
should be needful, and that if in case it should be requisite, that on the
behalf of his Majesty, she should cause it to be dispatchte quickly,
especially where the people of the Church, will not obey to the reformacion
made by the Bishops, conformable to the decree of thesaied Council of Trente.

And for conclusion, sith that which his Majesty writes to her highness,
as is aforsaied, is that which belongs to the profit of the Religion and of
the country on this side, which were nothing worth without the same, and
that this is the way for to keep them in Justice, peace, and tranquillity.
And because her highness sees what it imports, his majesty requires her
again to follow the way, whereby that which is aforesaied, may be brought
to effect, and that it shall be the thing, whereby his Majesty may receive much
contentacion, as well of her highness, as of the Lords being under her, to
whom her highness should give in charge the same, to the end that they implose
themselves as his Majesty trusts that they will not fail, knowing the
contentment that they shall do unto him, besides that they shall fulfill the
duty of soche personages as they be, and according to the obligacion that
they have to the service of God, and of his majesty and to the universal
profit of the country on this side, and also of them selves perticularly.

The President and Council of the Kings majesty of Hollande, Zelande, and
Frieslande.
NOble, worthy, and discrete, and also good friends, we have received certain
letters of the Duches, Regent of the Kings Majesty in these low countries,
with express;e commission and commandment unto your honors. For to certify
how his majesty, nothing in the world more does require then the conseruacion
of the Catholic religion, and his good subjects of these countries in good
peace, rest, quietness and union to maintain, and the same to keep from all
inconveniences, the which in many places of Christendom, by the chaungyng of
religion, be chaunsed and happened: Does will you to understand that the
Proclamacions and ordinances of the late Imperial majesty, made upon
poinctes of religion to be kept, and in all poinctes to be maintained and
executed, as also the mind of his majesty is well and straightly to maintain
that, which by the holy and general Council of Tre^t by the Provincial
synodes has been ordained and statuted, and in especial as touching the
reformacion of the Spirituality, without any thing against the same, to do
that in correctyng of the heresies, evil manners, by the same may be amended
and punished: Therefore his majesty does will that the Inquisitors of the
faith, in the executyng and exercisyng of their office, shall have all the
help and assistance that you are able to show or do unto them: and that the
Inquisicio^ by the same Inquisitors be done in like sort, as it has been unto
this present time, according as it apperteineth unto them, by Spiritual and
Temporal laws, the which his Majesty expressly has commanded, and in
the same to his Majesty, in so holy and good a matter to be obedient, we could
no less do, then to write these presents, and in the same to require, and in
the name of his Majesty to commau^de very earnestly, that in these you will
do, according unto the will and ordinances of ^is majesty, without doing,
or suffering to be done against the same in any poincte, upon pain and penalty
of the Placarde and ordinance comprehended, like as by us has been in the
departing of his majesty out of this low Country, by his majesty at large
has been written. You shall further keep and observe the last Proclamacion,
published the.29. day of March before Easter. Anno.1563. touching the Midwifes
with also that that has been commanded you by our letters missiues, at ye
sending of the same proclamacion, as to keep and take good regard upon al such
as do absent themselves from the church, not heating Mass upon the Sondaie
and holy day in that his Majesty's letters, the.29. day of March Anno.1563.
and ours the 11 of April. An 1564. after Easter, and unto us. Certified that
daily more and more, upon the streets, wagons, boats, and ships, and other
places, dishonest and vnreuerent songs he used against the holy Sacraments
of the Altar, Baptism, and others: We charge and ordein your honor, the same
coming unto your knowledge, with all comely manner, the same to let and hinder,
and those to apprehend that shall sing any such Songs, contrary to the
christen faith, unto the tenor of his majesty's Proclamacion aforesaied, and
to the intent that you, and also all the subjects, the better ordein your
selves, unto the good pleasure and will of his majesty's Proclamacion: you
shall henceforthe take better regard, that the Proclamacion upon the poinctes
of Religion namely the Proclamacion of the year of our Lord.1556. every half
year be renewed and published, to the end that such as be inclined to any new
learning and sects, by the penalty in the Proclamacio^ contained, might be
retired.

Noble worthy, discrete, and in especial good friends, our lord God be with
you: written at ye Hage the 8 of January. 1565. Stilo curi.
The Proposicion made by Mounsire de Brederode, to Madame the Duchess, before
he presented the declaracion.
MAdame, the gentlemen assembled in this town, and others of like quality in
compitente number, who for certain respects, are not here present, have stayed
for the service of the king, and the public weal of this low Country, to
present unto your highness with all humility, this declaracion, upon the
which it shall please you to give soche order, as shall be thought convenient,
humbly besechyng your highness, to take it in good part. And further Madam,
we are advertised to have been charged before your highness, before the lords
of the Council, and others, that this our deliberacion, has chiefly been made
for to raise up tumultes, vprores and sedicions, and, which is more
abominable, they have charged us that we would change our Prince, ^auyng
practices, leagues; and conspiracies, with Princes and Capttaines strangers,
as well Frenchemen, Almaines, as others, which thing we never thought upon; and
is altogether contrary to our loyalty, and to that which your highness shall
find by this declaracion: besechyng nevertheless your highness, to name and
discover unto us, them that have so unjustly blamed so noble and honorable a
company.

Moreover Madame, the Lords here present have understanding, that there is
some amongst them, who perticularly are accused and charged, to have taken in
hand and gone about, to bring to effect the forsaied wicked enterprise,
as well with Frenchmen, as other strangers, whereat we feel our selves greatly
grieved. And therefore humbly beseech your highness and favor, as to name the
accusars, and accused, to the end that the wrong and mischief being
discovered, your highness may make brief and manifest Justice, and by that
means suppress the euilles and slanders, which might come upon it, being
well assured that your highness will never suffer, that soche a noble and
honorable company, should remain charged, with so great infamies and wicked
acts.

The request of the Nobility of the low Country, presented to Madame the
Duchess of Parme and Plaisance. etc.
MAdame, it is well enough known that throughout all Christendom has always
been greatly renowned (as it is yet at this present) the great fidelity of
the people of this low Country, to wards their lords and natural Princes,
wherein the nobility has always kept the chief ra^cke, as the same which has
never spared neither body nor goods, for the conseruacion and increase of the
greatness of them. In the which we the most humble subjects of his
majesty will always continue from good to better, so that both day and
night we keep our selves ready, for to do him most humble service, both with
our bodies and goods: and seeing in what case the affairs are at this
present, have thought best to charge our selves with some ill will, then to
keep secret from your highness, things which might hereafter turn to the
prejudice of his majesty, and forthwith altogether trouble the rest and
tranquillity of this country. Trustyng that theffecte will appear in time,
that emongeste all the services which we might have done, or hereafter may do
to his majesty, this same ought to be accounted amongst the most notable,
and to best purpose, whereby we assuredly persuade our selves, that your
highness can not take it but in very good part. Although then, Madame, that we
doubt not but that all that, which his majesty has heretofore, and also
now presently of new does constitute, touching the Inquisicion and strait
obseruacion of the Placardes for the state of religion, has had some
foundation and just title, to wit, to continue that which the Emperor Charles,
of most high memory decessed, had established for a good intent.
Nevertheless considering that the difference of one time from an other,
brings immediately with it diversity of remedies, and that now of late within
these few years thesaied Placarde, notwithstanding that they were not executed
with all rigor, have nevertheless given occasion to many grievous
inco^ueniences. Certainly the last resolucion of his majesty, by the which he
forbad not only that thesaid Placardes should not be mitigated, but also
plainly commanded, that the Inquision should be observed, and the Placardes
executed with all rigor, does give us sufficient just occasion to fear,
that thereby not only the said inconveniences should greatly increase, but
also that in the end should follow a commotion and general sedicio^, tendyng to
the miserable ruin of the whole country, according as the manifest tokens of
the alteracion of the people (which now appears on every side) does give
us plainly to understand.

Wherefore, knowing the euidencie and greatness of the danger, which does
threaten us, have hitherto hoped yt either by the lords, or by thestates of
the country, declaracion should be made in convenient time unto your highness,
to thend to remedy it, by taking away the cause and original of the evil:
but since having seen, yt they have not executed it for some occasion to us
unknown, and that in the mean while the evil increases daily, in somoche yt
the danger of sedicion and general rebellion is even at hand, we have thought
it good, following ye oath of fidelity and homage together, with ye good will
yt we bear to his majesty and the Country, not to tarry and longer, but
rather to set forth our selves with the first, to do the duty required, and
so much the more boldly, because we have more occasion to trust that his
majesty will take our advertisement in very good part, seeing that the matter
touches be nerer, then it does any other, seeing that we are in more danger
of the inconveniences and calamities, which customably come of soche like
accide^tes, having for the most part our houses and goods situate in the
fields, and ready to be a pray to every man: considering also generally,
that following the rigor of the said Placardes, as his majesty has expressly
commanded to proceed, there shall not be amongst us any man, no nor in the
whole country on this side, of what estate or condition soever he be, that
shall not be found guilty of the confiscation and forfeicture of his body
and goods, and subject to the reproach of the first enemy, who to have
part of the confiscation, will accuse him under color of the Placardes, not
having any other thing left him for refuge, but only the dissimulacion of the
officer, into whose mercy his life and goods are wholly put. In consideracion
whereof, we have so much the more occasion, most humbly to beseech your
highness (as in deed we beseech you by this present request) for to give good
order herein. And (for the importance of the matter) to send as spedely as
may be, an express and fit manne to his majesty to advertise him, and
beseech him most humbly on our behalf, that it would please him to provide as
well for the time present, as the time to come. And forasmoche as the same can
not be done, suffryng thesaied Placardes to remain in their force, seeing that
thereof depends the spring, and original of the said inconveniences: that
it would please him to abolishe the same, the which shall be needful for the
withstandyng of the total ruin and loss of all his countries on this side.

And to the end that his majesty have no occasion to think that we (which
pretend nothing but to do him most humble obedience) would take in hand to
bridle him, or make him a Law at our pleasure (as we doubt not but our
adversaries will interpret it for our disadvantage) it may please his
majesty, to make other Ordinances, by the advice and consent of all the
estate generally assembled, to the end to forsee to this aforesaied, by other
means more apt and convenient, and without so evident dangers. Besechyng
also most humbly his highness, that until soche time that his majesty shall
attend to our just request, and give order according to his good and just
pleasure, that in the mean time he forsee unto the said dangers, by a
general stay, as well of the Inquisicion, as of all execucion of thesaid
Placardes, until soche time that his majesty have taken other order.

Protestyng expressly, that in asmoche as to us apparteineth, we are acquitted
of our duty by this present aduertisemente: Since that from henceforthe, we
discharge our selves before God and me^, declaryng, that if any inconvenience,
disorder, sedicion, rebellion, or sheddyng of blood, do hereafter come to
pass, through fault that there has not been remedy taken in time, we can not
be blamed for keeping close so apparent an evil, wherein we take God, the King,
your highness, and the Lords of his Counsel, to gether and our conscience in
witness, that we have proceeded as behooves good and lawful seruitors, and
faithful subjects of the King, not exceadyng in any thing the limits of our
duty, wherefore also we so much the more instantly beseech, that your
highness will see unto it, before that the evil happen.

Presented by Mounsire Henry of Brederode, Lord of the said place, with
Lodewicke Erie of Nassowe therles of Berge and Culenborgh accompanied with the
Nobility of the low Country, the.5. of April 1565. before Easter.
The Answer made in the Counsel of Estate, by Madame. etc. upon the
declaracion going before.
HEr highness, having understood, what is required and domaunded, by the
matters contained in this request, is fully determined to send toward the
Kings maisstie, for to present it unto him, and to ^se toward him all good
means, that her highness shall think, may serve to dispose and incline his
sai^ Majesty, to condiscende to the request of thesaied suppliantes, who ought
not to doubt, but that all things shall be worthy and conformable to his native
and accustomed benignity: her highness having already (before the coming of the
said suppliantes, by the assistaunce and advise of the governors of the
Provinces, Knights of the Order, and those of the Council, being under her)
gone about to conceive and address, a moderacion of the said Placardes,
touching the state of Religion, for to present it unto his said majesty. The
which moderacion her highness hops should be found soche, that it should give
to every one reasonable contentment. And seeing that thaucthoritie of her
highness, as the suppliantes may well consider and understand, does not
extend so far, as to be able to stay the Inquisicion, and the Placardes as
they demand, and that it behooves not to leave the country, as touching
religion without law, her highness trusts that the suppliantes will content
them selves with this, that she send (to the end aforsaid) toward the
kings majesty, and in the mean time whilst she waits for his answer, her
highness will give order, that as well by the Inquisitors (whereof there have been
until now) that by the officers which have the oversight, things be
executed discretly, and modestly, as apperteineth to their charges, in soche
sort that there be no occasion given of complainte, her highness trustyng
also, that the suppliantes will order themselves after soche fashion, that it
shall not be needful to use it otherwise. And it is to be hoped that by the
good means, which her hignes shall make to his majesty, he shall be content to
discharge the other of the Inquisicion where she is, according as it may be
understood, that it is now declared upon the request of the chief tounes of
Brabant, that they shall not be charged with it. And her highness will labor
so much the more freely toward his majesty, to the end and effect
aforesaied, in that she is assured that the suppliauntes do mind and intend
determinatly, to bring in no new thing, contrary to the ancient religion,
observed in the country on this side, but to maintain it and observe it with
all their power.

Made by her highness at Brusels, the 6. day of April.1565. before Easter.
The Reply upon the Answer going before made the. 8. day of April.
MAdame, having seen the answer, which it has pleased your highness to give
us, we will not fail first of all to thancke most humbly your highness, for
the brief expedicion thereof, especially of the satisfaccion that your
highness has had of this our assemble, the which was made for none other
occasion, but for the good service of the kings majesty, and the tranquillity
of the country: And for the better contentme^t, and rest of the same Country,
we have greatly desired that the said answer of your highness, had been
made more ample and plainer. Nevertheless, sith that your highness has not
the authority that we desired, as we understand, whereof we are very sorry,
we trust according to the hope and assurance that your highness has given
us, that there shall be soche order made, as well toward the Magistrates, as
the Inquisitors, enioynyng them to stay themselves from all suits proceadyng
of the Inquisicion, Ordinances, or Placardes, as well old, as new, touching
the state of Religion, until the Kings Majesty have otherwise detreed. Of
our part, Madame, since that we desire nothing but to follow all that which by
his majesty, with the advice and consent of the Estates generally assembled
shall be decreed, for the mainteinyng of the aunciente Religion, we trust to
gide our selves in soche sort, that your highness shall have no occasion of
miscontentment. And if any man commit any heinous or sedicious act, that he be
by your highness, and them of the Council to Estate, appoincted s^ke
punishment, as the desert of the deed shall require. Protestyng again that
if any inconvenience do rise, by fault of not having given good order, that
we have fulfilled our duty, most humbly besechyng your highness to hold that
our duty as agreeable and bounden, receiuyng it for the service of his
Majesty. Offering our selves to remain most humble and obediente seruitours to
your highness: and to dye at his feet for his service, as often as it shall
please your highness to command us.

Requests of the four members of Flanders, and the Cities, and Cassellries
ioynyng thereunto upon the effect of Inquisicion.
Showing and requiryng in all humility, the four members of your country and
Countess of Flanders, as well for them as for all the Citees, Cassellries in
general of all the Inhabiters, and Subjects of the same Countrees. How that
not long since, they had presented your Majesty a supplicacion, for that it
might please your highness, to permit the suppliantes, to emoy in the before
written quality, their old liberty and freedom, for the preseruacion of
them, and to forbid the Inquisitours, and other Spiritual persons, for the
bryngyng in of any new matters, through the practice of Inquisicion, and that
upon the before written supplicacion, as it nothing had been ordained. For that
your majesty first and formoste require in particular, to understand the
meaning of the suppliantes, according to supplicacions here unto annered, so is
it that they for the satisfaccio^, they now adressyng them selves unto your
Majesty, as to the same perforsed by obligacion of their oath, and to the
conseruacion and welfare, of your before written low Countrees: as also newly
thereunto moved, through the new practice and subteltie of my Lord the
Bisshoppe of Bridgis, and of miaster Peter Litelman, them namyng Inquisitours,
as it appears by the copy of the articles by them, showing hereunto annexed.
Therefore requiryng very humbly, that you taking regard, upon the reasons
hereby rehearsed at large, by the before said supplicacion, and in especial
that your patrimoniall lands, their neighbors not brought to bondage or
subieccion, of the aforesaied Inquisicion, by liberty of the which, your
other patremoniall Countrees, the Inhabitours of the before written, your
country of Fla^ders, should be occasioned to depart, and to leave their
Country and lands, for the auoydyng of soche bondage, vexacio^ and
subieccion, as already has been found by experience. It may please your
Majesty, to let the suppliantes enjoy peaceably the aforesaied, their rightes,
freedoms, customs, and vsaunces, and for as much as the exercise of the
aforesaid Inquisicion, is directly contrary to all the aforesaied rightes,
freedom, customs, and vsances of the said suppliantes: the same wholly to
disanull, and wholly to frustrate and make void, in asmoche as it touches the
temporal persons. Forbiddyng furthermore all Spiritual Justices, to take any
knowledge of matters belongyng unto the knowledge of temporal iurisdiccion, but
the same to put only to the judgment of the Temporal Judges. And not to
consent that the Inhabiters of your before written countrees of Flanders, more
straightly to be bound to any inquisite or rigor of Ordinances and
Proclamacions, made touching Religion, then other their ioynyng countrees and
Provinces, the aforesaied declaracions Your majesty well assuring that they of
your country of Flanders, and the Commons in general, having no other meaning
or desire, then them selves to employe, and to the country masion, and
mainteinyng of the old catholic faith, and to all the service of your
majesty, as true and obediente subjects of the same.

anno.1565. April after Easter.
FINIS.

