The Tragoedy of ROLLO DUKE of Normandy.

ACTED BY HIS Majesty's Servants.

Written by JOHN FLETCHER Gent.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to the University. ANNO 1640.

The Names of the Actors.
Rollo Sons to the deceased Duke of Normandy. Otto Sons to the deceased
Duke of Normandy. Aubrey, Kinsman to Rollo. Gisbert Two Counselors of State.
Balwin, Two Counselors of State. Latorch, Favorite to Rollo. Hamond, Captain
of the Guard. Allan, His brother. Granpree Servants to Rollo. Verdon, Servants
to Rollo. Trevite, Servants to Otto. Du Prette, Servants to Otto.
Citizens. Guard. Servants. Boys. Cook. Butler. Pantler. Yeoman of the
Cellar.
Russee. Cheaters. De Bubie. Cheaters. La-Fiske. Cheaters. Norbret. Cheaters.
Pipeane. Cheaters.
Sophia, The old Dutchess^. Matilda, Her daughter. Edith, Daughter to Baldwin.
THE TRAGOEDY OF ROLLO Duke of NORMANDY.
ACTUS 1. SCENA 1.
Enter Gisbert and Baldwin. Baldw. THe brothers then are met?

Gisb. They are.

Baldw. It Is thought they may be reconciled.

Gisb. It Is rather wished.
For such whose reason do direct their thoughts
Without self flattery, dare not hope it Baldwin,
The fires of love which the dead Duke believed
His equal care of both would have united,
Ambition has divided; and there are
Too many on both parts that know they cannot
Or rise to wealth or honor, their maine ends,
Unless the tempest of the Princes fury
Make troubled Seas, and those Seas yield fit Billows
To heave them up, and these are too well practiced
In their bad arts to give way to a calm,
Which yielding rest to good men proves their ruin.

Bald. And in the shipwreck of their hopes and fortunes
The Dukedom might be saved, had it butten
That stood affected to the general good,
With that confirmed zeal which brave Aubrey does.

Gisb. He is indeed the perfect character of a good man,
And so his actions speak him.

Bald. And did you observe the many doubts and cautions
the brothers stood upon before they met?

Gisb. I did, and yet that ever brothers should
Stand on more nice terms then sworn enemies
After a war proclaimd would with a stranger,
Wrong the reporters credit; they saluted
At distance, and so strong was the suspicion
Each had of other, that before they durst
Embrace, they were by several servants searched,
As doubting concealed weapons; antidotes
Taken openly by both, fearing the room
Appointed for the enterview was poisoned;
The chaires and cushions with like care survai'd,
And in a word, in every circumstance
So jealous on both parts, that it is more
Then to be feared, concord can never join
Minds so divided.

Baldw. Yet our best endeavors
Should not be wanting Gisbert.

Gisb. Neither shall they, Enter Granpree and Verdon.
But what are these?

Baldw. They are without my knowledge,
But by their manners and behaviors
They should express themselves.

SCENA 2.
Gisbert, Baldwin, Granpree, Verdon. Gran. Since we serve Rollo
The eldest Brother, weel be Rollians,
Who will maintain us as brave as Romans
You stand for him?

Verd. I do.

Gran. Why then observe,
How much the business, the so longed for business,
By men that are named from their swords concerns you:
Lechery, our common friend, so long kept under
With whips and beating fatal hemp shall rise;
And baudry in a French-hood shall plead before her
Where it shall be concluded, after twelve
Virginity shall be carted.

Verd. Excellent!

Gran. And Hell but grant the quarrel that's between
The Princes may continue, and the business
That Is of the sword, t'outlast three suits in law.
And we will make Atturneys lans prizadoes,
And our brave Gown^men practisers of back-sword,
The pewter of all Sergeants Maces shall be melted
And turned into common Flaggons,
In which it shall be lawful to carrouse
To their most lowsey fortunes.

Baldw. Here Is a statesman!

Gran. A Creditor shall not dare but by petition
To make demand of any debt, and that
Only once every leap year, in which if
The debtor may be won for a French Crown
To pay a souse, he shall be registered
His benefactor.

Verd. The Chancellor hears you.

Gran. Fear not, I now dare speak as loud as he,
And will be heard and have all that I speak law.
Have you no eyes? there is a reverence due
From children of the gown to men of action.

Gisb. How Is this?

Gran. Even so, the times, the times are changed,
All business is not now preferred in parchment,
Nor shall a grant pass which wants this broad seal,
This seal, do you see? your gravity once laid
My head and heels together in the dungeon
For cracking a scald officers crown, for which
A time is come for vengeance and expect it,
For know you have not full three hours to live.

Gisb. Yes somewhat longer.

Gran. To what end?

Gisb. To hang you, think on that Ruffion.

Gran. For you Schoolmaster, you have a pretty daughter;
let me see,
Near three a clock, by which time I much fear
I shall be tired with killing some five hundred,
Provide a bath, and her to entertain me.
And that shall be your ransom.

Baldw. Impudent rascal!

SCENA 3.
Enter to them Trevile, and Duprete. Gisb. More of the crew.

Gran. What are you Rollians?

Trevile. No: this for Rollo and all such as serve him:
We stand for Otto.

Gran. You seem men of fashion,
And therefore i will deal fairly, you shall have
The honor this day to be chronicled
The first men killed by Granpree; you see this sword,
A pretty foolish toy, my valors servant,
And I may boldly say a Gentleman,
It having made when it was Charlemaines
Three thousand Knights; this Sir shall cut your throat,
And do you all fair service else.

Tree. I kiss your hands for the good offer, here is another
The servant of your servant, which shall be proud
To be scowr'd in your sweet guts, till when,
Pray you command me. Exeunt o^nes praeter Gisbert and Baldwin.

Gran. Your Idolater Sir.

Gish. That ever such
Should hold the names of men!
Or justice be held cruelty, when it labors
To pluck such roots up.

Baldw. Yet they are protected, and by the great ones.

Gisb. Not the good ones Baldwin.

SCENA. 4.
Aubrey, Gilbert, Baldwin. Aub, Is this a time to be spent thus by such
That are the principal ministers of the State?
When they that are the heads have filled the Court
With factions, a weak woman only left
To stay their bloody hands? can her weak arm
Alone divert the dangers ready now
To fall upon the Commonwealth, and bury
The honors of it, leaving not the name
Of what it was? O Gisbert the fair trials
And frequent proofs which our late Master made
Both of your love and faith, gave him assurance
To choose you at his death to be a Guardian, nay
A Father of his Sons, and that great trust
How ill do you discharge? I must be plain
That at the best you are a sad looker on
Of those bad practices you should prevent.
And where is the use of your Philosophy
In this so needful time? be not secure,
For Baldwin be assured since that the Princes
When they were young and apt for any form,
Were given to your instruction and grave ordering,
'Twill be expected that they should be good,
Or their bad manners will be imputed yours.

Bald. 'Twas not in me my Lord to alter nature.

Gisb. Nor can my Counsels work on the^ that will not
Vouchsafe me hearing.

Aub. Do these answers sort
Or with your place or persons? or your years?
Can Gisbert being the pillar of the Laws
See them trod under foot, or forced to serve
The Princes unjust ends, and with a frown
Be silenced from exclaiming on the abuse,
Or Baldwin only weep the desperate madness
Of his seduced Pupills? See those minds
Which with good arts he labored to build up,
Examples of succeeding times oreturn'd
By undermineing Parasites; no one precept
Leading to any act, or great or good
But is forced from their memory, in whose room
Black Counsels are received and their retirements
And secret conference, produceing only
Divelish designs, a man would shame to father.
But I talk when I should do, and chide others
For that I now offend in.

SCENA 5.
Rollo, Lator^h, Trevile, Granpree, Otto, Verdon, Duprete, Gisbert, Baldwin,
Aubrey. Gisb. See It confirmed:
Now do or never speak more,
We are yours.

Rollo: You shall know who I am.

Otto: I do, my equal.

Roll. Thy Prince, give way, were we alone i would force thee
In thy best blood to write thy self my subject,
And glad I would receive it.

Aub. Sir.

Gisb. Dear Lord.

Otto. Thy subject?

Roll. Yes, nor shall tame patience hold me
A minute longer, only half my self,
My birth gave me this Dukedom, and my sword
Shall change it to the common grave of all
That tread upon her bosom, ere I part with
A piece of Earth, or title that is mine.

Otto. I need it not, and would scorn to receive
Though offered what I want not, therefore know
From me though not delivered in great words,
Eyes red with rage, poor pride, and threatening action;
Our father at his death, then when no accent
Were then a son could fall from him in vain,
Made us co-heires, our part of land and honors
Of equal weight, and to see this confirmed
The oath of these is yet upon record,
Who though they should forsake me, and call down
The plagues of perjury on their sinful heads,
I would not leave my self.

Treu. Nor will we see the will of the dead Duke infringed.

Lator. Nor I
The elder robbed of what is his right.

Granp. Nor you?
Let me take place I say I will not see it,
My sword is sharpest.

Aub. Peace you tinder-boxes,
That only carry matter to make a flame,
Which will consume you.

Roll. You are troublesome, to Baldwin,
This is no time for Arguments, my title
Needs not your school defenees, but my sword
With which the Gordian of your Sophistry
Being cut, shall show the Imposture for your law. to Gis.
It is in me to change them as I please,
I being above them ( Gisbert)
Would you have me protect them?
Let them then now stretch their extremest rigor,
And seize upon that Traitor, and your tongue
Make him appear first dangerous and then odious,
And after under the pretense of safety
For the sick State, the Lands and Peoples quiet,
Cut off his head, and I Will give up my sword,
And fight with them at a more certain weapon
To kill, and with authority.

Gisb. Sir I grant,
The Laws are useful weapons, but found out
To assure innocence not to oppress.

Roll. Then you conclude him innocent?

Gisb. The power your father gave him, must not prove a crime.

Aub. Nor should you so receive it.

Bald. To which purpose,
All that dare challenge any part in goodness
Will become Suppliants to you.

Roll. Such have none,
That dare move me in this, hence, I defy you
Be of his party, bring it to your laws,
And thou thy double heart, thou popular foole^
Your morrall rules of justice, and her balance.
I stand on my own Guard.

Otto. Which thy injustice
Will make thy enemies; by the memory
Of him whose better part now suffers for thee,
Whose reverend ashes with an impious hand,
Thou throwst out to contempt, in thy repineing
At his so just decree; thou art unworthy
Of what his last will, not thy merit gave thee,
That art so swollen within, with all those mischiefs
That ere made up a Tyrant, that thy breast
The prison of thy purposes, cannot hold them
But that they break forth, and in thy own words
Discover, what a monster they must serve,
That shall acknowledge thee.

Roll. Thou shall not live Offers his sword at Otto, the faction joyneing Aubrey
between severs the Brothers.
To be so happy.

Aub. Nor your misery
Begin in murder; duty, allegiance,
And all respect of what you are forsake me.
Do you stare ons? is this a theater?
Or shall these kill themselves, like to manfencers,
To make you sport? keep them asunder, or
By Heaven I Will charge on all.

Gran. Keep the peace,
I am for you my Lord, and if you will have me^
I Will act the Constables part.

Aub. Live I to see this!
Will you do that your Enemies dare not wish,
And cherish in your selves those furies which
Hell would cast out? do, I am ready, kill me,
And these that would fall willing sacrifices
To any power that would restore your reason
And make you men again, which now you are not.

Roll. These are your bucklers boy,

Otto. My hindrances,
And were I not confirmed, my justice in
The taking of thy life, could not weigh down
The wrong, in shedding the least drop of blood
Of these, whose goodness only now protects thee.
Thou should feel, I in act would prove my self
What thou in words do labor to appear.

Roll. Hear this and talk again, I Will break through all
But I will reach thy heart.

Otto. It Is better guarded.

SCaeNA. 6.
Sophia, Rollo, Otto and the rest. Soph. Make way or I will force it, who are
these
My sons, my shames; turn all your swords on me,
And make this wretched body but one wound,
So this unnatural quarrel find a grave
In the unhappy womb that brought you forth.
Dare you remember that you had a Mother,
Or look on these gray hairs, made so with tears
For both your goods, and not with age, and yet
Stand doubtful to obey hers? from me you had
Life, nerves and faculties to use those weapons,
And dare you raise them against her, to whom
You owe the means of being what you are?

Otto. All peace is meant to you.

Soph. Why is this war then?
As if your arms could be advanced, and I
Not set upon the wracks, your blood is mine
Your danger's mine, your goodness I should share in,
And must be branded with those impious marks
You stamp on your own foreheads, and on mine
If you go on thus: for my good name therefore
Though all respects of honor in your selves
Are in your fury choakt, throw down your swords^
Your duty should be swifter then my tongue,
And join your hands while they are innocent,
You have heat of blood and youth apt to ambition
To plead an easy pardon for what is past;
But all the ills beyond this hour committed,
From Gods or men must hope for no excuse.

Gisb. Can you hear this unmoved?

Aub. No Syllable
Of this so pious charm, but should have power
To frustrate all the juggling deceipts
With which the Devil blindes you.

Otto. I begin to melt, I know not how.

Roll. Mother, I Will leave you,
And Sir, be thankful for the time you live
Till we meet next, (which shall be soon and sudden)
To her persuasion for you^

Soph. O yet stay,
And rather then part thus, vouchsafe me hearing
As enemies, how is my soul divided!
My love to both is equal as my wishes,
But are returned by neither, my grieved heart
Hold yet a little longer, and then break^
I kneel to both, and will speak so, but this
Takes the authority of a Mothers power,
And therefore like my self, Otto to thee,
And yet observe son, how thy Mothers tears
Out strip her forward words to make way for 'em,
Thou art the younger Otto, yet be now
The first example of obedience to me,
And grow the elder in my love.

Otto. The means to be so happy?

Soph. This, yield up thy sword,
And let thy piety give thy mother strength
To take that from thee, which no enemies force
Could ere dispoile thee of^ why do thou tremble?
And with a fearful eye fixed on thy brother,
Observ'st his ready sword as bent against thee?
I am thy armor and will be pierced through
Ten thousand times before I will give way
To any peril may arrive at thee,
And therefore fear not.

Otto. It Is not for my self
But for you Mother; you are now engaged
In more then lies in your unquestioned virtue.
For since you have disarmed me of defense,
Should I fall now, though by his hand, the world
May say it was your practice.

Soph. All worlds perish
Before my piety turns treasons parent.
Take it again, and stand upon your guard,
And while your brother is, continue armed.
And yet this fear is needless, for I know
My Rollo, though he dares as much as man,
So tender of his yet untainted valor,
So noble, that he dares do nothing basely.
You doubt him, he fears you, I doubt and fear
Both, for others safety not my own.
Know yet my sons when of necessity
You must deceive or be deceived, it is better
To suffer treason then to act the traitor;
And in a war like this, in which the glory
Is his that is overcome. consider then
What it is for which you strive, is it the Dukedom,
Or the command of these so ready subjects?
Desire of wealth, or whatsoere else
Fires your ambition? it is still desperate madness,
To kill the people which you would be Lords of,
With fire and sword to lay that country wast,
Whose rule you seek for, to consume the treasures
Which are the sinews of your government,
In cherishing the factions that destroy it.
Far, far be this from you, make it not questioned,
Whither you can have interest in that Dukedom,
Whose ruin both contend for.

Otto. I desire
But to enjoy my own which I will keep.

Rollo. And rather then posterity shall have cause
To say I ruined all, divide the Dukedom,
I will accept the moietie.

Otto. I embrace it.

Soph. Divide me first or tear me limb by limb,
And let them, find as many several graves
As there are Villages in Normandy,
And it is less sin, then so to weaken it.
To hear it mentioned does already make me
Envy my dead Lord, and almost blaspheme
Those powers which heard my prayers for fruitfulness,
And did not with my first birth close my womb.
To me alone, my second blessing proves my first,
My first of misery, for if heaven
That gave me Rollo, there had staid his bounty,
And Otto my dear Otto nere had been,
Or being, had not been so worth my love,
The stream of my affection had run constant
In one fair current, all my hopes had been
Laid up in one, and fruitful Normandy
In this division had not lost her glories.
For as it is now it is a fair dyamond
Which being preserved entire exceeds all value,
But cut in pieces, (though these pieces are
Set in fine gold by the best workmans cunning)
Parts with all estimation: so this Dukedom
As it is yet whole, the neighboring Kings may covet
But cannot compass, which divided will
Become the spoil of every barbarous foe
That will invade it.

Gisb. How this works in both!

Baldw. Prince Rolloes eyes have lost their fire.

Gisb. And anger, that but even now wholly possessed
Good Otto, has given place to pity.

Aub. End not thus Madam,
But perfect what is so well begun.

Soph. I see in both fair signs of reconcilement
Make them sure proofs they are so: the fates offer
To your free choice, either to live examples
Of piety or wickedness, if the latter
Blinds so your understanding that you cannot
Pierce through her painted outside, and discover
That she is all deformity within,
Boldly transcend all presidents of mischief,
And let the last and the worst act of tyrannies,
The murder of a Mother but begin
The Scene of blood; you after are to heighten;
But if that virtue and her sure rewards
Can win you to accept her for your guide,
To lead you up to heaven and there fix you
The fairest star in the bright sphere of honor,
Make me the parent of a hundred sons
All brought into the world with joy not sorrow,
And every one a Father to his country
In being now made mother of your concord.

Rollo. Such and so good loud fame for ever speak you.

Bald. I, now they meet like brothers. The brothers throw down their swords and
embrace.

Gisb. My hearts joy
Flows through my eyes.

Aub. May never woman's tongue
Hereafter be accused, for this ones goodness.

Otto. If we contend, from this hour it shall be
How to overcome in brotherly affection.

Rollo. Otto is Rollo now, and Rollo Otto,
Or as they have one mind, rather one name,
From this atonement let our lives begin,
Be all the rest forgotten.

Aub. Spoke like Rollo.

Soph. And to the honor of this reconcilement
We all this night will at a public feast
With choice wines drown our late fears,
And with Music welcome our comforts.

Baldw. Sure and certain ones.

Soph. Supported thus I am secure o sons,
This is your Mothers triumph. Exeunt omnes praet. Granpre, Verdon, Trevile,
Dupr^

Rollo. You deserve it.

Gran. Did ever such a hoped for business end thus?

Verd. It Is fatal to us all, and yet you Granpree
Have the least cause to fear,

Gran. Why, what is my hope?

Verd. The certainty that you have to be hanged;
You know the Chancellours promise.

Gran. Plague upon you.

Verd. What think you of a bath, and a Lords daughter
To entertain you?

Gran. Those desires are of frail thoughts:
All friends, no Rollions now, nor Ottoes,
The several courtesies of our swords and servants
Deferr till apter consequence: let us make use
Of this nights freedom, a short Parliament to us,
In which it will be lawful to walk freely,
Nay to our drink we shall have meat too, and that's
No usual business^ to the men 'oth sword.
Drink deep with me tonight, we shall to morrow
Or whip or hang the merrier.

Trev. Lead the way then. Exeunt.

Enter Latorch and Rollo. Lator. Why should this trouble you?

Rollo. It does and must do,
Till I find ease.

Lator. Consider then and quickly,
And like a wise man take the current with you
Which once turned head will sink you.
Blessed occasion offers it self in thousand safeties to you,
Time standing still to point you out your purpose,
And resolution (the true child of virtue)
Ready to execute: what dull cold weakness
Has crept into your bosom, whose mere thoughts
Like tempests ploughing up the soyling Forests
Even with their swing were wont to shake down hazards.
What is it your mothers tears?

Rollo. Prithee be patient.

Lator. Her hands held up, her prayers, or her curses?
O Power of prayer dropped through by a woman.
Take heed the Soldiers see it not, it is miserable
In Rollo, below miserable, take heed your friends
The sinews of your cause, the strength you stir by,
Take heed I say, they find it not; take heed
Your own repentance (like a passing bell)
Too late and too loud tell the world you are perished.
What noble spirit eager of advancement,
Whose employment is his plough, what sword whose sharpness
Waits but the arm to weild it, or what hope
After the world has blown abroad this weakness
Will move again, or make a wish for Rollo?

Rollo. Are we not friends again, by each oath ratified
Our tongues the Heralds o^ our hearts?

Lat. Poor hearts then.

Rollo. Our worthier friends.

Lat. No friends Sir to your honor,
Friends to your fall, where is your understanding
The noble vessel that your full soul sailed in,
Rib'd round with honors, where is that? it is ruined,
The tempest of a woman's sighs has sunk it.
Friendship, take heed Sir, is a smiling harlot
That when she kisses, kisses a soder'd friendship
Peec'd out with promises; o painted ruin!

Rollo Latorch, he is my brother.

Lat. The more doubted,
For hatred hatched at home is a tame Tiger,
May fawn and sport, but never leave his nature.
The jarres of brothers^ two such mighty ones,
Are like a small stone thrown into a river,
The breath scarce heard, but view the beaten current
And you shall see a thousand angry rings
Rise in his face, still swelling and still growing;
So jarres circling in distrusts, distrusts pull down dangers,
And dangers death, the greatest extreme shadow
Till nothing bound them but the Showers, their graves.
There is no manly wisdom nor no safety
In leaning to this league, this piece patcht friendship,
This reared up reconcilement on a billow
Which as he tumbles^ totters down your fortune.
Is It not your own you reach at? law and nature
Vshring the way before you, is not he borne and
Bequeathed your subject?

Rollo. Ha?

Lat. What fool would give a storm leave to disturb him
When he may shut the casement? can that man
Has won so much upon you by your pity,
And drawn so high, that like an ominous Comet
He darkens all your light, can this cou^h'd Lion
(Though now he licks and locks up his fell paws
Craftily humming like a Cat to cozen you)
But ambition whets him and time fits him,
Leap to his prey, and seized once, suck your heart out?
Do you make it conscience?

Rollo. Conscience Latorch? what is that?

Lat. A tear they tie up fools in: natures coward,
Tasting the blood and chilling the full spirits
With apprehension of mere clouds and shadows.

Rollo. I know no conscience, nor I fear no shadows.

Lat. Or if you did, if there were conscience,
If the free soul could suffer
The fiery mind, such puddle to put it out,
Must it needs like a rank vine run up rudely,
And twine about the top of all our happiness
Honor and rule, and there sit shaking of us?

Rollo. It shall not nor it must not: I am satisfied,
And once more am my self again.
My mothers tears and womanish cold prayers
Farewell, I have forgot ye. If there be conscience,
Let it not come betwixt a Crown and me,
Which is my hope of bliss, and I believe it
Otto, our friendship thus I blow to air
A bubble for a boy to play withal,
And all the vows my weakness made like this,
Like this poor heartlesse rush, I rend a pieces.

Lat. Now you go right Sir, now your eyes are open.

Rollo. My Fathers last petition's dead, as he is,
And all the promises I closed his eyes with,
In the same grave I bury.

Lat. Now you are a man Sir.

Rollo, Otto thou shewst my winding sheet before me,
Which ere I put it on, like heavens blessed fire
In my descent i will make it blush in blood.
A crown, a crown, o sacred rule now fire me,
Nor shall the pity of thy youth false brother,
Although a thousand Virgins kneel before me^
And every dropping eye a Court of mercy,
The same blood with me, nor the reverence
Due to my Mothers blessed womb, that bred us
Redeem thee from my doubts: thou art a woolfe here
Fed with my fears, and I must cut thee from me,
A crown, a crown, o sacred rule now fire me,
No safety else.

Lat, But be not too much stirred Sir,
Nor too high in your execution; swallowing waters
Run deep and silent till they are satisfied,
And smile in thousand curles, to guild their craft,
Let your sword sleep, and let my two-edged wit work.
This happy feast, the full joy of your friendship
shall be his last.

Rollo. How my Latorch?

Lan. Why thus Sir.
I Will presently go dive into the Officers
That minister at Table, gold and goodness
With promise upon promise, and time necessary
I Will pour into 'em.

Rollo. Can thou do it neatly?

Lat. Let me alone and such a bait it shall be
Shall take off all suspicion.

Rollo. Go and prosper.

Lat. Walk in then and your smoothest face put on Sir.

Exeunt. SCOENA 2,
Enter the Mr Cook, Butler, Pantler, Yeoman of the Cellar, with a Jack of beer
and a dish. Cook. A hot day, a hot day, vengeance hot boys,
Give me some drink; this fire's a plaguey fretter.
Body a me I am dry still, give me the Jack boy,
This wooden skiffe holds nothing.

Pant. And faith master,
What brave new meats, for here will be old eating?

Cook. Old and young boy, let em all eat, I have it,
I have ballasse for their bellies, if they eat, a Gods name
Let em have ten tire of teeth a piece, ^ care not.

Butl. But what new rare munition?

Cook. Peuh a thousand,
I Will make ye Pigs speak French at table, and a fat Swan
Come sculing out of England with a challenge.
I Will make ye a dish of Calves feet dance the Canaries,
And a consort of crammed Capons fiddle to em.
A Calves head speak an Oracle, and a dozen of Larkes
Rise from the dish, and sing all supper time;
It Is nothing boys, I have framed a fortification,
Out of Rye past, which is impregnable,
And against that for two long hours together,
Two doz^n of maribones shall play continually.
For Fish i will make ye a standing lake of White-broth,
And Pikes come ploughing up the plumbes before 'em^
Arion on a Dolphin playing Lachrimae,
And brave King Herring with his oil and onyon
Crowned with a leomon pill, his way prepared
with his strong guard of pilchers.

Pant I marry master.

Cook. All these are nothing, i will make ye a stubble goose
Turn oath toe thrice, do a cross point presently
And then sit down again, and cry, come eat me.
These are for mirth, now Sir, for matter of mourning
I Will bring ye in the lady loyne of Veale
With the long love she bore the Prince of Orange.

Omn. Thou boy, thou!

Cook. I have a trick for thee too,
And a rare trick, and I have done it for thee.

Yeo. Sell. What Is that good master?

Cook. It Is a sacrifice, a full vine bending like an Arch,
And under the blown god Bacchus sitting on a hogs-head
his altar here, before that a plump Vintner,
Kneeling and offering incense to his Deity,
Which shall be only this, red spratts and pilchers.

But. This when the Tables drawn, to draw the wine in.

Cook. Thou have it right,
And then comes thy Song butler.

Pant. This will be admirable.

Yeo. Sell. O Sir, most admirable.

Cook. If you will have the paste speak, it is in my power
I have fire enough to work it, come stand close,
And now rehearse the Song it may be perfect,
The drinking song, and say I were the Brothers.
The Song.
Drink to day and drown all sorrow,
You shall perhaps not do it to morrow.
Best while you have it use your breath,
There is no drinking after death.
Wine works the heart up, wakes the wit,
There is no cure against age but it.
It helps the headache, cough and tissick,
And is for all diseases Physic.
Then let us swill boys for our health,
Who drinks well loves the common wealth.
And he that will to bed go sober,
Falls with the leaf still in October.
Finis.
Well have you borne your selves, a red-deere pie boys,
And that no lean one, I bequeath your ^ertues.
What friends have thou to day, no Citizens?

Pant. Yes father the old Crew.

Cook. By the Mass true, wenches
Sirrah, set by a choine of beef and a hot pastie^
And let the jole of Sturgion be corrected,
And do you mark sir, stalk me to a Pheasant
And see and ye can shoot her into the Seller.

Pant. Godamercy dad,
Send me thy roaring bottles,
And with such Nectar I will see 'em filled,
That all thou speak shall be pure Helicon.
Mounsieur Latorch, what news within? Enter Lator.

Lator. Save ye,
Save ye master, save ye Gentlemen,
You are casting for this preparation,
This joyful supper for the royal brothers:
I Am glad I have met ye fitly, for to your charge
My bountiful brave Butler, I must deliver
A beavy of young lasses, that must look on
This days solemnity, and see the two Dukes
Or I shall loose my credit, you have stowage.

Butl. For such freight i will find room, and be your serva^t.

Cook. Bring 'em, they shall not starve here, i will send 'em victuals
Shall work you a good turn, though it be ten days hence sir.

Lator. Godamercy noble master.

Cook. Nay i will do it.

Yeo. Sell. And Wine they shall not want, let 'em drink like ducks.

Lator. What misery it is that minds so royal,
And such most honest bounties as yours are,
Sold be confined thus to uncertainties?

Butl. I, were the State once settled, then we had places.

Yeo. sell. Then we could show our selves and help our friends sir.

Cook. I then there were some savor in it, where now
We live between two stools, every hour ready
To tumble on our No^es, and for ought we know yet
For all this supper, ready to fast the next day.

Lator. I would feign speak to you out of pity,
Out of the love I bear you, out of honesty,
For your own goods, nay for the general blessing.

Cook^ And we would as fain hear you, pray go forward.

Lator. Dare ye^ but think to make your selves up certainties,
Your places and your credits ten times doubled
The Princes favor Rolloes?

Butl. A sweet gentleman.

Yeo. sell. I, and as bounteous if he had his right too.

Cook^ By th'masse a royal gentleman indeed boys,
He Will make the Chimnies smoke.

Lator. He would do friends,
And you too, if he had his right, true Courtiers,
What could ye want then? dare ye? --

Cook. Pray be short sir.

Lator. And this my soul upon it, I dare assure you^
If you but dare your parts.

Cook. Dare not me Monsieur,
For I that fear neither fire nor water sir,
Dare do enough a man would think^

Yeo. sell. Beleeve't sir,
But make this good upon us you have promised,
You shall not find us flinchers.

Lator. Then i will be sudden.

Pant. What may this mean, and whether would he drive us?

Lator. And first for what you must do, because all danger
Shall be apparently ti'de up and mussel'd,
The matter seeming mighty, there is your pardons.

Pant. Pardons? is it come to that? good god defend us.

Lator. And here is five hundred crowns in bounteous earnest.
And now behold the matter. Lator. gives each a paper.

Butl. What are these Sir?

Yeo. sell. And of what nature? to what use?

Lator. Imagine.

Cook. Will they kill rats? they eat my pies abhominably,
Or work upon a woman, cold as Christmasse?
I have an old jade sticks upon my fingers.
May I taste 'em?

Lator. Is your will made?
And have you said your prayers? for they will pay ye,
And now to come to you for your knowledge,
And for the good you never shall repent ye,
If ye be wisemen now.

Cook. Wise as you will sir,

Lator. These must be put then into the several meats
Young Otto loves, by you into his wine sir,
Into his bread by you, by you into his linen.
Now if you desire, ye have found the means
To make ye, and if ye dare not ye have
Found your ruin, resolve me ere you go.

Butl. You Will keep faith with us?

Lator. May I no more see light else.

Cook. Why it is done then.

Butl. It Is done.

Pant. It Is done which shall be undone.

Lator. About it then, farewell, ye are all of one mind?

Cook. All.

Omn. All, all.

Lator. Why then, all happy. Exit.

But. What did we promise him?

Yeo. sell. Do you ask that now?

Butl. I would be glad to know what it is.

Pant. I Will tell ye,
It is to be all villains knaves and traitors.

Cook. Fine wholesome titles,

But. But if we dare go forward.

Cook. We may be hanged drawd and quartred.

Pant. Very true Sir

Cook. What a goodly swinge shall I give the gallows, yet I think too,
This may be done, and we may be rewarded
Not with a rope, but with a Royal master,
And yet we may be hanged too.

Yeo. sell. Say 'twere done,
Who is it done for? is it not for Rollo and for his right?

Cook. And yet we may be hanged too.

Butl. Or say he take it, say we be discovered.

Yeo. sell. Is not the same man bound still to protect us?
Are we not his?

Butl. Sure he will never fail us.

Cook. If he do friends, we shall find that will hold us,
And yet me thinks this prologue to our purpose,
These Crowns should promise more. It Is easly done,
As easy as a man would roast an egg,
If that be all; for look ye gentlemen^
Here stands my broths: my finger slipps a little,
Down drops a dose, I stir him with my ladle,
And there is a di^h for a Duke: Olla podrilla:
Here stands a baked meat, he wants a little seas^ing
A foolish mistake, my spice box gentlemen.
And put in some of this, the matters ended:
Dredge ye a dish of Plovers, there is the art on it,
Or in a galingale a little does it.

Yeo. sell. Or as I fill my wine.

Cook. It Is very true Sir
Blessing it with your hand, thus, quick and neatly first,
It Is past.

Yeo. sell. And done once it is as easy^
For him to thank us for it, and reward us.

Pant. But it is a damned sin.

Cook. I never fear that,
The fire's my playfellow, and now I am resolved boys.

But. Why then have with ye.

Yeo. sell. The same for me.

Part. For me too.

Cook. And now no more our worships, but our Lordships.

Pa^. Not this year of my knowledge, i will un-lord ye. Exeu^t.

SCENA 3.
Enter Serv^nt and Shewer. Ser. Perfume the room round: and prepare the table:
Gentlemen officers wait in your places.

Shewer. Make room there,
Room for the Dukes meat, Gentlemen be bare there,
Clear all the entrance, Guard put by those papers,
And Gentlemen Vshers see the Gallery clear
The Dukes are coming on. Ho boys and banquet.

Enter Sophia between Rollo and Otto, Aubrey, Latorch, Gisbert, Baldwin,
attendants Ham^^, Matilda. Serve. It Is certainly informed.

Otto. Reward the fellow,
And look you mainely to it.

Ser. My life for you Sir.

Soph. Now am I straight my Lords, and young again,
My long since blasted hopes shoot out in blossoms,
The fruits of everlasting love appearing.
O my blessed boys, the honor of my years,
Of all my cares the bounteous fair rewarders!
O let me thus embrace you, thus for ever
Within a mothers love lock up your friendships,
And my sweet sons, once more with mutual twin^ings,
As one chaste bed begot you, make one body:
Blessings from heaven in thousand showers fall on ye.

Aub. O woman's goodness never to be equaled,
May the most sinful creatures of thy Sex,
But kneeling at thy Monument, rise Saints.

Soph. Sit down my worthy sons, my Lords your places.
I, now me thinks the Table's nobly furnished,
Now the meat nourishes, the wine gives Spirit,
And all the room stuck with a general pleasure,
Shows like the peaceful bower of happiness.

Aub. Long may it last, and from a heart filled with it
Full as my cup, I give it round my Lords.

Bald. And may that stubborn heart be drunk with sorrow
Refuses it, men dying now should take it,
And by the virtue of this Ceremony
Shake off their miseries and sleep in peace,

Roll. You are sad my noble brother.

Otto. no indeed Sir.

Soph. No sadness my sweet son this day.

Roll. Pray ye eat,
Something is here you have loved, ^ast of this dish,
It will prepare your Stomach.

Otto. Thank you brother,
I am not now disposed to eat.

Roll. Or that,
You put us out of heart man, come these baked meats
Were ever your best diet.

Otto. None I thank you.

Soph. Are you well noble Child?

Otto. Yes gracious mother.

Roll. Give him a cup of wine then, pledge the health,
Drink it to me i will give it to my mother.

Soph. Do my best child.

Otto. I must not my best mother,
Indeed I dare not, for of late my body
Has been much weakened, by excess of diet.
The promise of a fever hanging on me,
And even now ready, if not by abstinence.

Roll. Excuse your self sir,
Come it is your fear, and not your fever brother,
And you have done me a most worthy kindness.
My Royal mother, and my noble Lords,
Hear, for it now concerns me to speak boldly,
What faith can be expected from such vows,
From his dissembling smiles, what fruit of friendship,
From all his full embraces, what blessed issue,
When he shall brand me here with base suspicion?
He takes me for a poysoner.

Soph. Gods defend it son.

Roll. For a foul knave, a villain, and so fears me

Otto. I could say something too.

Soph. You must not so sir,
Without your great forgetfulness of virtue.
This is your brother and your honored brother,
Indeed your loving brother.

Roll. If he please so.

Soph. One noble Father with as noble thoughts,
Begot your minds and bodies, one care rockt you,
And one truth to you both was ever sacred;
Now fie my Otto, whether flies your goodness?
Because the right hand has the power of cutting,
Shall the left presently cry out, he is maymde?
They are one my child, one power and one performance,
And joined together thus one love, one body.

Aub. I do beseech your Grace, take to your thoughts,
More certain Counsailors then doubts and fears,
They strangle nature, and disperse themselves
If once believed, into such foggs and errors,
That the bright truth her self can never sever.
Your brother is a Royal gentleman,
Full of him self honor and honesty,
And take heed Sir, how nature bent to goodness,
(So straight a Cedar to himself) uprightness
Be wrested from his true use, prove not dangerous.

Roll. Nay my good brother knows I am to patient.

Lator. Why should your grace think him a poys^ner?
Has he no more respect to piety,
And but he has by oath tide up his fury,
Who durst but think that thought?

Aub. Away thou firebrand.

Lator. If men of his sort, of his power and place,
The eldest son in honor to this Dukedom. --

Bald. For shame co^tain thy tongue, thy poisonous tongue,
That with her burning Venom will infect all,
And once more blow a wildfire through the Dukedom.

Gisb. Latorch, if thou be honest or a man,
Contain thy self.

Aub. Go to, no more, by heaven
You Will find you have played the fool else,
Not a word more.

Soph. Prithee sweet son.

Roll. Let him alone sweet mother, and my Lords
To make you understand how much I honor
This sacred peace, and next my innocence,
And to avoid all future difference
Discourse may draw on, to a way of danger,
I quit my place, and take my leave for this night,
Wishing a general joy may dwell among ye.

Aub. Shall we wait upon your Grace?

Roll. I dare not break ye, La Torch. Exit Roll. and Lator.

Soph. Do you now perceive your brothers sweetness?

Otto. O mother that your tenderness had eyes,
Discerning eyes, what would this man appear then?
The tale of Synon when he took upon him
To ruin Troy, with what a cloud of cunning
He hid his heart? nothing appearing outward
But came like innocence and dropping pitty^
Sighs that would sink a Navy, and had tales
Able to take the ears of Saints belief too,
and what did all these? blew the fire to Ilion.
My brother has put on, oh I could tell ye
But for the reverence I bear to nature,
Things that would make your honest blood move backwar^

Soph. Ye dare tell me.

Otto. Yes in your private closet,
Where I will presently attend you, rise
I am a little troubled but twill off.

Soph. Is this the joy I looked for?

Otto. All will mend.
Be not disturbed dear mother: I Will not fail you. Exit Sophia, and Otto.

Baldw. I do not like this.

Aub. That Is still in our powers,
But how to make it so that we may like it --

Bald. Beyond us ever. Latorch me thought was busy,
That fellow, if not looked to narrowly, will do a sudden mischief.

Aub. Hell look to him,
For if there may be a devil above all yet,
That rogue will make him. Keep your self up this night.
And so will I, for much I fear a danger.

Bald. I will, and in my watches use my prayers. Exeunt.

ACTUS 3. SCENA 1.
A Stool set out. Enter Sophia, Otto, Matilda, Edith. Otto. You wonder (Madam)
that for all the shows
My brother Rollo makes of hearty love,
And free possession of the Dukedom twixt us,
I notwithstanding should stand still suspicious;
As if beneath those vailes, he did ^onvey
Intents and practices of hate and treason.

Soph. It breeds indeed my wonder.

Otto. Which makes mine,
Since it is so safe and broad a beaten way
Beneath the name of friendship to betray.

Soph. Though in remote and further off affection
These falsehoods are so common, yet in him
They cannot so force nature.

Otto. The more near the bonds of truth bind,
The more often they sever,
Being better cloakes to falsehood ever.

Soph. It cannot be that fruits (the tree so blasting)
Can grow in nature, take heed (gentle son)
Lest some suborned suggester of these treasons
Believed in him by you, provoked, the rather
His tender envies to such foul attempts.
Or that your too much love to rule alone
Bred not of him this jealous passion,
There is not any ill we might not bear
Were not our good held at a price too dear.

Otto. So apt is treachery to be excused
That innocence is still aloud abused,
The fate of virtue even her friends perverts
To plead for vice oftimes against their hearts;
Heavens blessing is her cur^e, which she must bear,
That she may never love.

Soph. Alas (my son) nor fate nor heaven it self
Can or would wrest my whole care of your good
To any least securenesse in your ill.
What I urge issues from my curious fear,
Lest you should make your means to escape your snare,
Doubt of sincerenesse is the only mean,
Not to incense it but corrupt it clean.

Otto. I rest as far from wrong of all syncerenesse,
As he flies from the practice, trust me (Madam)
I know by their confessions he suborned,
What I should eat, drink, touch, or only have sented
This evening feast was poisoned, but I fear,
His open violence more that tr^^herous odds
In his insatiate thirst of rule^
Is like to execute.

Soph. Believe it son,
If still his stomach be so foul, to feed
On such gross objects, and that thirst to rule
The state alone, be yet unquencht in him,
Poisons and such close treasons ask more time
Then can suffice his fiery spirits have,
And were there in him such desire to hide
So false a practice, there would likewise rest
Conscience and fear in him of open force,
And therefore close nor open you need fear.

Mat. Good Madame stand not so inclined to trust,
What proves his tendrest thoughts to doubt it just;
Who knows not the unbounded flood and sea,
In which my brother Rollo's appetites
Alter and rage with every puff of breath?
His swelling blood exhales, and therefore hear
What gives my temperate brother cause
To use his circumspection, and consult,
For remedy against all his wicked purposes;
If he arm, arm, if he strew mines of treason
Meet him with countermines, it is justice still
(For goodness sake) to encounter ill for ill.

Sop^. Avert from us such justice (equal heaven)
And all such cause of justice.

Otto. Past all doubt,
(For all the sacred privilege of night)
This is no time for us to sleep or rest in,
Who knows not all things holy are prevented
With ends of all impiety? all but
Lust, gain, ambition.

Enter Rollo armed and Latorch. Rollo, Perish all the world
Ere I but loose one foot of possible Empire
By sleights and color used by slaves and wretches,
I am exempt by birth from both those curbes,
And sit above them in all justice; since
I sit above in power, where power is giv^n,
Is all the right supposed of earth and heaven.

Lat. Prove both Sir, see the Traitor.

Otto. He comes armed.
See mother now your con^^dence.

Soph. What rage
Affects this monster?

Rollo. Give me way or perish.

Soph. Make thy way Viper if thou thus affe^t it.

Otto. This is a Trea^on like thee.

Rollo. Let her go.

Soph. Embrace me, wear me as thy shield my son,
And through my breast let his rude weapon run
To thy lives innocence.

Otto. Play not two parts,
Treacher and coward both, but yield a sword,
And let thy arming thee be odds enough
Against my naked bosom.

Rollo. Loose his hold.

Mat. Forbear base murderer.

Rollo. Forsake our Mother.

Soph. Mother, do it thou name me,
And put off nature thus?

Rollo. Forsake her traitor,
Or by the spoil of nature through hers
This leads unto thy heart.

Otto. Hold.

Soph. Hold me still.

Otto. For twenty hearts and lives I will not hazard
One drop of blood in yours.

Soph. O thou art lost then.

Ot. Protect my innocence heaven.

Soph. Call out murder.

Mat. Be murdered all, but save him.

Edith. Murder, murder.

Rollo. Cannot I reach you yet?

Otto. No fiend.

Rollo. Latorch
Rescue, I am down.

Lat. Up then, your sword cooles Sir,
Ply it in the flame and work your ends out.

Rollo. Ha,
Have at you there Sir. Ent. Aub.

Aub. Author of prodigies,
What sights are these!

Otto. O give me a weapon Aubrey.

Soph. O part em, part'em.

Aub. For heavens sake no more.

Otto. No more, resist his fury no rage can
Add to his mischief done. Dies.

Soph. Take spirit my Otto,
Heaven will not see thee dye thus.

Mat. He is dead,
And nothing lives but death of every goodness.

Soph. O he has slain his brother, curse him heaven.

Rollo. Curse and be cursed, it is the fruit of cursing.
Latorch, take off here; bring too of that blood
To bloody ore my shirt, then raise the Court,
And give it out how he attempted us
In our bed naked; shall the name of brother
Forbid us to enlarge our state or powers?
Or place affects of blood above our reason,
That tells us all things good against another,
Are good 'ith same line against a brother. Exit.

Gisb. What affairs inform these outcries? Enter Gibs^ Baldwin,

Aub. See and grieve.

Gisb. Prince Otto slain!

Bald. O execrable slaughter!
What hand has author'd it?

Aub. Your Scholars, Baldwin.

Baldw. Unjustly urged Lord Aubrey, as if I
For being his schoolmaster must teach this doctrine.
You are his Counselor did you advise him
To this foul parricide?

Gisb. If rule affect this license, who would live
To worse then dye, in force of his obedience?

Bald. Heavens cold and lingering spirit to punish sin,
And humane blood so fiery to commit it?
One so outgoes the other it will never
Be turned to fit obedience.

Aub. Burst it then
With his full swing given, where it brooks no ground,
Complaints of it are vain, and all that rests
To be our refuge (since our powers are strengthlesse)
Is to conform our wills to suffer freely
What with our murmures we can never master.
Ladies be pleased with what heavens pleasure suffers,
Erect your Princely countenances and spirits,
And to redress the mischief now resistlesse,
Sooth it in show, rather then curse or cross it,
Wish all amends and vow to it your best,
But till you may perform it let it rest.

Gisb. Those temporizings are both dull and servile
To breath the free air of a manly soul
Which shall in me expire in execrations
Before for any life I sooth a murderer.

Bald. Power lives before him till his own be dry
Of all lives services and humane comforts,
None left that looks at heaven 'sleft half so base
To do these black and hellish actions grace.

Enter Rollo, Latorch, Hamond, and Guard. Rollo. Have Latorch,
And raise the City as the Court is raised,
Complaining the abhorred conspiracy
In plot against my life.

Lat. I shall my Lord. Exit.

Rollo. You there that mourn upon the justly slain
Rise and leave it if you love your lives,
And hear from me, what (kept by you) may save you.

Mat. What will the Butcher do? I will not stir.

Rollo. Stir, and unforc't stir, or stir never more.
Command her you (grave Beldam) that know better
My deadly resolutions, since I drew them
From the infective fountain of your own,
Or if you have forgot, this fiery prompter
Shall fix the fresh impression in your heart.

Soph. Rise daughter serve his will in what we may,
Lest what we may not he enforce the rather.
Is this all you command us?

Rollo. This addition
Only admitted, that when I endeavor
To quit me of this slaughter, you presume not
To cross me wirh a syllable, nor your souls
Murmur, nor think against it, but weigh well,
It will not help your ill, but help to more;
And that my hand wrought thus far to my will
Will check at nothing till his circle fill.

Mat. Fill it so, I consent not, but who soothes it
Consents, and who consents to tyranny does it.

Rollo. False Traiteresse dye then with him.

Aub. Are you mad
To offer at more blood, and make your self
More horrid to your people? I Will proclaim
It is not as your instrument will publish.

Rollo. Do, and take that along with you -- so nimble: He disarms him.
Resign my sword, and dare not for thy soul
To offer what thou insolently threatnest,
One word proclaiming cross to what Latorch
Has in commission, and intends to publish.

Aub. Well Sir, not for your threats, but for your good,
Since more hurt to you would more hurt your country,
And that you must make virtue of the need
That now compells you, i will consent as far
As silence argues to your will proclaimed.
And since no more sons of your princely Father
Survive to rule but you, and that I wish
You should rule like your Father, with the love,
And zeal of all your subjects, this foul slaughter
That now you have committed made ashamed
With that fair blessing that in place of plagues
Heaven tries our mending disposition with,
Take here your sword, which now use like a Prince,
And no more like a Tyrant.

Rollo. This sounds well.
Live and be gracious with us.

Gisb. and Bald. O Lord Aubrey.

Mat. He flatter thus?

Soph. He temporizes fitly.

Rollo. Wonder invades me, do you two think much
That he thus wisely and with need consents
To what I author for your countries good,
You being my Tutor, you my Chancellor?

Gisb. Your Chancellor is not your flatterer Sir.

Bald. Nor is it your Tutors part to shield such doctrine.

Rollo. Sir first know you,
In praise of your pure Oratory that raised me,
That when the people who I know by this
Are raised out of their rests and hastening hither,
To witness what is done here are arrived
With our Latorch, you (extempore)
Shall fashion an Oration to acquit^
And justify this forced fact of mine,
Or for the proud refusal loose your head.

Gisb. I fashion an oration to acquit you?
Sir know you then that it is a thing less easy
T'excuse a parricide then to commit it.

Roll. I do not wish you Sir to excuse me,
But to accuse my brother as the cause
Of his own slaughter, by attempting mine.

Gisb. Not for the world, ^ should power blood on blood,
It were another murder to a^^^se
Him that fell innocent.

Roll. Away with him,
Hence, hail him straight to execution.

Aub. Far fly such rigor your amendfull hand.

Roll. He perishes with him that speaks for him.
Guard do your office on him, on your lives pain.

Gisb. Tyrant 'twill have thine own death.

Roll. Let it wing it,
He threatens me, villains tear him peece-meale hence.

Guard. Avaunt Sir.

Roll. Dispatch him Captain,
And bring me instant word he is dispatched,
And how his Rhetorique takes it.

Ham. I Will not fail sir.

Roll. Captain besides, remember this in chief,
That being executed you deny
To all his friends the Rites of funeral,
And cast his carcass out to dogs and fowls.

Ham. It Is done my Lord. Exit.

Roll. Upon your life not fail.

Bald. What impious dareing is there here of heaven^

Roll. Sir now prepare your self, against the people
Make here their entry to discharge the Oration
He has denyde my will.

Bald For fear of death^
Ha, ha, ha.

Roll. Is death ridiculous with you?
Works misery of age this, or thy Judgment?

Bald. Judgment false Tyrant?

Rollo. You Will make no Oration then.

Baldw. Not to excuse
But agravate thy murder if thou will,
Which I will so enforce, i will make thee wreack it
(With hate of what thou win'st by it) on thy self
With such another justly merited murder.

Rollo. I Will answer you anon. Enter Latorch.

Lat. The Citizens
Are hasting Sir in heaps, all full resolved
By my persuasions of your brothers treasons.

Rollo. Honest Latorch. Enter Hamond.

Ham. See Sir Gisberts head.

Rollo. Good speed, wast with a sword?

Ham. An axe my Lord.

Rollo. An axe, it was vilely done: I would have had
Mine own fine headsman done it with a sword,
Go, take this dotard here, and take his head
Off with a sword.

Ham. Your Schoolmaster?

Roll. Even he.

Bald. For teaching thee no better, it is the best
Of all thy damned Justices, away
Captain, i will follow.

Edith. O stay there Duke,
And in the midst of all thy blood and fury
Hear a Poor maids petitions, hear a daughter
The only daughter of a wretehed father,
O stay your have, as you shall need this mercy.

Roll. Away with this fond woman.

Edith. You must hear me:
If there be any spark of pity in you,
If sweet humanity and mercy rule you.
I do confess you are a Prince, your anger
As great as you, your execution greater.

Roll. Away with him.

Edith. O Captain by thy manhood
By her soft soul that bare thee: -- I do confess sir,
Your doom of justice on your foes most righteous;
Good noble Prince look on me.

Roll. Take her from me.

Edith. A curse upon his life that hinders me,
May fathers blessing never fall upon him,
May heaven never hear his prayers. I beseech you,
O Sir, these tears beseech you, these chaste hands woe you^
That never yet were heaved but to things holy,
Things like your self, you are a God above us,
Be as a God then, full of saving mercy,
Mercy, O mercy sir, for ^is sake mercy,
That when your stout heart weeps, shall give you pity.
Here I must grow.

Roll. By heaven I Will strike thee woman.

Edith. Most willingly, let all thy anger seize me,
All the most studied torments, so this good man,
This old man, and this innocent escape thee.

Roll. Carry him away I say.

Edith. Now blessing on thee: o sweet pity
I see it in thy eyes. I charge ye soldiers,
Even by the Princes power release my Father,
The Prince is merciful, why do ye hold him?
The Prince forgets his fury, why do ye tug him?
He is old, why do ye hurt him? speak O speak sir,
Speak as you are a man, a man's life hangs sir,
A friends life and a foster life upon you.
It Is but a word, but mercy, quickly spoke sir,
O speak Prince speak.

Roll. Will no man here obey me?
Have I no rule yet? as I live he dies
That does not execute my will and suddenly.

Bald. All thou can do takes but one short hour from me.

Roll. Hew off her hands.

Ham. Lady hold off.

Edith. No, hew 'em, Exit Baldwin with the Guard.
Hew off my innocent hands as he commands you,
They Will hang the faster on for deaths convulsion.
Tho^ seed of rocks, will nothing move thee then,
Are all my tears lost, all my righteous prayers
Drowned in thy drunken wrath? I stand up thus then,
Thus boldly bloody Tyrant,
And to thy face in heavens high name defy thee,
And may sweet mercy when thy soul sighs for it,
When under thy black mischiefs thy flesh trembles,
When neither strength nor youth, nor friends nor gold,
Can stay one hour, when thy most wretched conscience
Waked from her dream of death, like fire shall melt thee,
When all thy mothers tears, thy brothers wounds,
Thy peoples fears and curses, and my loss,
My aged fathers loss shall stand before thee --

Roll. Save him I say, run save him, save her Father^
Fly and redeem his head. Ezit Latorch.

Edith. May then that pity,
That comfort thou expect'st from heaven, that mercy
Be locked up from thee, ^ly thee, howlings find thee,
Despair, O my sweet father^ storms of terrors,
Blood, till thou burst again. Enter Latorch Hamond with a head.

Roll. O fair sweet anger!

Lator. I came too late Sir, 'twas dispatched before,
His head is here.

Roll. And my heart there go bury him,
Give him fair rites of funeral decent honors.

Edith. Will thou not take me monster? high heaven,
Give him a punishment fit for his mischief.

Lator. I fear thy prayer is heard, and he rewarded
Lady have patience 'twas unhappy speed,
Blame not the Duke, 'twas not his fault but fates,
He sent you know to stay it, and commanded
In care of you, the heavy object hence
Soon as it came, have better thoughts of him.

Enter the Citizens. Cit. 1. Where Is this young Traitor?

Lator. Noble Citizens here,
And here the wounds he gave your Sovereign Lord.

Cit. 1. This Prince of force must be
Beloved of Heaven, that heaven has thus preserved.

Cit. 2. And if he be loved of heaven you know,
He must be just and all his actions so.

Roll. Concluded like an Oracle, O how great
A grace of heaven is a wise Citizen!
For heaven it is makes them wise, as't made me just,
As it preserved me, as I now survive,
By his strong hand to keep you all alive,
Your wives your childrens goods and lands kept yours,
That had been else prey to his Tyrannous power.
That would have preyed on me, in bed assaulted me
In sacred time of peace, my mother here,
My sister this ^ust Lord, and all had felt
The Curtian Gulf of this conspiracy,
Of which my Tutor and my Chancellor,
(Two of the gravest and most counted honest
In all my Dukedom) were the monstrous heads.
O trust no honest men for their sakes ever
My politic Citizens, but those that bear,
The names of Cutthroats, Vserers, and Tyrants.
O those believe in; for the foul mouthed world
Can give no better terms to simple goodness,
Even me it dares blaspheme, and thinks me tyrannou^
For saving mine own life, sought by my brother;
Yet those that sought his life before by poison,
(Though mine own servants hoping to please me)
I Will lea^ to death for it which your eyes shall see.

Cit. 1. Why what a Prince is here!

Cit. 2. How just?

Cit. 3. How gen^le?

Rollo. Well now my dearest subjects, or much rather
My nerves my spirits, or my vital blood,
Turn to your needful rest, and settled peace,
Fixed in this root of steel, from whence it sprung
In heavens great help and blessing, but ere sleep
Bind in his sweet oblivions your dull senses,
The name and virtue of heavens King advance
For you (in chief) for my deliverance.

Cit. Heaven and his King save our most pious Sovereign.

Rollo. Thanks my good people, mother, and kind sister, Exeunt Cit.
And you my noble kinsman, things borne thus,
Shall make ye all command what ever I
Enjoy in this my absolute Empery.
Take in the body of my Princely brother,
For whose death since his fate no other way
Would give my eldestbirth his supreme right,
We Will mourn the cruel influence it bears,
And wash his Sepulcher with kindly tears.

Aub. If this game end thus^ heavens! will rule the seat: Exeunt omnes praeter
L^torch and Edith.
What we have yielded to, we could not let.

Lat. Good Lady rise and raise your spirits withal
More high then they are humbled, you have cause
As much as ever honored happiest Lady,
And when your ears are freer to take in
Your most amendfull and unmatched fortunes,
I Will make ye drown a hundred helpless deaths
In sea of one life poured into your bosom
With which shall flow into your arms the riches,
The pleasures, honors, and the rules of Princes.
Which though death stop your ears me thinks should open them:
Assay to forget death.

Edith. O slaughtered Father!

Lat. Cast off what cannot be redrest, and bless
The fate that yet you curse so, since for that
You spoke so movingly, and your sweet eyes
With so much grace filled, that you set on fire
The Dukes affection, whom you now may rule
As he rules all his Dukedom, is it not sweet?
Does it not shine away your sorrows clouds?
Sweet Lady take wise heart, and hear and tell me.

Edith. I hear no word you speak.

Lat. Prepare to hear then,
And be not barred up from your self, nor add
To your ill fortune with your far worse judgment,
Make me your servant to attend with all joys
Your sad estate, till they both bless and speak it:
See how theil bowt'ye, make me wait, command me
To watch out every minute, for the stay
Your modest sorrow fancies, raise your graces,
And do my hopes the honor of your motion
To all the offered heights that now attend you.
O how your tou^hes ravish! how the Duke
is slain already with your flames embraced!
I will both serve and visit you and often.

Edith. I am not fit Sir.

Lat. Time will make you Lady. Exeunt.

Enter Guard, 3 or 4 boys, then the Sheriff, Cook, Yeo. Seller, Butler, and
Pantler to execution. Guard. 1. Come bring these fellows on, away with em.

Guard. 2. Make room before there,
Room there for the prisoners.

Boy. 1. Lets run before boys, we shall get no pla^e else.

Boy. 2. Are these the youths?

Cook. These are the youths you look for.
And pray my honest friends be not so hasty.
The'rle be nothing done till we come I assure you.

Boy. 3. Here Is a wise hanging, are there no more?

But. Do you hear Sir,
You may come in for your share ift please you.

Cook. My friend if you be unprovided of a hanging
You look like a good fellow I can afford you
A reasonable penniworth.

Boy. 2. Before, before boys,
Here Is even enough to make us sport.

Yeo. sell. Pox take you, do you call this sport?
Are these your recreations?
Must we be hanged to make you mirth?

Cook. Do you hear Sir,
You Custard-pate, we go to it for high treason,
An honorable fault, thy foolish father
Was hanged for stealing sheep.

Boys. Away, away boys.

Cook. Do you see how that sneaking rogue looks now? you sheep Pantler,
You peaching rogue that provided us these necklaces,
You poor rogue, you costive rogue you.

Pant. Pray, pray fellows.

Cook. Pray for thy crusty soul, where is your reward now
Good goodman manchet, for your fine discovery?
I do beseech you Sir, where are your dollers?
Draw with your fellows and be hanged.

Yeo. sell, He must now,
For now he shall be hanged first that is his comfort,
A place too good for thee, thou meale-mouthd rascal.

Coo. Hang handsomely for shame, come leave your praying
You peaking knave, and die like a good Courtier,
Die honestly and like a man, no preaching
With I beseech you take example by me.
I lived a lewd man good people. pox on it,
Die me as thou had dined, say grace and God be with you.

Guard. Come will ye forward?

Cook. Good Master Sheriff your leave too.
This hasty work was never done well, give us so much time
As but to sing our own Ballad, for weel trust no m^n
Nor no tune but our own, 'twas done in Ale too,
And therefore cannot be refu^'d in justice,
Your penny pot-Poets are such pelting thieves,
They hang men ever twice, we have it here Sir,
And so must every merchant of our voyage,
Heel make a sweet return else of his credit.

Yeo. sell. One fit of our own mirth, and then we are for ye.

Guard. 1. Make have then and dispatch.

Yeo. sell. There Is day enough Sir.

Cook. Come boys sing cheerfully, we shall never sing younger,
We have chose a loud tune too because it should like well,
They sing.
Come fortune's a whore I ^are not who tell her,
Would offer to strangle a page of the Celler.
That should by his oath to any man's thinking
And place, have had a defense for his drinking.
But this she does when she pleases to palter,
Instead of his wages she gives him a halter.
Three merry boys, and three merry boys,
and three merry boys are we,
As e're did sing three parts in a string,
All under the triple tree.
But I that was so lusty, and ever kept my bottles,
That neither they were musty, and sel^ome less then pottles.
For me to be thus stopped now
With h^mp instead of Cork Sir,
And from the Gallows lopt now
Shows that there is a forke Sir
In death, and this the Token.
Man may be two ways killed,
Or like the bottle broken,
Or like the wine be spilled.
Three merry boys, etc.
O yet but look on the master Cook the glory of the kitchen,
In sowing whose fate at so lofty ara^e no Tailor had a stitch in
For though he make the man,
The Cook yet makes the dishes:
The which no Tailor can,
Wherein I have my wishes.
That I who at so many a feast have pleased so many Tasters,
Should come my self for to be dressed, a dish for you my masters.
Three merry boys, etc.
O Man or Beast or you at least,
That wears or Brow or Antler,
Prick up your ears unto the tears,
Of me poor Paul the Pantler.
That am thus chipt, because I clipped,
The cursed crust of Treason
With loyal knife, O doleful strife,
To hang thus without Reason.
Three merry boys, etc.
There Is a few copies for ye now,
Farewell friends, and good Mr^ Sheriff let me not
Be printed with a brass pot on my head.

Butl. March fair, march fair,
Before good Captain Pantler. Exeunt.

ACTUS 4. SCENA 1.
Enter Aubrey and Latorch. Aub. Latorch I have waited here to speak to you
And you must hearken: set not forth your legs
Of have, nor put your face of business on,
An honester affair then this I urge too,
You will not easily think on, and twill be
Reward to entertain it. It Is your fortune
To have our masters Ear above the rest
Of us that follow him, but that no man envies,
For I have well considered, truth sometimes
May be convay'd in by the same conduits
That fa^shood is, These courses that he ^akes
Cannot but end in ruin, Empire got
By blood and violence must so be held,
And how unsafe it is, he first will prove,
That toyling still to remove Enemies
Makes himself more^ it is not now a Brother^
A faithful Counsailor of state or two,
That are his danger, they are fair dispatched,
It is a multitude that gin to fear
And think, what began there must end in them,
For all the fine Oration that was made 'em;
And they are not an easy monster quelled.
Princes may pick their suffering nobles on it,
And one by one employ them to the block:
But when they once grow formidable to
Their Clownes and Cobblers, ware then guard themselves^
If you durst tell him this Latorch, the service
Would not discredit the good name you hold
With men: besides the profit to your master,
And to the public.

Lator. I conceive not Sir,
Their ayery fears, and why should I object 'em
Unto his fancy, wound what is yet sound?
Your Counsels color not with reason of state,
Where all that is necessary still is just.
The actions of the Prince, while they succeed,
Should be made good and glorifide, not questioned:
Men do but show their ill affections
That --

Aub. What? speak out.

Lator. Do murmr against their masters

Aub. Is this to me?

Lator, It is to whosoever,
Mislikes of the Dukes courses.

Aub. I? is it so?
At your state ward sir.

Lator. I am sworn to hear,
Nothing may prejudice the Prince.

Aub. Why? do you?
Or have you? ha?

Lator. I cannot tell: men's hearts
Show in their words sometimes.

Aub. I ever thought thee
Knave o'th chamber: art thou the spy too?

Lator. A watchman for the State, and one that is known
Sir, to be rightly affected.

Aub. Baude of the State,
No less then of thy masters lusts; I now
See nothing can redeem thee, dare thou mention,
Affection or a heart that never had any?
Know not to love or hate, but by the scale
As thy Prince does't before thee, that do never
Wear thine own face, but putst on his, and gatherst
Baits for his ears, liv'st wholly at his beck,
And ere thou durst utter a thought thine own,
Must expect his, creep'st forth and wad'st into him,
As if thou were to pass a ford, there proving
Yet, if thy tongue may step on safely or no,
Then bringst his virtue a sleep, and staist the wheel
Both of his reason and Judgment that they move not,
Whit'st over all his vices, and at last
Do draw a cloud of words before his eyes,
Till neither he can see thee nor himself.
Wretch I dare give him honest Counsels, I,
And love him whilst I tell him truth: old Aubrey
Dares go the straightest way, which still's the shortest.
Walk on the thorns thou scaterst, Parasite,
And tread 'em unto nothing: and if thou
Then letst a look fall of the least dislike,
I Will rip thy Crown up with my sword at height,
And pluck thy skin over thy face in sight
Of him thou flattrest: unto thee I speak it
Slave, against whom all laws should now conspire,
And every creature that has sense be armed,
As against the common enemy of mankind,
That sleep'st within thy masters ear, and whisper'st,
It Is better for him to be feared then loved,
Bid'st him trust no man's friendship; spare no blood
That may secure him; It Is no cruelty
That has a spacious end for soveraignety,
Break all the laws of kind, if it succeed,
An honest noble and praiseworthy deed,
While he that takes thy poisons in, shall feel,
Their virulent workings in a point of time,
When no repentance can bring aid, but all
His spirits shall melt, with what his conscience burned,
And dying in a flatterers arms shall fall unmourn'd.
There Is matter for you now.

Lator. My Lord this makes not,
For loving of my master.

Aub. Loving? no,
They hate ill Princes most that make 'em so.

Enter Rollo, Hamond, Allan, Guard. Roll. I Will hear no more.

Ham. Alas it is for my brother,
I beseech your highness.

Roll. How? a brother?
Had not I one my self? did title move me,
When it was fit that he should dye? away.

Allan. Brother loose no word more, leave my good cause
To upbraid the Tyrant. I Am glad I am fallen
Now in those times that willed some great example
T'assure men we can dye for honesty.

Roll. Sir you are brave, pray that you hold your neck
As bravely forth anon unto the headsman.

Allan, Would he would strike as bravely, and thou by
Rollo, 'twould make thee quake to see me dye,

Aub. What Is his offense?

Ham. For giving Gisbert burial
Who was sometimes his Master.

Allan. Yes Lord Aubrey,
My gratitude and humanity are my Crimes.

Roll. Why bear you him not hence?

Aub. My Lord, (stay soldiers)
I do beseech your highness do not loose,
Such men for so slight clauses, this is one
Has still been faithful to you, a tried soul
In all your fathers battles. I have seen him
Bestride a friend against a score of foes;
And look, he looks as he would kill his hundred
For you Sir, were you in danger.

Allan. Till he kills his Brother, his Chancellor, then his amster,
To which he can add naught to equal Nero
But killing of his mother.

Aub. Peace, brave fool,
Thou valiant Ass, here is his brother too Sir,
A Captain of your Guard has served you long
With the most noble witness of his truth
Marked in his face, and every part about him
That turns not from an enemie^ but view him,
And do not grieve him, Sir, if you do mean
That he shall hold his place, it is not safe
To tempt such spirits, and let 'em wear their swords,
You make your Guards your terrors by these Acts,
And throw more hearts off from you then you hold,
And I must tell you Sir (with my old freedom,
And my old faith to boot) you have not lived so,
But that your state will need such men, such hands,
Of which here is one shall in an hour of trial
Do you more c^rtaine service with a stroke,
Then the whole bundle of your Flatterers,
With all the unsavorie unction of their tongues.

Rollo. Peace talker.

Aub. One that loves you yet my Lord,
And would not see you pull on your own ruins,
Mercy becomes a Prince, and guards him best,
A weand affrights they are no ties of love,
And when men 'gin to fear the Prince, they hate him.

Rollo. Am I the Prince or you?

Aub. My Lord, I hope
I have not uttered ought should urge that question.

Rollo. Then practice your obedience, see him dead.

Aub. My Lord.

Rollo. I Will hear no word more.

Aub. I am sorry then
There is no small despair Sir of their safety,
Whose ears are blocked up against the truth,
Come Captain.

Ham. I do thank you Sir.

Aub. For what?
For seeing thy brother dye a man and honest,
Live thou so Captain, I will so, I assure thee,
Although I die for it too. Come. (...) Exeunt omnes praeter Rollo, and Latorch.

Rollo. Now Latorch,
What do you think?

Lat. That Aubries speech and manners
Sound somewhat of the boldest.

Rollo. It Is his custom.

Lat. It may be so, and yet be worth a fear.

Rollo. If we thought so it should be worth his life,
And quickly too.

Lat. I dare not Sir be author
Of what I would, he is so dangerous,
But with your highness favor and your license.

Rollo. He talks it is true, and he is licensed: leave him.
We now are Duke alone, Latorch secured,
Nothing left standing to obscure our prospect,
We look right forth, besides and round about us,
And see it ours with pleasure: only one
Wished joy there wants to make us so possess it,
And that is Edith, Edith, she that got me
In blood and tears in such an opposite minute,
As had I not at once felt all the flames,
And shafts of love shot in me (his whole armory)
I should have thought him as far off as death.

Lat. My Lord expect a while, your happiness
Is ne'rer then you think it, yet her griefs
Are green and fresh, your vigilant Latorch
Has not been idle, I have leave already
To visit her and send to her.

Rollo. My life.

Lat. And if I find not out as speedy ways,
And proper instruments to work and bring her
To your fruition, that she be not watched
Tame to your highness, say you have no servant
Is capable of such a trust about you,
Or worthy to be -- of your delight.

Rollo. O my Latorch, what shall I render thee
For all thy travells, care, and love?

Lat. Sir, one suit,
Which I will ever importune till you grant me.

Rollo. About your Mathematitians.

Lat. Yes to have
The scheme of your nativity judged by them.
I hav't already erected, O my Lord,
You do not know the labor of my fears.
My doubts for you are such as cannot hope
Any security but from the stars,
Who being rightly asked can tell man more,
Then all power else, there being no power beyond them

Rollo. All thy petitions still are care of us.
Ask for thy self.

Lat. What more can concern me
Then this?

Rollo. Well rise true honest man and go then,
We Will study our selves a means how to reward thee.

Lat. Your Grace is now inspired, now, now your Highness
Begins to live, from this hour count your joys,
But Sir, I must have warrants with blanck figures
To put in names such as I like.

Rollo. You shall.

Lat. They dare not else Sir offer at your figure,
O I shall bring you wonders, there is a Friar,
Russee an admirable man
Another Gentleman, and then La fiske,
The mirror of his time, 'twas he that set it,
But there is one Norbret, (him I never saw)
Has made a mirror, a mere lookin-glasse
In show you would think it no other, the form ovall,
As I am given to understand by letter,
Which renders you such shapes, and those so differing
And some that will be questioned, and give answers,
Then has he set it in a frame that wrought
Unto the revolutions of the stars,
And so compacted by due proportions
Unto their harmony does move alone
A true Automicon: Thus Dedalus Statues
Or Vulcans stools --

Rollo. Do thou believe this?

Lat. Sir, Why what should stay my faith or turn my sense,
He has been about it above twenty years,
Three seavens, the powerful and the perfect numbers,
And art and time Sir can produce such things,
What do we read there, that Hiarbaes banq^et
The great Gymnosophist that had his Butlers
And Carvers of pure gold wait at the table:
The images of Mercury too, that spoke,
The wooden Dove that flew, a Snake of Brass
That hist: and Birds of silver that did sing.
All these were done Sir by the Mathematiques:
Without which there is no science nor no truth.

Rollo. You are in your own sphere ( Latorch) and rather
Then I Will contend with you for it, I Will believe you.
Yo' have won upon me that I wish to see
My fate before me now, what ere it be.

Lat. And I Will endeavor you shall know it with speed,
For which I should have one of trust go with me,
If you please, Hamond, that I may by him
Send you my first dispatches: after I
Shall bring you more, as they come more,
And accurate forth from them.

Rollo. Take your way,
Choose your own means, and be it prosperous to us.

Exeunt. SCENA 2.
Enter Russe, De bube, La Fiske, Norbret, Pippeau. Russe. Come bear up Sirs,
we shall have better days,
Mine Almanac tells me.

Bube. What Is that, your rumpe.

Russ. It never itch't in vain yet; slid La Fiske,
Throw off thy sluggish face, I cannot abide
To see thee look like a poor Jade in the pound,
That saw no meat these three days.

Fiske. S'light to me,
It seems thirteen days since I saw any.

Russ. How?

Fisk. I cannot remember that I ever saw
Or meat or money, you may talk of both,
To open a man's Stomach or his purse,
But feed 'em still with air.

Bube. Friar, I fear
You do not say your office well adays,
I cannot hear your beads knack.

Nor. Pox, he feeds
With lechery, and lives upon the exchange
Of his two eggs and puddings, with the market-women.

Russ. And what do you sir with the Advocates wife,
That you persuade upon your Doctorall bed,
To take the Mathematical tran^e so often?

Fisk^ Come we are stark naught all; bad's the best on's,
Four of the Seven deadly spots we are,
Besides our lechery we are envious
And most, most gluttinous when we have it thus,
Most covetous now we want it: then our boy,
He is a fifth spot, sloth, and he undoes us.

Bub. It Is true the child was wont to be industrious,
And now and then send in a Merchants wife
Sick o'th husband, or a swearing Butler
That mist one of his Boles; a crying maid
Had lost a silver spoone: the Curry-combe
Sometimes was wanting, there was something gotten
But now --

Pip. What now, did I not yester-morning
Bring you in a Cardicue there from the Peasant,
Whose Ass I had driven aside and hid that you
Might conjure for him? and then last night
Six souse from the Cooks wife, ye shard among ye
To set a figure for the pestle I stole,
It is not at home yet. These things my masters,
In a hard time they would be thought on, you
Talk o'your Lands, and Castles in the air
O'your twelve houses there, but it is I
That bring you in your rents for'em, it is Pipeau
That is your bird called.

Nor. Faith he does well,
And cuts through the Element for us, I must needs say
In a fine dextrous line.

Fisk. But not as he did
At first, then he would sail with any wind
Int' every creek and corner.

Pip. I was light then,
New built and rigged, when I came to you Gentlemen,
But now with often and far ventring for you,
Here be leakes sprung, and whole plancks wanting, see you,
If you will new sheath me again, yet I am for you
To any bog or sleights, where you will send me,
For as I am, where can this ragged bark
Put in for any service, less it be
In The i will of Rogues, and there turn Pyrate for you.

Norb. Faith he says reason, Friar you must leave
Your neat crispt Clarret, and fall to your Sider
A while; and you La Fiske your larded Capons
And Turkies for a time, and take a good
Clean tripe in your way; Debube too must content him
With wholesome two sous'd pettitoes, no more crown Ordinaries,
Till we have clothd our Infant.

Bube. So you will keep your own good motions Doctor, your dear self.

Fiske. Yes for we all do know the latitude
O'your concupiscence.

Russ. Here, about your belly.

Bube. You Will pick a bottle open, or a whimsey
As soon as the best on us.

Fiske. And dip your wrist-bands,
(For cuffes you ha'none) as comely in the sauce, Bells Ring within.
As any Courtier -- hark, the Bell, who is there. Exit Pip. and enter again.

Russ. Good luck I do conjure thee, boy look out.

Pip. They are Gallants, Courtiers, one of 'em is
Of the Dukes Bedchamber,

Russ. Latorch down,
On with your Gown, there is a new suit arrived
Did I not tell you Sons of honger? Crowns
Crowns are coming toward you: wine and wenches
You shall have once again: and Fiddlers
Into your studies close, each lay his ear
This door, and as you hear me to prepare you,
So come, and put me on that visour only.

Enter Latorch and Hamond. Lato. You Will not be far hence Captain, when the
business
Is done, you shall receive present dispatch.

Ham^ I Will walk sir in the cloister.

Russ. Mounsieur Latorch, my son,
The stars are happy still that guide you hither.

Lator. I am glad to hear their Secretary say so,
My learned Father Russee, where is La Fiske,
Mounsieur La Bube, how do they.

Russ. At their studies,
They are the Secretaries of the Stars sir,
Still at their books, they will not be pulled off,
They stick like cupping glasses; if ever men
Spoke with the tongue of destiny, it is they.

Lator. For loves sake lets salute 'em.

Russ. Boy go see,
Tell'em who is here, say that their friends do challenge
Some portion of their time, this is our minute,
Pray them they will spare it, they are the Sun and Moon
Of knowledge, pity two such noble lights
Should live obscured, here, here in a University,
Whose beams were fitt' illuminate any Court
Of Christendom --

Enter La Fiske, De Bube, and Pipeau. Fisk. Well look upon the Astrolobe, you will
find it
For Almucanturies at least.

Bube. It is so.

Russ. Still of their learned stuff, they care for nothing.
But how to know, as negligent of their bodies
In Diet or else, especially in their clothes
As if they had no change.

Pip. They have so little,
As may well free'em from the name of shifters.

Fisk. Mounsieur Latorch.

Lator. How is it learned Gentlemen,
With both your virtues.

Bube. A most happy hour
When we see you sir.

Lator. When you hear me then,
It will be happier; The Duke greets you both
Thus, and though you may touch no money father,
Yet you may take it.

Ru^s, It Is his highness bounty,
But yet to me and those that have put off
The world superfluous.

Fisk. We have heard of late his highness good success.

Bube. And gratulate it.

Lator. Indeed he has escaped a strange conspiracy,
Thanks to his stars, which stars he prays by me,
You would again consult and make a judgment
On what you lately erected for my love.

Russ. O sir, we dare not.

Fisk. For our lives.

Bube. It is
The Princes Scheme.

Lator. T'incounter With that fear
Here Is to assure you, his signet, write your names,
And be secured all three.

Bub. We must entreat some time Sir^

Lat. I must then
Entreat, it be as present as you can.

Fisk. Have you the Scheme here?

Lat. Yes.

Russ. I would you had Sir
Another warrant.

Lat. What would that do.

Russ. Marry,
We have a Doctor Sir that in this business
Would not perform the second part.

Lat. Not
Him that you writ to me of?

Rus. The very same.

Lat. I should have made it Sir my suit to see him^
Here is a warrant (Father), I conceived
That he had soly applied himself to Magic.

Rus. And to these studies too Sir, in this field
He was imitated: but we shall hardly
Draw him from his chair.

Lat. Tell him he shall have gold.

Fisk. O such a syllable would make him forswear
Ever to breath in your sight.
Sir, he (if you do please to give any thing)
Must hav't convai'd under a paper.

Rus. Or left behind some book in his study.

Bub. Or in some old wall.

Fisk. Where his Familiars
May tell him of it, and that pleases him sir.

Bub. Or else I Will go and assay him.

Lat. Take gold with you.

Rus. That will not be amiss, give it the boy sir,
He knows his holes, and how to bait his spirits.

Pip. We must lay in several places sir.

Rus. That Is true,
That if one come not, the other may hit.

Lat. Well go then; is he so learned Gentlemen?

Fisk. The very top of our profession, mouth of the Fa^^^,
Pray Heaven his spirits be in good humor to take,
They Will fling the gold about the house else.

Bub. I,
And beat the Friar, if he go not well
Furnished with holy water.

Fisk. Sir you must observe him.

Bub. Not cross him in a word: for then he is gone.

Fisk. If he do come, which is a hazard yet,
Mas he is there, this is speed. Enter Norbret, Russee, Pip^eau.

Norb. Where is your scheme?
Let Us see it; dispatch: nay fumbling now, who is this?

Rus. Chief Gentleman of the Dukes chamber Doctor.

Norb. O let him be, good even to him, he is a Courtier,
I Will spare his complement tell him: what is here?
The geniture nocturnall longitude
At twenty one degrees the latitude
At forty nine and ten minutes, how are the Cardines?

Fisk. Libra in twenty four, forty four minutes,
And Capricorn.

Norb. I see it see the Planets
Where, how they are disposed, the Sun and Mercury^
Mars with the Drago^s tail, the third house,
And pars fortuna in the Imo coeli.
Then Jupiter in the twelfe, the Cacadaemon.

Bud. And Venus in the second, inferna porta.

Norb. I see it, peace^ then Satu^^e i^th fifth,
Luna ith'seaventh, and much of Scorpio,
That Mars his gaudium rising in the ascendant,
That joint with Libra too, the house of Venus,
And Imum Coeli, Mars his exultation
In The seventh house, Aries being his natural house,
And where he is now seated: and all these show him
To be the Almuter.

Rus. Yes he is Lord of the gen^tures,
Whether you examine it by Ptolomies way,
Or Nasahales, Laell, or Alkindus.

Fisk^ No other Planet has so many dignities
Either by himself, or in regard o'th Cuspes.

Norb. Why hold your tongue then, if you know it; Venus
The Lady of the Horoscope, being Libra,
The other part Mars rules^ so that the geniture
Being nocturnall, Luna is the highest,
None else being in sufficient dignity,
She being in Aries in the seventh house
Where Sol exalted is the Alchocoden.

Bub. Yes for you see he has his termine
In the degrees where she is fand enjoyes
By that six dignities.

Fisk. Which are clearly more
Then any else that view her in the scheme.

Norb. Why I saw this, and could ha told you to^
That he beholds her with a trine aspect
Here out of Sagitary, almost partly,
And how that Mars out of the self same house,
(But another sign) here by a platique aspect
Looks at the hilage, with a quartile ruling
The house where the sun is; all this could I
Have told you, but that you will outrun me, and more^
That this same quartile aspect to the Lady of life,
Here the seventh promises some danger,
Cauda Draconis being so near Mars,
And Caput Algell in the house of death.

Lat. How Sir? I pray you clear that.

Norb. What is the question first?

Rus. Of the Dukes life, what dangers threaten him?

Norb, Apparent and those sudden: when the Hyley,
Or Alchocoden by direction come
To a quartile opposition of the place
Where Mars is in the geniture (which is now
At hand) or else oppose to Mars himself, expect it.

Lat. But they may be prevented.

Nor. Wisdom only,
That rules the stars may do it, for Mars being
Lord of the geniture in Capricorn,
Is (if you mark it) now a Sex^ile here
With Venus Lady of the Horoscope,
So she being in her exilium, which is Scorpio
And Mars his gaudium; is over ruled by him^
And clear debillitated, five degrees
Beneath her ordinary power, so
That at the most she can but mittigate.

Lat. You cannot name the Persons brings this danger?

Nor. No, that the stars tells not us, they name no man;
That's a work Sir of another place.

Rus. Tell him whom you suspect, and he will guess shrewdly^

Lat. Sir, we do fear one Aubrey, ift twere he
I should be glad, for we should soon prevent him.

Fisk. I know him, the Dukes kinsman, a tall man.
Lay hold on it Norbret.

Nor. Let me pause a little,
Is he not near of blood unto the Duke?

Lat. Yes reverend sir.

Nor. Fart for your reverence,
Keep it till then, and somewhat high of stature?

Lat He is so.

Norb. How old is he?

Fisk. About seven and fifty.

Norb. His head and beard inclining to be gray?

Lat. Right Sir.

Fisk. And fat.

Norb. He Is somewhat corpulent, is he not?

Lat. You speak the man sir?

Norb. Well look to him, farewell. Exit Norb^

Lat. O it is Aubrey: Gentlemen I pray you
Let me receive this under all your hands.

Rus. Why he will show you him in his Magic glass
If you entreat him; and but gratify
A spirit or two more.

Lat. He shall eat gold
If he will have it, so you shall all, there is that
Amongst you first: let me have this to send.
The Duke in the mean time^ and then what sights
You please to show I Will have you so rewarded
As never Artists were: you shall to Court
Along with me; and ther^ no^ wait your fortunes.

Bube. We have a pretty^ pa^^ on it in our pockets:
Boy we will all be new, you shall along too^ Exeunt.

E^ter Sophia, Matilda, Edith. Mat. Good Madam hear the fute that Edith urges
With such submisse beseeches, nor remain
So strictly bound to sorrow for yo^^ son,
That nothing else, though never so befitting,
Obtaines your ears or observation^

Soph. What would she say? I hear.

Edith. My suit is Madam,
That you would please to think as well of justice,
Due to your sons revenge, as of more wrong added
To both your selves for it; in only grieving,
Th'undaunted power of Princes should not be,
Confin^d in deedlesse cold calamity.
Anger (the twin os sorrow) in your wrongs,
Should not be smothered when his right of birth
Claims the air as well, and force of coming forth.

Soph. Sorrow is due already, anger never
Should be conceived but where it may be borne.
In some fact fit t'employ his active fame,
That else consumes who bears it, and abides
Like a false star that quenches as it glides.

Edith. I have such means t'employ it as your wish
Can think no better, easier or securer
And such, as but for th'honours I intend^
To your partakings I alone could end^
But your parts in all dues to crying blood
For Vengeance in the shedder, are much greater,
And therefore should work your hands to his slaughter,
For your consent, to which 'twere infinite wrong,
To your severe and most impartial justice,
To move you to forget so false a son,
As with a mothers duty made you curse him.

Mat. Edith he is forgot for any son
Borne of my mother, or to me a brother,
For should we still perform our rights to him,
We should partake his wrongs, and as foul be
In blood and damned Parraoi^^ ^^ he:
And therefore tell the happy means that heaven
Puts in thine hand, for all our longed for freedome^
From so abhorred and impious a Monster.

Soph. Tell what she will i will lend nor hand nor ear,
To whatsoever heaven puts in her power. Exi^.

Mat. How strange she is to what she chiefly wishes,
Sweet Edith, be not any thought the more
Discouraged in thy purpose, but assured
Her heart and prayers are thine: and that we two
Shall be enough to all we wish to do.

Edith. Madam my self alone I make no doubt,
Will be afforded power enough from heaven
To end the Murderer: all I wish of you,
Is but some richer ornaments and jewels,
Then I am able to provide my self,
To help out the defects of my poor beauty,
That yet have been enough as now they are,
To make his fancy mad with my desire,
But you know Maddam, women never can,
Be too fair to torment an Amorous man;
And this man's torments I would heighten still,
Till at their highest he were fit to kill.

Mat. Thou shall have all my jewels and my mothers,
And thou shall paint too, that his bloods desire,
May make him perish in a painted fire.
Have thou been with him yet?

Edith. Been with him? no;
I set that hour back t'hast more his longing,
But I have promised to his Instruments,
Th'admittance of a Visit at our house,
Where yet I would receive him with all luster
My sorrow would give leave too, to remove
Suspicion of my purpose.

Mat. Thou shall have,
All I can add, sweet wench, in jewels, tires,
I Will be my self thy dresser; nor may I
Serve mine own love with an attracted husband,
More sweetly nor more amptly then may thou,
Thy forward will with his bewich'd affections:
Affects thou any personal aid of mine,
Mine noblest Edith?

Edith. Naught but your kind prayers,
For full effect and speed of my affair.

Mat. They Are thine (my Edith) as for me mine own,
For thou well know if blood shed of the best,
Should cool and be forgotten, who would fear
To shed blood still, or where (alas) were then,
The endless love we owe to worthless men.

Edith. Love of the worthiest ever bless your highness.
Exeunt.
ACTUS. 5. SCENA. 1.
Enter Rollo with a glass, Aubrey and Servants. Roll. I never studied my
glass till now,
It Is exceeding well, now leave me cosen,
How takes your eye the object.

Aub. I have learnt
So much Sir of the Courtier, as to say
Your person does become your habit, bu^
Being called unto it by a noble war,
Would grace an Armor better.

Roll. You are still
For that great Art, of which you are the master,
Yet I must tell you, that to th'encounters
We often attempt, armed only thus we bring
As troubled blood, fears mixed with flattering hopes,
The danger in the service too as great,
As when we are to charge quite through and through
The body of an Army.

Aub. I Will not argue
How you may rank the dangers, but will dye in it,
The ends which they arrive at, are as distant
In every circumstance, as far as honor
Is from shame and repentance.

Roll. You are sour.

Aub. I would speak my free thoughts yet not appear so,
Nor am I so ambitious of the title
Of one, that dares talk any thing that runne^
Against the Torrent of his own opinion,
That I affect to speak ought may offend you.
And therefore gracious Sir, be pleased to think,
My manners or discretion have informed me,
That I was borne in all good ends to serve you,
And not to check at what concerns me not,
I look not with sore eyes on your rich outside,
Nor wrack my thoughts to find out to what purpose
It Is now employed; I wish it may be good,
And that I hope offends not. For a Subject
Toward his Prince in things indifferent,
To use the austerene^^e of a censuring Cato,
Is arrogance not freedom.

Roll. I commend
This temper in you, and will cherish it.

Enter Hamond with letters. Roll. They come from Rhoane, Latorch employed you.
I must not now be troubled with a thought,
Of any new design, good Aubrey read them
And as they shall direct you, use my power
Or to reply or execute.

Aub. I will Sir.

Rollo. And Captain bring a squadron of our guard,
To the house that late was Baldwins, and there wait me.

Ham. I shall.

Roll. Some two hours hence.

Ham. With my best care.

Roll. Inspire me love, and be thy diety
Or scorned or feared, as now thou favour'st me. Exit Roll.

Ham. My stay to do my duty, may be wrongs
Your Lordships privacy.

Aub. Captain your love
Is ever welcome. I entreat your patience
While I peruse these.
How Is this? a plot on me!

Ham. What is contained
In the letters that I brought that thus transports him?

Aub. To be wrought on by rogues, and have my head
Brought to the Axe by knaves that cheat for bread,
The creatures of a Parasite, a slave,
I find you here Latorch, nor wonder at it,
But that this honest Captain should be made
His instrument, afflicts me; I Will make trial,
Whether his will or weakness made him to it.
Captain you saw the Duke when he commanded
I should do what these letters did direct me,
And I presume you think I Will not neglect
For fear or favor, to remove all dangers,
How near soever that man can be to me,
From whom they should have birth.

Ham. It is confirmed.

Aub. Nor would you Captain I believe refuse,
Or for respect of thankfulness or hopes,
To use your sword with fullest confidence,
Where he shall bid you strike.

Ham. I never have don.

Aub. Nor will I think.

Ham. I hope it is not questioned.

Aub. The means to have it so is now proposed you,
Draw, so, it is well, and next; -- cut off my head.
It Is sir the Dukes pleasure,
My innocence has made me dangerous
And I must be removed, and you the man
Must act his will.

Ham. I Will be a traitor first,
Before I serve it thus.

Aub. It must be done,
And that you may not doubt it, there is your warrant,
But as you read, remember Hamond that
I never wronged one of your brave profession,
And though it be not manly, I must grieve
That man of whose love I was most ambitious,
Could find no object for his hate but me,

Ham. It is no time to talk now honored Sir,
Be pleased to hear thy servant, I am wronged
And cannot, being now to serve the Duke,
Stay to express the manner how, but
If I do not suddenly give you strong proofs,
Your life is deerer to me then my own,
May I live base and dye, so sir your pardon. Exit. Ham.

Au. I am both ways ruined, both ways marked for slaughter,
On every side about, behind, before me,
My certain fate is fixed, were I knave now
I could avoid this: had my actions,
But mere relations to their own ends, I could escape now:
O honesty, thou elder child of virtue,
Thou seed of heaven, why to acquire thy goodness,
Should malice and distrust stick thorns before us?
And make us swim unto thee hung with hazards.
But heaven is got by suffering, not disputeing:
Say he know this before hand, where am I then?
Or say he do not know it, where is my loyalty?
I know his nature troubled as the Sea,
And as the Sea devouring, where he is vexed,
And I know Princes are their own expounders,
Am I afraid of death? of dying nobly?
Of dying in my innocence uprightly?
Have I met death in all his forms and fears,
Now on the points of swords, now pitched on lances,
In fires, in storms of arrows, battles, breaches,
And shall I now shrink from him when he courts me?
Smile^ng and full of Sanctity? i will meet him,
My loyal hand and heart shall give this to him,
And though it bear, beyond what Poets feign,
A punishment; duty shall meet that pain,
And my most constant heart to do him good, Enter Mess.
Shall check at neither pale affright nor blood.

Mess. The Duchess presently would crave your presence.

Aub. I come; and Aubrey now resolve to keep,
Thy honor living though thy body sleep. Exit.

Enter Edith and a boy. A banquet set out. Edith. Now for a Fathers murder and
the ruin,
All chastity shall suffer if he reign,
Thou blessed soul look down and steel thy daughter,
Look on the Sacrifice she comes to send thee,
And through that bloody cloud behold my piety.
Take from my cold heart fear, from my sex pity,
And as I wipe these tears off, shed for thee,
So all remembrance may I loose of mercy,
Give me a woman's anger, bent to blood,
The wildness of the winds to drown his prayers,
Stormelike may my destruction fall upon him,
My rage like roving Billows as they rise,
Poured on his soul to sink it; give me flattery,
(For yet my constant soul nere knew dissembling)
Flattery the food of fools, that I may rock him,
And lull him in the down of his desires,
That in the height of all his hopes and wishes,
His Heaven forgot, and all his lusts upon him,
My hand like thunder from a cloud may ceize him, Enter Rollo.
I hear him come, go boy and entertain him.

The Song.
Take o take those lips away,
That so sweetly were forsworn,
And those eyes like break of day,
Lights that do mislead the morn,
But my kisses bring again,
Seals of love though sealed in vain.
Hide o hide those hills of Snow,
That thy frozen bosom bears,
On whose tops the pincks that grow,
Are yet of those that April wears,
But first set my poor heart free,
Bound in those Icy chains by thee.
Roll. What bright star taking beauties for me upon her,
In all the happy luster of heavens glory,
Has dropped down from the sky to comfort me?
Wonder of nature, let it not profane thee,
My rude hand touch thy beauty, nor this kiss,
The gentle sacrifice of love and service,
Be offered to the honor of thy sweetness.

Edith. My gracious Lord, no diety dwells here,
Nor nothing of that virtue but obedience,
The servant to your will affects no flattery.

Roll. Can it be flattery to swear those eyes
Are loves eternal lamps, he fires all hearts with
That tongue the smart string to his bow; those sighs,
The deadly shafts he sends into our souls,
O look upon me with thy spring of beauty.

Edith. Your Grace is full of game.

Roll. By heaven my Edith,
Thy mother fed on roses when she got thee.

Edith. And thine on brambles, that has pricked her heart out.

Roll. The sweetness of The Arabian wind still blowing,
Upon the treasures of perfumes and spices,
In all their pride and pleasures call thee Mistress.

Edith. Wilt please you sit Sir.

Roll. So you please sit by me.
Fair gentle maid, there is no speaking to thee,
The Excellency that appears upon thee
Ties up my tongue, pray speak to me.

Edith. Of what sir.

Roll. Of any thing, and any thing is excellent,
Will you take my direction, speak of love then,
Speak of thy fair self Edith, and whilst thou speakst,
Let me thus languishing give up my self wench.

Edith. Has a strange cunning tongue, why do you sigh sir,
How masterly he turns himself to catch me.

Rollo. The way to Paradise (my gentle maid)
Is hard and crooked, scarce repentance finding
With all her holy helps the door to enter,
Give me thy hand, what do thou feel?

Edith. Your tears sir,
You weep extremely: strengthen me now Justice,
Why are these sorrows Sir?

Rollo. Thou Wilt never love me
If I should tell thee, and yet there is no way le^t
Ever to purchase this blessed Paradise,
But swimming thither in these tears.

Edith. I stagger.

Rollo. Are they not drops of blood?

Edith. No.

Rollo. They are for blood then,
For guiltless blood, and they must drop my Edith,
They must thus drop till I have drowned my mischiefs.

Edith. If this be true I have no strength to touch him.

Rollo. Pree thee look upon me, turn not from me,
Ahlas I do confess I Am made of mischief,
Begot with all men's miseries upon me,
But see my sorrows mind, and do not thou learn,
Whose only sweetest sacrifice is softness,
Whose true condition tenderness of nature.

Edith. My anger melts, o I shall loose my justice.

Rollo. Do not thou learn to kill with cruelty,
(Those blessed eyes) as I have done with malice,
When thou have wounded me to death with scorn,
As I deserve it Lady for my true love
When thou had laden me with earth for ever.
Take heed my sorrows, and the stings I suffer,
Take heed my nightly dreams of death and horror
Pursue thee not, no time shall tell thy griefs then,
Nor shall an hour of joy add to thy beauties;
Look not upon me as I killed thy father,
As I was smeared in blood do thou not hate me,
But thus in whiteness of my washed repentance
In my hearts tears and truth of love to Edith,
In my fair life hereafter.

Edith. He will fool me.

Rollo. O with thine Angel eyes behold and bless me,
Of heaven we call for mercy, and obtain it,
To justice for our right on earth, and have it,
Of thee I beg for love, save me, and give it.

Edith. Now heaven thy help, or I am gone for ever,
His tongue has turned me into melting pity.

Enter Hamond and Guard. Ham. Keep the door safe, and upon pain of death
Let no man enter till I give the word.

Guard. We shall Sir.

Ham. Here he is in all his pleasure.

Rollo. I have my wish.
How now, why do thou stare so?

Edith. A help I hope.

Rollo. What do thou here? who sent thee?

Ham. My brother, and the base malicious office
Thou made me do to Aubrey: pray.

Rollo. Pray?

Ham. Pray,
Pray, if thou can pray, I shall kill thy soul else,
Pray suddenly.

Rollo. Thou can not be so traitorous.

Ham. It is a justice: stay Lady,
For I perceive your end; a woman's hand
Must not rob me of vengeance.

Edith. It Is my glory.

Ham. It Is mine, stay and share with me: By the Gods Rollo
There is no way to save thy life.

Roll. No?

Ham. No,
It is so monstrous no repentance c^res it.

Rollo. Why then thou shall kill her first, and what this blood
Will cast upon thy cursed head.

Ham. Poor guard Sir.

Ed. Spare not brave Captain.

Roll. Fear or the devil ha thee.

Ham. Such fear Sir as you gave your honored mother,
When your most virtuous brother sheild-like held her,
Such I Will give you; put her away.

Roll. I will not,
I will not dye so tamely.

Ham. Murdrous villain,
Will thou draw seas of blood upon thee?

Edith. Fear not,
Kill him good Captain anyway dispatch him,
My body^ ^onour'd with that sword that through me
Sends his b^^^k soul to hell, o but for one hand.

Ham Shake him off bravely.

Edith. He Is too strong, strike him.

Ham. O I am with you Sir, now keep you from him,
What has he got a knife?

Edith. Look to him Captain
For now he will be mischievous.

Ham. Do you smile Sir?
Does it so tickle you, have at you once more.

Edith. O bravely thrust, take heed he comes not in Sir,
To him again, you give him too much respit.

Rollo. Yet will thou save my life, and i will forgive thee,
And give thee all, all honors, all advancements,
Call thee my friend.

Edith. Strike, strike and hear him not,
His tongue will tempt a Saint.

Rollo. O for my souls sake.

Edith. Save nothing of him.

Ham. Now for your farewell,
Are you so wary, take you that.

Rollo. Thou that too.
O thou have killed me basely, basely, basely. Dies.

Edith. The just reward of murder falls upon thee,
How do you Sir, has he not hurt you?

Ham. No,
I feel not any thing, Sophia, Matilda, Aubrey, and Lords at the door.

A^^^ I charge ye let us pass.

Guard. Ye cannot yet sir.

Aub. I Will make my way then.

Guard. We are sworn to our Captain,
And till he give the word. Enter Soph. Matil. Aub. Lords and attendants.

Ham. Now let them in there.

Soph. O there he lies, sorrow on sorrow seeks me,
O in his blood he lies.

Aub. Had you spoke sooner this might have been
Prevented, Take the Duchess,
And lead her off, this is no sight for her eyes.

Mat. O bravely done wench.

Edith. There stands the noble doer.

Mat. May honor ever seek thee for thy justice,
O 'twas a deed of high and brave adventure,
A justice even for heaven to envy at.
Farewell my sorrows, and my tears take truce,
My wishes are come round, o bloody brother,
Till this hour never beauteous; till thy life
Like a full sacrifice for all thy mischiefs
Flowed from thee in these rivers, never righteous,
O how mine eyes are quarri'd with their joys now,
My longing heart even leaping out for lightness,
But, dye thy black sins with thee, I forgive thee.

Aub. Who did this deed?

Ham^ I, and I will answer it. Dies.

Edith. He faints, o that same cursed knife has killed him.

Aub. How?

Edith. He snatched it from my hand for whom I bore it,
And as they grappell'd?

Aub. Justice is ever equal.
Had it not been on him th'had'st died too honest.
Did you know of his death?

Edith. Yes, and rejoice in it.

Aub. I am sorry for your youth then, for though the strictness
Of law shall not fall on you, that of life must presently;
Go, to a Cloister presently carry her,
And there for ever lead your life in penitence.

Edith. Best father to my soul, I give you thanks Sir^
And now my faint revenges have their ends,
My vows shall be my kin, my prayers my friends. Exit.

Enter Latorch and Iuglers. Lator. Stay there, i will step in and prepare the Duke.

Norb. We shall have brave rewards.

Fisk. That Is without question.

Lator. By this time where is my huffing friend Lord Aubrey,
Where Is that good gentleman -- O I could laugh now,
And burst my self with mere imagination,
A wise man and a valiant man, a just man
Should suffer himself to be juggl'd out of the world,
By a number of poor Gypsies: farewell swash-buckler,
For I know thy mouth's cold enough by this time,
A hundred on ye I can shave as neatly,
And nere draw blood in show: now shall my honor
My power and virtue walk alone; my pleasure
Observed by all, all knees bent to my worship,
All sute's to me, as saint of all their fortunes
Preferred and crowded too: what full place of credit
And what place now? your Lordship? no it is common,
But that i will think to morrow on, now for my business.

Aub. Who Is there.

Lator. Ha dead? my master dead? Aubrey a live too?

Guard. Latorch sir.

Aub. Ceize his body.

Lator. O my fortune,
My master dead?

Aub. And you within this half hour
Prepare your self good Devil, you must to it,
Millions of gold shall not redeem thy mischiefs,
Behold the justice of thy practice villain,
The mass of murders thou have drawn upon us,
Behold thy Doctrine, you look now for reward sir,
To be advanced I me sure for all your labors,
And you shall have it: make his Gallows higher
By twenty foot at the least, and then advance him.

Lator. Mercy, mercy, it is too late fool. Exit Lator.

Aub. Such as you meant for me, away with him,
What peeping knaves are those, bring'em in fellows;
Now, what are you?

Nor. Mathematicians,
And it like your Lordship.

Aub. And ye drew a figure.

Fisk. We have drawn many.

Aub. For the Duke I mean sir.
Latorches knaves you are.

Norb. We know the gentleman.

Aub. What did he promise ye.

Nor. We are paid already.

Aub. But I will see you better paid, go whip 'em.

Nor. We do beseech your Lordship, we were hired^

Aub. I know you were and you shall have your hire,
Whip 'em extremely, whip that Doctor there,
Till he record himself a rogue.

Nor. I am one Sir.

Aub. Whip him for being one, and when they are whipt^
Lead 'em to the gallows to see their Patron hanged;
Away with 'em.

Nor. Ah good my Lord. Exeunt Iuglers.

Aub. Now to mine own right Gentlemen.

Lord. 1. You have the next indeed, we all confess it,
And here stand ready to invest you with it.

Lord. 2. Which to make stronger to you and the surer,
Then blood or mischief dare infringe again,
Behold this Lady sir, this noble Lady,
Full of that blood as you are, of that neerenesse,
How blessed would it be?

Aub. I apprehend ye,
And so the fair Matild^ dare accept me,
Her ever constant servant.

Mat. In all pureness,
In all humillity of heart and service,
To the most noble Aubrey I submit me.

Aub. Then this our first tie, now to our business.

Lor. 1. We Are ready all to put that honor on you.

Aub. These sad rights must be done first. Take up the bodies,
This as he was a Prince so princely funeral
Shall wait upon^ him: On this honest Captain
The decency of Arms, a tear for him too.
Go sadly on, and as we view his blood,
May his example in our rule raise good. Exeunt.

Flourish. FINIS.

