A CATHOLIC CONFVTATION OF M. JOHN RIDERS CLAIM OF ANTIQVITIE; AND A CAVLMING
COMFORT AGAINST HIS CAVEAT.

In which is demonstrated, by assurances, even of Protestants, that al
Antiquity, for all points of Religion in controversy, is repugnant to
Protestancie.

Secondly, that Protestancie is repugnant particularly to al articles of
Belief.

Thirdly, that Puritan plots are pernicious to Religion, and State.

And lastly, a replye to M. RIDERS Rescript; with a Discovery of Puritan
partiality in his behalf.

BY HENRY FITZIMON Of Dublin in Irland, of the Society of JESUS, Priest.

S. Augustinus de vtilitate credendi. cap. 5. If after the troubles of thy
mind thou seem to thy self sufficiently turmoyled, and wilt now have an end
of these vexations, follow the way of Catholic discipline, which from Christ
to the Apostles has proceeded to us, and shall proceed hence to posterity.

S. Prosper in lib. de promiss. and predict. cap. 5. Communicating with the
general Church, is to be a Christian Catholic. He is an Heretic who is
departed thence.

Printed at ROAN, with license of Superiors. Anno. 1608.

TO THE CATHOLICS OF IRLAND OF ALL ESTATES, AND DEGREES, GRACE, AND PEACE.
THIS my defense, against M. Ihon Rider (termed Deane of S. Patricks)
containing A Catholic Confutation of his Cauteriated claim of antiquity on
his side, and a Calming comfort against his pretended Friendly caveat to Irland
Catholics; after longing to exhibit unto you, after loathing to be employed
about it, and after lingering to partake you therewith, Dearly beloved Contrymen,
I now present, to your confirmation, and consolation. My longing was nether for
any mercenarie respects, nor popular applauds, but only for your aforsaid
confirmation, and consolation. My loathing was, to incowntre a spirit of
contradiction, esteeming the price of his pains a countenancing of a falsehood,
it imported not how impudently, if confidently, and contentiously. My lingering
was, by being vacant to recollections usual among them of my profession; and by
a doubtful deliberation of my Superiors, whether any further awnswer was due to
such an adversary, who nether durst permit that I should imprint this my
defense, and whom the right honorable his Majesty's Cownsell pronounced, by
public act, to have been an unfit aduocat, or proctor, to justify their
profession, and unable to ratify his own printed allegations.

2. But, whereas I am to incountre him in the whole purport of my book, and
also to tender resolutions equally belonging to all Catholics in general; I
thought good in this dedication to you, Contrymen Catholics, without
digression to digress, in acquainting you of what predecessors you are
descended, Catholics, or Protestants, holy or impiouse, famous or obscure:
that you be not longer strangers at home, and ignorant of our different
protestations; he saying, that your first Christianity was Protestant, and I
auerring that it was only Catholic, as now this word and term is usually
taken.

3. Two things I would feign in the begyning obtain. First, that none censure
my relation in this preface to be of tediouse prolixitie, until he pondre how
many discussions of doubts it contains. Secondly, that during my vnfowlding,
admirable, incredible, and hidden secreacies of our Contryes former
pre-eminence in Religion, and learning, no Readers would for preiudicated
opinions or erroneouse prescriptions in their minds, more distrust these
records, then they can lawfully disdain authorities by which they will be
maintained. Wherefore omitting all remote examinations belonging to our Contryes
first inhabitants, and other trifels wonted in like treatises to be curiously
inquyred; The first part of Irla^ds old Christianity.
I will only, and abruptly, search, the first Christianity, and degree of
learning, and piety, of our Christian ancestors.

4. Concerning therefore the first planting of Religion among us, diverse are the
opinions of Authors. Some affirm, that Legenda noua Anglicana in vita S.
Patricij.
S. James Apostle among other Contryes of the west, visited Irland, and
converted many. Others impute the first planting of Religion in the Britanian
Isles (among which Irland is accounted second, or as Ifaicus in Lycophronem,
terms it, the Occidental Britanie) to Nicephorus de S. Petro.
S. Peter. Others to Catal. Script. Brit. test wione lib 5. c 101.
S. Andrew. Others to Ferculphus Lexo niensis and Dorotheus Tyr. Episcopus ^n
sua Synop^s Apostolorum.
S. Philipp, by his directing unto them Joseph Arimath, and 12. Compagnions.
Others to Simon Zelotes. Many affirm that Irland, and Britanie received the
faith of the gospel at Bosius d^ signis Ecclesia lib. 8. c 1.
one and the same time; and consequently at least in the 203. year after our
Lord and Savior Christ's incarnation. To which accords this chronical verse,
belonging only to Irland, as shall God willing palpablye appear.

Joan. Mayor lib. 1. hist. c. 14.
Christi transactis tribus annis atque ducentis
Scotia Catholicam caepit habere fidem.
Two hundred years and three of Christ out run,
The faith of Christ in Scotland was begun.
Mermannius in theatro conuersionis Gentium and Demochares l. de Sacrificio.
Of all these opinions, other probability, or monuments, I could never find,
then that soon after the first Christianity among the Gentiles, diverse of our
Contry received the benifit thereof, and preached it to others as S. Mansuetus
disciple of S. Peter, ^^mpagnion of S. Clement, Apostle of Tull in Loraine, by
testimo^^e of Mermannius, and Demochares: S. Greg. l. 3. dial.
S. Fridian, Apostle of Luca, in ^^al^e; of whom S. Gregory makes mention:
vita Sedulij in mitio suorum operum, and in Trithemio.
Hildulphus teacher (...) Celius Sedulius: Sedulius him self: historiae eorum
manuscript^. S. Prosper in annal. an. 434. vide Rich. vitum lib. 1. annot. 6.
Vide Baron. tom. 3. fol. 323.
S. Declanus: S. Colman, and (...) Albius, and others before S. Patricks time
by S. Palladius found ^hristians at his arrual in Irland.

5. But whereas there is attributed to Irland for being called in ^^tin Ibernia,
the Conversion of Iberia in Asia, recorded by Nice^horus to have hapened under
Constantin the great; it is strange that it was so little examined by
Sabellicus, VVasnerus, Mercator, Hector ^oethius, Bosius, and manifould others,
as that so many differences ^f all circumstances mentioned by the rehearcer
thereof, were ^otable to persuade them otherwise but that it belonged to ^rland.
Then which supposition, scarcely could any thing be ^ore absurd, and therefore is
not longer to be trauersed.

6. Not withstanding these former petty, and private conuer^^ons, in Irland,
rather then of Irland; in duty, and devotion, let ^ll Irlands race with
perpetual and humble thankfulness, S. Antoninus to^. 2. c. 18. S. Vince^tius in
Speculo. Iacelinus in eius vita. Marianus Scotus an. 452. 453.
attribut their universal conversion, to the thrice gloriouse, and wonder^ull
S. Patricke. Wonderful, if the raising of 60. dead, the conse^^ration of 365.
Bishops, and Churches, and 3000. Priests, the ^aptising of 12000. Christians,
be wonderful. Wonderful, if ^he entier, and total conversion of a
stiff-necked people, not only ^^r the present time, but also by his prayer for
the future; not ^nly against Infidels, Danes, Normans, Aimoinus l. 4. c. 100.
Eginardus de gestis Caroli Magni. Vide Bosium de signis Ecclesiae lib. 8. c. 1.
Ostmans (if they were ^^uers) but also against heretics, Arians, Pelagians,
Puritans, be (...) wonder of Irland incomparable above all other nations; whom
^oth infidelity, and heresy, either altogether, or for the most ^art, some
time or other infected, after their first Christianity. Wonderful, if all
signs, and wonders, or marks of a lawful vo^^tion, as the gift of prophecy,
of tongues, of remedying al manner ^f diseases, of displacing mountayns, of
power over all elements, of ^^pernatural fastings, of angelical conversation,
of holiness at ^ome, of peerles reputation abroad, be wonderful. O what a ^epth
am I unwittingly tra^sported into, when I relate, or rather (...) collect part
of his wonders to believers, neglecting the contra^etie of winds expecting me
among misbeleeuers, from aduan^ng into the havens of their conceits? But as
much as I have ^^uentured hitherto, was out of Strangfoord haven; where the
^^rrent is so strong, that maugre any rack, and gale, to the contrary, yet
could not be hindered to fall out so far with so noble a tide, into an Ocean
(if I would sail therein) of endless scope. Yet I will return into the baye of
my matter, and ride at ancre upon the point of Irlands primative Christianity,
and piety, to demonstrat of what sort, and conformity, to their, or our
profession, they wear.

Volateran. in Anthropologia.
7. And first, such as are already specifyed, S. Patrick, for being a Regular
canon or religious man, abstayning from fleash during his whole life, devout
toward the Cross, a perswader of perpetual chastity to virgins, an erecter of
Abbayes; and Sedulius for commending adoration of Crucifixes (as by Gods
assistance I intend to show in the 152. Celius Sedulius Scotus Ibernensis
venerabilis a Gelasio papa dictus vt habet Gratianus did, 15.
number) and so of the residue, it is most evident, they could nether favor
nor further Puritanisme, as being diametricaly opposite and repugnant to such
their godly proceedings, and conuersations. Nether did their successors
degenerat from their example as confesses even Camden him self, a sectarist
of these times (the learnedest of that kind among the whole crew) saying.
Camdenus fol. 683. 684. 685. de chronographica descriptione Britania. Edit.
Franceford. anno 1590.
The disciples of Patrick so surpassed in Christian piety, that in the age
following, there was nothing more holy, nothing more learned then those Monks.
In confessing them to have been Monks, (unadvised Camden) and yet so holy, so
learned; how lowdly do thou condemn thy brethren, and M. Rider in
particular, first in maligning the holiness of Monks, and next in clayming a
conformity betwixt the first Christianity planted among us, and their Puritan
profession, so distant from it of Monks? But not to halt at every occasion;
such indeed was their abundant holiness, and singular renown of godly doctrine,
that Marianus of the next age to S. Patrick, Marianus lib. 2. page 375. Auienus
libello Orae maritimae. Beda lib. 3. hist. c. 7.
writes, Irland to have been full of Saints. Auienus affirms, that it was
termed the sacred Island. Beda informs, that out of France they repaired
thereto, legendarum gratia scripturarum; For more profound knowledge of
scriptures. Whereunto also, S. Brandons life accords.

8. But because I am now entering to an information that many can not choose but
repyne thereat, as by change of time not only incredible, but also disdaynefull,
that men in the downfall and depth of ignorance, inciuilitie, and abiection,
should now appear to have been formerly most learned, most virtuous, and most
respected; I crave of you, Contrymen, to afford such untrue surmisers, this
true defense, that all monuments being silent in our Contryes cause, and the
present countenance of our Contry ^ost remote from former flourishing estate;
they had no reason to ^ppose better thereof, then according their wonted manner.
Never had other knowledge been as yet attained, if Gods great ^rouidence had
not permitted the lives of Saints by late here^^cks to be derided and
distrusted, and inspyred Catholic wry^rs to justify, and publish them; in
which among other innume^able benifits, true knowledge of antiquities are most
assuredly ^^wght, and discovered. Out of these fountaynes Camden, Bale, and
^ther like took their drawghts, and together drunk up the ^orsayd notice, of
Irlands owld dignity. Surius. Molanus. Serrarius. Bosius. VVion.
Others fynding purer ^prings, and sucking thereat throwgh purer pypes the same
^nowledge, have also more purely powered out running streams ^o our Contryes
commendation. Out of which, I am now, to the ^orie of God, and your
consolation, to fill all empty caskes, duly ^isposed to be replenished; yet
nothing without direct deriuation from the purest well springs of vnsuspitious
Authors.

9. And first, who may be more vnsuspitious toward us, then ^e foresaid Camden,
whether we regard his Contry, or conscien^e? He then affirms Irlands fame to
have been so great, as they ^nly wear accounted among the English nation of
laudable ^ducation, who had been trained (O diversity of time) therein. Camden.
page 117.
^or proof whereof he alleges this prouerbial awnswer, when ^uestion was
made where any of quality was instructed; Amanda^us est ad disciplinam in
Iberniam; He is sent into Irland to his studyes. For ^onfirmation whereof, he
adds a verse frequented in common ^peeche.

Exemplo patrum commotus amore legendi
Iuit ad Ibernos sophia, mirabile, claros. Ibidem page 678.

Of custom old, desyring knowledge sownd
To Irish teachers grave, the way he found.
Many other arguments he alleges to verify the same; Ibid. 684. 117. 122.
630
which for brevity, and avoiding suspected ambition, I ouerslipp.

10. But although his authority may seem forcible in this ^ause, as being
from one of his disposition; yet I judge it my part ^ot to suffer it to depend
upon his only credit, but to auerr it by ^enerable Beda, and he an English
man, who flourished nine ^undred years ago in incomparable reputation of
religious ^ynceritie. Thus then he records. Beda in hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 27.
This affliction wrought also great ^estruction in Irland. VVherin at that time
wear many of the Nobles and ^ommons of the English nation: who in the time of
Finan and Colman forsaking their own Island repaired thither, partly for divine
Doctrine, partly for (...) continent life. And truly some did straight
conform them selves to the conversation of Moncks. Others circuiting the cells
of teachers, joyfully applied their study, whom the inhabitants most willingly
intertayning cherfully bestowed upon them their daily diet, books to study,
and their teaching freelye. Again he recompting how in Magio, (which I think
to be Mayo in Conacht) a Seminary was builded by S. Colman, and the Earl of
Mayo, Ibidem. l 4. c 3. and 4. and l. 3. c. 26.
for the English; thus he concludes: to wit which monastery is to this day
possessed by Englishmen. And it is now become great of a little one, and is
commonly called Iniugeo. So every one long since being converted to better
instructions, it contains a rare compagnie of Moncks, who being collected
from the province of English, in great continency, and synceritye, live by the
labor of their hands according the example of their venerable forfathers
under rule, and a Canonical Abbot.

Camden page 678.
11 Breeflly, to contain many proofs in one, Camden confesses, that in
Iberniam tanquam ad bonarum artium mercaturam vndique confluxerunt; They
flocked from all places into Irland, as unto a market of all sciences. What say
you now, Deerly beloved Contrymen: can you believe your eyes in behoulding this
quondam flourishing dignity of your now debased contrye? what think you: was
it for Puritanisme, or rather for regular discipline, more continent life,
obedience under a religious Monck, or Abbot, that such flocking was into
Irlande? Of your greatest emulators, who lifts to regard these authorities,
if they will admyre as amazed at them, yet the most impudent, will not
hereafter dare to deny them.

Camden page 685. Eginard Aimom. S. Bernard. loc. infra citandis.
12. But how was this flourishing devotion, and doctrine utterly extinguished?
Camden awnswereth by many foreign invasions. Beda, Eginardus, Aimoinus, and S.
Bernard, do confirm the same. Of whom Beda greatly reproves Ecgfrid, King of
Northumberland, Beda. l. 4 c. 26.
because, vastauit misere gentem innoxiam, and nationi Anglorum semper
amicissimam, ita vt neque Ecclesijs quidem aut monasterijs manus parceret
hostilis, He miserably wasted the harmeles Irish people, and to the English
nation most friendly, so that he did not spare either Churches, or Abbayes. S.
Bernard specifyeth so cruel to have been the persecutions of pirates, that in
one day, in one only abbaye of Benchor, they killed nine hundred Moncks.

13 Besyd which ruin of our ancient glory, I find another great desolation
in Irland to have suddenly happened, by a general fervor of our godly doctors,
conueying them to infidel ^ontryes to imparte unto them the clear brightness of
the gos^^ll. I say, I find such voluntary peregrination to have disabled ^^d
impouerished Irland by their absence, as much as they bew^fyed and benifyted
other Contryes by their presence. Of which ^niuersal transmigration, thus
writes Henricus Antisiodorensis. Henricus Antisiodore^. in epist. ad Carol.
Caluum.
Quid ^erniam commemorem contempto pellagi discrimine pene totam cum grege
^ilosophorum ad littora nostra migrantem: quorum quisquis peritior est, vltro
^^i indicit exilium? Why should I remember Irland, almost altogether (...)
trowps of philosophers, (the danger of sea vnregared) to these our Coasts
^oting: of whom as every one is most learned, so he enters into banish^ent
more promptly? When therefore the chief of our learned saints ^bandoned their
native soil, to displaye and plant Religion ^broad: is it any merueil that the
Contry at home was disfur^ished, and all the glorious ornaments thereof
deminished, and ^ithered?

14. As their zealous Apostolical spirit conducted them to all ^laces where they
might edify to salvation, (of which places ^ome few, for certainty sake, are
to be mentioned) so in England, so great wear their virtuous trauayles, Camden
page 117. and 157.
that as Camden ^cknowledgeth, in many places, to them if not only, yet
^heefly, their devotions wear addicted, their towns and ^hurches dedicated,
their patronage by all implored. To which ^amdens relation do approach and
belong these words of Beda. Beda l. 3. c. 3.
^y them the young and old of the English, wear instructed in studyes, and
observation of regular discipline. Again: they being teachers, Ibid. l. 4. c.
26.
the ^hole care was to serve God and not the world, to fill the soul, and ^ot
to pampre the body. So that the habit of Religion was then ^n great
veneration; in so much as where soever any Clercke, or Monck, ^ould come, he
would cheerfully be received by all, as the servant of God. ^lso if he wear
found in his journey, they would ronn to him, and bowing their heads covet to
be crossed with his hands, or blessed with his ^^outhe. Was this puritanisme?
was this old Catholic Religion different from this late Catholic Religion?
who, will ^ere after think so, whose senses and wit are at liberty, and whom
puritan protestations have not benumbed of all understanding? But I list not to
lingre, or trifle in a case so perspi^uous.

15. As in situation France is next England; so also was it, to the godly
visitation, of our Euangelical pilgrims. I will conioyne their fructifying
therein, and in the low Contryes (the bordres thereof) in one declaration. Of
the, (Mellifluous S. Bernard) I expect the filling of my sails with a
prosperous bonace, and forwynde; that I may safely ariue at the port of
persuasion; truth, and irrefragable authority, being my lead starr, and
inoffensiue manifestation of Irlands owld estate my pilot, and thou Benchor
Abbay the blessed rode, from which I will begynn my navigations.

S. Bernardus in v. S. Malachie.
16. Of this Abbay, says S. Bernard: it was a most noble Monastery before under
Congellus first parent thereof, yielding many thousand Moncks, and being head of
many Abbayes. A place in truth holy, fertile of saints most abundantly
fruictfull to God. So that one of that holy congregation named Luanus is
reported to have alone fownded (in France: as Florarium, a written martyrologe
in our library of Louain, contains) a hundred Abbayes. Which I therefore
relate, that by this one the Reader may conjecture how surpassing had been the
residue.

17. To be brief the budds or branches thereof so replenished Irland, and
Scotland, that the verses of David seem spoken of those times. Thou have
visited the earth, and made it dronken thou have multiplied to enriche it. The
flood of God is filled with waters, thou have prepared the food of them: for
so is the preparation thereof. Making drunk the banks of it, thou have
multiplied thereof, in the stilling dropps whereof the fructifying will rejoice;
I and in like manner, they which follow. Add not only into the foresaid, but also
into other strange Contryes those heaps of saints powered out them selves as a
ouerflowing stream. Of whom S. Columban aryued into these our parts of France,
erected the Abbay of Lexouium, and increased there into a great multitude. They
report, to have been so many, as one quyer succeding another, the solemn
divine service perpetualy continued, so that no moment of day or night was
vacant from Gods praises. Let this suffice of the old glory of the Abbaye of
Benchor. This being in time past destroyed by Pirates, Malachias for the
remembrance of the ancient dignity thereof, took it in hand, as if he wear
to replant paradise, because many bodies of Saints lay there in rest. For, that
I may say nothing of them that deceased in peace, they record that 900. wear
by pirates murdered in one day. Hitherto has S. Bernard safely transported me,
so near the wished harborow of full persuasion, and reasonable consent pliable
to reasons, (for who so presumptuously obstinat, as to distrust S. Bernard.)
that now I may lawfully seem protected from wynds, and weather, without
proceeding to further wharfe, or keye; all that I intended to prove of Irlands
ancient glory, being compendiously comprised, in the former discourse.

Sigibertus anno 651.
18. Althowgh in common appears, that France was auayled, and advanced
greatly, by recourse of our learned Saints ^^erto, Vide do his sanctis,
Surium, Molanum, Trithemium, Iocelmum, and librum M. S. apud Woluerstonum iuxta
Dubliniam etc.

De S. Madelgario, Fra. de Rosiers to. 4. stematum lotharingie hist. capitali
73. fol. 255. habet, fuisse illum rege^ Ibernie. Vide Guicciardinum in descrip.
Mentium Hanoniae. certe non fuit pro rex regis Fra^cie, cui nihil vnquam fuit
in Ibernia.


and by so many erected Abbayes the truest schools of ver^^e, and verity; yet
the appearing thereof in perspicuitie, depen^^th most upon the particular
histories of such our Contries bles^^d brood as are in late writers
plentifully extant. Among whom, what Columbs, Kilians, Vltans, Foilans,
Fursees, Fiacres, VViroes, ^^ncents, (otherwise called Madelgarius, or rather
Marguirius) Luglies, ^uglians, Adalgises, Corbicans, Fredegands, Foranans,
Elequies, Bertuins, ^ombols, and manifould others, might I specify? In Brabant
what ^umulds (some time bishop of Dublin) what Fredegands, what ^ymnaes
(otherwye Diuna; as she is inuoked in Louthe) what Gerebe^^s; in Flandres, what
Leuins, what Guthagons, what Gilloes, what in^^osed Columbs; in Holland, what
Hierons, what Plechelms; in all the ^^w contryes, what Helyes, wasnulphes,
Ogers, Chilens, Helans, Tressans, ^ermans, Verans, etc. (all being gloriouse
Saints of our Contry, ^emembred in benediction) might I delate upon, and
Calculat? So ^reat a Catalogue, or list, might I dinumerat, what by the
Kilians, ^alls, Ruperts, Trutherts, Virgils, Arbogasts, Florences, Hildulphes,
Erhards, ^illigods, Domnols, two Deodats, Totnans Colmans, and others the
pa^^ons of Germany; what by others of Italy, and others the pa^^ons of
Irland, that not so few as six hundred are they of our ^o^try who flourished in
admirable Sanctity, whose names I have (...) custody.

19. This multitude, this abundance caused Marianus to say: Marian. l. 2. page
379.
^ernia insula Sanctis and mirabilibus viris perplurimis plena habetur, The
island (...) Irland is replenished with Saints and manifowld admirable persons.
Surius and Molanus 2. Maij.
It ma^e Surius, and Molanus, to say: Scotia, quae and Ibernia dicitur,
fertilis ^nctorum insula and stellarum numerum prope equans protrocinijs
sanctorum. ^cotland which is called Irland, is a plenifull island of Saints,
Theodoricus in v. S. Rumuldi apud Sur. 1. Iulij.
and coequal to the ^^mber of stars, in the patronages of Saints. It made
Theodoricus to say: ^sula sicut omni terrarum gleba foecundior, ita sanctorum
gloriosa simplicita^^ beatior, An Island, as more fertile then any clodd of
lands, so more blessed in ^^e holy simplicity of saints. Vide Camden fol.
678. S. Bern. in v. S. Malachie. vitam S. Columbani, S. Galli. S. Kiliani.
Brefly it made every writer to amplify ^rlands comme^dations, every Contry to
whom they repaired to ^^und for them (as in Fulda, Herbi poli, Fossis, S Gallo,
etc.) habitations, and every nation whom they visited, to have their
festiuities in ^reatest veneration.

20. Neither is it the least part of their glory, that many of them wear of
Roial or princely race, as VVion. 20. October.
Vendelin, Florarium. 13. Ian.
Kentigerne, Kilian, Idem 8. Maij.
Fiacre, Sira his sister, Buchingerus ad ann. 888. Abbas pruniensis, Cuspinian,
P. Phrig. Platus.
Richardis emperesse and wife, VVion. 8. Iulij.
(yet perpetual virgin) to Carolus Crassus, Andreas Herbi Canonicus Attreb. in
lib. de vita eorum.
Luglius and Luglian brethren and Lilia their sister, Molan in na talibus, in
Indiculo, and in recapitulatione.
Guthagon, Molan in na talibus, in Indiculo, and in recapitulatione.
Dimna, Molan in na talibus, in Indiculo, and in recapitulatione.
Vincent, Surius 14 Nouem.
Laurence, Ioa. Mayor de gestis Scotorum lib. 2. p. 34.
Cuthbert, Merman, in theatro conuersionis Gentium page 104.
Fridolin, Volateran. l. 20. Antrop.
Fridian, M. S. liber VVoluerstoni.
Brandub, Ibidem.
Cormacus, Trithemical. 3. c. 31.
Brandan, Probus l. 2. vitae S. Patricij, tres illas fuisse regias virgins
commemorat. Sabel. enead. 8. l 9. Naucler. in gest. Caroli Mag. Joan. Valensis
part 10. compendiloquij. c. 6. Gaguin. l. 4. de orig. Francorum. Polidorus l.
5. history.
Aethyna, Vluena, Fethle etc. Showing thereby the degenerat, and bastard mynds,
of such as think any other nobility comparable to serve god in ecclesiastical
state; and never think their sonns fit to be of the clergy, unless they be
maimed, deformed, sottish: dealing with God as Cayne, in offering to him the
refuse oblations, and the choice to the vanity of the world. But of this
profane inconsideration, and disdaynefull conceit of godly worthiness, and what
punishments thereby ensue; our patriarchal Apostle S. Patrick, soon after will
give us a spiritual lesson, and privy reprehension, in the relation of the
occasions of his own, and his compagnies captivity.

21. Besyd the former two surpassing benifits in foreign Contryes, of
innumerable Abbayes erected by our contrymen, and so many preachers planting
and watering their dispositions to salvation, in all places whether they went,
they also occasioned universities to be erected; and among the rest it of Paris
it self, and it of Pauie. My authors are no meaner then Sabellicus, Nauclerus,
Ioannes Valensis, Gaguinus, and Polidorus. The two first in sentence and
circumstance concur, saying. Two men of monastical profession from Irland
lauding in France with Merchands of Britanie; when others propownded other
Merchandise, they lowdly professed to be Merchands of learning, and wisdom.
And being demanded, at what rate they whuld sell their wares; they awnswered
for only intertaynement of meat and appareil. At lenght Charles the great duly
informed of them, placed one (whose name was Claud Clement) in Paris. The other
(who was called John Scott) he directed into Italy to teach wisdom in Pauie.
Who does not evidently behold the singular deserts of most affectionat
reciprocation, and spiritual requitals exhibited by Irland to England, France,
Italy, Germany, Flandres, in the most beneficial manner that one nation could
demerit an oher?

22. Thus far, Contrymen Catholics, have I succinctly ouerronn many important
relations, sufficiently manifesting the ruthful ruin of our Contrye from so
great beauty, and flourishing fame, to so great decay, and obscurity, by the
multitude of our offenses, that even in perusing the evidence of them, yet we
our selves in comparing them to the present calamity of our said Contry, we
staggre to condescend, and incline to their ^^surance. The greatest exception
against them can be noe other, ^^en that diverse ancient authors did reproach
our Contry with ^^rbarietie, and especialy S. Hierome; with which, so floris^ng
doctrine, and devotion might seem not to have con^^ted.

23. To which objection I find two authentical awnswers by writers of a
thousand years antiquity. The first is ^f Jonas disciple to S. Columban,
saying: that nation, Jonas in v. S. Columbani apud Sur. to. 6. Nou. 21.
wanting in deed ^^e laws of other nations, was never the less flourishing in
the doctrine of Chri^ian religion, so that it excelled all neighbor nations.
The second is of ^^alafrid Strabo, more pertinently, and pithily (although ^he
former does avoid abundantly all brunt of the objection, ^hewing that any
barbarietie there found, if any wear, de^inished not their religious piety
from being peculiar) be^onging to the imputation, saying: VValafrid Straba in
pref. v. S. Galli, apud Sur. 16. October.
how horrible soever others have ^ritten of the inhabitants of Irland, since
the faith of Christ came among ^^em, is to be silenced. For where synn abounded
grace has super abounded. So that by the premises Irland without odiouse
ostentation is made ^otoriously comparable for antiquity of religion with most
of ^he formest, for stedfastnes with any of the firmest, for fer^oure with the
brightest Contrye now flourishing in christia^itie; in multitude of saints
peerles, by any soil of like ^^pacitie; in fructifying and flourishing abroad
and indebting ^ther Contryes by beneficious and officiouse functions, as
forward as any.

24. Nether have I usurped, borrowed feathers to adorn it ^s Horace his
chowgh; but been contented with the only propre and natural plume. Therefore
accepted not VVillibrord by grant ^f Bruschius, or the catalogue of the abbots
of Epternay; nor VVilli^ald, VVinibald, and their sister VValpurg (although in
Dublin there is (...) church dedicated to her mis named S. VVarborowes) by
authority ^f Molanus; nor Boniface by authority of Trithemius, Molanus,
Brussalus, ^latus; nor VVicbert, and his co^pagnions, by sundry authorities.
True ^n deed it is, that many, or all of these, had their nurture in Irland,
and as others, received all their indowments, or ornaments therein, whereby after
they glorified God, and them selves: otherwise, upon examination I account them
not to have been of our Con^ry. Thus much therefore to the honor, and glory of
God, be known, ^o discern that our first Christianity was repugnant to
Purita^isme, and conformable to Catholic Christianity in the principal
perfection thereof as now it is professed.

The second part, that Irland was the old Scotland.
25. Having studiously revealed all these former antiquities for your
contentment, and confirmation, in your ancient, universal, and conformable
belief, singularly beloved Contrymen Catholics; shall I refrain from
informing you, wherefore many of your blessed fore mentioned saints are called
Scots, which denomination you retain no longer? if I followed wholly their
footsteps who either in latin, or English, have hitherto unfolded diverse
parcells of your antiquities; I should also leap over this block, and
impediment, without removing it out of your way to know your own, and when
others wrongfully defeat you of your right: and do no more, then inform you,
that some time you wear called Scots, without specifiyng whether alone, or how
long so called or wherefore no longer. But having by long inquisition found out
choice guydes, and being willing to adventure on any journey whereby I may right
you in your cheifest glory; that being lawfully entitled, and possessed
thereof, you may remain as in the inheritance no less of your predecessors
goodness, then of there goods: will by the assistance of God proceed on this
examination by the most compendiouse path that through the thicket of old
antiquities shall lie open before me.

26. First therefore I say that Irla^d was the only known Scotland til the
destruction of Picts: which hapened after the year of Christ 800. For assuring
whereof, I will follow two kynds of proofs. The first by allegations testifying
in such manner Irland to have been the only known Scotland till that time, as
in all monuments of writers before this last 600. years, it is called Scotland
without either limitation, or insinuation of any other else where known; and
also with some addition incompatible to any other Scotland afterward so
called: either by being named together an Island, or by being specifyed not to
be any part of Britanie, but only neighboring thereto: or lastly, by being
expressly and indifferently applied to Irland, as much as the very name of
Irland it self. yea after the thousand year of our savior, it retained the
name of Scotland with a prerogative of being the greater Scotland and mother of
the less. The second kind of proofs shall be of such as condemn and Confute
the affirmers of any other Scotland else where before that time known.

27. Among all that ever penned any remembrance of Britanical matters, ( as
Caesar, Propertius, Dio, Diodorus Siculus, Pomponius, Ptolome^^, Solinus,
Tacitus, Eutropius, Spartianus, Capitolinus, Lampridius Vopisc^^, ^^relius
Victor, Herodianus, Procopius, and all others) not one of them ^^ifyed any
Scots in their times to have dwelled in any part of ^^itanie, having occasion,
and intention, to treat of the inhabi^^nts thereof. Yea six hundred years after
Christ's incarnation, Hucbaldus in v. S. Lebuini apud Sur. 12. Nouemb.
in ^^e history of S. Bertuinus, and in the prayer also or collect of S.
^^nianus, when all the inhabitants of Britanie wear distinctly re^^arsed, and
peculiarly prayed for, Del Rio in Octauian Senecae. Sedulius aequalis
Prudentio. Trithemius.
in them also wear Britanian ^^ots wholly omitted. Contrary wise, Amianus who
first, S. Hierome ^ho second, Sedulius and Prudentius coequals who thirdly,
Claudia^^ and all othere after conformably, who mentioned the denomi^^tion of
Scotland, and Scots; they ever attributed it, as I said, syno^maly, or
indifferently, to Irland, and Irish men, as much as the ve^^ name of Irland,
and Irish men. Which in any wisdom, all wry^rs as well old as late, holy as
prophan, forreiners as domesti^^l, would neuee have done, S. Hieronimus in
proem. 3. in Hieremia^. Erasmus ibid. Sedulius in o^nes epist. S. Pauli.
Claudianus in 4. consulatu Honorij and alibi S. Orosius lib. 1. page 20. S
Isidorus lib 12 cap. 6 Hegesippus. l. 5. c. 15. Hucbald. loc. cit.
if there had been any where else Scotland, (...) Scots known.

28. Of the foresaid authors S. Hierome speaking of the Scottish ^^tion, says,
it was only in Britanorum vicinia, neighboring upon Bri^^nie. Sedulius
tearming him self a Scot, put to it, Ibernensis, of Irland. ^^audianus makes
Irland bewail the disconfiture of Scots as the habitants thereof: Scotorum
tumulos fleuit glacialis Iberna, The death of ^^ts, could Irland did lament.
Again: totam cum Scotus mouit Ibernam. ^hen the Scot excited all Irland to
war. S. Orosius says; Irland is inhabited Scots. S. Isidore: Scotland is the
same that Irland is; Scotland is the Island next ^^tanie. Hegesippus: Scotland
is an island remote from all other land. Hucbald: Britanie Irland, otherwise
called Scotland adioyneth. Beda, Beda in hist. eccl. l 1 c. 1 Idem, in
appe^dice hist. Idem 13. Nouemb. and lib. 4. hist. c. 19. Aimoinus lib. 4 c.
100. Eginard. de Carolo Mag. Surius and Molanus 8. Maij. 1. Iulij. S. Bernard.
in v. S. Malach. Cesarius lib. 12. c. 38.
whose ver^^ct in a Britanian matter is irrefragable, writing in the year of
^^r lord 731. says: Irland is the propre contry of Scots; Scots inhabit
Irland, (...) Island near Britanie; from Scotland he came into Britanie;
Coming from ^land the Contry of Scots; etc. Aimoinus, and Eginardus: Irland
the Island of ^ots. Marianus: S. Kilian, a Scot, borne in Irland. Surius, and
Molanus: Scot^^nd, which is called Irland, fertile Island of saints. S. Bernard
of the inha^^tante of Armach: we are Scots, and not French men. Cesarius: let
them go (...) Scotland, and enter S. Patricks purgatory. I would inquyre,
without ^^ssion, of then that made ample volumes of Kings anh Contryes, ^arrs
and triumphs, marriages and genealogies, peace and ^^wes, lives and deaths of
other Scotlands, and Scots: did they ^^inke in their consciences, if any such
had been, had not so lear^^d, so diligent, so familiar historians in Britanian
matters, found (...) them out? If they had found them out, had they omitted
them? (...) they had omitted them, had they so confused conceits as to nam^
Irland indifferently for Scotland, and contrary wise, without intimation of any
other Contry so called? This age is to sharp-sighted not to discern the
futilitie and friuolousnes of such forge^ narrations as are founded upon mis
conceited dreams.

Gildas, Beda, Polidorus, Hluidus, Camden etc.
29. But observe, for full instruction in this controversy, tha^ in all places
of Britanie there wear first only Britons, or walshmen, inhabitants; of whom
fewer, and meaner dwelled in the northren parts, by means of greater
sterilitie then in the residue Which northren parts wear often even from
Julius Cesa^^ time infested, Panegyricus.
and molested by pyratical irruptions of Irishmen. These Irishmen, for causes by
none so probablye as by Camde^ specifyed, Camden de Chronographica descriptione
Britanie, and Insularum adiacentium, a fol. 55. deinceps. Impress. Francofard.
an. 1590.
not long after, wear also called Scots. And not long after such name, whereof
Amianus (as is before affirmed) made the first mention, there came into Irland
out of Scithia a people called Picts, and requested the Scots or Irishmen to
admit them to dwell in their dominion. Awnswer was made, that the Island could
not contain both: never the less they would advise then to attempt the
Northren desolat parts of Britanie, and to conquer habitation to them selves.
Beda in hist. l. 1. c. 1.
And if resistance would be made they would second them with strong assistance,
and plant then maugre all adversaries in those seats. The Picts feercely invaded
those parts, and by succession of time purchased them.

Ibid. cap. 12.
30. The Britons often inuoked succors from the Romans against their violence.
From whom a legion was sent unto the^ twyse, by which they repelled their
enemies, and placed the wall (the ruyns whereof to this day are named the Picts
wall) to defend them against their fury, which wall in Seuerus his time wa^
extended from the place where now Dumberton stands, to the Firth that enters
into Edinburg; and in Hadrians time, from Selwey Firth, to the place where
Barwick now stands. For the proceedings of the Picts did ebb, and flow,
according to the diversity of occasions; till at lenght the Romans pestered
with other wars, Pomponius Letus de anno 22. Valentiniani. Paulus Diac. l. 24.
sub finem. Beda l. 1. hist. c. 14. and lib. de natura temporum vbi de Theodosio
iuniore.
forlorned the Britons to their own defense: by when slacknes, and discords,
the Picts anno Domini 446. quietly inioye^ all that was beyond the foresaid
walls: which before they had only wasted, and vexed, by yearly incursions. The
Irishmen, or Sco^^ with their Spoils returned according their custom into
Irland leaving the Picts the second inhabitants now of Britani^ among other
captives by the Scots or Irishmen transported est^ons into Irland, (for as I
said it was their annual employment (...) invade the Britons) they purchased
the most happy booty that ^her Irland had, our blessed Apostle S. Patrick;
Genes. 41.
who as Joseph to Egypt, was to Irland, a prisoner procuring them liberty, and
life. ^is words before promised, I found in a hand written history of is life
in our library of Douaye, while I ransaked all libraries in ^y way for our
Contryes antiquities; whereby both his men^oned instruction, and his
Captivity, and the place of habitation or ^etrayt of the Scots, are evidently
notifyed, in manner following.

31. This was the cause of his first peregrination into Scotland. Vita
Manuscripta S. Patricij in bibliotheca patrum Societatis Jesus Duaci.
The army of ^cots when it often sailed into Britanie took many Captives.
Then was he seven ^ares old. But it is more probable to my thinking, which he
him self says in ^^e books of a Bishop. When I was ledd Captive I was
almost 15. years old. For (...) was unmindful of the true God, and was
transported Captive into Irla^d with (...) many thousand persons according our
deserts. By which we departed from God and did not keep his commandments, and
despised our priests who preached to us ^luation. And there God opened the
senses of our incredulity, that though late we ^^uld remember our offenses and
be converted to him. I daily fedd catle, and ^ften prayed each day, and the
love, fear, and faith of God, increased in me, in (...) much that daily, and
nightly, I prayed a hundred times. I remained in woods ^^d mountains, and was
rayfed to prayer, in mists, frosts, and rain. Nether ^as Islack thereto, but as
now I perceive, then was I fervent. I observed certain ^^rmonious unknown
spirits in me. Thus far his own words brea^ing a venerable antiquity, and
holy simplicity.

32. The Picts being established in Britanie, anno 446. Beda in hist. l. 1. c.
1. Joan. Mayor in hist. Scotica lib. 1. c. 11.
(who be^re as Beda says, anniuersarias praedas trans maria, milite nullo
^^sistente, cogere solebaut, accustomed to take yearly booties over ^he sease,
no soldiers being to resist them) desired to have wives ^ut of Irland: for
they had none in their compagnie. The confede^tion betwixt them purchased, that
their request was accorded unto, co^ditionalie that their princes should be
chosen sooner from ^he mothers side, then the fathers. The Picts condisce^ded
thereto, (...) faithfully observed it. Among these wives, their kindred,
fostrers, ^^quaintance resorted into the Picts contry, and although in small
^umbers, yet they became the third inahbitants of Britanie; but so (...) they
remained fee farmers to the Picts into whose dominion ^^ey came. Both nations
thus co^ioyned being more distrustful to ^^e Brito^s; they inuoked the Saxons,
English, Beda loc. cit. cap. 15.
and other Germain na^o^s, to their succors. These of defe^ders, became
offe^ders, and usurped all the choice part of the land to themselves, having
first plighted a leag with the Picts. Of frendshipp also made with the Sco^^
dwelling among the Picts, the same may be imagined, by means of their
co^sociation with the^; who otherwise, for their late coming into Britanie and
small number, are not by authors once mentioned.

Beda in historial. 3. c. 4
33. In the year 565. S. Columb Kille sailed into the Picts province, and
converted the Northren part of them, and of them received to him, and his
successors, the Island of Hye, now called Mula. This also was an occasion, why
many Scots passed into those parts. Beda lib. 1. hist. c. 1.
After a while Edan (who is by Beda called Reuda, of the composition Rye, and
Eda, signifying King Eda, and in latin is called Edanus) son of Gabrahan
sailed as I take it in the year 603 into Britanie, with a puissant army, and
what by force what by favor, intruded among the Picts, and is therefore said to
be the conqueror that first planted Scots in Britanie; to wit out of all
subjection of others. Which Iocelin she weth to have been fore prophesied by S.
Patrick in these words. Iocelinus Monachus Furnensis, in vita S. Patricij, cap.
137.
Of his linadge proceeded the most courageous Edanus, son of Gabrahan, who
subdued Scotland which is now called Albanie, and Islands bordering thereto, in
which his successiue posterity remains. The subduing of Scotland called
Albanie is imputed unto him, by his attempting it first, and planting them by
whom it was done long after, as the begyning of Rome is imputed to Aeneas who
dyed long before it was begone.

34. The name of Edanus, the circumstance of time, and of all things else, as
his powerful strength, and the rest, do command me to think this to be the
Edan King of Scots that inhabited Britanie, Beda in hist. lib. 1. c. 34.
who assaulted Edelfrid King of Northumberland, Motus eius profectibus, only
for emulation of his prosperity, more aduentourouslie, the^ prosperously. For
being repulsed with great loss, nether he; nor any of his progeny after,
says Beda, returned into Britanie against the English nation, unto the time
that Beda did write his history. Whereby also appears, that the first King
mentioned of the Britanian Scots, and all the rest following, dwelled out of
Britanie, and consequently in Irland, (for other Kingdom of Scots, ye^ or
princely province, or place fit for their Kings, nether ever was by ancient
author, nor by new can be named) the rather that Bed^ tells how the Picts
recovered into liberty the land of their possession, Beda ibid. l. 4. c. 26.
which the English and Scots that wear in Britanie, and part of the Britons
possessed, which hitherto they inioye toward 46. years. Whereby is first
apparent, the Scots to have come after the Picts into Britanie and into ^^^ir
parts only. Picti secundum veram historiam ante Scotos in Britania. (...)
Picts, (confesses John Mayor lib, 1. c. x.) according to the true history,
^^e before the Scots in Britain. Next the Picts not to have had the ^et
inheritance in Britanie before the year of our Savior ^rist 446. Thirdly King
Edan, or in the Irish tongue Rye Eda, or ^da, not to have flourished before the
year 603. and to have been ^e first guide of multituds of Scots into Britanie.
Lastly the Picts have soon after recovered their whole dominions, into their
^^ne jurisdiction.

35. These all putt together, we may also assuredly suppose, at never King of
Scots had any dominion peculiarly named ^otland, in Britanie, whils the Picts
had Kings, and as Beda says; ^^d he that adjoined the Epitome to his history;
Beda l. 3, c. 4. Epitome history Anglorum in fine.
potentissimos re^^ and tyrannos, most mighty Kings, and Tyrants, to the year
of Christ 765. ^herfor it was no marvel, that S. Rumuld son to David King
Scots, bishope of Dublin, living anno 750. was called son of ^^h King of
Scots, notwithstanding he was an Irishman, Joan. Domins de vita S. Rumuldi,
Molanus de natalibus Walt. Carthus. Hect. Boeth.
there ^ing no where else any Kings of Scots till after the destruction of ^cts:
Nether also among the Britanian Scots, was there any cal^d David, to the year
of Christ 1129. So coherent is truth to it ^^fe, and to all monuments of
vnsuspitious authors, in our be^lfe. The same shall be concluded against our
adversaries out of ^eir own chronicles in these verses.

Primus in Albanis fertur regnasse Kenedus
Filius Alfini prelia multa gerens. Joan. Mayor in hist. Scotica lib. 2. c. vlt.

Expulsis Pictis regnauit is octo bis annis.
Fame says, First Alban King was Keneth stowt,
Alfins Martial son, who Picts shutt out:
He reigned sixten years without all doubt.
36. This destruction of Picts, or rather extirpation, Hect. Boeth.
(for the ^ots utterly abolished their name and of spring) hapening about ^e
year of Christ, 846. and Kenedus being professed in the Alba^an or Britanian
Scottish Chronicles, to be the first Albanian ^otish King dwelling in Albanie;
it may be accounted an infal. ^^le rule, that until that time, at least, the
Scottish name belon^d only to Irland. For to testify an union of the Britanian
Scots ^ith Irishmen, they named their purchase the lesser Scotland, as ^e
Spaynards denominated their purchase in America, noua His^nia, Hispaniola etc.
new Spain; and little Spain etc. Therefore, for they had purchased their
dominion, the name of Scots belonged alone to the Irish, the belonging to whom
of the Albanian Scots them selves, being the cause why it was brought into
Britanie, and by the Irish permitted to remain theirin, to testify them to
have been one only people before, and then first separated rather by distance of
place, then affections. For betwixt both nations there has been, and still
remains, a natural concord, and consociation.

37. The sainctitie of both Irish, and Scottish, appertayning to our contry at
least till after 840. years, as is pregnantly demonstrated; what wrong to
Irland is it of late Albanian writers, to wreast, and distort testimonies of
writers in this manner? Georgius Thomsonus in suo libello de antiquitate
Christianae religionis apud Scotos.
if they say Columbanus to have been an Irish man: their meaning is, that he
was only of the mountain part of the lesser Scotland. If they say Kilian came
out of Irland: their meaning to have been, yea their words, he came out of
some Ila^de of this Scotland. Have not such perfidious glosses made all
strangers, and others, to account their wrytings but mere philopatrial
forgeries; and to have taken our defense generaly against them? The rule then a
forspoken is universal, that whersoeuer any Scot is mentioned before the foresaid
time; S. Bernardus in v. S. Malachie. Decretal. de dolo and contumacia cap. cum
olim. Caesarius lib. 12. c. 38. Fr. Malachias Mino rita de veneno peccatum cap.
xi.
he could be noe other then an Irishman. When many also, long after, be so
called, without other diversity, the doubt of them to be uncertain, till
after the time that Irland rejected that name. For S. Bernard, the old edition
of the Canon law, Cesarius, Malachias Minorita, do referr the name of Scotand
to our Contry 400. years, after the fatal ruin of the Picts.

38. Therefore, Albanian Scots do lose their pains, and credit, in repyning
that all foresaid Scots wear belonging to Irland. S. Bryde or Brigida will be an
Irish Virgin, as long as the volumes, and wrytings of all Martyrologes, of
Beda, Marianus, Sigebertus, Isingrenas, Capsgrauius, S. Bernard, Genebrard,
Baronius, and of the histories of S. Patrick, S. Ethkin, S. Laurence, and of
her self, be unburned, or unburied, S. Columbanus will be ane Irishman, while
the monumente of Jonas VValafridus, all martyrologes, the lives of S. Kilian,
of S. Rumuld, Beda, Sigebert, Trithemius, Vincent, Antonin, Vsuard, Volateran,
Mermanius, Molanus, Bosius, Baronius, VVion, Bernard, yea Bale, or Camden,
bear any reputation. So will S. Fiacre, if Surius, Clictouaeus, Hareus,
Gazetus, Molanus, and ecclesiastical hymns, be of greater reputation, then
some out-cryed, or Horned Hector, Thomson, or the like, without all proof or
probability auerring Bardical fictions. Among which a foresaid hymns, it of S.
Fiacre contains.

Lucernae nouae specula
illustratur Ibernia
illa misit Fiacrium.
Irlands high tower is bright
with a new shyning light, Clictouen^ de hymnis Ecclesiasticis.

it sent Feach man of might.
And so in like manner of all others (whether old or late, sacred ^r profane,
friends or foes, domestical or forreiners, general or par^icular writers, or
rules, be allowed) the former rule is out of all controversy, that howsoever
any Scots be granted to have in ^nnual incursions troubled Britanie, in few
numbers (and under ^ubiection of Picts, till the Picts wear razed out of
being, and memory) inhabited Britanie; yet that they transferred not the
Kingdom of Scotland, and name of Scots from Irland, till, and after the
foresaid destruction of Picts. Thus much without offending any (...) for
allthough there be much against preiudicated suppositions, yet the revelation of
truth deserves thankful acception of every one, it being a singular benifit
to deprive any of errors) be declared, to the honor of God, glory of his
Saints, and confort of my Contrymen Catholics.

39. These premises considered, give you your selves, as now a lawful
impaneled, and well instructed Jury, your verdict of these words of M. Rider
in his pretended friendly Caveat to your selves. That faith which can be proved
to be taught in Christ's time, M. Rider in the 34. number of his Caveat.
and so re^eaued and continued in the primative Church for the first five
hundred years after Christ's ascension, must needs be the true, ancient,
Apostolical and Catho^ick faith. And that other faith that can not be so
proved, but base, bastard, and counterfeit. Censure I say, and award, my dear
Contrymen, whether the faith of your ancient Mo^cks, Heremits, Pilgrims, vowed
Virgins, Prelates, Priests, or the puritan faith be most ancient, most received,
and continued in the primative Church; Since that now you understand S. Patrick
your Apostle to have been a monck, and his disciples no less, and in their
profession, of confessed singular holiness, and learning. Censure I say again,
whether his own faith be not by him self confessed to be base, bastard and
counterfeit, not which erecteth Abbayes, but subuerteth them; not which
inricheth ornaments of Gods service and Churches, but which turns them into
breches, cushions, and curteins; Not which imployeth plate, and iuwels, to the
use of Pixes and Chalices, but which conuerteth these into swilling bowls. Not
which renteth cloisters and hospitals, but which in riote and licentiousnes
consumes their revenues.

l. 7. hist. c. 12.
40. To this end I have carefully, and curiously, laid open your own
a^tiquities, that by your own predecessors, you might know your professions
antiquity, and judge your own cause accordingly. Sozomenus relates a prudent
fact of Theodose Emperor, who perceauing heresies plentifully to arise, he
summoned their chief patrons. They being assembled, he demanded: what think
you, my masters, our first teachers of Christianity, did they hold the
truth, or not? were they godly, and honest, or not? It was avnswered, that
they held the truth, and were godly. Why then, quoth he, let us examine your
doctrine and theirs, your lives and theirs: and if we find them conformable, you
shall be, and your doctrine, embraced; otherwise you must be suppressed. Thereby
they wear in deed suppressed. You (Contrymen Catholics) may demand the same,
of them, and us. Whom you find comfortable to your first teachers, them
embrace; the others eschew, and detest.

Galat. 1.9. 1. Joan. 2.24.
41. Whereas therefore S. Paul advises us, If any preach otherwise then as we have
received, to hold him accursed; and S. Ihon, what we have heard from the
begyning to walk in the same, because many seducers are gone into the world:
our first preachers, and preaching being manifested unto us; shall we for pelf
and trash of the world, for honors, for life, for death, Luc. 9. and 11. Mat.
11. Mar, 8.
(Christ saying to us that if we be ashamed to confess him before men, that he
also will be ashamed to confess us before his heavenly father, and angels) be
either trained, or terrifyed, from our ancient profession, to profess this new,
as yet not fashioned, and under the stamp; all shapes that hitherto it has
showed, dislyking the forgers them selves, and degusting the followers.

Twelve duble reasons to be constant Catholics.
42. First our old profession, that auerreth all scriptures from Christ's time
accounted Canonical, for the profession that dismembreth whole volumes,
depraueth more, rejects all that it Scripturs.
and partial judgment? 2. It that imbraceth The Creed of the Apostles.
the Catholic Church, the communion of saints, the forgiveness of synns? 3. It
which iustifyeth Traditions.
for it which abhors Fathers and Doctors.
and primative Councils.
for it which never had Council, or Co^uenticle, concordant? 6. It which has
sanctifying Sacraments, and opera^ing Sacraments sanctifying.
friuolouse figurs, and senseles shadows? 7. It which has a substantial and
Sacrifice of the lamb of God.
by a heavenly ^^blatio^ of the very Savior of mankind, for it which
disclaymeth verity, substance, and sustenance of such divine and immaculat
^amb, and his holy institution? 8. It which has Prelates, and priests, Prelates,
and priests. Hebr. 5.2. Number. 16.3.
to offer gifts, and sacrifices for offenses, for it which with Core, Dathan,
and Abiron affirms, that all the multitude is equaly sanctified toward those
functions? 9. Obedience to Princes.
It which commends and commands obedience Gods commandments and works of
charity.
and professes Gods A Visible Church.
conformable first and last, invincible against infidels, heretics, yea or
devils, for it which as a Platonical Idea, or poetical chimera is forged in the
air, particular, dissentiouse, perishing? 12. It that has flourished in
Communion of saints.
and is helped by them, for it that derydeth, and blasphemeth them, and deface
their remembrances? O times! o manners! what monstruouse absurdities have you
bred, that a Christian mind should once stand in consultation whether side to
Gods Church or heresies synagogue he should cleave, and adhere?

43. But I satisfy my self, that you are sufficiently informed, and
acquainted, of and in the controversy betwixt us, and that if you be not
wittingly miscaryed, you find his fre^dly caveat a venimouse kiss from sugared
lips; a wolueishe hypocrisy under a lambs contenance; Genesis 3.5. 2. reg. 20.
10. Iosue 9. Isa. 28.
a cruel wound under pretext of a charitable medicine; a serpentin narration to
Adame and Eua; a Ioabs salutation to Amasa; a Gabaonit to Iosue and the
Israelits, counterfeting as the Gabaonits did a remot antiquity; and brefly as
the prophet says one protecting him self, and putting his hope in an
untruth. God of his infinite goodness, and according the multitude of his
miserations, inspire you to understand the truth, inflame you to follow it,
and fortify you to remain, and persevere in it. Amen.

Your affectionat servant to command in Crist,

THE EPISTLE OF THE AVTHOR TO MASTER JOHN RIDER.
WOrshipful M. Rider. You have this Answer, if later then expected, yet I
assure my self sooner then affected: So that as an ungrateful guest, it
preuenteth all welcome. You might have had it long before, but that your
inuitation thereof was conformable to the new requesting friends to meals; with
many capps, and verbal ^urtesie, but without intertaynment, charity, or
hospitality. For you provoked ^^e to labor it, but debarred me to publish it.
And noe merueile: for you knew ^t to be that it is; to wit, a hand writing to
Balthazar; Mane, Thechel, Phares; Daniel to a licentiouse Judge, converting his
iniquity upon his own head; And (that I may not be a tedious reherser of what
you feel better then I can express) a David to Goliath, by his own sword
beheading him, and destroying tenn thousand of his compagnions. Not that I
impute any worth, ^or weight, to my cooperation therein: but that the cause it
defends is so inexpugnable, as like a firm rock, it crusheth them that fall
on it, and oppresses them on whom it falls. You might have been thought wise
if you had houlden your peace. For men of your sort, having a negative
religion, are commonly satisfied to carpe at our sayings, without care to
justify their own, and but by extremity, to specify any positive doctrine,
that they may have liberty to change at will. But you would be a more
venturouse Caualiero then the residue: let all the world judge, whether it was
for any extraordinary wisdom, or sufficie^cie, if you, who among thowsands
were most unfit, have professed plain decretal positions, repugnant not only
to all christianity, but (which ordinarily by you is more esteemed) to all
your own confraternie; or rather (because you continualy iarr) to your
confederated diversity. So that many of your most judicious surmisers
mistrust, that by some promised promotion of papists, you had praeiudiced, and
in a manner betrayed your profession to infamy, and derision, and of set
purpose, by so discovering many defective articles, and enorme absurdities
thereof, which to our own contryes can not choose but cause a dislyke, if not a
loathsomnes, and surfeit, and being notifyed to other contryes, (which had been
done, if I had not altered my purpose only for better concealing for what
frivolous futilities the Catholic faith in Christ Jesus is exchanged, by
writing in our vulgar tongue, what I first intended to have written in latin)
would produce in them either a disdain toward us, or deploration against our
estate, that so many good dispositions, and otherwise deep capacities, are so
miserably miscaryed by so base, and deceitful delusions, palpablie perceauable
even to winking eyes. I assure you no man's death I know, had been unto me more
vnwished before this my awnswer published, least it had been suspected, or
excepted, that I had imposed your own printed assertions, upon your
profession. But my synceritie will appear perspicuously, by inserting your
book entirely, and concordantly to your Dublinian edition; which can not be
imagined to have been a deed of any other then your self. You have great and
sundry causes to be thankful for this my awnswer. First, because it
displayeth several dangerouse errors, by which you would have eternally
perished, and now by reclayming them, if you please, you may escape. Secondly,
that by it the sharper reprehension and refutation of others who would and
might more disdaynfully reprove you, is perhapp anticipated, and hindered.
Thirdly, that for sparing favor toward you, many slips are indulgently
dissembled, and such as are detected, in the most mild style that might
possibly belong to matters of like quality, are prosecuted. I cowld calculate
others, if I attended deserved gratitude in one of your disposition, or
education. Howsoever you will interpret kind and beneficious offices, I will
incessantly implore Gods infinite mercy toward you, and your accomplices, that he
would open your obstinat eyes, and mollify your hardened hearts, and mitigat his
incensed wrath against you: whereby you may understand your errors, abandon
your heresies, cease to divide the Church and scattre Christ's Catholic flock,
being by so precious redemption formerly united; And finaly, that being
myndfull whence you are fallen, you repent, and return to your first works,
least your candlestyke be removed, and for want of true light, fall into that
infidelity of all Christian religion, which in Africa, Greece, and other
places, immediately succeeded opinions begone, and stifflye retrayned, against the
Apostolic, Romain, and Catholic belief. God grant. Fare ye well.

AN ADVERTISMENT TO THE READER.
THIS Disputation was occasioned the 29. of September 1600. by means of M.
William Nugent (an honorable, and learned Esquyer) at the table of M. Ihon
Rider (termed Deane of S. Patricks): The said M. Nugent, maintayning, no
diversity of belief, or Religion, to be betwixt the Catholics of these
times, and the primative Catholics of the times of the Apostles. Contrary to
which assertion, the foresaid M. Rider affirmed, that the difference was as
great, as betwixt Protestancye, and Papistrie; because the first Catholics, by
his saying, had been Protestants. Upon these two several affirmations, they
both agreed to abide a lawful resolution of the learned: which if it should
justify M. Nugents persuasion, then M. Rider would recant. If it could not;
then M. Nugent would become a Protestant.

2. To have the foresaid resolution, a counterfeit letter, as from doubtful
Catholics toward six articles therein specifyed, was addressed to all Priests,
Jesuits, and Seminarists, bearing date the 21. of October 1600. by way of
provocation, requyring them to answer thereto, as they te^dred the credit of
their Religon, the conuincing of Protestants, and the satisfying of poor
consciences: which answer was to be exhibited, within three months next
ensuing. To be brief; It was partly referred, and partly imposed, that I
should decide this controversy; as well as one (in prison, sequestered from all
communication of my brethren, and diverse otherwise disabled, and hindered) of
my slender capacity; in so short a time, might accomplish.

3. I having accordingly dispatched brief collections of Scriptures, Fathers,
and evidences of most principal Protestants, as well of England, as of other
Contryes, and observed such order as from time to time I laid open before all
behoulders, their evident demonstrations, that the cause of M. Nugent was just,
and the contrary altogether untrue: I sent them the 2. day of January, in the
name of Catholic priests of Irla^d, by my cosen M. Michael Tailor Gentleman;
who delivered them presently to M. Rider.

4. Great contentment was dissembled at the sight of our answer, great thanks,
great promises to replye with like expedition. The 6. of Ian. he repaired to
me, in the Castle, applauding to the foresaid answer, that it was beyond his
expectation. Yet that he would reioyne thereto, if it might be approved by my
name, and subscription. I mistrusting badd measure by such demand, remained
slack to condescend thereto. Manifowld protestations were made, as also in his
letter to that effect, of great goodwill to pleasure and benifit, and no
intention to indomage thereby. Upon which flattring, but especialy to honor my
Savior Jesus Christ, and his invincible Church, I gratifyed him with my
approbation, and subscription, not fearing death or danger for my Profession.

5. Notwithstanding his former promise of expedition, in three months almost
thrice trypled, appeared noe replye to such our answer. Also contrary to his
promise, he published his replye the 28. of September 1602. Before ever he had
acquainted me therewith; that I might not have had in redines my aunsuer to
confront it. When at last every extended hand, yea many avoiding hands were
filled with his replye under the name of Caveat, then in that liberal dole, I
also was presented with one copy. Whereat considering the tenoure thereof, I
stood amazed (as Polidor virgil says of him self, when he beheld the
history of Hector Boethius) like one that had seen a bear whelping. In fine,
I advertised him self, within 48. hours that if he would adventure to
purchase me liberty of books, a cleark to ingrosse my wrytings, and
communication with my brethren, I would join issue with him, even before the
right honorable Deputy and Counceil; yea also before his own pew-fellowes of
the College: that if I did not convince such his Caveat to be frawghted and
entirely replenished, with falsifications, deprauations, corruptions, gnorance,
and impiety; I would abide any their voluntary appointed penalty, and
punishment whatsoever.

6. This sharp admonition urged him, (as I desired and preconceaued) to
propounde the suit to the State. They of their bounty accorded, that at his
discretion, books, access, and printe should be allowed me. Books I confess
to have had courteously, from the College. A clarck also; and that only, I
obtained. Other communication, but especialy the print, was debarred me, not
withstanding al possible entreaty.

7. They who are ever provoking to disputation, when they are ^^re it can not
succeed, by impediments objected by them selves, ^^rthering it with a fingar,
and hindering it with an arm, prete^ding ^easons in stedd of reasons, trusting
much more inclusions, and ^^trusions, them learned co^clusions; by no means
possibly, could (...) induced to an encountre against my self (the meanest
among a ^owsand) by all the vehemency I could invent to incense them. Luth.
ep. 5. ad Philip, Mela^ct. Iulij 20. anno 1530. in tom. Germanico Ienenj^.
and such was Luthers confession in plain terms, when he ^erceaued the
Catholics to have co^discended to a disputation, and (...) have protected all
comers thereto, saying: Postea qua^ isthaec men^^cissima diaboloru^ capita
ludunt in permittendo Conciliu^ liberu^, sic volo and ego (...) eis ludere,
voloque ab eoru^ somnijs appellare ad illud ipsum Co^cilium, quod tame^ ^nqua^
futuru^ est, vt ego interea in pace agam. After that those lying heads of
evils, do dally in permitting a free Council, I will also appeal from their
^eams, appealing to the self same Cou^ncil, which not with standing will never
(...), that I in the mean time may be in peace. Behold I say, their manner
^xpressed by their Patriarch, to dally; to appeal, to delude in ^rouoking to a
disputation, without any desire to attain it, and with settled purpose by one
excuse or other, finaly to avoid it.

8. I will breefly comprise some part of such my mentioned in^igations to have
them into a plain feeld, contained in my leters ^o themselves. The kingdom of
God is not in words, but in virtue. 1. Cor. 4.20.
Therefore (...) most earnestly crave, and instantly require, to come off, to
some indifferent ^urse, and plain grownd, by some commendable disputation. Yea
I adjure you, (...) the confidence you have in your cause, and by the trust
that you will have given (...) your protestations, that you nether delay, nor
declyne, the performance thereof. ^or my part of the abundance of my heart, my
mouth so speaks, and from my ^art, to my hand, and from my hand, to the eyes
and ears, both of the most hono^able L. Deputy, as also to them of the
college, I have exhibited my supplication (...) that effect. Again; But to
vrdge you M. Ryder the more, I undertake (...) maintain that you are wrongful
to scriptures; next to your own fathers; and thirdly to ours. Also to conceal
and dissemble truth, you have wrested the ^^stimonies clean contrary to the
authors mynds, making their denials, to be ^ffirmations, their ample
disproofs, friendly approbations, imposing what they have ^ot, and denying what
they have. Which unchristian abuses (pardon me M. Ryder, in so clear a matter)
besyds others, I undertake, under any arbitrary ^naltie, to auerre. Again;
brefly I crave, (all tergiuersation set apart) that (...) the fear of God we
may indefferently defend each of us, the truth of our ^^ofessions, not
seeking victory, but verity, sine fuco, and fraud. Lastly in my ^etter to
him on new years day 1604. I inserted these words. like to this is your
provocation that I would come to issue. Is it not my demand, to Deputy and
College, upon promise of indifferency? Did I ever incountre you, (...) write
to you, but that I required it? I therefore inform and resolve you, that I
covet with all speed it be effected. etc.

9. Nevertheless, he blushed not to pretend all slacknes, and tergiuersation,
to be in me. How could he make it to any, even of them selves to seem so?
Considering I had obliged my self to the state, and College, to obyde their
appointment, who might at will compel me to an incountre; considering I was
among, and in the power, of his friends, and of adversaries in the highest
degree to my profession, and person; from whom I could not start, they having
no intention to spare me; (in so much, as they never used such restraints, and
wardings, toward any criminal malefactor, as toward me). And lastly
considering that I had used the former impulsions to come to a conference, yet
says he, the fault was in you, because you tendered me not a legible view of
your wrytings, which you intended to print, according to your promise. But who
behouldeth not, that a skillfull scholar should blushe, to crave the knowledge
of what was to be objected against him, yea, who behouldeth not, that M. Rider
might blushe to make this the pretext of his relenting, when he him self
confesses to have received, both what he says was promised, and it also to be
legible? These are the words of such his confession. The highest in the land
had a view of your scrowle, and the Reuerendest and learnedest diligently
perused the same. Now I crave, how could such, view, peruse, and (as after he
affirms) censure, such termed scrowle, if it were not tendered, or legible?
The highest in the land, are the state, who commonly are not of the cleerest
sight. Who if they censured what was vnlegible; M. Rider, terms them all,
in plain English, but fools. These are his words to such effect: Such as
will censure before they see, are like such wise men, as will shoot their
bowlt, as soon at a bushe, as at a bird. By wise men, ironicaly, he taxes
them for fools. So that, if it were legible, M. Riders long pretense is
utterly discredited and disproued. If it were not; yet censured as aforsayd,
M. Rider avvardeth the highest, reuerendst, and learned in the land, to be
fools. If they take it not in ill part, I covet no other benifit thereby, then
to have my scrowle (as it pleases him to call it) to be known to have been
legible.

10. When my answer by him termed a Scrowle, yet containing near two quyers
of paper, had been so legible to him, as grieved, and graueled him, to behold
it: and when he would ^ther permit the printing thereof, and could not replye
thereto, ^t in manner as after shall appear: he hearing that license was ^me for
my enlargement, and fearing that I would discover his ^ifts, and fayntnes
toward a disputation, in all have published a ^cond book against me, full of
venomous railing, which he cal^th Tarte terms. wherein he trotteth, and
tottreth to a hundred ^ifts, to purchase the peoples opinion, that he was
forward, and ^solut, to incowntre any adversary to his profession. This late
^rt of grace, he entertained, partly because he thought that I ^ould not hinder
the benifit of such releasment of my five years ^durance by such disputation;
partly because he had observed a ^te willingness in them of the College to save
and salve his repu^tion. And therefore thought, that I would not accept, in that
ex^emitie, to hazard my granted departure, by opposing my self (...) any
favored by the state; Or if I would, that they of the Col^^ge would plaster up
all his discredit, by stretching favor and their arbitreme^t beyond right and
conscience; of which, we will after by Gods help treat more amply.

11. In this confident surmise, that I contrary to my custom would temporize
in the heat I had ever professed toward main^^yning Religion, and my
profession, he doubted not to affirm be^^re the right worshipful Mayor of
Dublin, Justice Palmar, Cap^^yne Godl, and others, that he would come to the
Castle in their ^^mpagnie to challe^ge me to my face. Which by their importunat
^^ouocation he having done accordingly, the 4. of April 1604. he ^ound me,
contrary to his expectation full of facility toward such ^profre, at the same
instant, and place. And according the for^ardnes of my mind, I presented him a
gold ring, which he should not deliver me, but when I effected all my promises
for ^isputation, Judges etc. He first very promptly accepted the ring, ^ut
suddenly his heart failed, in the foresaid assembly, and of others ^f the guard of
the castle, amounting altogether to above a houn^red, (Sir Richard Cook also
out of his chamber in the castle, being ^riuie to all our proceeding) and
thereupon would needs restore ^e the pledged gold ryng. I would not receive
it, and he would ^ot retain it. The right worshipful Mayor of the city
took it (...) custody leaving all Protestants ashamed of their champion. It
(...) not yet long since this happened in the sight of so many witnes^es, that it
may be well remembered, and I am not so prodigal of my good name, that I would
forge in a matter subject to such censures as might, and ought to ensue an
untruth of like quality, if it were not notorious, and beyond all disproofe.
The foresaid Justice Palmer, the Captain, and all the recidue, publicly
censured against him, that what copy of my answer was delivered to him, could
not be denied, either to be legible, or correctedly written: exclaiming against
him, that I so resolutly presenting to accompagnie him instantly to a
Disputation to the very college; he being known to have long before allowance
and warrant from the State toward such Conference; yet that he would not enter
the lists, but being publicly come to provoke, and the combat by his
adversary being accorded unto, he like a Iubellio would to the dishonor of
his cause, flinche away and retire most dastard like. Suerly there was among
the soldiers so great hissing of their champion after his departure, and so
great jealousy against the profession whereunto such sleights, and acts of
hypocrisy was the chief defense, that 8. or 10. of them there upon, shortly
after came to be reconciled.

12. The next day the Conceill sitting close upon accounts; M. Ryder for his
credit sake having attended till full dynner time to have their allowance to
dispute; and not willing to depart before he had motioned to the state, what he
intended toward our disputation, he came up at length to dyne among us
prisoners. Some gentle bickerings chanced betwixt us about the angelical
salutation to our our Lady, in greek. He, ad his fellow Balse, in the presence
of the Constable, (who I imagine will not lightly lie, on either side) were fownd
so exorbitantly confounded, and disgraced, that the Constable ashamed to impose
silence, cowld remain no longer; and M. Ryder according to his wont, sell
from reason to railing, not sparing or respecting me more, then his fathers
sonns compagnion. I was no less with him, then a traitor, fool, liar, knave,
etc.

13. By this time the Lords of the Conceil were vacant, and having dyned,
prepared them selves to give audience to sutours. M. Ryder before others
propounded his demand. Not to linger in, or by, any long relation of the
circumstances, it was generaly reproved, and particularly, by Sr. James
Foulerton refuted, in his allegations. So that in a great rage he burst into
the cry, of Felix an owld heretic, S. August l. 1. de gestis cum Felice cap.
12.
related by S. Augustine, Saying: That he would be burned, him self, and his
books, if any thing were written by him ^roneously. These were his very
words. But there was no ^ace there to boulster out his vanities. In the
end, sharply re^ked for his arrogancy toward them, and ouer-matching him
^lfe, and discrediting the cause, having hardly escaped from prison, conciling
him self to me for his late insolent demeanure, and questing me to shutt up
all variances, he omitted till now to ^olest me further.

^4. Because I had often promised to make our reciprocations ^nowen, if I might
come to any convenient place: and because (...) desire to justify such
sentence of the state against our Puritan, whereby they had disauowed him to be
a lawful proctour, or ^duocat of their profession; and because also by my once
being of that ^rofession, I have means to reveal much to others unknown;
^herby truth may be manifested: I have thought good to pu^ishe this Treatise
following, to the honor and glory of God, and discharge of my duty toward
his immaculat and invincible ^owse the Church, to whose sacred doom, or
censure, I resign ^^l my writings, past, present, and to come.

^5. I affect a method, brief as the contents may allow, brevity ^eing an
attendant on truth; Plain, without foreign terms, or ^ntricat conceits;
Courteous, if by means of the craggy knotts of any work, I be not enforced
against my will, from my planer, ^o my axe; Pithie, with matter, and work,
knowing malice, and ^oords, to attend on falsehood: conformably to which, says
the ^cripture; Non est sensus vbi est amaritudo; Eccli. 21.
There is noe sense where ^here is bitterness. True also it shall be, the cause
belonging to Gods honor, according as he says by his Prophet: Ierem. 23. Job.
13.
He that has my ^eeche, let him speak it, truly. What means this straw,
among wheat, ^yth our Lord: Numquid Deus indiget vestro mendacio; vt pro illo
loquamini ^olos? Does God need your lie, that for him you should speak
^eceits? And therefore from my heart I make this protestation, used by the Poet
to another sense, never to transgress the bonds of truth and fidelity, in all
my discourse.

Virgilius: Sed mihi vel tellus optem prius ima dehiscat,
Vel Pater omnipotens adigat me fulmine ad vmbras
Pallentes vmbras Erebi, noctemque profundam,
Ante Pudor quam te violem, aut tua iura resoluam.
Virgilius: Let lowest gulf down rather swallow me,
Or mighty God by thunder me detrude,
Among the dark, and damned compagnie,
Before my shame I break, or truth delude.
16. That I do insert his whole book, proceeds, to confound him the more,
and to confute his thoughts that I durst not do it, and that none have any
excuse to forbidd my awnswer, since that it is conjoined with his objections,
without any words substraction. Also I have the example thereto of D. Harding
against Iuel; Stapleton against Horn, etc. Thirdly, because truth never
appears so brightly, as when falsehood is confronted thereto. That I add
numbers to his objections, and my resolutions; proceeded from plain meaning,
that when I attaynt him with any fault, it may be found speedely, by specifying
at what number it is found. Diverse such mates, nether quote leaf, nor chapter,
nor point, to walk thereby more confusedly, and covertly. For my part, either
by plain dealing I will prevail, or not at all. Let no man mistrust to find
in ordinary controversies, but ordinary resolutions: such matters, and method,
being carefully by me followed, as directly belong to the kernel of the cause,
more by showing it rotten, by inward revolution of the Reformers them selves,
then by outward examinations of other reprehenders.

CATHOLIC CONFVTATION OF M. JOHN RIDERS CLAIM OF ANTIQVITIE: And first, of
the errors contained in his Inscription, or Title of his book: and of his
Preface.
TO ALL ROMAN PRIESTS, AND ALL OTHER OF ANY OTHER ROmish order, untruly
surnamed Catholic Priests: and to every of them within the kingdom of
Ireland.
IF the Irish Testament (a godly laborious and profitable work to Gods Church)
had not imbusied the Printers Press: long before this time, M. Riders Preface.
my Friendly Caveat had presented it self to your friendly censures. I have
only handled the first position, and could go no further in the rest, till
the Printers return from London with new letters: and whereas there be some
faults escaped, impute them not to the skillful Printer, but to the stumpeworne
letter: for as weapons vnsteeled cut not, so letters ouerworne print not. I
have laid down your prooffes and speeches touching the first ^osition, not
adding, diminishing, or altring one syllable or letter: but as I received them
by a courteous Gentleman (I think a Priest) and as master Henry Fitzsimon
subscribed the same, approouing them to be Apostolical and Catholic: Your
Preface concerns nothing the matter in question.
so I have ^eliuered them, only the Preface I scilence, till I know your
further pleasure, because it is too biting and bitter, relishing rather of
malice then matter. But if ^ou mislike with this scilence, upon the least
notice, my next Treatise shall ma^ifest it to the world by way of a Postscript,
to which I will annex a Rescript. And whereas your letter directed unto me at
first, was subscribed in stead of your names, Catholic Priests, I have
therefore not knowing your names, Read Vincent. Lyrinens. aduersus haereses,
and you shall see what Catholic is.
given you ^ill the same titles. But I must tell you plainly, you have only
the names without ^he truth of the thing it self: which vain usurped titles
you must cast off, until you can prove your doctrine Catholic: for a
Catholic opinion without a^ Apostolical warrant, is fitter termed vpstart
heresy, then Catholic divinity.

Fitzimon.
Whether Romanians and Catholics be not all one.
In the 4. number thereof.
OMitting the mistearming of our Doctrine to be a dangerous dream, (which by
Gods grace, shall be duly examined in the examination of Protestancie toward the
articles of the Creed) let it be first known, how M. Rider can confess, that
we are Roman Priests, S. Hieron. Apol. 1. aduersus Ruffinum. Vict. l. 1. de
persecut. Greg. Turon. de gloria mart. c. 30. and 79.
yet no Catholic Priests. S. Hierome affirms them to be all one, saying: If
we agree with the bishop of Rome; Ergo Catholici sumus; Therefore are we
Catholics. Secondly S. Victor, and Gregory of Tours report, that ancient
heretics, the Arians, and Nouatians, used the same appellation in like
decision, against the primative Catholics, by calling them Romanish, and
Roman Priests. Saying: Incipient Romani martyrem praedicare, etc: de hoc
Romanorum presbytero, etc. The Romans will extol their Martyr, etc: of this
Roman Priest, etc. Signifying Roman, Catholic, and Christian, to have been of
one and the same signification, for depending upon the authority of the Roman
Bishop. A confortable correspondence, betwixt first and last Catholics, to be
by first and last heretics, conformably mis-named for conformable consent in
belief.

Whether Roman Priests be Catholic Priests.
2. Next, in saying we are untruly surnamed Catholic Priests; it might as
lightly be denied, as it is affirmed. But M. Rider may affirm, that it is not
lightly affirmed, considering he directs to Vincentius Lirinensis a competent
arbitrer for manifestation thereof. I embrace him with heart, and good will;
protesting to depend upon his decision in that, and all other controversies:
the rather that I never perused any, either Catholic, or other, who reprehended
him. In all his little goulden book, hardly might any fail to find pertinent
proof to our purpose. But especialy in the third chapter he examineth, and
defyneth, what is Catholic, and who is such. I will allege it word by word,
for the pertinencie thereof.

Vincentius Lyrinensis Contra prophanas haeresis nouitates cap. 3.
3. In ipsa item Catholica Ecclesia magnopere curandum est, vt id teneamus quod
vbique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est. Hoc est enim vere proprieque
Catholicum, quod ipsa vis nominis ratioque declarat, quae omnia vere
vniuersaliter comprehendit. Sed hoc ita demum fit, si sequamur vniuersalitatem,
anti^atem, consensionem. Sequemur autem vniuersalitatem hoc modo, si hanc (...)
fidem veram confiteamur, quam tota per orbem terrarum confitetur Eccle^
Antiquitatem vero ita, si ab his nullatenus sensibus recedamus, quos
San^^naiores nostros ac patres celebrasse manifestum est. Consensionem quoque
^^m, si in ipsa vetustate omnium, vel certe pene omnium sacerdotum pariter
^agistrorum definitiones sententiasque sectemur. Also it is greatly to be
ob^^ed in the same Catholic Church, that we hold that which every where, ^^ch
always, and which of all is believed. For this is truly, and properly
Ca^^ick: which the signification of the name, and definition do declare, which
^^ly does comprehend all universally. But this is then performed if we follow
^^uersalitie, Antiquity, Consent. Thus shall we attain Universality; if we
^^esse that one faith to be true, which the whole Church throwghout the world
^^esseth. And thus Antiquity; if we in no case depart from those suppositions,
^^ch is manifest, our ancestors and Fathers did sustain. Also Consent in this
^^er; if we follow the definitions and sentences either of all, or almost all
^^sts, and masters of elder time.

By this we learn first, that many times people may pretend ^^se to favor
them, who absolutely are their impugners, and ^^st urgent disprouers. A foul,
yet usual practice among Re^^mers. Secondly, what had M. Rider to do with that
faith, ^^ich every where, which always, and which of all, is believed? (...)
not the reformed faith professed new, and known private? ^^d, a less, our
ancestors profess that faith? Let any one desy^s to know, how universal,
ancient, and how concordant, the ^^rming persuasion is, but peruse the 48.
number following, and ^ecialy the article of the communion of Saints. They
shall find ^y them selves professed new, without all antiquity, particular, ^t
only for provinces, but also for persons; dissensious so exorbi^^^tly, as they
distroy, persecute, and execute on another, as (...) many of the brethren of
Cadmus. I will not preoccupat the ^^^cussion thereof from the foresaid propre
place: where it is no ^^se assuredly, then pertinently, and I doubt not,
vnawnswerably, ^^monstrated.

What did ancient heretics, against primitive Catholics, S. Hieronim epitaph.
Nepotiani Cap. 9.
but is ^^inst us done as egarly by Reformers? S. Hierome says; Bishops ^^e
taken, priests slain, and diverse of other ecclesiastical orders: Churches ^^e
overthrown: the altars of Christ made mangers for horses: the relics (...)
martyrs dug up etc. And now are not Churches turned to ^^bles, Church
ornaments, to cushions and breeches, Chalices to ^illing bowls, Church men
pursued? How many thousand religious habitations have Reformers razed, burned,
profaned* But more of this God willing shall ensue in treating of the
practices of Puritans. Nether is it a lawful objection, that Q. Ma^^ severely
punished Reformers: therefore they may do the same For she followed not therein,
other laws, then in all Christendom from farthest memory, were inacted. We
are oppressed by force, against laws made from farthest remembrance, only upon
the suggestions of miserable ministers, abusing the ears, and clemencie^ of
Princes, and Magistrates, by their swoords to destroy their trustiest subjects;
thereby to subdue all government under the said ministers them selves: as shall
appear in our treating of the practices of Puritanisme.

Luther. tom. 1. Germ. lib. ad Nobilitatem Christianam. Vide Gretser exercitat.
Theol. page 89.
6. The ancient Christian laws abolished in such manner (as by Luther the Canon
laws burned) shows that antiquity was not conformable to the abolishers of
them. And therefore, such being a proof, that they were not also Catholics: how
comes it now, that novelty claymeth to be Catholic; which is conjoined by
S. Vincents declaration, S. Vincent. Lyr. loc. cit.
with antiquity? Wherefore I pray you, were they hitherto as great enemies to
the name of Catholic, as to the ancient religion, of which they pretended them
selves Reformers* and not only they, S. Aug. con. Gaudent. lib. 2. c. 25. B^za
in pres. nou. test. 1565. Humfred. in vita Iuelit. page 113. Sutcliff. in his
challenge. page 1. Bibles of the years 1562. 15^7. Eusebius. Nib. 2. hist. c. 22.
in sine.
but all other heretics, who generaly vsurp to them selves the office, and
titles of Reformers? As Gaudenti^ named the title of Catholics, human
fiction (by relation of S. Augustine:) so by Beza, it is called, a vain word;
by Laurence Humfrey, a void term; by Sutcliff, a fruictles name. The hate of
Reformers against it, made the Inglish bibles in our late Queens days, a long
time to omit it, over the epistles of S. James, S. Peter, and S. Jude,
(although Eusebius affirms, they had been so entitled, ever since the
Apostles times) and when the later bibles being ashamed thereof, would amend
such omission; they failed, as ill as if they had said nothing, by translating
Catholic into general. S. Hieron. Apol. 1. con. Ruffin.
For if the late words out of S. Hierome (if we agree in faith with the Bishop
of Rome, Ergo Catholici sumus; Therefore are we Catholics) should be translated,
therefore are we generals; and Catholick^ should hence forward be called
generals; would not such translations, and translaters, worthily be accounted,
both repugnant to the name, and sense of the word Catholic, and also
ridiculous, and foolish fancies of fanatical Reformers? Muscul. in prefat. loc.
com. priores Catechism^ Reformatoru^. Lyndan. in Dubitant.


The same hate against the name Catholic, made the Creed of the Apostles, to
be corrupted by Reformers, saying: I believe in the ^^istian Church; for, I
believe in the Catholic Church. It made an al^^tion out of Luther, in the
disputation of Altemburg, Colloq. Altemburg. an. 1568. fol. 154.
to be utterly ^^cted; because said they; It is not; Phrasis Lutheri quod
aliquid ^olice intelligi debeat. A phrase used by Luther, that any thing ought
to ^nderstood Catholickly. It made ancient heretics to apply it, Vincent.
Lyr. loc. cit. cap. 26.
by ^sion against our ancestors, saying: Come o ye fools and mise^^e, who
are commonly called Catholics, and learn the true faith, which (...) been hid
in many ages heretofore, but is now revealed, and showed of (...). To which
words M. Rider approaches, saying: You, and (...) late Romish Catholics, do
quyte dissent from Christ's truth, and (...) Romish religion: and therefore
remember whence you are fallen, and ^^urne to the ancient truth. And else where
(n. 113. 115.) forgetting (...) claim to be a Catholic, he tells us that we
endeavor to keep (...) Catholics in great blindness, meaning thereby, Vide number.
113. 115. 120. 130.
them of our pro^^ion. So soon after, propounding an observation, to which
(...) would have them of our profession to be attentive, he says: ^rke this
ye Catholics. Again; And least the Catholics should think ^naunswerable.
Wherefore we being restored by M. Rider him self (...) the name of Catholics;
he must consequently be a registrer of ^^e first untruth against him self.
The 1. untruth. S. August. tract. 22. in Joan.
And therefore by the words of (...) Augustine; We have received the holy
Ghost, if we love the Church, if we be ^^tt and conjoined together by charity,
if we do exult and rejoice to be Catho^^ks as well in faith, as also in name.
Of which exultation among us, ^^ere could be no better proof, then that we
willingly are named ^^tholicks. Be not therefore angrye good brother (says S.
Pacianus, S. Pacian. epist. 1. ad Symphron.
above (...) hundred years past) and do not afflict thy self: Christian is my
name, ^^d Catholic in my surname; by the former I am called, by the second I
am ^anifested. This may suffice to testify all good Christians, as to be
^omanists, so to be Catholics.

Whether the cause of omission of my Preface, be truly alleged.
First he tells, that his two years delay to replye to my first ^wnswer of
his six articles, or rather but to my awnswer of one ^^ticle, happened because
the Irish testament imbusied the Printers Press, ^^ich testament is, says he,
a Godly laborious, and proffitable woork to ^^ods Church. I will not except
against either of these to be an ^ntruth; yet considering that M. Rider is
altogether ignorant of ^he Irish tongue,, I marvel by his own words (such as
will censure before they see, are like such wise men, as will shoot their
bowlt as soon a^ bushe, as at a bird) he refrayned not from commending an
unknow translation. The next point, that he could go no further in the other
articles, till the printers return; is suspicious to be untrue: bo^^ because
the departure of the printer, could not debare his proceeding in his study: as
also because the printer returning wi^^ new letters, yet there was nothing
printed. Nether are all faul^ escaped, belonging to the worn letters, as often
will appear.

9. Our Preface, contained the protestations of the cheifest protestants in the
world, that the Fathers (by M. Rider claymed) were adversaries to protestancie,
and it to them. That it could be bitte^ or biting, The 1. untruth.
by our fault, must needs be untrue; because no word of any Catholics are
intermedled therein.

10. My intention is to wynke at the greater part of vntruthe^ and only to
calculat them, The 2. untruth.
which by no evasion can be excused Let this then be the second in number, that
upon our dislyke with his silencing (I can not approve his orthographie here
used) the said preface (which was manifowldly made known to have ben^
dislyked) he would manifest it to the world in his next treatise. An. 1604.
For such Treatise, as he published the last of March against me vvanted still
my Preface, and to this hour he durst never manifest it. And in deed, (as
soon after it shall appear) such it is as being a most pregnant, and palpable
manifestation, that M. Ride^ claim to the Fathers was unjust, by verdict of
the whole cru^ of his brethen; he may well say, it was bitter, and biting; as
every breath is to a scabbed head, and as every touch is to a botch o^ byle,
paynfull, and pearcing.

11. That he imagines a Catholic opinion may be without a^ Apostolical
warrant, is against the creed of the Apostles; by which being commanded to
believe in the Catholic Church, by the same, we are commanded to believe all
Catholic opinions of that Church, to be Apostolical: the Apostles wholy
consenting (as after God willing shall be demonstrated) in all, and every article
of such belief. The marginal advise to read Vincentius Lyrinensis, we have
accepted, and embraced, and fownd behouefull, as appears in our first 6.
numbers. I some time remain astonished at the wonders of God; Iustus Caluinus
in suae Apologia.
and now in particular, that I find Iustus Caluinus as renowned a Protestant
as any in the troop, acknowledge his recantation to be a Catholic, procured
by reading this little book here commended: yet that M. Rider, fullfilling the
horrible ^^nsideration mentioned in Gods word; Considera opera Dei, Eccl. 7.
quod ^no possit corrigere quem ille despexit; Consider the woorcks of God,
that none ^y correct him whom he has despised, not only was not converted by
^t book, but also commends it to others, as favoring his ima^^nations,
against which it might seem of set purpose composed.

But this is most sure, that you have forsaken the verity of Christ's Gospel,
and ^e faith of the Primitive Church: Sermon. 140. de tempo, fol. 297. col. 3.
to prove it but in this one point of our que^^on. Augustine says, Ideo
Dominus absentauit se corpore omni ecclesia, etc. Ther^^e the Lord (Christ)
absented himself touching his bodily presence from every ^^urch, and
ascended into heaven that our faith might be edified. Brag now no ^ore of
Christ's corporal presence to be in your Church: if you do, we with ^ugustine
will say you have no true Church.

Whether by Christ's being in heaven, his real absence from the Church, is
proved?
1. HE says, it is most fure that we have forsaken the verity, etc. which he
proves, because S. Augustine certifyeth, that Christ, touching his bodily
presence, is absent from the Church, that our faith may be edified. I showld
think, that for ^^ch a peremptory conclusion, some very choice proof should
be ^leaged, which might effectualy persuade. But God be glorified, ^ther this
must purchasse our reca^tation, or there can be no other ^roofe fownde to
deserve it, beside this. We therefore answer, ^oth that the ascension of Christ
into heaven, and also that S. Au^ustin in this place confirms us in our
belief. The ascension: because it being wrought beyond the nature of a
corporal body, which rather descends then ascends; it shows that Christ
was not tied to nature, but as above nature he was borne of a ^irgin, walked on
the sea, made him self invisible, issued out of his ^epulchre, entered among
his closed disciples, ascended up to heaven, ^enetrated the heavens; so also he
may above nature, be in heaven and earth together. And that he had so been in
very deed, shall God ^illing be notifyed in the 71. number. Yea Christ him
self, used ^^e argument that he would ascend, to persuade that his words,
(...) his fleash to be meat truly, and his blood drink truly etc. Wear to
be ^eleeued. Yet now, they are here called into distrust by M. Rider, because
of such ascension, which is to argue altogether oppositly to Christ, and
consequently to truth.

Secondly S. Augustine only reasons of Christ's visible being in the Church,
not usual since his ascension into heaven: intending nevertheless, that his
invisible being therein, is nothing thereby hindered. As appears by his saying
in the same place. Non eum visuri eramus in carne, S. Augustine. sermon 140. de
temp.
and tamen manducaturi eius carnem; We were not to behold him in fleashe, and
yet we wear to eat his fleashe. Absentia Domini non est absentia; The absence
of our Lord, is not absence. Tecum est quem no^ vides; The 3. untruth. Glossa
did. 2. de Consecr. c. Prima quidem 44. donec.
He is with the whom thou see not, etc. Therefore it is a third great
untruth, perspicuous in the eyes of all men, that by such allegation we are
proved to have departed from Christ's verity etc. Or that S. Augustine is
against us. Further awnswer is in the gloss upon a like testimony of S.
Augustine in the Canon law. And because I en end by Gods help, to convict M.
Rider in every principal point by his own principal brethren; I will here
insert Melanctons, and VVestphalus Words, co^curring in this matter [
VVestphal^ citat Melanct. in apol. con. Calu. page 216.] Augustine never meant
to tie Christ so to one place, that he cowld not be in another; especialy
because the scripture never so teaches, and nothing can be browght to bind
Christ to one place beside the judgment of humain reason, etc. This is
Melancton whom Martyr (con. Gardener. de Eucha. part 4. page 768.) calls a
singular and incomparable man. great or small, fatt or lean as he is, he
contradicts M. Riders wisdom, in inferringe out of S. Augustine, that Christ
is ascended: therefore he is not in the B. Sacrament.

12. And again, as you will have a corporal presence, so you teach the
communicants to receive Christ with their mouths corporally, Super Ioh. Tract.
26. page 174. col. 4. Fide non deny. Read Aug. super. Ioh. tract. 25.26. and
50.
not with their faith spirituallie: contrary to the opinion of Augustine,
showing the manner how Christ is to be eaten in the sacrament, four times
together says spiritualiter, spirituallie spirituallie. And you cannot show
one ancient writer that speaking of the manner of our eating Christ in the
Sacrament, that says once corporally. And therefore seeing this ancient
Father condemns your faith, and contradicts your doctrine, forsake new Romes
heresy, and return to old Romes religion.

Whether corporal communion does exclude spiritual communion?
Thr 4. untruth.
12. IN the 4. palpable untruth is contained, that we teach the co^municants to
receive with their mowth corporaly, not with their faith spiritualy. I am
witness that M. Rider perused and noted our decretals, and all the second
distinction of Consecration: which I understood by viewing his marginal
observations and vnderlynings when I had borrowed his book. There he found us
teach out of S. Augustine. (which ^^o confirms that is contained in the next
precedent number) (...) that we receive Christ's body and blood, De consecra.
did. 2. c. non hoc corpus. Cap. Quid est Ibid. Cap. vt quid. Ibid. Cap. hoc
est. Ibid.

which the Apostles (...) behold, and the Jews did shed; Ipsum inuisibiliter,
and non ipsum ^iliter; The same inuisibly, but not visibly.

Secondly in the three next chapters he teaches, that we should ^eaue Christ
worthily, by his and our dwelling one in another, ^d by faith; and not only
receive the Sacrament, but also the ^ce of the Sacrament. Besyd, Cap. Qui
mandu^ at c. credere. c. Corpus and. c. Hoc Sacram. c. panem. etc.
what others in the said distinction ^che to the same effect, manifould whole
chapters are therein out (...) S. Augustine. So that no ignorance could excuse
this to be the ^wrth untruth; he having perused the decretals, and knowing
^nsequently our doctrine to teach both corporal and spiritual re^^uing. Yea I
undertake, in the 34. number to disprove him, by (...) own words, that in our
decretals we profess a spiritual ^eauing.

Such our doctrine (as not long after in the 39. S. Chrysostom. hom. 60. ad Pop.
Antio.
number will ^peare) of receiving the B. Sacrament both corporaly, and
spiri^^ly, and not only corporaly, nor only spiritualy, was anciently ^ofessed
by S. Chrysostom saying: Non fide tantum, sed and ipsa re; Not (...) faith
alone, but also in very substance; And by S. Cyril, saying. S. Cyrill. l. 10.
in Joan. c. 13.
Not (...) charity only, but by natural partaking, is Christ in us. Whereby
ap^areth, that to say we exclude the internal, by including the ^^ternal, or
contrary wise; is not either to know what we profess, (...) knowing it, to
misinforme wittingly.

Whether our receiving by faith, be only of a figure?
^ Yet is it warily to be considered, that in teaching either manner (...)
receiving, corporaly, and spiritualy; in nether of both we agree ^ith late
Reformers. For althowgh they inculcat a faithful ^^ceauing, a faithful
conjunction, a faithful union etc. betwixt ^eir sowles and Christ: Yet is
there noe participation betwixt ^e manner of faith by us intended, and by them.
We instruct in ^e words of S. Chrysostom; Cum fide enim accedere, S. Chrysostom.
ho. 24. in 1. Cor.
non est vt propo^um Corpus tantummodo recipias, verum multo magis vt mundo
cord tangas, (...) sic adeas quemadmodum ipsum Christum; To approache by
faith, is not ^t thou showldest only receive the body propownded, but much
more that ^w should touch him with a pure heart, and so approache as to
Christ him ^fe. Also in the words of S. Augustine, S. Aug. Ser. 2. de verb.
Apost. and 17.26. and 27. in Joan.
Corpus and sanguis Christi erit ^ta cuicunque, si quod visibiter accipitur in
Sacramento, spiritualiter comeda^r in veritate ipsa; The body and blood of
Christ will be life to every one, if what is visibly taken in the Sacrament, be
spiritualy eaten, in the true verity. So that according our approaching by
faith, we come with a cleansed heart, as to Christ him self, according to
verity, and not as to a figure, appellation, or representation.

All this is taught after by M. Rider himself.
They teach the contrary, that the Sacrament only serves as an external sign
that Christ feeds at that time their sowls, as bread feeds their bodies,
Christ operating no effect by the Sacrament in their sowls, and being no nearer
unto them, then in heaven; nor the Sacrament effecting any thing in their
bodies, because it is a Sacrament (say they) only during the use, and the use
consisting only in the similitude of his feeding the soul, as the bread
feeds the body. Yet at that time of receiving; they hold that bread as yet
nourishes not the body: (which is to none unknown, for food must abide many
alterations, yea and mutations in substance, before it nourishe) so that I can
not conceive, nor any other that ever I could encounter, how at the time of
receiving there can be any such signification of duble nourishing in body and
soul, there being none possible at that time in body, the bread not deing
digested: and consequently, how there can be any Sacrament in time of
receiving, which wants the life of the Sacrament; which is (say they) only
signification. Zuingl. to. 2. resp. ad Luth. Confession. fol. 477.
For this is the office of every Sacrament (says Zuinglius) that it signify
only. If they them selves conceive better thereof, I do not malign them.
Concerning our former doctrine, by means of the same objections often
reiterated, it must be often also expressed number. 34. 39. 46. 94.

Whether any ancient writer allows, or mentions, Corporal receiving?
15. Although this belongs to our second proof for the real presence by
suffrages of Councels and Fathers: yet this foul fifth untruth, The 5. untruth.
is breefly to be disproued, in this place. Because I am after in the 120.
number, by Gods grace, to deliver a verdict of Luthers, that they are heretics
who deny God, ore carnali, with the fleashly mouth, to be received; I here
omit it. First therefore S. Augustine says: S. August. l. con. Aduers. leg^ and
Proph. Tertull. l. de resurrect. Carnis. S. Ch^^^^t. l. om. 45. in C^p. 6. Joan.
Fideli cord atque ore suscipimus; We receive with faithful heart and mouth.
Secondly, Tertullian: Caro corpore, and sanguine Christi, vescitur; The fleash
is sedd with the body, and blood of Christ. Thirdly, S. Chrysostom: Permittens
se tangi, and ma^ducari, and dentes carni suo infigi; Permitting him self to
be tutched, and eaten, and teeth to be printed in his fleashe.

^f in the mouth of two or three witneses every word be to stand; ^en here is
it made undoubtful, that the denial of any ancient ^riter to have believed the
corporal receiving, is the fifth untruth. ^^r the receiving by mouth, the
feeding the fleashe, the touching (...) teeth, are euidentlly corporal
receiving, and consequently this (...) truth is inexcusable. But I will in
form, and propre terms, ^^d not by construction only, show the falshod of M.
Riders nega^on in this point. Cyrill. l. 10. in c. 13. Joan. per communionem
corporis Christi, habitat in nobis Christus csrporaliter: By the communion of
the body of christ, Christ dwellesh in us corporaly. Look M. Rider, the very
word (...) self, Corporaly. Blush, and believe, and contradict no more the
ap^are^t truth. An answer to this place, is in Fox page 1325. but such (...)
one as should shame all Foxian brethren, that there could no other be given.
For he confesses that corporaly is to be taken here ^n the same sense, that
S. Paul says, the fullnes of Divinity to dwell corporaly in Christ, that is
not lighly, nor accide^taly, but perfectly, and substantialy. Then which
answer, what might we require more to condemn M. Rider?

16. But you will say, it is shame for me to belie the holy Sea, The third
book, cap. 3. de interpretandis scripturis, page 102. Colen print. 1588. Then
it seems some gross falts remain still.
whose doctrine is Apostolical, and their life Angelical, My prooffes shall
be your own friends. Lindanus speaks of an ancient complaint of Agobertus
Bishop of Lions, who said, Antiphonarium magna ex part correximus, amputatis
quae superflua, leuia, falsa, blasphema, phantastica multa videbantur. We have
the most part corrected the Antiphonarie, cutting off those which seemed
superfluous, light, false, blasphemous, and many fantastical things. Behold
now the purity of the doctrine of the Church of Rome, who dare venture his
soul upon such sandy superstition? nay, wicked and damnable heresy and
irreligion. And for the life of your Clergy in Rome, hear some of your own
friends speak their knowledge. Read Concilium delectorum Cardinalium, Council.
Tom 3. page 823. there thus you shall find it speaking of Rome. In hac etiam
vrbe, meretrices vt matronae incedu^t per Vrbem seu mula vehuntur: quas
affectantur de media die nobiles, Cardinaliu^ familiares. Clericique. Nulla in
vrbe vidimus hanc corruptionem praeterquam in hac, omnium exemplari. That is to
say, in this city of Rome the curtisans or common whoores pass through the
streets or ride on their mules like honest matrones. And in the midst of the
day, the Noblemen, the Cardinals dear friends, and Priests attend upon those
whoores. We never saw such corruption but only in this city of Rome, which
is an example to all other cities. The Popes own Cardinals being appointed by
Pope Paul the third, anno Dom. 1538. to visit the clergy and the stews,
return this shameful commission. But perchance you will tell the Queens
subjects, that these whoores dwell in some blind Alley, but the Popes court and
palace are a most holy sanctuary of saints. No says Luitprandus your own
Proctor, lib. 6. cap. 6. Imo Laterense palatium sanctorum quondam hospitium
erat, nunc est prostibulum meretricum. The very Popes palace at Lateran
sometimes was the harbout of holy Saints, but is now become a filthy stews
of common whoores. Now you see the Popes religion, and the Popes life; the one
false, the other lewd: forsake both, defend neither for if you do, Primasius
ad Romans cap. 2. will tell you, Nemo pariculosius pe^^^, quam qui pecenta
defendit. No man sins more dangerously: then he that pleads in the defense
of sin.

Whether our Religion be wicked, and damnable, if the Antiphonarie was
corrected?
That heretics excel in corrupting books. not only of others, but of their
own, is most apparent in Gretzers lib. de heret. lib. abolendis.
M. Rider, as may be perceived, makth an odious inference, for the correcting of
the Antiphonarie. First, his alleged author Lindanus informs, that it was
corrected by a Catholic Bishop from the errors specifyed. Secondly, he says
that such errors had crept in, by deceitfulnes of heretics, and corruptions
of Printers. Thirdly, the book so corrected, is so obscure, and unknown among
us, that nether booke-bynders shopps, nor learned doctors, could ever give me
any notice thereof. The premises duly pondred; I ask in the name of Jesus
Christ, what condemnation belonged to the Catholic religion, for the said
correction? was it, to have corrected a corrupted book, by such mates and
means? Secondly I crave in courtesy; to be instructed, why a private, and
unknown book, being erroneous; our Religion should therefore be wicked, and
heretical?

But since that it is made a lawful antecedent to such a consequence, let me
have the same allowance to infer in like manner. The communion book after
great travail, The statut praefixed to the communion book.
and deliberation, published; was commended in the statut prefixed, to contain
the most sincere and pure Christian faith of the Scriptures: Of which says
Iuel, in the Apol. 170. Accessimus quantum potuimus ad Ecclesiam Apostol. etc.
We approached as much as we might to the Church of the Apostles, etc. nothing
remaining (says he fol. 46.) that either was superstitiouse, or repugnant to
scripturs, or offensive to good men. Yet thus it is censured, by puritans! In
the order of the service there is nothing but confusion, Gilby pa. 2. pa. 90.
to eat the Lords supper, they play a pageant of their own. There is no
difference put betwixt truth and falsehood, betwixt Christ and Antichrist,
betwixt God and the devil. Secondly, Carlyle in his book that Christ descended
not. Browghton in his Epistle to the Council.
of your bibles, your principal brethen co^fes, that in them, scripturs are
depraved, darkness spread, falshod followed, etc. These two are books not
private, but commended by Public authority, Ecclesiastical, and temporal; not
meanest, but the very highest, and principal; not once corrected, but eftsoon:
therefore by M. Riders sequel, M. Riders religion must be wicked, and heretical.
I will not trample (...) one prostrated: but yet I will leave him to him self,
to rise ^yne. But least he should seem to start far from me, I will (...)
this spansel to his horse feet, presented by Calvin, saying: Cum specie
perfectionis, imperfectionem nullam tolerare possumus, aut in corpore, ^n
membris ecclesiae: tunc diabolum nos tumefacere superbia, and hypocrisi se^ere,
moneamur. Calu. art. 2. con. Anabap. When under the show of ^ection, we can
not tolerat any imperfection in the body, or members of the ^urch: then we are
admonished that the devil puffs us with pride, and se^eth us with hypocrisy.
This much from Calvin himself, against (...) scholar, for concluding so
odiously upon such pretended im^rfection.

Whether wickedness of prelates be a lawful condemnation of any Religion.
^. He requesteth my friends to admonish me that he will not ^gest, but that I
shall answer this matter being so material. I be^eue, before I depart from it,
he will be less able well to digest it. First he says, that whoores in Rome did
pass and ride like honest matrons (...) have no dowbt thereof that they do so
every where else. Secondly, that noble men, and familiars of Cardinals attended
upon them. Which also (...) believe. Thirdly, that clercks were also in their
compagnie. I think they were the more to blame. If I would say, that such
Clerckes (if Beza his translation of the word Clerus be true) wear ministers;
I have this help out of Beza: Beza in 2. Pet. S. How soever it be taken it
belongs only to the doers. Council. Delectorum Cardinalium Tom. 3.
The ancient Fathers transferred the name Clerus, to the college of
Ecclesiastical ministers. Fowerthly, that the reporters of this abuse had not
observed such corruption else where. The more commendation of other places. This
complaint was returned by nine commissioners (among whom was Cardinal Poole, of
glorious memory) appointed by Paul the third, to reform and ^bolishe abuses.
Is there now any thing in all this, whereby our Religion is taynted? Is there
greater condemnation, or commen^ation belonging for this to the Pope, who
employed such commissioners to redress abuses? let us understand the next.

The Lateran palace of the Pope, became a stews of whoors. I answer, that
might happen in a large court, among the serving men, and ^fficers, unknown to
the Pope: or when the Pope were at S. Marcks ^allace, or in the Vatican.
Althowgh it had hapened by the Popes ^ault, yet his life was never made our
rule, nor his vices our virtues: so that as by a holy Pope it can not be
inferred that we are all saints; nether by a wicked Pope may we be condemned
to be devils. And according our rule, man may know good, and the will of his
master, yet do contrary thereto, and consequently may have a good faith, yet a
badd life. Is there any iott of these imputations vnawnswered? What more light
matters against a Religion, more impertinent to our doctrine, or to our
controversy of the blessed Sacrament might be objected? Clerckes followed
whoores, and in the Popes Lateran palace there were whoores ergo your religion
is hellishe. Is not this a reasonable ergo?

Mat. 23.3.
18. Could they be ignorant of our religions safety against such imputations,
who ever heard our Saluioure command us to obey our Prelates words, although we
did not imitat there woorks? who ever heard S. Augustine saying; S. August. con.
Parm. lib. 2. c. 10.
Omnia sacramenta cum obsin^ indigne tractantibus, per eos tamen prosunt digne
sumentibus: All Sacraments whereas they are hurtful to the unworthy handlers,
yet by them they proffit the worthy receauers? Who has not heard above a
hundred Popes of Rome, to have been of as eminent sainctitie, as dignity above
others, in so much, as three and thirty martyrs successively flourished in that
sea? To which number no other episcopal seat has any proportion, and no other
any resemblance. Shall we leave all these Angels if one Lucifer; all these
Apostles, if one Judas, might incroache among them? Let us then, if such
reasoning must be current, turn the leaf.

Whether any late Reforming Patriarchs wear of commendable life?
19. I may be thought unreasonable, at the first surmise, to examine this
demand: first, that I would without limitation so generaly inquyre of all the
brood; among whom perhaps some first Apostles of Reformations, might be
inculpable: Secondly, considering how great, how exorbitant, how incomparable
commendations they may find given to the chief of their sort; especialy to
Luther and Calvin. I will deal uprightly, and omitting the residue not so
excessiuely commended, will examine the said two pillars of protestancie, not
concealing their commendations.

Vide Fox. Acts. p. 404. the Harborough in the last oratien.
20. First, I find Martin Luther a saint in Foxes calendar. Secondly I find
in the Harborowgh said; I am the country which brought forth the blessed man
Ihon Huss, who begott Luther, who begott truth. ^hirdly I find in Iuel, that he
was a most excellent man, Iuel. defen. Apol. par. 4. c. 4.. 2. Mathes. conc. 8.
de Luth. page 88. Amsdorf-praef. to. 1. Luth.
sent from God ^lighten the world. Fowerthly, in Mathesius; He was supremus
Pater ^^clesiae; The supreme Father of the Church. Fifthly, in Amsdorf; He was
^h, cui par spiritu and fide, sapientia and intelligentia veritatis nunquam
toto ^e Christiano quisquam fuit, neque erit; To whom in all the Christian
world, ^ne like in spirit and faith, wisdom and profunditie in scripturs,
was, or ^er will be. Sixthly in Alberus, he is said; Verus Paulus, verus Elias,
Alberus con. Carolostadianos lib. 7. B. D. 8.
vir ^moranda irae Dei sufficiens: cuius non puderet Augustinum esse
discipulum; (...) true Paul, a true Elias, a man sufficient to appeace the
wrath of God: Vide number. 120. Illyric. in Apoc. c. 14. Conrad. Schluss. in
Theol. Call. l. 2. fol. 124. Confess. Eccl. Tygur. fol. 116. 127. Luth. ep. ad
Argentin. 1525. Call. de vera ratione reform. Eccl. 463.
to whom Augustine might not blushe to be his scholar. Seventhly with Illyricus,
^e is fortould in the Apocalips, as the Angel flying through the midst of
^auen, having the eternal gospel. Eighthly with Schlusselburg; Elias and Ihon
^^p^ist weer but figurs of him. Nynthly by Zuinglius report, he called ^im
self the Prophet and Apostle of the Germains: which is confirmed by ^s own
saying; Christum a nobis primum vulgatum audemus gloriari; We ^re boast that
Christ was first by us preached. All which co^mendations, ^e by Calvin
confirmed assuredly: so that noe protestants may lawfully ^oubt of them.
Tenthly, and lastly, if you knew not what place ^e purchased in heaven, now
give ear, to Spangeburg.

Christus habet primas, habeas tibi Paul secu^das
^^st loca post illos proxima Luther habet.
First place to Christ, Cyriacus Spangeb. con. Steph. Agricol. fol. 6. a.
the next to Paul,
Then Luther first of others all.
Not much inferior to the former, are the praises of Calvin, with Beza; he
being optimus scripturaeinterpres, quo nemo vnqua^ molius, Beza lib. Iconum. R.
3. a.
pru^e^tius, clarius, and illustrius de rebus diuinis and religione scripsit,
The cheifest inter^reter of scripture, then whom no man ever wrote better,
wyser, cleerer, and with greater fame, of Scripturs. To Cartwright, Cartwr. li.
1. page 32.
he is the most noble instrument of Gods Church, in restoring the plain and
sincere interpretatio^s of the scripturs, which has been since the Apostles
time. To one in Geneua he was so great, Zanchius epist. ad Mase.
^s si veniret S. Paulus qui eade^ hora co^cionaretur qua and Caluinus, relicto
Paulo ^udiret Caluinu^; If S. Paul would come and preach in the same hour
wherein ^aluin preached, he would leave S. Paul, to attend on Calvin. Jacob.
Bernardus in Epist. ad Calvin. inter Epistolas Call. Calvin. in antid. Co^c.
Trid. sess. 4. page 374.
To one James ^ernard he was, lapis que^ reprobaru^t aedifica^tes factus in
caput anguli; The stone ^eiected by the builders, made up in the corner head.
Breefly he says of him self; Shamfastnes hinders me to say, what otherwise I
might most truly pro^esse, that for the understanding of scripturs we have
furthered more then all the ^ctours the papists ever had from the begyning. By all which, and much more which might have been brought, appears, that these
two are in^o^parably preferred, in heaven and earth, in so much, as the mother
of God, and all Apostles, are made inferior unto them. For, quicquid agit
^^u^dus, Luther vult esse secu^dus, What ever shift be found, Luther will be
secound.

21. If therefore these two, by as evident testimonies of like witnesses, be
found most abominable, and wicked wretches: can any body do less then think
that men of such lauishnes, ad prodigality in untruths, are to be suspected
most, where they importune most to be believed? I will begin with the great
prophet, Apostle, Elias, Paul, light of the world, father of truth, Angel, and
third or second person in heaven, against him self and all his commenders.
Induratus and insensatus sedeo in otio, Luth. epist. 234. ad Philip.
proh dolor, parum orans, nihil gemens pro Ecclesia Dei. Carnis meae indomitae
vror magnis ignibus: I sit in idleness (says Luther) hardened, and senseless,
alas praying little, and nothing lamenting for Gods Church. Idem lib. de vita
Coniugali.
I burn with the great fyers of my untamed fleashe. Minime situm est in me, vt
sine muliere sim:; It lies no ways in my power to be without a woman.

Luther in Colloq. mensal. fol. 271. 275.
Secondly, he says of him self and his nearest bedfellow; Diabolus frequentius
and propius mihi condormit, quam mea Catherina; The Devil sleeps nearer, and
oftener by me then my Catharine. Thirdly; Satan mihi multis modis prae
caeteris fauet; Satan favors me much more then be does others. Idem ibid.
fol. 5.129.
Fowerthly; Sancte Satan or a pro nobis: minime tamen contra te peccauimus
clementissime Diabole; Holy Satan pray for us: we never have offended the o
most Clement Devil. there follows some words in this last allegation, which
I refer to M. Rider as a reserved case. Is not this sufficient, to make him
known as far beyond all abominable miscreants in wickedness according truth,
as he was preferred beyond all saints according falsehood? Schlusselburg. lib.
2. art. 12. de theol. Caluinist.
If it be not, let the children help the father: He was, say they, proud,
furious, intolerable, full of error, impudent, forger, deprauer of Gods word,
deceitful, seducter, fals-prophet, lunatic, presumptuous, crucyfyer, and
murderer of Christ etc.

22. Now of Calvin says Schlusselburg: God that would not be mocked by men,
has showed his judgment in this world against Calvin, visiting him by the
scourg of his fury, Conrad Schluss. lib. 2. art. 9. fol. 72. in loc. cit.
and horribly punishing him before the day of his death. For he struck this
sacramental heretic in such sort, as he dyed desperate, swearing, and inuoking
the devils to whom he rendered his spirit. He dyed of the lousy disease, gnawed
with worms issuing out of a filthy sore in his privy me^bres so stinking as
the people wear not able to endure the stenche: These things are publicly
written. Besyd all this, he was infamous by Sodomie: for which be was marked on
his shoulder with a hot iron, by appointment of the magistrate. He was cruel,
Hosnus. defen. con. Calvin.
bloody, tyranous, deceitful, treacherous, babbler, contemner, sophist,
Epicure, corrupter and tosser of Scripturs, as Ovid in his metamorphosis. This,
being revealed by the holy brotherhood them selves, by after occasions I will
confirm. Now I will examine, whether the ^ood degenerateth from the parents. Yet
will I not touch them (...) our contries: that I may have their greater good
will, and pa^ences, to understand the truth.

^. Of the followers of these two, much is to be mentioned in ^e 18. number of
the examination of the creed. Calu. lib. de Scandali page 118. 127
Of the greater part (...) them who betake them selves, says Calvin, to the
gospel, what other in^^ntion had they; nisi vt excusso superstitionum iugo,
solutius in omnem lasci^am diffluerent; then having shaken of the yoke of
superstition, they might ^ore dissolutly plunge them selves in all riot and
lasciuiousnes?

^econdly Smidelin says; That the world may know they are no Papists,
Smidelinus conc. 4. super c. 2. Luc. conc. 1. s^per c. 21.
^r to have trust in their good woorks, not one good will they practice. In
stide (...) fasting they are altogether in feasting. For being more bowntifull
toward ^e poor they vnfleece and fley them. Prayers they turn to oaths etc.
^hirdly Spangenberg faith; Post reuelatum euangelium, Spangenbergius in sua
vera narratione beneficiorum per Diuum Mart. Lutherum.
and reiectum Pon^icatum, euasisse homines adeo feros, vt Deum non agnoscant,
nec vllam eius ra^nem habeant, velintque rectum and iustum sit, quicquid
vnicuique visum fuerit; after the revelation of the gospel, and the papacy
cast off, men to have become (...) wild, as they acknouledg not God, nor hold
any account of him, and make (...) to be right and lawful, which every one
lyketh. Fowerthly. Castal. apud Rescium page 54.
Castalion ^^yth, of them of Geneua. They are proud, puffed with glory and
re^enge, that with less danger you might offend princes, then exasperat these
^ierce Caluinians. Their life is infamous and villainous. They are masters of
^rte in reproaches, lies, cruelty, treason, and insupportable arrogance. They
^ame their GENEVA the HOLY CITY, and their assembly JERUSALEM. ^ut in very
truth (he dwelled long among them, and was a most pe^uliar friend of BEZA) we
should call it, O BABYLON, BABYLON! (...) AEGIPT, and the true frontiers of
Egiptian and Babilonical inchanters! (...) most infamous SODOM, and children
of GOMORRHE! Truly I ^ould fill not a few sheets of paper, with these
evidences of their^wne, of the deformations following their pretended
Reforma^^ons; But what need lanterns in the sun!

^4. A word or two in particular, beside that which God willing shall be said in
treating of Puritanisme. Schlusselburg. lib. 1. fol. 92. 93. lib. 2. art. 1.
lib. 3. art. 8.
Beza not in the ^^me of his papistrie, but ever after in all his life employed
him self (...) ^oly in fullfilling his lusts, writing his loves, revenging his
corriuals: Who ^uing long deliberated whether to use more of the two offenses,
^rlotrie with another man's wife, or Sodomie with a boy; he ^olued by his own
confession, to follow more this later. I may ^^rhapps translate his elegy
containing the said confession. Luther de missa priuata.
Of ^colampadius, Carolostadius, and Bucer, the brethren them selves confess
they were in the end smuthered with devils. Among the Caluinists,
Schlusselburg. in catal. haerit. lib. 1. page 4.
all the principal became Turcks or Arians: as Alemanus, Adam Neuser, Alciatus
Siluanus, Gregorius Paulus, Andraeas Volanus, Seruet^^, Blandrata, Franciscus
David, Gentilis, Gribaldus, etc. even by there oune brethrens confession.
Reserve your appetit for more of this kind, to the examination of the Creed.
Vide number. 18. super symbolum Apostoloru^.
Of Zuinglius, he confessed of him self and his brethren, that their leacherie
had made them infamous. In the end, he dyed in rebellion, armed: whereof, in
remembrance, is this verse, in Germany usual.

Occubuit patrio bellator Zuinglius ense
In civil broyle, was Martial Zuinglius sllayne.
25. And that also the Ministers have noe regard to Gods glory, but only to
their temporal licentiousnes, these few evidences may demonstrat. Menno in
fundam. tit. de doctr. praedica^t.
First says Menno; I have known most assuredly, that they are without the
spirit, mission, and word of Christ. That by their teaching and woorks, they
hunte only after favor of men, honors, pride, revenues, fair building,
Calu. in tract. page 150. and epist. 54. and l. de scan. page 131.
and lousnes of life. Secondly says Calvin; The ministers of Geneua, as empty
bellyes given up to all idleness, so they may inioye their delights, do not
regard whether heaven and earth be consounded together. VVherof peruse amply in
the 18. number upon the Creed. So that what the leaders, what the followers,
what the under leaders, in general, and particular, have been, is sufficiently
now notorious. What their Doctrine is, defending, of all these mischeefs God to
be the author, and nothing to be sinful in his sight but only infidelity,
shall be by gods permission abundantly declared in the examination of the creed,
and compendiously in the conclusion thereupon, numbers 22. I trust by this time,
this matter to be so tarte, as he that would not digest, but it should be
answered, now that it is avnswered, will require no more savvce to digest
it. I believe he will make as sovvre countenances in well digesting it, as if
he had been crammed with a bankett of sour crabbs. For if as he infers,
by prelates life their doctrine be esteemed; such greaceless doctors could never
follovv but suitable doctrine. I say nothing, as you behold, of Eaton the
preacher, first pilloried in cheap side, and after at Paul's cross, for lying
with his one dawghter. I vvil not recompt rapes, Sodomies, Murders, Piracies:
not so much, to tell the truth, for sparing the doers, as the hearers, and my
self; especialy, desiring only to discover the weakness and falshod of his
exceptions, and for that purpose to relat brefly sufficient demo^strations and
instances, as far as might be from incensing domestical readers to impatience.

^^. And your friend Bernard tells the Pope Eugenius to his face, Bern. in all
his five books de considerat.
that for his su^^emacie and usurping both swords, he holds them non Apostolico
iure, not by Gods (...). And that his priests in show serve Christ, but in deed
Anti Christ. And else^ere he painteth out the Popes Clergy, Sermon. 33. upon
the Can^. page 141.
that there is with them meretricius Ni^^ etc. they be trimmed like whoors,
attired like plaiers, and served like princes: but (...) ^ife they are
murderers, whoormaisters, bribers, and deceivers. And if the Pope ^^n was an
usurper of his supremacy. and comdemned for his Ambidextership. that man of
any reasonable sense, would embrace this religion that is so false, or ^^mmend
this Romish clergy whose lives are so filthy? And now Gentlemen, I ^onder
you inform not the subjects of the dangerous plots the Pope and Spaniard
^actise against then: the one has drawn them to ydolatrie, and the other
inciteth whom he ca^ to treachery. Popery seeks to bring Ireland to Spanish
slaverie, from English liberty.
And if Spain might have his will of this kingdom (but ^^e is liker to loose
Spain then conquer Ireland) the subjects should be used as the ^ukedome of
Millain and the kingdom of Naples are by the Spaniards handled: al ^^e
Nobility and Gentlemen upon pain of death are forbidden to dwell in Castles:
^^d the citizens in h^gh streets, but back lanes: and no man to wear a weapon,
^^t a knife of three inches long, yet ripped with a French pofie, No point. This
should (...) the miserable state of the Irish under bloody Spaines government.
Now for ^onclusion, let me entreat you as August. did his Readers, In his
Preface before the third book de Trinitate.
Noli meas literas ex tua ^pinione vel contentione, etc. neither reprove nor
correct these labors according ^o your own private opinion, or contentious
humors, but correct and confute them lectione diuina, by Gods word, and then
you shall have my good leave and ^oue (and my best furtherance to the State that
after you have replied to this, it may ^e printed, as also your persons for
further conference protected) and the like I desire of you, that when you find
the text and truth against you, you seek not any ^lying gloss or Romish shift
to help you, rather contending for victory then verity. The lord open your
eyes that you may see the truth, that you and we jointly and joyfully may
preach only Christ crucified, without man's inventions. etc,

Your loving friend, so far as you are Christ's and the Queens. Ioh. Rider.

Whether S. Bernard reprehended Catholics, or protestants? of strange
digressions.
26. AS from the 3. number to the 7. is demonstrated, that Vincentius
Lyrinensis, to whom we were addressed, approved our doctrine; and disproued our
adversaries: so in this place, we are directed to S. Bernard, in his books of
consideration, to find him against the supremacy, and ^els where, to find him
against the clergy. There could never any more vnfittly be alleged by
Protestants, then S. Bernard in all, and every controversy betwixt us. Not to
linger, or delay in showing it, this is declared by S. Bernard, to be the 6.
great untruth: The 6. untruth.
that by him the Popes authority, or Popes clergy was reprehended. The
authority of the Pope is belonging to the 6. article propounded to be
resolved: S. Bernard de consid. lib. 2. c. 8.
and therefore in this place let this small word, be a record to the world what
S. Bernard taught thereof: Tu es cui claues traditae, cui oues creditae sunt.
-- nec modo ouium, sed and pastorum, tu vnus omnium pastor. -- cum quisque
caeterorum habeat suam, tibi vna commissa est grandissima nauis facta ex
omnibus ipsa vniuersalis ecclesia tot^ orb diffusa. Thou (Eugenius Pope) art
he, to whom the keys are deliured, and the sheep committed. -- Not only of
the sheep, but also of the sheepheards, thou art the one pastor of all. -- of
the residue, every one has his own, to thee the huge shipp containing all the
universal church dispersed through the whole world, is committed.

For the other point, that he reprehendeth not the popes clergy, so much as
Protestants ministers, the express words declare. They are the ministers of
Christ (as they pretend) and serve Antechrist. S. Bernard Ser. 33. in Cantica.
They go honored by the goods of our Lord, who honor not our Lord. Thence is
the whoor-lyke neatnes, the player like fashion, the royal provision, which you
daily behold. Thence is gould in their bridles, sadles, and spurrs: and their
spurrs binghter then their altars. Does not this nearly belong to your last
attire, wherein I did behold you: when you came forth in your short cloak,
and short cassake vngirded, and lifted before in both syds to present, in sight,
a great tronke pair of french russet, or dowke purple velluet breeches? And
at other times, when you ruffle, and glister, in your satin gown, faced with
velluet, in your silks, in your pontificalibus? Upon my conscience, among all
the princes of blood of the clergy, whom I viewed in Rome, or else where, I did
behold none, so player like; or whose altars wear so far less bright then
their spurrs, as yours, and your own self. What I might say more in matter of
others of the same crew, I leave to another time. I know what to find in the
second admonition to the parliament, Anno. 1572.
in Martin Mar prelat, etc. Verily I say not all at this time that I know.

Of many extrauagant digressions, for want of matter.
27. Of plotts, and platforms, we may perhapp be drawn to discourse in treating
of puritanisme. It is a propretie of falsehood to be full of fear, the Jews
anciently said; Venient Romani and tollent locum nostrum; The Romans will come
and take away our place. Joan. 11. O semper timidum scelus! O always fearful
wickedness said Statius. 2. Theb. But qui pauet vanos metus veros fatetur, quoth
Seneca, Oedip. he that trembles at vain fears, does confess true causes of
fear in his conscience. ^e have no need to animat our Catholics to withstand
dan^^rous plots, or practices; they are them selves forward thereto. ^^oke back
to all services, and exploits, and do but indifferently ^^arde, and you will
find more Catholic blood shed in defense (...) Kingdoms, then Puritan. Nay
look to the most Puritan ^^ptains, of whom some are knights, and let them put
out my eye ^^th a scarre or scratch, in repugning any invasion, or for having
^y testimony of valerousse exploits. Alas what means this ^^nging digression
out of all our matter, out of all our contries, ^^er seas, over the Alps, and
Apenins, to talk of gentlemen, and ^mmons, castles, and cottages, long, and
short weapons, pointed, ^^d vnpointed knyues, and french poesies. Is it not
easier, and ^^tter cheap, to write and speak at random of places, then (...)
travail to them to know whether, what is reported, be true, (...) noe? yes
suerly: for the one costeth nothing but a dash of a ^nn, and travail of tongue;
the other requires great charges, ^reat toil, great adventure, and great
time. But in particular (...) the vvandring matter, without vvandring.

It is the seventh gross untruth, that the Pope has drawn 37. The 7. and 8.
untruth.
Catholics to idolatry. It is the 8. which in every part of the ^ormer
diuagation is contained. Some merry compagnions in^ended to make you M. Rider
ridiculous to the world. Every ^eane house in Millan, and Naples, might be a
house competent ^or the mayor of your VVigen. Every Citisen is armed at his
^hoise. Every weapon long at will, and pointed sharply. Every such poesy [no
point] might pass for good English, but not for any french. Nether do they
speak french in those contryes. Have not these men much mind to discuss a
controversy of ^he real presence, that make prefaces so far wide from it, and
^ange rouing to Antiphonaries, to prelates lives, to whoores, to Popes
supremacy, to the plotts of the K. of Spain, the habi^ations and weapons in
Naples, and Millan? His preface being ^t large considered, let my preface which
he concealed, have li^ence to appear, aunswering this challenging letter,
whereby our ^isputation began.

^8. I covet only at this time to premonishe the Reader, con^erning the
inscription of this letter, S. August. to. 4. con. mendac. c. 6.
that as S. Augustine said of ^uld heretics; Although they believe not the
Catholic faith, yet they ^o speak, as they may be taken to be of our
profession: even so our new Euphrateans, Iudicum. 12.6.
they would feign pass for good Israelits, but they can not pronounce
Schiboleth: that is, they can not counterfett the style of Catholic, but that
they are discovered.

A FRIENDLY CAVEAT TO IRELANDS CATOLICQVES, CONCERNING THE DAVNGEROVS Dream of
Christ's corporal presence in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: grounded upon
a letter sent from the Catholicques, etc.
To the reverend Fathers, the holy Jesuits, Seminaries, and all other Priests
that favor the holy Roman religion within the kingdom of Ireland.
HVmbly prays your Fatherly charities, Rider.
F. W. and P. D. with many other professed Catholicques of the holy Roman
religion: that whereas of late they have heard some Protestant Preachers
confidently affirm, and (as it seems unto our shallow capacities) plainly do
prove, that these positions here under written cannot be proved by any of
you, to be either Apostolical or Catholicque by canonical Scripture, or the
ancient Fathers of the Church which lived and writ within the compass of the
first five hundred years after Christ's ascension: which assertion of theirs,
has bred in ^our supplia^ts great doubts touching the truth of the same:
unless your fatherly ^ccustomed charities be extended presently to satisfy
our consciences in the same, ^y the holy written word of God, and such Fathers
of the Church as aforesaid, which being so directly and plainly proved by you
(as aforesaid) may be a speedy means to convert many Protestants to our
profession. Otherwise, if these points cannot be so proved by you, upon whose
learned resolution we greatly rely, then ^ot only we, but many thousands more
in this kingdom of Ireland, can hold ^hese points to be neither Apostolical
or Catholicque. And thus having showed ^^me of our doubts, we desire your
fatherly resolutions, as you tender the credit ^f our religion, the conuincing
of the Protestants, and the satisfying of our poor ^onsciences. And thus
craving your spedie learned and fatherly answers in writing, at or before the
first of February next, with a perfect quotation of both ^cripture and Fathers
themselves, not recited or repeated by others for our better ^^struction: and
the adversaries spedier and stronger confutation, we commend your ^ersons and
studies to Gods blessed direction and protection.

Positions.
That Transubstantiation, or the corporal presence of Christ's body and blood
in the Sacrament, was never taught by the ancient fathers that ever writ in
the first five hundred years after Christ's ascension, but a spiritual presence
only to the faithful beleuers.

2 That the Church of God had not their service in an unknown tongue, but in
su^^ language as every particular Church understood.

3 Thirdly, that Purgatory and prayers for the dead were not then known in
God Church.

4 Fourthly, that images and praying to Saints were then neither taught by the^
Fathers, nor received of the Catholicque Church.

5 Fifthly, that the Mass which now the Church of Rome uses, was not then
known to the Church.

6 Sixthly, that there ought not to be one supreme Bishop over all the world,
and the Bishop to be the Pope of Rome: and that the said Pope has not
universal jurisdiction over all Princes, and their subjects, in all causes
Temporal and Ecclesiastical.

The Protestant Preachers affirm, unless you prove the premises by canonical
Scripture they cannot be Apostolical: and there fore bind not the conscience
of any And if they cannot be proved by the said Fathers, then they be neither
auncien^ nor Catholic: And therefore to be rejected as men's inventions.

Gatho. Priests.
Provoked to prove either by Scriptures, or Fathers, which lived within the
com^^^^ of five hundred years after Christ's ascension, that the Primitive
Church and Catholicques of this time are of consent touching these Articles.

1 That Christ is really in the blessed Sacrament. 2 That scriptures should not
be perused by the vulgar. 3 That prayer for the dead and Purgatory was
believed. 4 That images were worshipped, and prayers made to Saints. 5 That
Mass was allowed. 6 That the supremacy of the Pope was acknowledged.
Rider. Master W. N.
GEntlemen: the cause of this your prouokement was a quiet and mild conference
upon these positions, with an honorable Gentleman (and a special good friend
of yours concerning religion) wherein he confidently affirmed, that the Jesuits
and Roman Priests of this kingdom, were able to prove by Scriptures and
Fathers, these Positions to be Apostolical and Catholicque. And that the
Church of Rome add the Roman Catholicques in Ireland now hold nothing touching
the same, but what the holy Scriptures and primitive Fathers held within the
first five hundred years after Christ's ascension. Now if you in this
conference for your part, have made such proof by the holy canonical
Scriptures, and such Doctors of the Church as aforesaid, I have promised to
become a Roman Catholicque: if you have failed in your proof (which I am
assured you have done,) he likewise before worshipful witnesses has given his
hand, to renounce this your new doctrine of the church of Rome, and become a
professor of the gospel of Christ.

This was the occasion and manner of your prouokement, which I hope the best
minded will not mistake, nor you misconter, being only provoked by your
friend, 1. Pet. 3.15.
yea and faith (if you refuse not Saint Peter's counsel) to be ready alwais to
give an answer to any man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in you.

The preface, in effect, which was concealed by M. Rider.
Provoked to prove either by Scripturs, or Fathers, which lived within the
compass of the first five hundred years after Christ's ascension, that the
pri^atiue Church and Catholics of this time, are of consent ^uching these
Articles: 1. That Christ is realy in the B. Sacrament. 2. That Scripturs should
not be perused by the vulgar. 3. That prayer for the dead, and purgatory, was
believed. 4. That Images were worshipped, and prayers made to Saints. 5. That
mass was allowed. 6. That the supremacy of the Pope was aknowledged.


AT this only entrance, the whole residue was brought to a demurr, or adiurned
to another term, or as M. Rider ^^armeth it, to a writ or rescript. Which
adiurne, or rescript, as ^et depriving the world of the said preface, I thought
convenient to ^eliuer the purport thereof in few words. Provoked (said I) to
^roue by Scripturs, or Fathers, the foresaid articles: I perceived ^^y
challengers to have perused the prouocations of Iuel, as famous or calling
these matters into question, as Herostratus for burning ^he temple of Diana;
remembered only by infamy. For Laurence ^umphrey the great Doctor of Oxford,
Humphred in vita Iuelli page 212.
writing the life and com^endation of Iuel, omitted not to reprehend and
reprove him, for ^^ch vain and unadvised appeal to the Fathers in these
contro^ersies: Saying: Quid enim rei nobis cum Patribus? What have we to do
^ith the Fathers? He could not be ignorant that in all the volums of ^^e
Fathers nothing is treated, but what we profess; nothing ^^mmended or
condemned but what we commend or condemn. and who could have any distrust
thereof, but such as could not ^ehould light in the sun, or water in the sea?

^^. This made Luther in defiance of the Fathers to exclame: I ^re not if a
thousand Austins, a thousand Cyprians, a thousand Churches stood against me.
Hierom, does chiefly anger me. Quia tantum de ieiunio, de de^ctu ciborum, and
de virginitate scripsit: Si hoc saeculo viueret, nos plane damna^^t. For he
writes only of fasting, and choice of meats, and virginity: If he ^ued in
this age, he would plainly condemn us. Which is a plain confession and the
cause thereof not concealed: Luth. to. 2. page 340. Colloq. conuiual. c. de
patribus. Colloq. Ger. de Schol. Theol. Fol. 499.
Gregory was deceived by the devil. Origenem iam olim excommunicaui.
Chrysostomum nullo loco habeo, nihil est enim nisi loquaculus. Basilius plane
nihil valet, totus est monachus. I have long since excommunicated Origin. I
disdain Chrysostom, for he is nothing else but a babbler. Basil is altogether of
no account, he is wholly a monck. Call. l. 3. Instit. c. 5. n. 10.

Beza ^p. 8. theolog. and 81. and in tract. de trip. episco. genere, ad Scotos
circa an, 1579.

Zuing. tom. 1. in explan. art. 64. Fol. 107. P. Mart. de votis page 50. 477.
490 476. Baleus in pref. Act. Romans Po^tif.

Muscul. in loc. con. de Scrip. sacr. page 164. 165.


Secondly, Calvin says of the Fathers generaly: Abrepti fateor in errorem
suerunt; They were borne away in error. Thirdly Beza says: They followed
Paganism for a rule. The Fathers in the Council of Nice vnderlayd the seat of
the harlot that sits upon seven mowntayns. Fowrthly Zuinglius, The Fathers,
yea forsooth the Fathers have so professed: but I allege to the no fathers or
mothers, but the word of God. Fifthly, Peter Martyr (whom they of Zurick sent
to plant protestancie in England; which by having him, says: Bale, was
happy, and by wanting him was unhappy) confesses: As long as we remain in
Concils and Fathers, we will abide ever in the same errors. Sixthly Musculus:
Plane stolidissimus est, vel studiose malignus in ecclesian Dei, quisquis
Patrum calculis conscientias fidelium obstringendas censet; He is plainly most
foolish, or wittingly malicious against the Church of God, who would bind the
consciences of the faithful according the resolutions of the Fathers.

Cartur. l. 1. page 513. page 154. lib. 2. p. 507. 508. lib. 1. page 88. lib.
2. p. 502. 303. lib. 1. p 94. p. 103. p. 98. lib. 2. p. 622.
Seventhly, Cartwright; Seeking in the Fathers wrytings, is, a raking in
ditches, a moving and sommoning of hell, a measuring of truth by the crooked
yard of time. The Fathers imagined fondly; they deall like ignorant men; they
were mastered by their passions; they had many errors. Clement, Anaclet, and
Anicet are discharged for rogues, and men burnd in the forheads; Damasus spoke
in the dragons mowth; Ambrose houldeth many things corruptly, and many errors,
and violently inforceth the text; there is no sincerity to be looked for at
Hieroms hands; Augustins sentence is approved unadvisedly, and thereby a window
is open to bring in all popery; Ignatius was a counterfeit and vain man, etc.
Causeus dial. 5. 8. 11.
8. Causeus, Dionisius was but a doting foolish, pernicious dreamer; Clement a
spreader of dross and dreggs; Ignatius, an idle trifler; Disp. Albe Iulie. in
Actis 8. diti. de Hi ro^ Vide Bazam in A^t^ Ap. c. 23. 2. ad These. 2. annot. 3.
2. ad Timoth. 3. annot. 8. 1. Cor. 7. annot. 1. and 9. and 28.
Ireneus, a fanatical writer; Cyprian, blockish and reprobat; Nazianzen, a
babbler; Ambrose, bewitched by the devil; Hierom, no less damned then Lucifer,
etc. Lastly, Alba Iulia Disputation: Nobis cum illis nihil est commune; We
have no participation with the Fathers.

31. These are the chief Reformers I could find in the world, and of all
sorts the very principal: of Luthera^s, Caluinians, Zuinglians, Purita^s,
Adiaphorists, Polimorphians, etc. Had not M. Rider occasion to co^ceal this
preface, wherein al aforsayd Reformers give verdict against him, that he is (let
no man think these reproaches to be mine) bound by his claim to have the
Fathers his favorers, (...) abide still in error: that he is plainly most
foolish and wittingly mali^^use against the Church of God, etc. Who can blame
him to affirm (...) is preface to be bitter and biting? And who can disblame
him, ^^r imputing the bitterness thereof from the wolves to the lambs, ^^om the
kytes to the chicken, that is from them selves to us? If ^^y untruly would
defeat us of our right, the least we can be ^^lowed to do, is to produce our
evidences to disprove them. No ^ore is now done by us. If the Fathers be for
Protestancy or against it, let all the world now freely determyne. I make but
(...) is dilemma or two edged argument; if the Fathers, by all pro^^sta^ts, be
confessed their adversaries; how are they their approuers? ^^r if they were
approuers, how are they so irreverently, and ^^sdainfully mistermed: unless you
think, according truth, that (...) your consociats deserve no other treatment?

^^. In your first line you change a word, ( and, for or, Rider.
) which greatly alters ^e Catholics question, and is farrefrom our first
meaning. For we hold with ^hrists truth, that unless the written word of God
first warrant it, we are not ^ound in conscience to believe it, though all the
Doctors and Prelates in the ^orld should swear it.

Whether it be not all one to say, Scripturs or Fathers. to be for any
opinion, as to say, the Scriptures and Fathers to be for the same?
^2. I Confess, that M. Rider came to me the 2. October. 1602. Fitzimon.
to reclaim his resignation of these controversies to Scripturs or Fathers
seueraly; resolving not to accept the Fathers for arbitrers, unless they had
the scripturs ^onioyntly concurring with them. A poor retraict; First because
^^y promise, and all his printed books, he had appealed to them ^ot conioyntly,
but seueraly: Secondly, because it is a seelye ^magination to think they may
be separated. S. Aug. con. Pelag. l. 2. c. 10.
For S. Augustine ^weetly, according to his manner, instructs all Christians to
^now concerning the Fathers; Quod inuenerunt in Ecclesia, tenuerunt: ^uod
didicerunt, docuerunt: quod a Patribus acceperunt, hoc filijs tradiderunt. That
which they fownd in the Church, they retained: that which they learned, ^hey
tawght: that which they received of their fathers, that they delivered to their
children. And consequently, what the Apostles recaued of Christ, they delivered
to their successors; their successors, to their scholars; their scholars, to
their disciples, etc. Which as it is conformable to the Apostle S. Paul, Ephesians.
4.12.
so is it perfectly confirmed by him, saying; God to have given Apostles,
Evangelists, Pastors, and Doctors, to the co^summation of the holy, until we
all meet in unity of faith, and knowledge of the Son of God; that is, that
he had given such instructers, as by true, and lawful descent, and succession,
should inform the ages succeeding one another, in one faith, and knowledge of
one God; until the first, middle, and last, be gathered into the flock of
Christ. And as the later should receive from the former Baptism, and other
Sacraments; so also should they receive all other truth: which would be
infallible unto the^, if they would not leave their forefathers to follow their
own braynsick novelties.

D. VVhitg. lib. 2. page 353. 507. 508.
Therefore Whitgift worthily exclaimed at the Puritans, excepting against the
Fathers as being wresters, and sorcers, of the text, the Scripturs not having
any other searchers, defenders, conseruers but them. Therefore also Calvin
worthily taxes their presumption, Call. in trac. Theol. p. 471.
who irreverently insinuated the Fathers did disagree from scripturs, they
having from hand to hand of their predecessors received the understanding of
them: they having by infinite labors expownded them they having by virtue of
them planted Christianity, excluded idolatry, Beza epist. 81. page 384.
surmou^ted heresy. Therefore Beza worthily imputes it, to ignorance, impudence
and impiety, to divorce or sequester Scripturs and Fathers, or to affirm
where the Scripturs are, or Fathers, there they can be seueraly or otherwise
then only conioyntly. So that from first to last, who have Fathers, they must
have Scripturs, and contrarywyse. And consequently, M. Rider first, and, last
remains alyke engaged.

But to make it evident to the most repining, and sparing conceit toward my
allegations, that I never changed or, for and; and that all this is a frivolous
and falls cavil, and pretext: who does not know, that the ground and fundation
of M. Riders claim, was but a repetition and borowing of the owld impudent
protestation of Iuel? In which not and, but or, is contained in all the
articles; it being said, either by Scripture, or by the example of the primative
Church, or by the owld Doctors, or by the ancient General Concils. And if any
be able to prove any of these articles by any one clear, or plain clause of
either Scripturs, or of the old Doctors, or of any old general Concils, or by
any example of the primitive Church within 600. years after Christ I promise
to give over and subscribe. So that I disprove hereby M. Rider, not only by his
own printed book, but by his original copy: whence as he took the same
claim, so he ought to have taken the same conditions. And therefore whether he
will or nill, he must stand, that not, but him self, and his Iuel, have undone
him, by or, ^^d not and.

^^. And this was demanded of you, not as the demanders doubted that the
^^nonicall Scriptures were insufficient to prove any article of faith; but
only, ^at all men might see and so be resolved, whether the Protestants, or
the now Ro^ane Catholics join nearest to Christ's truth, and the faith of
the first primitive others.

Whether all belief be contained in the written word of God?
^3. ALl the proof brought by M. Rider, Joan. 10.31.
so to persuade us, is only in these words; But these things are written, that
you may believe that Jesus is the Son of God: and that believing you may have
life in his name. Good Lord! that inference is this: Hebr. 11.
the things written serve to believe in Christ: therefore all belief is written?
By S. Paul's declaration, ^bel, Enoch, Noe, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, etc. had
undoubtedly Faith: ^et they had nothing of Scripture written. Secondly all the
primitive Church, had noe parcel of the new Testament, at least ten ^earesafter
Christ: will you say they had no faith, or were not ^ound to believe! Thirdly,
the Creed of the Apostles, Vide P. Cotto^, de sacrif. contre Caille predica^t.
Gallice page 122. 126. 127.
the consubstantialitie of the Trinity, the procession of the holy Ghost, ^he
perpetual virginity of our Lady, the baptising of children, ^he not
rebaptizing of them by heretics baptized, the breaking of ^he sabbath, and
keeping of sunday, the observation of Easter in ^he Christian and not in the
Jewish manner, the receiving of the Sacrament fasting, the eating of blood, and
strangled meat prohibited in the Acts, the not marrying of the sister in law,
after the ^rothers death, without heirs; and especialy I would know of ^ur
protestants allouing women to sing psalms in the Church, unless they build it
upon some tradition true or false; how tremble ^hey not to contradict the
prohibition thereof by the Apostle? 1. Corinthians. 14. 1. Timoth. 2.
Where find you these points of belief, which are believed in the whole
Church, and some of them contrary to Scripturs, nor in any ^cripture contained?

Therefore, that the Scripturs alone are sufficient to prove every ^^rticle of
belief, to concur with you once in a grammarian sentence, is qui nil dubitat,
nil capit inde boni; he that thinks so, upon better consideration, may now
think and say otherwise. Are not these people easily persuaded to have good
proofs for their profession when they ca^ confute us about the name of
Catholic by Vincentius Lyrinensis, about the Popes supremacy, by S. Bernard,
and now about traditions by this text here alleged? Does M. Ride^ think that
he is Perseus on his wynged horse Pegasus, tra^sforming al^ his adversaries
into stones, that they can not discern these prooft, to be no proofs, Call. in
7. mat. et in 9. 12 16, 18. Ia c. 6. mac. v. 16.17.18. in c. 26. mat. In c. 2.
Luc. 16. In Joan. 1. Castal. in pref. Bibl. ad Edw 6. D. Whitg. a page 31. ad
51. Stow chron. page 1022. 1189. 1283. 1551. Melan. in loc. con. An. 1539. Fol.
8. and 10. An. 1545. fol. 53. An. 1558. loco de filio. Sebast. Fran. apud Bezam
ep. 6. Cartwr. in 2. reply. page 191. Joan. 10.31.
but of stupiditie in them alleging them? To have the foresaid words well
applied in deed, let them first procure that Caluinians, leave to doubt of the
divinity of Christ. Let them be opposed to Castalio, mistrusting the Messiah
to be yet come. Let them be opposed to Atheists, abounding every where, since
reformation began. Let them debarr, that there be no successors to Francis
Kett master of Art, to George Paris, and Ihon Jews lately executed in England,
for denial of Christ's divinity. Let them confound Melancthon, allowing but a
parcel of diuinie nature to our Saluiour. Let them confound Sebastia^ Franck,
accompting Christ no more God then Socrates, or Trismegistus. Let them confound
Cartwright saying, the Jews had been fools to account him their living God,
whom they did behold a seely aend miserable man. These things are written,
that such should believe Jesus is the Son of God: and that believing they
might have life in his name. To prove any thing against us, there can not
possibly be any wise application of them.

Rider.
34. For that faith which can be proved to be taught in Christ's time, and so
received and continued in the primitive Church for the first five hundred
years after Christ's ascension, must needs be the true, ancient, Apostolical,
and Catholicque faith. And that other faith that cannot be so proved, is but
base, bastardly, and counterfeit; and I trust in Christ, that the Reader easily
shall perceive before the end of this small Treatise, that this your opinion
touching Christ's carnal presence in the Sacrament, (and so in the rest of the
other Positions) was never taught by Christ, nor once dreamed on by the
ancient Fathers, but invented and devised a thousand years after Christ, by
the late Church of Rome: grounding their proofs only of an empty sound of
syllables, without Apostolical or Catholicque sense: enforcing both Scriptures
and Fathers to speak what they and you pleased, not what the holy Ghost and
the Fathers purposed.

Whether M. Rider has condemned his Church to be base, bastard, and
cownterfet.
Fitzimon. All this app^areth in our 20. number, or 30. number.
34. IF any thing by him was unadvisedly affirmed, by this his verdict against
his own Church, he has especialy disconfited his profession. For first thereby
he has condemned Luther, and Calvin, and their adherents, affirming them to
have been first preachers of Christ, and greatest doctors of truth, not only
above the primative others, but above all that ever were, or ever will be,
whether they (...) Apostles, or not. If then the religion of the first five
hundred ^^res be only true, and all other but base, bastard, and counterfeit: ^w
can this new religion, Haddon in the end of his epistle. Bale. cent. 1. page
66. 72 cent. 8. page 678. Epistle to the Confer. betwixt Latimer and
Ridley-Harborough in the last oration.
(which Haddon professed to have been ^t thirty years known; of which, all
English late writters ^compt Latimer to be the Apostle; and saying Luther to
have been not ^ly the reformer of abuses, but the very Father of truth) but
thereby (...) condemned? Nay how are not the two most glorified Foxian ^artyrs,
Ridley, and Cranmer, thereby condemned, saying: they would ^oue all the doctrine
set forth by K. Edward, to be more pure then ^y other used in England a 1000.
years before? Is it not thereby, ^oth professed unknown till that time, as also
not to be the do^rin of Christ? For had it been known, and his promise true of
^e inuincibilitie thereof, 16. Matthew. it could never have had a 1000. ^ares
interruption. And what may be said of the Prince of Condees ^^scription in his
coin of Gold: Lud. XIII. Dei gratia Francorum Rex, ^imus Christianus?

Secondly, all the disputations and monuments of all principal ^otesta^ts,
professing the primative Fathers of the first, second, third, and fowerth
hundred years, repugnant to protestantcie, as appea^eth in the 30. number, by
induction are thereby condemned. Awnswer to Sawnders Rock. page 248. 278. Beza
conf Geneu. c. 7. and 12. Et in c. 2. ad These.
Thirdly ^ll the learnedest protestants condemning the Church of the Apo^les
time, and saying, Antichrist to have then begun, and condemning ^l, and every
of the Apostles them selves, and Evangelists, and their ^nmediat disciples; all
these I say, are thereby condemned. For if ^ese were favorable to protestantcye,
Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 10. col. 558. 559. 560. Call. in 1. Cor. c. 4. v. 4. c. 7. v.
9. Romans c. 9. v. ^. Quintin. apud Rescia^ in pref. nimistromachie Cent. 1. l.
2. c. 10. Vide Calu. loc. cit. Bullinger. com. in 19. and 22. Apoc. Quintin.
loc. cit. Calu. apud Feuard, pref. in Ruth. Beza de hist. adultere. Luth. tom.
5. fol. 439 440. vitus Theod. page vlt. in nou. test.
there had been no occasion (...) despise, or disprayse them in such manner, as
to affirm such de^cts in S. Peter, as by the Centuriasts (who curiously and
not only ^refully have calculated 15. sins of his) by Beza, by Illyricus, are
(...) disparage him, carefully, and plentifully registered. To affirm of (...)
Paul, with Calvin; that he was full of cold, and heat, of presumption,
te^eritie, confusion, and precipitation. And with Quintinus; that he was not a
^ose^ vessel, but a broken vessel. and with the Ce^turiasts; that he was
impatie^t, (...) in desperation, during his afflictions, in Asia; dissentio^s
toward Barnabas, and hypo^tical toward James, and others. To affirm of S.
Ihon, with Bullinger; that ^his pro^ptnes to adore the angel he had sinned in
apostasy. With Quintinus; to ^arme him: Iuuene^ stolidulu^; a foolish youth.
With Calvin, to distrust his 6. Cap. and with Beza; his 8. Cap. for untrue. To
affirm of S. James, that he was a ^ruerter of S. Paul's doctrine, his epistle
bastard, cou^terfet, wicked, and vnapostolical. To affirm with Luther; Luth.
pref. ad nou. test, and in ep. Petri tom. 3. Wittemb. Calu. in c. 2. Mat. v.
15. c. 4. v. 13. c. 8. v. 17. c. 21. v. 9. c. 27. v. 9. Idem Act. 15. v. 40.
Tower disp. 4. days Conference. Calu. in c. 21. Act. v. 23.
the three first Evangelists to be apochriphal. To affirm in particular with
Calvin; that S. Matthew, abused, distorted, and alleged, unaptly, diverse
citations; That S. Mark was an Apostat, and disloial, not to be excused. To
affirm with Luther; that S. Luke was excessive in commending good woorcks; And
with the Tower disputation; That hi^ gospel is dowbtfull; And lastly of all
Apostles with Calvin, to affirm; that they were over superstitiouse, and
subject to vice. If, I say, these had not been repugnant to protestancye: why
should they be thus disabled and disgraced.

Nether will I be contented, to have their dislyke manifested in particular
against these Apostles, and Evangelists, as repugnant to their profession;
thereby apparently testifying them selves not to have been aggreable to the
Apostolical Church, and consequently by M. Riders own verdict to be base,
bastard, and counterfett: but I will also discover, their abiuration of the
owld and new Testament together, for being also utterly against them: so that,
they must be enforced to depend only upon their Father of truth, their
Prophet, Apostle, Angel, Elias, and third person of heaven (as they term him
number. 2.) their incomparable Luther, who never had not will have his like,
Luther. in epist. ad Argentin. An. 1525.
certifying, and assuring him self, to have been first of that rank, saying;
Christum a nobis primo vulgatum audem^ gloriari; We dare boste, Christ by us
first to have been published. To which purpose, I might have no small
furtherance by the disputation of the Tower, Tower disputation. 4. days
Conference.
disauthentising out of the owld Testament Tobias, Judith, Hester, Baruch,
VVisdome, Ecclesiasticus, 2. books of Machabees, to which others adioyne the
prayer of Manasses, 2. Paralipomenon, the Song of the Three children, the story
of Bell; And out of the new, S. Lukes gospel, Hebrews, James, 2. Peter, 2. and
3. of Ihon, Jude, Apocalips, etc. But having them altogether, by the resolution
of protestant ringleaders, need the less to linger about parcels. This then
is Luthers decree concerning the owld testament. Luth. to. 3. Ienen. 1 par.
Vide Jacob. Carrion. in Chroncl. An. 1556. page 151. Basilea.
Ne ingeretur nobis Moises. Nos in nouo testamento, Moisem nec videre nec
audire volumus. Let not Moises be thrust upon us, we in the new testament will
not abide to see or hear Moises. That he had rather never preach, then
propownd out of Moises. That he that does allege any thing of his, Luther.
sermon. de Moise.
does deprive Christ out of the hearts of men. That Moises belongs nothing to
us. That by receiving him all Jewish ceremonies must ensue, etc. By Moises
every one understands the owld Testament; which Luther says belongs not to
protestants; and that they should not abide to hear, or see it.

Now concerning the new Testament, thus speaks Zuinglius: Quotiescunque sieve
Christus, sieve Apostoli ad Scripturam relegant auditores, Zuingl. tom. 2.
^lench. Con. Anabap. fol. 10.
in^ligunt non suos Apostolos, aut euangelium, etc. As often as Christ or the
^^ostles remitt any to Scripturs, Ochinus lib. 2. dialog. page 154. 155. 156.
157.
they do not understand their epistles or the ^spell, but the owld testament.
Ochinus proceeds more to the matter, ^^ying; Non debemus plura credere, quam
crediderunt sancti faederis antiqui; ^e should not believe more then the holy
Saints of the owld Testament. ^herby he infers, that we should not be bound
to believe the ^rinitie, consubstantialitie, etc. Because they are in the new
testa^ent only, and not in the owld. By all which most unchristian ^fidelitie,
is testified, in the sight of God, and man, that these Re^rmers, were nothing
agreeable to Moises, the Prophets, Apostles, ^^d Evangelists, nor contrarywyse
they to them.

But did the second hundred years Doctors content them better? Contur. 2. cap.
4. page 55. 65. edit. Basil. par Joan. Operin. Centur. 3. c. 4. p. 79.
^o, say the Centuriasts: Multae enim monstrosae and incommodae opiniones ^ssim
a Doctoribus sparse reperiuntur; Many monstrous and incommodous ^nions are
found dispersed by the doctors. What of the third? they answer: Doctores huius
aetatis a vera doctrina Christi and Apostolorum de bonis ^eribus declinarunt:
the doctors of this age declined from the doctrine of Christ ^^d his Apostles,
(as protestancie would have it) for good woorks. Beza loc. cit in number. 30. and
epist. 81.
What ^et of the fowerh? then was papistrie vnderlayd by the concile of Nice,
say ^hey, that congregation of Sophisters, then was the creed made of
Sathanasius (...) Athanasius. The histories of their lives so testify.
What further might be said of the being of the ^rincipal primitive Fathers
Heremits, Moncks, or Friars: as for ^xample; of Effrem, Climachus, Nazianzen,
Basil, Hierom, Augustine, Da^ascen, Gregory, etc.? Could these erecters of
cloisters, and Abbaies, ^e favorers of the subuerters of them? Could these
co^menders ^f lyturgies, or Masses, of Fasting, of care for the dead, Centuriae
Magdeburgicae, Centuria 2. 3. 4. in Singularum capite 4.
of Chastity ^f Invocation of Saints, of Good woorks, of Confession, of
Tra^itions, of Preesthod, of the Supremacy, of ecclesiastical Cere^onies, and
of all papistrie, being so acknowledged by your selves, and termed in the 30.
number precedent; doting, foolish, per^tious, idle, fanatical, reprobat,
bewitched by the devil, no less damned then ^ucifer, etc. Could I say these
men, such commenders and so by ^rotestants abused; be favorers of
Protestantcie? or the first five ^undred years, wherein such men were Popes,
Bishops, Prelates, ^onfessours, Martyrs, and Saints, and honored by all the
Church ^f that time; be fauourerers of the reprehenders of Masses, ^asting,
care for the dead, Chastity, Inuocations of saints, Good woorks, Confession,
Traditions, etc.?

To conclude, could the condemners of them to be heretics who denied the real
presence, ^^^^^^et. dial. 3. c. 19. ^ertull. de prescrip. and in Sarpiaco.
Iren. l. 3. Epiphan. here is by Basil de Spirit. S. c. 27. August. l. co^. Max.
etc. Epiph. her. 53. Hieron. l. 1. con. Iouin. Marcel. de error. Montani. Clem.
l. 5. recog. August. her. 11. and 49. Con. Faust. l. 22. c. 30.74.76.77. her.
51.53. Greg. l. 4. dial. c. 4. etc. Clem. l. 5. recog. August. her. 54.
as Theodoret condemned some; or who denied or disalowed Traditions as;
Tertullian, Ireneus, Basil, Augustine, Epiphan, condemned therefore the Gnostics,
Marcion, Cerdon, Arius, Eunomi^, Aerius, Nestorius; or the despisers of Lent,
and fasting days, such as besyd the former were the Eustathians, and
Iouinians, condemned therefore by Tertullian, Epiphan, and Hierom; or of
Montanus, Manicheans, Circumcellions, Donatists, Aerians, and Armenians, for
denial of Confession, of Freewill, of the lawfulnes of Moncks, and religiouse,
and Church riches, of purgatory, and prayer for the dead, condemned therefore by
Marcelin, Hierom, Clement, Augustine, Gregory etc.; or of Aeti^, Eunomius,
Simon Magus, affirming Solifidian Justification; condemned therefore by Clement
and Augustine: could, I say, by all the wit of man, or a^gels, any accord be
made betwixt al these as one Church? They who condemned late protestant
opinions in ancient heretics, and therefore by late protestants are in manner
aforsaid condemned; and contrariewyse they who defended by woorks and writings
the same doctrine, and profession, of late Catholics, and therefore are by them
honored and inuoked, as saints; should be favorers and furtheres of
Protestantcy, and disprouers, and enemies of Papistrie! Can any sodring, or
hammering, conioyne, or cupple, these unsuitable doctrins together?

Mat. 9.16. Mar. 2.22.
Therefore M. Rider, it can not be denied, but your new patch, has torn your
owld cloak, and your new wine has burst your owld vessels. And to all
judgments, not wilfully peruers, is revealed, that never cowld any profession
by the defenders be more betrayed, then protestantcy by M. Rider: challengeing
to be a Catholic, and appealing for trial to Vincent. Lyrinensis, most opposite
thereto; impugning supremacy of the Pope, and appealing to S. Bernard so chief
a maintayner thereof; and clayming to be of the first ancient Church, and have
it so repugnant to him: leaving in the mean time his faith, and profession,
discovered by this means, to be base, bastard, and counterfeit. Yea leaving by
occasion of his unadvised assertion, open to all men's eyes, that owld and new
testament, Apostles and doctors, are disagreeing from protestantcie: and that
all papistical doctrine even in particular, was sustained by them, and
altogether condemned by them. Wherefore truly said S. Augustine: Improbatie
haereticorum facit eminere, quid ecclesia tua sentiat, and quid habet sana
doctrina. Aug. l. 7. Confess. c. 19. The impugning of heretics, does make
manifest what thy Church (with continual conformity and correspondence to it
self) houldeth, and true doctrine teaches.

35. But first, here you wrong your self much, your cause more, Rider.
but the simple ^^ple most of all, in altering the state of the question; for
our controversy is of (...) manner of Christ's presence in the Sacrament: The
Catholicque Priests subtly alter the state of the question.
whether he be there corporally (...) ^pirituallie. And you (no doubt in your
conscience knowing it impossible to ^^oue your carnal presence) alter the
question (very deceitfully) from the man^^ to the matter: That Christ is
really in the blessed Sacrament: A thing never denied ^s, nor ever in question
betwixt Protestant and Papist; for both you and we ^d Christ's real presence in
the Sacrament, but you carnally and locallie: we mi^^allie and spiritually;
you by Transubstantiation: we in the commanded and ^full administration.

But here you forget your grounds of divinity, and rules of Logic, in making
(...) opposition betwixt spiritual receiving and real receiving, opposing
them as ^^^traries, whereas the opposition is not betwixt spiritual and real,
but betwixt ^^^porall and spiritualll: for spiritual receiving by faith is
real receiving, and ^^^porall receiving by the mouth, is also real receiving:
So that the Scriptures and ^^^ers that here you allege, be altogether
impertinent to prove your carnal ^^^ence of Christ and his new conception, of
bread; not of the blessed Virgin; by ^^^fulll Priest, not by the holy Ghost.
For Christ willing I will make it plain ^o you, that you have showed little
divinity, and concealed much learning in (...): only hudled up a number of
texts of Scriptures and Testimonies of Fathers (...) of Eckius Common-places,
and otherlike Enchiridions, and never read the ^^^ers themselves, which at
first was requested.) And thus trusting other men's ^^orts, and not your own
eyes: you have wronged your self, weakened your cause, (...) abused the simple.
For if you had diligently read and thoroughly weighed these ^^iptures and
Fathers, you might have seen and known that these confute your ^^onious
opinons, and confirm them not.

But this you should have here proved for the Catholicques satisfaction, (in
^^ich you have altogether failed) That after the Priest has spoken over and to
the ^^ead and Wine, Hoc est corpus meum, and used powrefull words over it and
them, Rhem test. 1. Cor. 11. Sect. 9.
^^ich you call your consecration: that presently the substances of Bread and
Wine ^e gone, not one crumme or drop remaining, but wholly transubstantiated,
tran^^^tured, and changed into the very real, natural, The. Test. math. 26.
Sect. 4.
and substantial body and ^^oud of Christ, which was borne of the Virgin
Marie, and nailed on the cross, ^^d is now in heaven: and yet in the
Sacrament, whole, alive, and immortal; and ^^at this body of Christ must be
received with our corporal mouth, and locally ^^scend into our corporal
stomachs. Which body so made by the Priest, is of^^ed by the Priest to God
the father, as a propitiatory, merciful, and redeeming ^^^rifice, by which the
Priest applies (as he says) the general virtues of Christ's ^^ssion to every
particular man's necessity, either quick or dead, for matters tem^^rall, or
graces spiritual, for whom and when he lists and for what he pleases. ^ur
carnal presence shall be first handled. The second point, which is your
pro^atorie sacrifice, shall be handled in the title of the Mass. This is your
Roman (...) learning which you should have proved: but how, your own proofs
(being ^^^ly examined) disprooue you, let the learned judge. But now to your
first proof (...) of the sixth of John, to prove your opinion touching the
first position.

(...). 6. ^ers. 51. The bread which I will give is my flesh. etc. Catholicque
Priests.


(...). 6. ^ers. 51. Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink
his blood, you shall have no life in you.

(...). 6. ^ers. 55. My flesh is meat truly, and my blood is, etc.

Whether we have changed the state of the Question, or not? And whether the
real presence was ever denied by Protestants? whether Protestants do not
falsely claim the term Spiritual? And whether all the terms of their
supper be not redeemed from them?
Fitzimon.
35. COncerning the first demand I having conceived, according to Philosophy,
and reason, that corporal and real, were not different, otherwise, then by only
conceit; I also supposed, it was all one to affirm, Christ to be realy
present, and corporaly, according as is supposed by all other writers, of what
profession soever they be. This, by M. Rider, is called a wrong, and deceit.
Next he says; The real presence was never denied by protestants, nor in
controversy betwixt Protestant, and Papist. What think you, Gentlemen?
whether was the name of Catholics, by verdict of Vincentius; disproofe of
supremacy, by verdict of the primative Fathers; the forged consent of the
ancient church, five hundred years after Christ to Protestantcie; or this
resolut affirmation that the real presence, was never denied or in
controversy, more full of shamelesnes, and inconsideration? I need not to
lingre in making this 9. The 9. and 10. untruth.
and 10. untruth, even to Protestants them selves, notoriouse, yea and odiouse.

Fox Acts and Monuments. page 1687
First, Ihon Fox says, of one of his martyrs, Ihon Lomas; not to have And D.
Perne, (Fox page 1257.) said: I deny not his presence, but his real and
corporal presence. Showing, as any other not out of his wit, that where there is
real presence, there also is corporal. Secondly Oecolampadius says; Absurdum
est si dicamus Christi corpus realiter in coena adesse; Oecolamp. libello de
verbis Domini, etc
It is absurd if we say the body of Christ to be realy in the supper. Fowerthly
M. Rider him self, aunswering the first, of the six articles by act of
parliament established, Caveat before the fowerth proof,
that there is Christ's real presence; says: this article is sufficiently
confuted. If real presence was never in controversy, or denied: how could
Lomas, and Perne, but believe it? How could it be, with Oecolampadius, said to
be absurd, to affirm it? How could M. Rider say that he denies it not, and
yet that he had confuted it? Let any friend of M. Riders but read Fox, of Ihon
Lambert, Frith, Tindal, Barn, Anne Askew, and all the rest of Foxes principal
martyrs, to inform M. Rider of this foul untruth: and if he being warned
thereof by them, yet will not reform it, chyde him in my behalf. Secondly, in
the other untruth, that I had changed the question: why is he not more
agreeable, in such accusation? Sometime he makes the state of the question to
be betwixt corporal, and spiritual; sometime, betwixt real, and figurative;
sometime, betwixt real, and spiritual. All is one with him spiritual and
figurative: but not with S. Paul, Hebr. 10.1. 1. Cor. 15.46. 1. Cor. 10.11.
granting the Jews had figurs and shadd owes in the owld testament, but the
only new testament to have things spiritual. Every thing with M. Rider that is
corporal, is suddenly denied to be spiritual: but not with S. Paul, saying: If
there be a corporal or natural body, there is also a spiritual.



Corporal, but also by not enduring the word, Spiritual, to be belonging to
that divine mystery: which hitherto few seem to have duly observed. I dowbt
not, by the grace of God, but to make it evident, even to the most slumbring
eyes, that they have no title or interest in either the corporal, or spiritual,
or faithful, or figurative, or Sacramental being in this mystery. Whereof now
let these two proofs serve for a taste. (...) difference (said the protestant
martyrs) between the faithful and papists concerning the sacrament is, that
the papists say, that Christ is corporaly under, or in the forms of bread and
wine: but the faithful say, that Christ is not there, nether corporaly nor
spiritualy. Next says Musculus: the bread is the body of Christ nether
naturaly, nor personaly, nor realy, nor corporaly, nor yet spiritualy, Vide n.
96.108.
nor figuratively, nor significatiuely: it remains after all these, that we
say the bread is the body of Christ, sacramentaly.

As for Sacramentaly, it also shall be recovered from them. What occasion had I
then to alter the question, as if Christ could not be said to be corporally in
the Sacrament, but thereby should be denied that he were spiritualy? or if he
were found to be spiritualy, thereby the protestant opinion should be favored,
or my opinion disaduantaged? S. August. l. 3. de doctrina Christiana c. 10.
Truly said S. Augustine: when the mind is preoccupated by any error, what
soever the scripture has so the contrary, they take it to be spoken
Figuratively. Which is verifyed in our adversaries, who being preoccupated by
error, do strain, and wrest, all words out of their natural signification,
by some figurative collusion, to serve their turns; especialy in affecting
such, as have dowbtfull and ambiguous significations, whether thy belong to
them or no, thereby to lurk unknown in darkness. As in our controversy, if any
as I said infer Christ to be Corporaly, and realy, present: they except
against it, if they can find, that any spiritual word or understanding, be
implied together therewith: as if forsooth Corporal and Spiritual cowld not in
any wise to consist together; but they, to whom nether of both belong, must not
be overthrown thereby, or by any of the rest that refuteth them. If any
suffrage of the Fathers testify the same, if they find the least mention of
figure, Sacrament, or sign, conjoined there withal; they seem to be well
defensed by such a target, inferring thereupon that no verity cowld be
together, both truth and figure, substance, and sacrament, body, and sign,
(although hundreds of assurances persuade the contrary, and that the same as I
said, is made a safeguard to their figure only, only signification only
representation. Such reasoning may some time breed tediousnes, but little
travail in refelling it: whereof if wisdom overcome the tediousnes, discretion
shall moderat the travail. Now at least appears how destitute their opinion
is of spiritualitie, and how pretending it hitherto in show was to take a
Joseph's cloak, to a deceitful cloaking of a synnfull dishonestie.

36. GEntlemen: you mistake utterly Christ's meaning, Turn back to the 3^. page
and place the four last lines, beginning The bread which I etc. as title to this
36. paragraph of M. Rider, and then read as here follows. Gentlemen: you
mistake. etc.
wresting Christ's words from the spiritual sense in which he spoke, to the
litterall sense which he never meant, ancient Fathers never taught, Primitive
Church of Christ for one thousand years at least after Christ's ascension never
knew or received. For the words and phrases be figurative and allegorical,
therefore the sense must be spiritual, not carnal.

For this is a general rule in Gods book, ancient Fathers, yea and in your
Popes Canons and glosses, that every figurative speech or phrase of Scripture
must be expounded spirituallie, not carnally or litterallie, as anon more
plainly you shall hear.

But that the simple be no longer seduced by your Roman doctrine, expounding
this 6. of John grammaticallie, and carnally, contrary to Christ's meaning,
constraining these places to prove your carnal presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, when there was no Sacrament then ordained. I will set down (GOD
willing) Christ's meaning truly and plainly which you shall not be able
either by Scriptures or ancient Fathers to contradict.

1 First I will plainly deliver the occasion why Christ used the Metaphor of
Bread, calling himself Bread.

2 Secondly, according to which of Christ's natures he is our living bread,
whether as he is man only; or God only; or as he is complete God and man.

3 Thirdly, how this bread must be taken and eaten, whether by the mouth of the
body or the mouth of the soul.

4 Fourthly, the fruit that comes to the true eaters thereof.

5 Lastly, the reasons shall be alleged out of Christ's own words, to prove
that your round Wafer-cakes upon your supposed hallowed Altars, are not that
true bread (Christ's flesh) which Christ here speaks of.

The first proof of Catholics for the Real presence, out of the 6. of S. Ihon.
36. THe 11. the 12. and 13. untruth, Fitzimon. The 11. 12. and 13. untruth.
are here suddenly obtruded to all men's eyes; That Christ never meant the
literal sense: that Christ's Church for a 1000. years never tawght it; That
every figurative speech must be expounded not litteraly. I might have added,
his saying that the phrases in this mystery be figurative, and allegorical;
That we are not able to contradict his expositions; That he will expound such
things as he promises. But, that the bulk be not to great, I promise to
dissemble the greatest part of his untruths. Nether will I proceed, but by
good proofs, against the former few untruths calculated. The first, that
Christ intended not the literal sense: is contradicted by Christ him self,
saying, (when he did give at his last supper, what here he promised) that it
was his body which was to be delivered, Mat. 26.1. Cor. 11.24. Mar. 14.24.
and (...) blood which was to be shedd: therefore, as not a figure, nor any body
figuratively, but literaly, and naturaly, was given for our sins; so no
figurative sense, but literal must have been intended by Christ. The second, is
to be testified, in all our controversy. The third is very absurd. Galat.
4.22.23. Genes. 16.15.21.
For S. Paul certifyed, that Abraham had two sonns: one by the handmayd, and
one by the free woman: but he by the handmayd was borne according to the
fleash, and he by the free wooman by repromission. Which says he, are
figuratively spoken.

Now if M. Riders words were not untrue; these words being Genesis, wherein the
literal history is related. Likewise whereas he says, that what soever Christ
promised, is to be received by faith; and whereas S. Paul here affirms the
son of the free woman, to have been by repromission: it should acording to
his wysdom follow, that such a son, was never borne but only by faith. Yea, if
to his former saying, you conioyne his saying a little before, that receiving by
faith is real receiving, and make one saying of both, that Christ's promises
are received by faith, and being so received are really received: it must
ensue; first that Abraham had his son Isaak really, yea and all his
posterity really, as soon as he believed faithfully the promises of our Lord;
secondly, that our bodies already have immortality really, and heavenly
glory, and all that we may expect at Gods hands, (if we have faith thereof) as
I said, already really. Yea, the punishments of hell being promised to the
wicked; by M. Riders saying, must be received by faith: and consequently,
contrary to all protestantcy, but not truth, the wicked may have faith; and
contrary to protestantcie, Esa. 29.13. Mat. 15.8. Mar. 7.6.
and also truth, the damned them selves must have faith likewise; seeing they
receive the punishments promised to them by Christ. Is not this learned
doctrine? would any old woman knowing her prayers but in latin transgress so
much against faith and religion?

1. Occasion.
The question was moved by some Belli-gods that tasted of Christ's banquet, and
bounty (in feeding five thousand men with five loaves and two fishes) whether
Moises or Christ were the more excellent and liberal in feeding men,

Rider.
37. FIrst, they commend Moises from the greatness of his place and person,
being Gods Lieutenant to conduct Israel out of Egypt.

2. Secondly, they commend their Manna from the place whence it came, which was
the heavens as they supposed.

3 Thirdly, they commend the bread from the Virtue of it; which was, it fed
their Fathers in the dry sandy and barren wilderness, and saved them from
famine, and therefore they thought that no man was greater then Moises, no bread
to be compared with Manna:

Now Christ by way of opposition and comparison, confutes them: opposing God to
Moises, and himself to Manna:

1. First, denies that Moises was the giver of that Manna; but that God was
the author, Moises only the Minister.

2 Secondly, that it came not from the eternal kingdom of God, which is
properly called heaven, but from the visible clouds improperly called heaven.

3 Thirdly, Christ denies Manna to be the true bread, because it only
preserved life temporal, but could not give it: but this bread (Christ) does
not only give life corporal, but also life spiritual in the kingdom of
grace, and life eternal in the kingdom of glory.

4 Fourthlie, this bread Manna ceased when they came into Canaan, and could no
more be found: Joshua 5.12.
but this bread (Christ) does feed us here in this earthly wilderness, and
reigns for ever with his triumphant Church in our everlasting and glorious
Canaan the kingdom of heaven.

5 This bread Manna, and so all corporal meats when they have fed the body,
they have performed their office, they perish without yielding profit to the
soul: Ioh. 6.54.
but this bread of life (Christ) is the true btead, which once being received
into the soul, does not only assure and give unto it eternal life, but also
to the body like assurance of resurrection and salvation, so that the soul
must first feed on Christ, before the body can have any benefit by Christ:
contrary to your doctrine, which is, that the body must first feed on Christ
carnally, then the soul shall be thereby fed spiritually.

And because they were so addicted in Moises time to Manna: in Christ's time to
his miraculous loaves, respecting the feeding of their bodies, not the feeding
of their souls: Therefore Christ dehorted them from food corporal to food
spiritual: Labor not (says he) for the meat that perishes, Ioh. 6.27.
but for the meat that endures to everlasting life, which the son of man
shall give unto you, etc. And thus much touching the occasion, why Christ is
said to be the true bread of life, which as far excelled Manna, as the
soul the body: life death: eternity time: and heaven earth.

NOw let us see according to which of Christ's natures, 3. Point.
he is called our living Bread, whether according to his manhood or godhead, or
both. Christ calls this bread his flesh, and Christ and his flesh are al one,
and therefore Christ and his flesh are all one and the same bread; and as our
bodies are fed with materiel bread, so are our souls fed with the flesh of
Christ, and this flesh he will give for the life of the world, which flesh is
not Christ's body separated from his soul (as some of you imagine and
untruely teach) nor Christ's body and soul separated from his divinity but
even his quickninge flesh, which being personally united to his eternal
spirit, was by the same given for the life of the world, not corporally and
really in the Sacrament as you untruly teach: But in the sacrifice of his body
and blood once on the cross, as the Scriptures record: for the flesh of Christ
profits not, but as it is made quickening by the spirit. Neither do we
participate the life of his spirit, but as it is communicated unto us by his
flesh, by which we are made flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone: as has
bin showed before. Which holy mystery is represented unto us in the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, and the truth thereof assured, and sealed in the due
administration and receiving of the same.

So this true bread (spoken of in the sixth of John) which has this spiritual
quickening and nour^shing power, is complete Christ, God and man, with all his
soul saving merits. And neither Manna in the wilderness: nor your round Wafer
cakes upon your supposed hallowed Altars. Manna it could not be, for it ceased
many hundred years before. Your imagined and transnatured bread it could not
be, because the Sacrament was not then instituted. And so to the third point.

The manner how this true bread (Christ) must be eaten.
3. Point.
THe meat is spiritual, and therefore the manner of eating must not be
corporal; for such as is the meat, such must be the mouth: but the meat is
spiritual, therefore the mouth must be spiritual, as before you have heard,
Fide non dente, In the epistle to the Reader.
etc. which thing being there handled before out of holy Scripture, Fathers, and
your Popes Canons, I will only refer you thither, where you may (unless
you be malcontents) be fully satisfied toucheing the true manner of eating
Christ: where you may find proved out of Gods book, that coming to Christ,
believing in Christ, abiding in Christ, dwelling in Christ, and to be clad with
Christ, and to eat Christ, are all one, so that out of every one you might
frame this or the like unanswerable argument.

How sacred Scriptures are exorbitantly depraved?
Fitzimon.
37. ALas! what misery, and impiety, is every line fraught with all, in this
his exposition? Considre, but how many falsifications of the text, are here
used. First that some belly-gods had moved question, whether Moises, or Christ,
were more liberal in feeding men. There is no such matter. Nether also their
commending of Moises greatness. For only, Christ lightly mentioned him, the
residue not thinking of him, by owght appearing in Scripture. Nether do they
commend the bread from the virtue of it, but only tell, that their Forfathers
had eaten thereof, without any further relation. Nether does Christ deny Manna,
to be true bread, for there is no such word. The fowrtenth untruth, The 14.
untruth.
(besyd others wincked at) shall be registered by M. Rider against him self. Here
he says, that our doctrine is, that the body must first feed on Christ
corporaly (so it should be, to approach to truth) then the soul shall be thereby
fedd spiritualy. How is this saying suitable to these words in his preface: You
teach the communicants to receive Christ with their mowthes corporaly not with
their faith spiritualy? You make your self ridiculous by such palpable
contradiction: that we teach, and that we do not teach, Christ to be received
spiritualy: that we teach only corporaly, and yet that we teach first
corporaly, and after spiritualy. Would not any other display all the figurs of
rhetoric, against this figure of a learned man?

The 15. untruth.
Christ would receive a bloody spear into his side, before man's sin could be
satisfied. This spear to have pierced Christ, after his death, and not when
his fleash was quickened by his Spirit, is testified by S. Ihon, saying: that he
had then delivered up his Spirit: Joan. 19. a v. 31. ad 35.
the Jews had informed Pilat of his death: the Sowldiours, Vt viderunt eum iam
mortuum, non fregerunt eius crura. Sed vnus militum lancea latus eius aperuit;
when they beheld him dead they did not break his thighs. But one of the
Sowldiours with a lance opened his side. Now make up these two together: that
Christ's fleash withowt his Spirit proffiteth nothing: and yet that man's sin
cowld not be satisfied, but after Christ's fleashe was separated from his
Spirit, and then pierced. I never in my life, nor I think any other, noted
such implications before in any book hitherto printed.

what is spiritual can not be received by a corporal manner. Was there ever any
thing more contrary to Divinity, philosophy, or reason? First, faith is
spiritual: yet it is by hearing; Romans 10.17.
which is a corporal manner. Regeneration is spiritual: yet it is by manner of a
corporal washing. Yea God is a most spiritual Spirit; yet the Apostle
commands us to bear him in our bodies. 1. Cor. 6.
Contrarywyse, Christ's birth, his body made invisible, his issueing out of his
sepulcher, his entering among his shut disciples, walking on the sea, his
ascension, were verlye corporal; yet the manner was not corporal, but spiritual.
So that nether spiritual gifts are continualy conjoined with spiritual manners,
but often with corporal; and corporal gifts, often conioiyned with spiritual
manners. The soul of man is a spiritual form and not material: and yet it is
received corporaly, and into a corporal body. And the damned spirits being
spiritual creaturs, yet they are tormented, not with a spiritual but with a
corporal fire. 1. Corinthians. 6.
Lastly S. Paul says: You are bowght with a great price, glorify and bear God
in your bodies. So that God him self, which is the most spiritual of all
spirits, may be borne in our bodies and not only in our sowls. And when is he
to be said, borne in our bodies, so much as when we receue the B. Sacrament of
his fleash and blood, to which he is united by his divinity personaly? Caveat
in the preface.
Now says he, the meat is spiritual, and therefore the mowth owght also to be
spiritual, as before is heard and handled; that we may have satisfaction,
unless we may be malcontents. Good Jesus, what expectation might this man
have, that his own favorers would ever tolerat such dissimulation? In the
place where unto he refers us, for this satisfaction; this is all the proof
out of holy Scripture, Fathers, and Canons, that is there found: Augustine
showing the manner how Christ is to be eaten in the Sacrament, sower times
together says spiritualiter, spiritualie, spiritualie. One word more, there is
not either of Scripture, Father, or Canon, to prove, that the mowth to receive
every spiritual gift, ought only to be spiritual.

First, hereby, how does he overthrow his former speeches, S. August. c. 9.
contra aduersarium legis and prophet.
Whereunto I add out of S. Augustine, that we should receive, fideli cord, and
ore; with faithful heart and mowthe. Behold in plain and literal manner,
declared, that as to the heart, so to the mowth, does belong to receive Christ.
Secondly out of S. Leo: Hoc enim ore sumitur, quod fide creditur; this is
received by mowth, S. Leo Sermon. 6. de Ieiunio. Tertull. l. de resurrectione
Carnis.
which is believed by heart. Thirdly by Tertullian, Caro corpore and sanguine
Christi vescitur, vt anima de Deo saginetur, the fleash is fedd by the body and
blood of Christ, that the soul might be fatned by God. Is not here declared
without requirie, that we exclud not spiritual receiving, by affirming corporal
receiving? Are not both affirmed requisite, and nether to be omitted?

Good M. Rider spare your own reputation, so much engaged in this discourse,
that unless the residue supply defects, and enormities here escaped, it is not
possible but the State will think it belonging to their wysdoms, to testify
that they dislyke your defense of their opinion. Defense, wherein so many
strange doctrins are affirmed to be in S. Ihons gospel, which never any had yet
perceived. Defense, wherein M. Rider is made every foot to disprove, and refell
him self. Defense, wherein wonderful promises are made of confuting us, when
in truth, it confirms all our doctrine. For you shall not lykely mistake any
one earnest point of his replye, but when you find him vehemently seeming to
overthrow us, then you shall discover him to be as a Senacharib, 4. Reg. 19.
Judith. 6. 2. Machab. 8.
Holosernes, and Nicanor, promising to ruin us, and inuiting peoples
considerations to buy our doctrine at the rate of nynty for one talent, when we
are most safe from inconvenience, and he nearest to his destruction: as Nicanor
invited merchants to buy Israelits by nyntie for one talent, when they were
most secure from his sale, and rather to recover their money who intended to
buy them; and he by them spedely to be discumfited, and confounded. How many
such promises does he make, saying: I will show and discover that you have
forsaken the verity of Christ's gospel: the reader shall easily perceive before
the end of this treatise that this your opinion was never tawght by Christ: I
will show that you wrong your selves, forgett your grounds of learning, that
your proof is your disproofe, that you never read but Enchiridions and never
read the Fathers them selves, that here you change, that there you dismember,
etc.? When God knows he shows nothing, but the turpitude, and confusion of
his profession: Genes. 9.21.
as Noe when he was dronken showed the dishonestie of his body, whereby one of
his own children, although wickedly, derided him. How aptly does S. Augustine
admonish such a promiser, saying: Ostende promissa: S. Augustine l. 3. con.
Max. c. 26.
quid pergis in vacuo? quid deludis expectationem nostram? nec exhibes
pollicitationem tuam? multiplicas verba non necessaria, vt necessaria occupes
spatia. Show your promises why proceed you in vacuitie? why delude you our
expectation? why effect you not your protestation? you multiply needless
words, to wast needful time?

Rider. Ioh. 6.56.35.
38. Whosoever dwells in Christ and Christ in them, only eats Christ's flesh
and drinks Christ's blood. But the true believers only dwell in Christ and
Christ in them: therefore the true beleuers only eat Christ's flesh and
drink Christ's blood.

Ioh. 6.56. Ephe. 3.17.
The proposition is Christ's own words, of which it were damnable to doubt. The
assumption is Paul's. Let Christ dwell in your hearts by faith: therefore the
conclusion cannot be denied. And so to the fourth.

Whether M. Riders unanswerable argument, be not answerable even by a child,
to M. Riders infamy.
Fitzimon.
38. TO manifest that this argument is easy to produce M. Riders infamy, I
deny your mayor; as being the 16. untruth, The 16. untruth. Joan. 6.56. Joan.
14.11.
by express addition, and alteration of the text. the words are; He that
eats my flesh and drinks my blood remains in me, and I in him. Why then
have you added the word, only? why had you noe terror by the words of the
Apocalips, Apoc. vlt.
so to violat Gods sacred truth: and that, to auowche a palpable and manifest
error? For Christ says; Do not you believe that I am in my Father, and my
Father is in me? And who is so erroneous, as to say, that God the Father does
eat the fleash, and drink the blood of Christ? and that only? will you
affirm, that any can more dwell in Christ, then his Father, yet dare you not
mantayne, that his Father communicates the body and blood of Christ. Recant
therefore, and that with shame, and say, that they that dwell in Christ and
Christ in them, do not only eat his fleash, and drink his blood. The minor
also is false; that the true believers only dwell in Christ, Wh takerus in
controuer. de Sacra Scriptura. page 666. 1. Cor. 13.12.
and Christ in them. For in heaven, even by the confession of Whitaker,
belief enters not but, all are blissed by seeing face to face: Christ
dwells in all, and all in him; and also God the Father, and holy Ghost do
dwell in him; who may not be said to have belief in him.

The conclusion is likewise false, by haueing a fowerth term, Only; which
should not have been in the premises. I leave to thy equitable censure,
indifferent protestant, whether I might not lawfully lawnche into all
rhethorical tropes against such unanswerable arguments of such a disputer.
Truly, my devotion would serve me, not to spare, at least such impiety toward
Gods word: but I refrain, that by moderat style, the truth may shine to thy
mind the brighter: as the son does more plainly appear in calm then
troubled water. Besyd all that is produced, consider how in the opinion of M.
Rider, the sixth chapter of S. Ihon, not treating of the B. Sacrament; his mayor
proposition should by him self, be acknowledged impertine^t. But what cares
(or knows) he, what is pertinent or not?

The fruit and profit that redoundes to the true eaters of this bread of life,
which is Christ.
39. Many rich benefits we have by eating Christ in the manner aforesaid:
Rider.
that is, by apprehending, applying, 4. Point. Ioh. 6.44.54.50.51.
and appropriating unto us whole Christ with his benefits, I will only name
one or two, and refer you for the rest to sixth of Ihon. He that eats this
bread, I will raise him up at the last day to life (concerning his body,) and
he shall never die but live for ever, (concerning his soul.)

What the benefits are of the protestant communion. And how they frustrat all
Sacraments.
39. ALl benefits to be received by protestant communion, Fitzimon.
are here drawn to two; The first, resurrection of the body; the second,
everlasting life of the soul. He nether tells you, whether this shall happen
by virtue of your receiving, or not by virtue thereof; or only by grateful gift
and reward of God. Concerning the resurrection of the body, I crave delay to
reveal what Protestants profess and believe thereof, till I treat in the
examination of the Creed, the article of the resurrection of the dead, in the
20. number, of the foresaid examination. But here let al Christians Catholics
and Protestants note, that when by pretense of reformations, five sacraments
were abolished, and two only of Communion, and Baptism retained; the next
degree to have been, to deny any fruict belonging to either of these two. So
that they allow them only to be bare external signs, in them selves, without
any power to sanctify. Of many proofs, I will produce but these apparent. It
was, (says Zuinglius, the author of Englands persuasion, Zuingl. tom. 2. de
bapt. fol. 70.
) a great error of the owld Doctors, that they supposed the external water of
Baptism to he of any value toward the purgeing of sin. And Luther affirms
it to be, Luth. de Capti. Babil. Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 4. n. 17. 23. Beza 1.
Cor. c. 10. n. 3. Calu. and Beza in 1 Cor. 10. v. 2.3.

Musscul. in locis. c. 373. Calu. Instit. l. 4. c. 18. n. 12.

Zuing. to. 2. fol. 563. 564. Sloidan. lib. 10. fol. 152. Buchan. hist. Scot.
l. 15. page 523. Benedict. Aretius 2. part. problem. fol. 319. Bernard.
Lutzenburg. in Catal. her. l. 1. c. 29. Fox. Act. page 70.

Zuing. tom. 2. resp. ad Luth. conf. fol. 477. Idem fol. 43.

Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 14, n. 14. In Ioa. 6. v. 54. Beza epist. Theol. 65.
fol. 285.

Mart. in defens. co^tra Gardin. par. 2. reg. 5. page 618. par. 3. page 683.


but an external sign to make us remember Gods promises Calvin, and Beza,
consent to the same. And the Anabaptists, ipso facto, do omit Baptism toward
children, as unprofitable.

Likewise for Communion, they agree commonly that it is no Buchananus relates.
And in other places, they stand without all regard or reverence, to receive
their communion; As to testify, they should not adore that, which they
acknowledge to be but an image, figure, or representation, least they should
break the commandment, forbidding to adore (as they translate) images. And
Barlowe in the sum of the conference before the K. Majesty, page 95.
confesses, the vicar of Ratisdal to have dealt the bread out of a basket,
every man putting in his hand, and taking out a piece, etc. vide number. 68. This
disabling of this sacrament, began first from Almaricus, whom Fox calls a
worthy learned man: who says, that the body of Christ is no otherwise in the
sacrament, then in any other bread. Zuinglius says it, to be only, as the
Emperor is in his banner. He again, Calvin, Beza, P. Martyr, Jewel, and now
most protestants of their followers affirm it, to be no otherwise in the
sacrament then in a sermon, saying; Nihilo magis habetur ex sacramentis, quam
verbis, It is no more had by sacraments, then by words. Neque vereor dicere
multo etiam etc. I fear not, says P. Martyr, to affirm, that we come to the
receiving of Christ's body much more by words, then by sacraments. Calu. in 1.
Cor. c. 11. v. 24.
So that, says Calvin, if otherwise we were myndfull of Christ's death, this
healp were superfluous. And this is common to all sacraments, for they are
healpes of our infirmity.

What Protestants hearing their preachers magnify in words with the teethe
and mowthe of the soul, and arms of faith, and imbracement of heart, we eat,
devour, and enjoy Christ with all his sowle-sauing merits, with all benifits
of his passion, sealing all his promises unto us, and giving us interest,
title, and right, by an effectual, and infallible calling, to eternal bliss,
and such other seducing benedictions frequented in sermons) that would ever
imagine by such dilusions, he were a leading, to esteem as basely of this
Sacrament, as of the void ceremonies of Jews; as of any other bread; as of a
needles memorial; of a bare representation, as of a sermon etc. or that it
should be as fruictles, as the sacraments of the owld testament, Galat. 4.9.
which S. Paul terms; Infirma and egena elementa, weak and poor elements.
Or as the English bibles translate, weak and beggarly ordonances? Against
which disordre and deformation of Reformers, Hebr. 10.28.
the said Apostle worthily disputes, saying; A man making frustrat the law of
Moises, is therefore adjudged to death by the verdict of 2. or 3. witnesses. How
much more deserves he more extreme punishments, which thus treads the Son
of God under foot.

Vide Petr. Mart. in 1. Cor. c. 10. u. 1 2.
What then should hinder me to grant all this to be true of their sacrament?
considering that I find the Manna of the Jews, much more lively expressing
and representing Christ, by raining down from heaven, in a miraculous manner,
so as it was wondered at by the Jews, which had all sweetness of delitesomnes,
was very white; whereas the communion bread retayning still his nature, came from
the earth, without all miraculous manner to be wondered at, has only the taste of
bread, sometimes also mowldie, and is not of the whytest; and consequently not
so convenient to represent, the descending of the Messiah our Saluioure among
mankind, his wonderful incarnation and life, his delytesome feeding our
sowles, his innocence, as the former representation Manna; yea I report me to
all indifferent wysdomes, whether it be not rather far inferior, in way of
signification (which by protestants is called the chief life of Sacraments)
thereunto. Now then, do not marvel, good reader, that M. Rider dilated not
unto thee, how by communion thou art to have resurrection of the fleash, and
everlasting life of the soul: for it is sufficient in his mind to give the
great promises, painted words, sweet benedictions, to captiuat thy soul; and
in effect to bestow only on thee a piece of bread, extolled against truth to
make thee leave the true bread of life, and dispraysed as a sacrament
instituted by Christ, to euacuat the new testament; praised as a bigg shadow,
to make thee forsake and misbeleeue the substance of Christ's body, and
dispraysed as a substantial healpe, to frustrat thy salvation. Whereupon I
remitt you to the 63. number, to have a pertinent relation of S. Epiphanius.

Rider.
40. But an opposition being made betwixt this true bread Christ and this
Sacramental bread, (as was betwixt Christ and Manna,) it will be clear, (nay
impossible) that your consecrated bread should be the bread of life which is
spoken of in the sixth of Ihon:

1 Your consecrated bread never came from the heaven of heavens: therefore it
is not the true bread of life spoken of in this place.

2 All that eat of this true bread (Christ) are saved, but many that eat of
your Sacramental bread are damned: therefore it is not that bread spoken of in
the sixth of John.

3 Your bread only enters the bodily mouth, and is received into the
stomach of the body, and so passes the way of all excrements: and therefore
is not the true bread.

4 Your bread cannot for ever preserve temporal life, much less give it, but
not at all life eternal: and therefore it is not the true bread of life spoken
of in this sixth of John.

Whether there be any opposition betwixt our Sacrament, and Christ. And
whether by entering our stomaches, Christ be payned, or hurt.
40. Our consecrated bread, after consecration, is Christ: and therefore is the
true bread spoken of in this place. Fitzimon.
And salvation is gotten only by him, whom we eat, and by no other devotion so
much as by eating him. Whereby it is said, they that eat him, shall have life
everlasting, viz. as by a most principal mean to come thereto. Yet diverse eat
him unworthily to their damnation; other after eating deprive them selves from
the benifit of him by new wickedness: to whom may be said; Ozec 13.9.
their salvation is by him, their damnation by them selves. I pray let us as
well examine these said oppositions, and your holy supper. Came your supper from
heaven? Are all that eat of it saved? Are all receauers thereof immortal. I
pray you good Sir, tell us of one only, that is assuredly saved of your sort,
or immortal, by your Lords supper. Nay, how can you affirm conformably to your
sayings in the next precedent number, that any have help or benifit thereby,
unless they were forgetful of their faith? But you will say, never thelesse
where is any answer to that objection: your bread enters the mouth, passes
the stomach, departs with other excrements, and therefore not Christ? I answer
thereto, that it is not very Christian, to think that Christ after his
resurrection has a mortal body; and that it is a conceit altogether
Capharnaical, to suppose he is eaten in so gross a manner as by you is
specified. Our Sacrament therefore, which is Christ, remains realy in us during
the remaining of the form of bread intierly, which forms by the heat of our
stomachs, being digested, Christ after pouring his grace into our soul,
cease realy to be in us. And this aunswear may suffice any Christian mind.

I will here also wynke at several untruths, for breuites sake, and axamin
further. Nether let any one maruayle that I am very succinct in treating the
foresaid point, Origin. hom. 9. and 13. in Leuitic. Hebr. cap. 5.

S. August. sermon. 46. de verbis. De Ciu l. 10. c. 6. In Ps. 39, lib. 50. hom.
42. Tra. 11. in Joan.


how long Christ remains in the receauers; because I imitate the primative
Fathers saying: Non immoremur in his, quae scientibus nota sunt, and
ignorantibus patere non possunt; Let us not be prolix in such things, as are
known to the believers, and can be notifyed to the ignorant. This made S.
Paul, mentioning the sacrifice of Melchisedech, to have straight abrupted it,
as not to be diuulgated to faithles conceyts. This made S. Augustine sildome to
name otherwise, this mystery, then the Sacrament known to the faithful.

41. Rider. Ioh. 6.54.50.
Now seeing that Christ had not all this time when he made this sermon in the
sixth of John, ordained his last Super; and therefore not the bread in the
Supper: And seeing this bread can neither assure the body of the receivers of
resurrection, nor their souls of salvation, it cannot be that this bread in
the Sacrament was the same that Christ spoke of in John. And therefore your
proofs brought to prove your carnal presence of Christ by these texts, be
impertinent, sauouring (by your leave) of small reading in the Fathers, and
less understanding in the Scriptures.

But that all men that read this, may see your errors, and so beware of your
new dangerous doctrine, I will bring Augustine and other Fathers, to disprooue
you in plain terms for misalleadging these texts.

Augustine brings forth (as it were upon a stage) the three Evangelists
Matthew, Mark, and Luke, delivering the doctrine of the Sacrament: Aug. Tomo
quart. de consensu Euangelistarum: lib. 3. Cap. 1. Math. 26. Mark 14. Luke 22.
Ioh. 6. These three Euang. handled (as it were) the body of Christ. John the
soul and divinity of Christ.

Lyra in psalm. 110.


but when he came to John he says: Johannes autem de corpore and sanguine
Domini hoc in loco nihil dixit: John in the 6. of his gospel spoke nothing of
the Lords body and blood. I wonder with what face you can brag to follow the
fathers, and no men nor sect more opposite to their faith and facts then you.
There Aug. has cract your credit, salve it how you can. And your own Doctor
Lyra condemns your erroneous opinion which will apply these as spoken of the
Sacrament: his words be these; Nihil direct pertinet ad Sacramentalem vel
corporalem manducationem, hoc verbum: Nisi manducaueritis, etc. Nam hoc verbum
fuit dictum diu antequam Sacramentum Eucharistiae fuerit institutum. This
saying of Christ (unless you eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his
blood) does nothing directly appertain to the Sacramental or corporal eating
of Christ in the Sacrament. For Christ spoke this long before he ordained this
Sacrament. Therefore no sound argument, (says he) can be grounded upon that
litteral exposition of the Sacramental communion, and he gives a reason
vnaunswereable. Nam primo debet existere in rerum natura. For first the
Sacrament must be ordained, before it can be a Sacrament. But you here would
have Christ's carnal presence in the Sacrament before it be a Sacrament. And
then Lyra concludes. De Eucharistia Sacramentali qu^ nondum fuit tam alta
sententia proferri non potuit, quae dicitur. Nisi manducaueritis, etc.

Therefore of this place, there can be made no good sufficient argument,
touching the sacramental communion, unless (says he) some curious
Hereticqu^^ will take these words spoken by Christ to be spoken propheticallie.

Quod nondum est, no^ datur priuilegium.
Now says your own Doctor, if you take this chapter of the sixth of John
litterallie (as you do) then it is impossible and absurd, because you will have
a carnal presence in the Sacrament, before there be a Sacrament; if
prophetically, then your own champion calls you curious Heretics. Lyra.
eodem loco. Luc. 23.41.
And to prove your litterall exposition, gross, false, and absurd, he
produces against you two famous examples: the first of the Thief on the
cross, who by his lively faith performed the tenor of this text, yet never
communicated Sacramentallie; And Judas, who communicated under both kinds, and
yet failed in the meaning of this precept. Lib. 4. did. 9.
And then shuts up the mouths of all Litteralists and Heretics that hold this
spoken of the Sacrament, alleging Thomas Aquinas his draught out of
Augustine, Non manducans manducat, and manducans non manducat. He that eats
not Sacramentally, may yet eat Christ spiritually by faith, and so did the
Thief on the Cross, and was saved. Some eat the Sacramental bread but not
Christ, (which is the inward grace of the Sacrament:) as Judas did and was
damned.

Many more Fathers shall you have to second these against you if these satisfy
you not.
Thus you are condemned by two learned Fathers, that you ignorantly, or
maliciously, or both, mistake and misapplie the sixth of John, to speak of the
Sacrament before the Sacrament was instituted.

Whether Christ treated of the Eucharist in the 6. chap. of S. Ihon.
Fitzimon. In his Rescript.
41. I Am threatened by M. Rider, that unless I answer this matter well, I am
overthrown horse and foot. I will therefore begynn thus, saying, that S.
Augustine, and Lyra, are untruly alleged. Indeed, S. Augustine speaking of the
time immediately before Christ's passion, August. tom. 4. de Consen. Euan. l. 3.
c. 1.
says; Ioannes autem de corpore and sanguine Domini, hoc loco nihil dixit: But
Ihon in this place says nothing of the body and blood of our Lord. These
words added by M. Rider, [sixt of his gospell] are the text of a cunning
misreporter, not of S. Augustine. He gives a reason, why S. Ihon treated not of
the body and blood of our Lord, in this place; because, says he, amply he
treated thereof before. Is this, Augustine to deny, or affirm, that S. Ihon
treated of the body and blood of Christ in the sixth chapter? For unless he
treated in the sixth chapter only, S. Augustins words that he had treated
thereof amply before (in no other place they being specified) can not be verifyed.

Now, to Lyra. Tell posterity, I request you, in your next writing, that you
had mistaken Lyra for one Mathias Dornick, who carpeth by replies at the
additio^s of Paul Burgensis annected to Lyra. Your own cited book will
inform you thereof before the prologue to the psalms, and else wheare. The
sword of Goliath again, shall cut his own head: I mean, that the authors by
you alleged, shall testify against you. Lyra then says, even upon the 6. of
S. Ihon; Postquam egit de pane spirituali qui est verbum, Lyra in Cap. 6. Joan.
hic consequenter agit de pane spirituali qui est sacramentum. After that he
had discoursed of the spiritual bread, which is the word; here he handles the
spiritual bread which is the Sacrament. Again: Ne crederent, quod caro eius
contineretur in sacramento Eucharistiae sicut in signo, ideo hoc remouet
dicens, caro mea vere est cibus, etc. Least they should believe, that his
fleash were contained in the Eucharist, as in a sign, therefore he preuenteth
that, saying, my fleash is meat indeed. Again: quia hic sumitur realiter non
figurative; here it is taken realy, says he, and not figuratively. After he
tells you, that they are heretics who affirm, it to be, tantummodo sicut in
signo, only as in a sign. Let this suffice to know, to whom might by another
be said; De mendacio ineruditionis tuae confundere; Eccli. 7.
be ashamed at the falsehood of your ignorance. For forgerie is, opprobrium
nequam in homine, a badd reproache to any man; but is incident principaly to
the unlearned, Eccli. 34.
in ore indisciplinatorum assidue erit.

As here it is manifest, three great untruths are heaped together; First by
unlearned mistaking S. Augustins words being of what was delivered, belonging
only to the immediate action of Christ before his passion: Secondly, by addition
of words to S. Augustins speech: Thirdly by unlearned mistaking Lyra for
another. Notwithstanding I will score up but the 17. untruth, which was by
badd intention, and only to misinforme, inserted. For the point, all
catholics, and most principal protestants acknowledge, that Christ in S. Ihon
chapter 6. treated of the Sacrament: But, by way of premonition, anticipation,
or instruction, (as was his wont, toward the greatest mysteries, of his
passion, ascension, coming of the holy Ghost, etc.) and not by institution. It
being clear among Catholics, I will auerr it by protestants. Martyr. in
defens. Eucha. Con. Gardin. par. 3. page 644. 547. Bucer. in c. 6. Joan. and in
cap 26. Math. Ecpenceus in Apolog.
That (says Peter Martyr) which Christ promised in the sixth of Ihon, that he
performed in the last supper. Martin Bucer, upon the very sixth of Ihon, and
else where, craves pardon of God, that ever he had bewitched any with your
opinion, that Christ handled not his true, real, and corporal being, (by way of
premonition) in this Chapter. Like repentance had also Peter Martyr, for some
time being of your imagination. As also had Oecolampadius by his own
testimony, Oecolamp. ad Land. Hess. 1529.

Feuard. in pref. com. in Ruth.

Vide in examine symboli. n. 7.

Calu. con. Heshusium. Beza in Creophagia. Tygurenses con. test. Brency.
Micomius in S. Marc. page 150. Cureus in Spongia. Daneus con. Selneccerum.

Cautier page 186. etc. Caveat a little before.


saying: Vtinam pri^ceps illustrissime, abscissa fuisset mihi haec dextera, cum
primum inciperem de negotio Coenae Dominicae quicquam scribere: I would, most
excellent prince, that this right hand of mine had been chopped off, when I
began first to write owght of the Lords supper. Feuardent reports, that
Calvin misbeleeued S. Ihon to have been author of this sixth chapter, because
it was to clear against his imagination. Yet Calvin him self in his book
against Heshusius approves it to treat of the Sacrament* So does Beza; The
ministers of Zurick, Miconius, Cureus, Daneus, Cautier, etc. So lastly does
most clearly M. Rider not long before, against him self, saying: who soever
dwell in Christ, and Christ in them, only eat Christ's fleash, and drinck
Christ's blood. Which says he, (being Christ's words in the sixth of Ihon, verse
56.) it were damnable to doubt of them. Then suerly it can not be but damnable
to doubt of Christ's mentioning the Sacrament in the sixth of Ihon, whereby he is
eaten of us, dwells in us, and we in him.

I trust, you will not deny now, to have been answered, to S. August. and Lyra
contradicts your information, your brethren confute it, and your self
disprove it: then which what fowler disgrace could happen to a writer? But I
will make it yet fowler, by ingadgeing your precious Iuels credit, Iwels reply
against Harding art. 5. Diuisione 3. page 323.
whether Christ did not mention the eating of his flesh in the 6. of S. Ihon or
not; he co^fidently saying: That Christ in the sixth of S. Ihon speaks of the
spiritual eating by faith, by which his very fleash and very blood indeed, and
verily is eaten and drunken. Notwithstanding we say that Christ afterward in
his last supper unto the same spiritual eating, added also an owtward
sacrament, or figure. Behold his assurance that Christ did here treat of
eating Christ, and that his speech here belongs, to that he after ordained.

Rider. You are not only taxed by Aug. to be ignorant in the circumstance of
the text, but also in the sense of the text which is a gross thing in divines.
42. Now you shall hear Augustine tell you, that this sixth of John is to be
taken figuratiuelie, and allegoricallie and therefore spirituallie, meaning
that the speeches and phrases which Christ used be borrowed and translated from
the body to the mind, from eating and drinking to believing, from chamming
with the teeth, to the believing with the heart. So that what eating and
drinking is to the body, that believing is to the soul. And as bread and
flesh be meat corporal for the body; so Christ our bread is made spiritual
for the soul. And as corporal meats are taken with the corporal mouth, so
are spiritual meats (Christ crucified with all his benefits) received with
faith, the mouth of the soul. And therefore to teach all posterities how to
expound these words of Christ, he gives a general rule perpetually to be
observed in GODS church: Saying: De doct. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 16.
Si praeceptiua locutio est, etc. If the Scriptures seem to command an
horrible or vile fact, the speech is figurative: The second proof out of the
sixth of John.
and then alleges your second proof that you bring out of the sixth of John,
for example. Except you eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his
blood, ye shall have no life in you. Facinus and flagitium videtur iubere,
Christ (in this place) seems to command a wicked and horrible act. Figura est
ergo, It is therefore a figurative speech, commanding us to keep in mind that
his flesh was crucified and tormented for us. Now examine Augustines
exposition. To eat corporally, reallie, and substantiallie Christ's flesh with
our material mouths, and to drink his precious, substantial, real blood with
our bodily lips, is a horrible thing. Therefore Christ's words be figurative.
So that by Augustines own words your litterall sense and carnal presence is
wicked and horrible, howsoever you cloak it with fained titles, to blind the
eyes and deceive the hearts of simple Catholics.

And if you would but read the fifth chapter of the foresaid book; you should
see his Christian caveat he gives to Gods Church touching this point. In
principio cauendu^ est ne figurata^ locutione^ ad littera^ accipias, etc. First
of all, you must beware that you take not a figurative speech according to the
letter: his reason follows, for the letter, (that is, the litterall sense)
kills. But the spirit, that is, the spiritual sense) gives life. For when
we take the figurative speech for a proper speech, we make the sense carnal,
neither is there any thing more fitly called the death of the soul.

Thus you see Aug. teaches (if you would learn) that if the speech be proper;
the sense must be litterall and carnal: but if it be figurative, it must be
mystical and spiritual: and alleges this your own text for the same. So I
would wish you either follow Augustines doctrine, or else cease to use
Augustines and the rest of the Fathers names: for in usurping their names, and
perverting their doctrine, you abuse the Fathers, and deceive the Catholics.
Your Bernard also in later times condemns your absurd and unchristianlike
exposition of this your own text, Ber. Sermon. 33. inps. Qui habitat. Fol. 68.
Col. 2.
Unless you eat the flesh of Christ, etc. He asks the question. Quid aute^
est manducare eius carnem, and bibere sanguinem? nisi communicare passionibus
eius, and eam conuersationem imitari quam gessit in carne: What is to eat
Christ's flesh and drink his blood? but to communicate with his passions, and
to imitate his holy conversation in the flesh. And then follows: Vnde and
hoc designat illibatum illud Altaris Sacramentum. vbi Dominicu^ corpus
accipimus: vt sicut videtur illa panis forma in nos intrare: sic nouerimus eam
quam in terris habuit conuersationem, ipsum intrare in nos, ad habitandum per
fidem in cordibus nostris. Whence also this (text) signifies that pure
Sacrament of the Altar, where we receive the body of Christ: that as the form
of bread is seen to enter into us, so we shall know, Christ enters into us to
dwell in our hearts by faith, by that holy and godly conversation that he had
being in earth.

Now examine Bernard your own Abbot though living in the palpablest time of
the grosest superstition: yet he utterly co^demnes your exposition of this
place, and shows you that it does not signify Christ's carnal presence in
the Sacrament. But as the Sacrament consists of an outward sign and inward
grace: so bread the outward sign enters into the mouth, and Christ which is
the inward grace, enters into our hearts by faith. So that your own Author
tells you, it is bread that enters the mouth, it is Christ that enters the
heart, and that by faith, not by teeth: by believing, not by chamming or
swallowing. So that this your Bernard teaches you, that this your text must be
taken for the diuiner part of the Sacrament, which is Christ with all his
merits, to the souls and hearts of the believers, not to, or in the
blasphemous mouths, and stinking stomachs of Infidells, wicked men, dogs,
cats, or other beasts, as your own books most wickedly record.

Whether every spiritual sentence, or mention, be a denial of Corporal, and
Real?
Fitzimon.
42. THey are in extreamitie, and want of wolle, who wandre among brambles to
gather flocks. Such is the proceeding of our adversaries, seeking with all
ernest attentiuenes, fragments, from the Fathers, in which they commend
spiritual receiving, spiritual being of Christ in the sacrament, a quick and
lively faith toward Christ, and the sacrament; and by these sentences, they
certify their brethren, that the Fathers stand for their opinion, as if they
were excluding true and real receuing. That which is so often taught them,
should once be conceived; that the Fathers toward the Sacrament commend
spiritualitie, conjoined with realitie and substantialitie, and allow figures
conjoined with verity, not haueing any purpose or place in their writings, by
the one to exclude the other Our doctrine, that spiritual and corporal were not
incompatible, but agreeable together, Chrysostom. hom. 60. ad popul. Antioch.
Idem. hom. 61.
was uttered long since by S. Chrysostom, saying of Christ's being in the
Sacrament, that he is meddled with us; Non fide tantum, sed and ipsa re; not in
faith only, but also in very substance. Again; not by charity only, but by
very substance, is he made our food. Also by S. Cyril Alexandrin, Cyrill. l.
10. in Ioa. c. 13.

Theophylac. in cap. 14. Mar. and 17. Mat. Greg. hom. paschali.


in conformable words: not by charity only, but by natural partaking, is
Christ in us. Also by Theophilact: this, my body, which you receive, is not
only a figure or exemplar of our Lords body, but the body of Christ. Also by
S. Gregory: Christ is both the verity and figure; the verity by his body
being made of bread, Ansel. l. de Diu. offic. apud Claud. rep. 3. c. 4.
and the figure by what outwardly appears. Also by S. Anselme: By the
benediction of Christ the bread is made the body, not significatiuely only,
but substantialy. For nether from this sacrament do we exclude a figure, nether
do we admit it alone. It is the thing truly, for it is Christ's body. It is a
figure, because that is sacrificed, which is known incorruptible.

Do not these Fathers affirm both spiritual and substantial, Aug. trac. 27.
in Joan. in Psalm. 98. De verbis Apo toli. Ser. 2. Item Cypr. ac^ana.
only spirit without letter? What mean they, to bring S. Augustine disputing
against the Capharnaical conceit of receaueing Christ ( as, in cadauere
dilaniatum, aut in macello venditum, in his carcas bowtchered, or sold in the
shambles, as he him self expresses often) and in respect of them, to call the
Sacrament a figure? Does he say only a figure? Or his, and S. Bernards
commending the spiritual sense of scriptures, and spiritual receiving of the
Sacrament an argument, as if they had, or would exclude thereby the literal
sense, or substantial receiving? Are you in doubt of their minds in this
controversy? They then resolve you. First S. Augustine, August. in Ps. 33.
that Christ by saying, this is my body, was twyse at the table, once sitting,
and once houlding himself in his own hands; S. Bernard. de coena Domini.
and that secundum literam, according to the leter. Next S. Bernard, saying:
Hostia quam vides iam non est panis, sed caro mea etc. The host which thou
behouldest is not now bread, but my fleashe. Even so the lyquor which now you
see is not wine but my blood. Even as the forms are there seen, whose
substance are not believed to be there: so the thing truly, and substantialy
is believed, whose form is not seen. Here our transubstantiation, here our
haueing Christ's body in diverse places, here our literal doctrine, here our whole
papistrie, is assured to have been in these Fathers as much as in us.

S. Paul says; Si est corpus animale, est and spirituale; 1. Cor. 15.45.
If there be a natural body, there is also a spiritual body. Therefore, the one
does not exclude the other. Therefore Christ's spiritual body should not be
Capharnaicaly supposed to be bitten, rent, or ma^gled, by his real,
substa^tial, and corporal being in the Sacrament. You would think him
injurious, who would infer, that because you have a corporal head, corporal
body, and are a corporal man, that therefore you have no spiritual wit in your
head, no sense in your body, and are no spiritual man. Can both consist in you?
and not a figure and substance, spirit and corporal, truth and literal, in
sacraments, and scriptures? O protestantcy! seely are thy shifts, and they
discovered; foul and apparent thy falshod, and it made manifest: yet there are
that persist to follow thee, fullfilling therein the scripture, saying; Prou. 29.
Verbis non emendabitur seruus durus: si enim and intellexerit non obedient: By
words will not the hardened servant be amended: for althowgh he should
understand, yet will he not obey. I have been slack to number the 18. untruth,
The 18. untruth.
which at least is here produced in plain terms, that our own author
tells us, it is bread that enters the mowthe; whereas he only says, panis
forma, which M. Rider, him self translateth, the form of bread, and not bread
it self: adding that we should know; Per eam, ipsum intrare in nos Dominicum
corpus; through it, our Lords very body to enter into us, to dwell in our hearts
by faith. Suerly if M. Rider may receive his guest into his house and heart, to
his meat and mind, as he often professes: so should he imagine that we may and
should in like manner receive Christ in the Sacrament.

What he says of dogs and catts, Christian shame would have D. Tho. 1. par.
q. 8. art. 3.
quo ad potentiam, essentiam, praesentiam, not only by power, but by substance,
and essence, equaly in heaven, and in earth, yea and in hell, and under waters,
and not be blemished, tormented, or disgraced? why then is it thought an
absurdity, that Christ true God, and man, being now immortal, and impassible,
should be any where, or in any person how vile soever, without al bleamish,
hurt, or disgrace? This Ethnical reproaching the heavenly mysteries, posterity
will detest; by the very testimony, Calu. in prefat. Catecheseos.

Luth. ser. Conuiual fol. 158. and in pref. tom. 1.


if not Baalamitical prophecy, of Calvin, saying; Posteritatem tandem fraudas
nouatorum sensuram, and antiquis vijs instituram; Posterity will discover the
frauds of Reformers, and return to the old ways: when (as Luther also
fortould) horum temporum curiositas saturata fuerit; the curiosity of these
times will be satiated. Which are two strange predictions of two Protoplasts of
the fifth apostolical gospel; whereby al their enterprises, are insinuated to be
fraudulent innouations, and desperate doctrines founded only on the curiosity
of these times.

Rider. Gross absurdities follow the Priests positions.
43. And if your litterall exposition were true, then none could be saved but
such as eat your consecrated Christ made of bread: then infants that die and
communicate not, should be damned. Captives that from their cradle live under
Tyrants, and those that before Christ: in Christ's time: and in the first
thousand years after Christ, before your new consecration was stamped, are
damned. And contrariwise, all that eat of your consecrated Host be saved, be
they never so blasphemous to God, traitorous to their Prince, and injurious to
their brethren.

But that both these extremes that spring from your litterall exposition
contrary to Scriptures and fathers, be false and horrible to Christian ears:
no godly man may doubt, unless he will deny Christ and his word: the
ancient Fathers, and the Primitive church, and you shall never give the
Catholics that have hanged their precious souls upon your bare sayings, due
satisfaction in this, without public and penitent recantation of this.

You follow nether Scriptures nor Fathers.
If with the Fathers you would but observe duly the circumstances of the 5.
and 6. of John, you might see, it cannot be meant of the Sacrament, and
therefore you are deceived in the Scriptures, because the Sacrament was not
then ordained. Again, by the judgment of Augustine the speech is figurative,
and therefore the sense spiritual. And so Augustine stands with us against you.

Old Lyra says, that the sixth of John, Nihil direct pertinet, etc. speaks
not one word directly and pertinentlie of the Sacrament. The Father says,
nihil, nothing, direct directly, yet you against Scriptures and Fathers will
wrest these texts indirectlie, and impertinentlie, to speak of the Sacrament
before it was a Sacrament.

If we should commit such palpable errors against Scriptures, Fathers, and
common sense, you would call us common sots without learning or sense, plain
murderers and soul slayers, from which sin the Lord deliver us both.

Now I will ask your conscience this question, how durst you cut off Christ's
words by the waste? meant you plainly in that? surely no: for if you had
recited the whole verse, it had marred your market: you only set down the
middle of the sentence, concealing the beginning of it, and curtalling the end
of it, and so thinking that to serve your turn, and blind the eyes of the
simple. But God willing I will discover the truth, which you seek to cover,
and let the simple people see how far and how long you have deceived and
misledde them, to the great peril of their souls, with wresting the
Scriptures, and wronging the Fathers.

Christ's whole sentence was this. Verse. 51.
I am the living bread which came down from ^eauen, if any man eat of this
bread he shall live for ever. and this you cut off. Then follows your proof.
The bread that I will give is my flesh: John. 6.50.
then you curtall ^he rest: which I will give for the life of the world. If you
had dealt plainly, and ^eliuered Christ's words to Gods people without
substraction, as Christ delivered them unto you, then the people even the
simplest of them, would not have so ^ong been deceived by you. For the former
part of the verse, and the later con^ealed by you, expound Christ's mind, and
bewray your errors.

Let me but reason with you out of the first part of the verse, from the
property of this bread here spoken of by Christ. First it is living bread,
and gives eternal ^ife to the receivers: yours does not. This came from
heaven, yours did not. Who so eats of this cannot be damned: but many eat of
yours, and die eter^ally: and therefore the very properties of this bread show
plainly, that it cannot ^e meant of your singing-cakes, as has been proved
before unto you. Because they have no life in themselves, and therefore can
neither give life, nor preserve ^ife unto others. The later part of the verse
concerns Christ's flesh, which is this true bread. And thus out of Christ's
words I prove that the flesh of CHRIST spoken of in this place, cannot be the
flesh of CHRIST which you would have given in the Sacrament.

How, and when M. Rider reiterateth strange Deductions, Arguments, and
Reprehensions.
43. Do not marvel at these deductions of M. Rider to be often applied, and
replied. For in 20. Fitzimon.
months space they being collected, he might eftsoons forgett what he had
formerly engrossed, and so forgetting him self, and what he had said before, he
might insert the self same things often: Or not fynding in so long study, any
thing to his purpose, but rather whersoeuer he turned his eyes, and converted
his mind, to be wholly against his cause, and condemning him and it; he thought
good to make many messes of small cheer, and to furnish the table with one only
provision, by art of cookerie diuersely prepared; otherwise it were hard, that
in one sheet of paper, they should be so often inculcated. Yet then I answer
(...) before in the 40. number, that the saluioure of mankind JESUS Christ our
Lord, is our food in the Sacrament. Whosoever, of discretion, eats him not,
or by contempt (after denuntiation of his pleasure, and merciful gift of him
self) shall never be saved. When by impossibility or impediment any is
debarred from eating him, they may be saved, by haueing intention to discharge
their duty thereto at convenient opportunity. All that eat of the consecrated
host worthily (for if unworthily, it is their damnation) they shall be saved,
unless by their own wickedness they deprive themselves of the benifit thereof.
This was aunsweared before, and to the same old frivolous objections, the same
resolution may suffice. But in vain of a Coocow, is any new, and variable song
expected. Verily, if I did think that all readers of his book, did not
plainly observe his objections, and matters, to be handled in a method worthy of
all deploration; and by him to be hudled, shuffled, and iugled, miserably,
disordredly, intricatly, and erroneusly; I would display it palpably. But let
us not long interrupt him. I am here challenged to have cut by the wast, and
curtayled Christ's words

Indeed I confess, when I intended to select brief proofs out of scripture,
that my meaning was not, to allege whole books o^ chapters, of scripture, as
they are intierly each of them by their writers delivered. Wherefore to affirm
that I produced no^ whole scriptures in that manner, I confess it willingly: as
also, that by example of all writers, sacred and profane, I brought but such
as seemed to me sufficient against my adversaries. In that sense I yield to
have cut by the wast, and curtailled scriptures; But, that I have not
competently for my matter delivered testimonies of scripture; or that I
deceytfully concealed any disproofe thereof to my cause; or that any syllable of
scripture contradicts me, which any other has, or may allege, with
modesty, I may confidently deny. What then if this reproache be found but a
pretext to avoid the brunt of the matter, and under the shadow thereof not to
have weacknes discovered? Front. l. 2. c. 13.
For so P. Claudius, surmounted by his enemies, yet putting up his flaggs of
victory, came cunningly off, and escaped his wondering foes. And diverse expert
Captains when they have most will to retire from imminent dangers, they raise
fyers and smokes, not where they are, but where they are not, purloyning their
forces in the mean time, by darkness, into their houlds; yet never did any of
them practice this skill more often then my adversary. He blames me (like as
Goliath blamed David, 7. Reg. 17.43.
that he had but few and weak weapons) for bringing too little against him,
that by the mask of such a challenge, he may slily remove, from what
tormenteth his mind, and quite overthrows his profession. It appears by
that insueth.

I had to prove that Christ gave his body corporaly in the Sacrament, and
thereto alleged these words of Christ; the Bread that I will give is my
fleashe. M. Rider finding that he could never deflect these words to his
figures, and representations, raised up a mist, or mask, in reprehe^ding me
for cutting by the wast, curtailling, and subtracting pertinent scriptures:
which, says he, being brought, the simplest, had not been deceived. I would
feign know, of any ^ne in his perfect senses, does not what he has supplied
(which I ^ad omitted) rather confirm, then infirm my belief? I believe that
the B. Sacrament, is Christ that descended from heaven, and the sacred fleash
which he was to give for the life of the world: the words of Christ by him
alleged do confirm the same, for ^e promised it should be his fleash, which
he would give for the ^yfe of the world, when he would give them the bread here
mentioned. Are not therefore all Readers, by M. Rider accounted no better then
dunses, when he persuadeth them that these words are against our belief,
which of all others confirm it most? for if the bread which he would give by
him self, in express terms, be declared to be the self same fleash which he
would deliver in his passion for the life of the world: how is it not believed?
how is it said to be only a figure? how is this said to be against us? But, by
this time, it is known, that there is no slandre in his tongue, nor any regard
due to his talk, as being one whom it satisfies to have said any thing, it
imports not how little to the purpose. But Reader, attend nether his words,
nor mine, but believe thy own eyes, when thou may behold, whether of us
tells the truth; for I never said it to be only a figure, appellation, or
representation. I concur in the same words by Christ assured, and uttered;
and follovv no imaginations, or constructions of dreaming brayns, misledd even
by their own confessions, by uncertain spirits, as M. Rider does: Whether of
us then, do these words impugn? A tubb is never so full of sound as when it
is emptiest: so is not M. Rider more full of noyize, then when he is destitut
of all other matter: for then florisheth he in his exceptions, exclamations,
apostrophes, etc. as a mere circulator, or tooth, drawing physician, under a
baner of rotten teeth, and impostumes, when his stomach, and purse, are most
empty, then he pleads, and prateth, most endlesly.

This also is the third time of replying these same objections, as appears in
the 40. number. He that has no change may be allowed to turn, and return his
coat. One M. Sabinus Chamber, on Christimas eaue last past, 1604. gave me
under his hand, that M. Rider defending under him for bachelershipp of art in
Oxford, anno 1581. although he took in New Park great pains with him (at the
request of two of his own awnts, by whom M. Rider was releaued) yet that he
could never make entrance for M. Riders head into philosophy, nor for
philosophy into his head. This foresaid gentleman is at this hour in place,
and account, of great trust: who to be better believed, added this secret
token, that M. Rider contrary to the laws of the university, proceeded master
in the self same year of his bachelershipp, not without perjury in his
witnesses. Marvel not therefore, that he wants variety of arguments, and
knowledge, especialy in the higher science of divinity, when he could not
enter in at the inferioure gate of philosophy, which only leads to
knowledge. To the matter last rehearsed, further aunswear is also given at the
number. 37. and 40.

Rider.
44. Christ's flesh promised in the sixth of Ihon, was only given on the Cross:
but the Sacrament was not the Cross. Therefore in the Sacrament the flesh of
Christ was not given: So that these arguments grounded upon Christ's own words,
which you concealed, confute you and your carnal presence in the Sacrament For
your Sacramental bread neither came from heaven, nor your imagined flesh of
Christ made by the Priest cannot be this flesh here spoken of. For it was
offered once, not often as you teach, and that by himself, not by the Priests:
upon the Cross, not in your Mass: and that for the plenarie remission of the
sins of all believers, not for the temporal benefit of some particular
persons, quick, or dead, as the Priest pleases.

Whether Christ's words teach Christ's fleash to have been only given on the
Cross.
Fitzimon.
44. THis argument, auerreth effectualy the precedent attestations: as being out
of all the 19. moods, and three figures, allowed in philosophy. For by haueing
the medium, or mean twyse in the predicato, or later part of the propositions;
it should be in the second figure: and being deformed in that figure, it is
excluded out of all the rest. The deformation appears, that the second
proposition should have been, and is not, in this manner [but the fleash of
Christ in the Sacrament, was not only given on the Crosse] from which it
varyeth, by omitting all the former part, and exchangeing the being given on
the Cross, into the being of a material Cross. The conclusion also is
misshapen, as which ought only to have been: [therfor the fleash of Christ in
the Sacrament was not promised in the sixth of Ihon. Because I am, Romans 1.14.
Debtor factus sapientibus and insipientibus; made a debtour to the learned
and unlearned, I have borrowed license of the unskillful in Philosophy, to
have in a start, followed this matter in his kind.

Now, to the capacity of all; I answer to the first proposition, The 19.
untruth.
that it is evidently the 19. untruth, and against Christ's express promise in
the 6. of S. Ihon, promising, that besyd his giving his flesh to be crucified,
he would also give him self to be eaten of us: saying, unless you eat etc. I
aunswear to the next, that it is true, that Christ's fleash in the Sacrament was
not only, given on the Cross, as being also given to be eaten in the
Sacrament. The conclusion is contained in the premises, and so denied, or
affirmed, as the premises. All the residue, is either specified, and reuersed,
in the 40. or. 43. numbres, or else being void speeches at random, need noe
further resolution. Behold, beloved reader, Joan. 6. v. 51.53.55.
to these words of Christ (this bread which I will give is my flesh for the
life of the world) no word of worth, or wit, is replied, but time, Joan.
14.6. cap. 7.17.
and wind, wasted, in most idle diuagations. Is Christ the truth? are his
words, as the Evangelist affirms, the verity? why then, the bread he gave
was his fleash, not his figure: then his fleash was not only crucified, but
also eaten: then his fleash, is meat, truly, and not figuratively. To
aunsweare therefore to these pregnant and infallible words of Christ him self,
only that we mistake not showing how, the Fathers deny, when, and what they
affirm, apparently that Christ's words are spiritual, and therefore not
litteral: and for other answer to digress into reproaches, to multiply
words, to beat the wind, not showing any defense, or warrant of Scripture, or
Father, for your figure only without verity, appellation only without
substance, representation only without commodity: such aunswearing I say, is
breefly, Psalm. 4. v. 3.
Diligere vanitatem and querere mendacium; to love vanity and to seek lies.

The third proof of the Catholic Priests out of the sixth of John, to prove
Christ's carnal presence in the Sacrament. Catholicque Priests.
Verse. 55. My flesh is meat truly, and my blood is drink truly:
Rider.
45. IF you should ask your boy in his Grammar rules a question if he answered
not in the same case, or by the same tense of a verb that the^ question is
asked by, you will count him a silie Grammatist. But if you ask your Sophister
a question in quid, and he answer in quale, you will ta^^ him for an
improper and impertinent answer. But most of all, if a great Divine be asked
a question, to prove the manner of a thing, and he neglecting or omitting
that, as too hard or impossible for him, proves the matter that was never
demanded or doubted of, what will the Reader think of this matter, this man,
and this proof? Surely he must say either he understands not the state of
the question, or else he is not able to prove the question: and so uses this
shameful shift i^ steed, of a sufficient proof.

All the Catholics in this kingdom expected to be satisfied by your answer
touching the manner of Christ's presence in the Sacrament, whether it be carnal
or spiritual: and whether he must be eaten by faith spirituallie, or the teeth
carnally. And your answer is as improper and impertinent, as either
Grammatist or Sophister, for you leave the manner of Christ's presence which you
should prove, and bring the matter of his presence which was never in
question, saying; My flesh is meat truly, etc.

How this your answer does relish of learning let the learned judge. When a^
the Catholics in the kingdom hang their souls on your saying: Are these you
contentments you give them? If they ask you how they must eat Christ's fle^
and drink Christ's blood, then you tell them: my flesh is meat in deed, and my
blood (...) drink in deed. Do you answer their question or satisfy their
conscience, or resolve their doubts? alas no. Thus you have dealt, dallied,
and deceived a long time Christ's people with these your improper, impertine^t,
unprofitable, nay untrue aunsweres, and yet you will be called Fathers,
Doctors, and what not.

But I pray you tell me why you added not the next words of Christ? you thought
they were against you. But if you had dealt as men having Gods fea^ before your
eyes, you would not have stayed there: for the next verse plainly discouers
your bad dealing with the simple people, for that answers their question,
and that would satisfy all good Catholics in this point. For if you ask
there the holy Ghost this question: how must Gods children eat Christ's flesh
and drink Christ's blood: he will answer you: that whosoever dwells in Christ
and Christ in him, eats Christ's flesh and drinks Christ's blood: but the
faithful only dwell in Christ and Christ in them, therefore the faithful
only eat Christ's flesh and drink Christ's blood: whether it be in hearing the
word, in baptism, or in the Lords Supper, as you have heard before. If you had
added this verse, it h^^ ouerthrown your carnal presence in the Sacrament, and
your orall eating of Christ with your mouth, teeth etc. But as you wrong the
Catholics with an impertiti^^ answer, and as you abuse them by keeping back
the next words of Christ which expounds his own meaning: So here you abuse
your holy Father the Pope, and your dear mother the Church of Rome, in
expounding this text contrary to the Roman sense.

The second part, of the Catholics first proof, by Scriptures.
45. Here, in the words of Christ is assured: Fitzimon.
for the matter, that it is fleashe and consequently not his appellation only:
for the manner, that it is truly, and consequently not figuratively only; yet
does this proctor of the protestant profession, only to cavil, tell that the
matter was never in question and that the manner is not proved. I say then, the
boy in Grammar, or the Sophist, that would not conceive the state of the
question propounded, and expounded unto him, by Christ him self, not
obscurely, or doubtfully, but evidently; yet affirms, that instruction has
not been given him; is to have many strypes according to Gods word. Proverb.
10. v. 10. Ose. 4.14.
Populus non intelligens vapulabit; the not understanding people shall be beaten,
etc. Of the rest, whether the faithful only dwell in Christ, and only dwellers
in him eat him, and that it is all one to hear the word and to communicate,
as here is affirmed, appears, in the 33. 34. 35. and 43. numbres.

46. For you take this flesh of Christ which is our true meat, Rider.
to be the flesh which was borne of the virgin and suffered on the Cross, but
the Popes and Church of Rome say contrary: for these be the words of the
Canon: Did. 2. de consec. page 434. canon dupliciter. Col. 4.

Read the gloss and you may see your error as in a glass.


Dupliciter intelligitur caro and sanguis Christi, vel spiritualis illa atque
diuina: de qua ipse ait, Caro mea vere est cibus and sanguis meus vere est
potus: and nisi meam carnem etc. Vel caro mea ea quae crucifixa est, etc. The
flesh and blood of Christ (says your own Church of Rome) must be considered
two manner of ways, either for the spiritual and divine flesh spoken of by
Christ, my flesh is meat in deed, etc. and except you drink his blood, etc. or
else for that his flesh which was crucified, and that his blood shed by the
sharp lance of a cruel soldier: so that here you forsake your Roman
Catholic faith, and become Apostates from the Church of Rome. Thus you abuse
the Catholics, in making them believe you teach as the Pope teaches, and you
do not: therefore either the Pope or you must err grossly, teaching
contraries. But that all men may see, that not only this Pope, but also other
Popes have held the contrary opinion to your new broched heresy, I will
allege him that you dare not contradict, Innocentius tertius: lib. 4. cap.
14. de Sacramento Altaris. page 179.
that is Innocentius tertius that first begat your abortiue Transubstantiation.
De spirituali commestione Dominus ait, Nisi manducaueritis, etc. The Lord
Christ when he spoke of the spiritual eating, said: Except ye eat the flesh
of the son of man, etc. Lo, here is another Pope against you. For you late
Jesuits, Semynaries, Rhemists, and Priests, take this as spoken of Christ's
flesh in the sacrament, and they take it for that spiritual and divine flesh
of Christ, whereon all the faithful fed by faith, as well before Christ's
incarnation, as since his ascension.

The Pope your Father, and Rome your mother witness against you Priests and
the rest of their degenerat children.
I would bring more witnesses against your untrue expositions and allegations,
but that I think it sufficient that the Parents Testimony is the strongest
evidence against their degenerat children. And after, the Pope alleges
Augustine and the Canon. Quid paras dentem and ventrem, creed and manducasti,
and then concludes against your carnal eating of Christ's flesh most strongly:
Qui credit in Deum, comedit ipsum. Caro Christi nisi spiritualiter comedatur
non ad salutem sed ad iudicium manducatur.

Why (says your Pope) preparest thou thy teeth to eat and thy belly to be
filled? believe and thou have eaten, he that believes eats. For the flesh of
Christ is not eaten to salvation, but to destruction, unless it be eaten
spirituallie. And there in the next chapter, Pap. 180.
the Pope gives this marginall note: Christus est spiritualis Eucharistia;
Christ is our spiritual Eucharist not our carnal food in the Sacrament. And in
the same page he says, Cibus est non corporis, sed animae: this is not meat
for the body, but for the soul. And if it be meat for the soul, then it
must be received by faith, not the mouth, spirituallie, not carnally.

You see now the Scriptures, Fathers, Popes old and new, the Text and gloss
of your dear mother the Church of Rome against you. And least you should
cauil, I have alleged the Books, Chapters, Distinctions and Pages. And if
you will still tell the Catholics that these places by me alleged be not
true, then I tell you, all your own Authors and print be false: for I allege
Father, Pope, and Canons of your own print; and if you doubt, look unto your
own books and prints, Printed Anno. 1599. Impensis Lazari Zetzneri.
and you shall find them so verbatim, unless your late Ind^^ expurgatorius
has blotted out the truth, as in many things it has.

Whether the Popes, and Church of Rome do in their Decretals deny Christ in
the Sacrament to be the same that was borne of the Virgin Marie.
Fitzimon.
46. THe Decretal, and gloss, telling only, that Christ may be considered either
Spiritually as he is in the Sacrament, or as he was on the Cross, with his
sensible quantity; and Innocentius instructing, that we may receive, verum
corpus quod traxit de Virgin and in cruce pependit; his true body, received
from the virgin, and which hanged on the Cross, sacramentaly that is, says
he, under the form, or Spiritualy by faith only: such testimonies, confirming
apparently our doctrine, and being opposite to our adversaries, without reason,
or ryme, our Spiritual M. Rider, for the only mention made of Spiritualitie,
certifyeth, to make for his purpose: thinking he has as good right to all
testimonies containing Spiritualitie, although otherwise they be most repugnant
to him, as to all tyethes, and fruicts, of his Deanery bequeathed for uses
altogether opposite to his wonted offices of spiritualitie, as if he fullfilled
them.

In the mean time, by several titles, is here made up the 20. untruth; that
our Canons teach contrary to us either generaly, The 20. untruth.
or particularly, in this point. For do we say that Christ is present realy,
corporaly, and substantialy? so do they: Did. 2. de consecr. cap. Christus
panis est.
secundum carnem assumptam pro mundi vita; according to his fleashe assumpted
for the life of the world. Do we say, that it is the same body which was borne
of the virgin, and crucified. So do they; Did. 2. de consecr. cap. Reuera
mirabile.
hoc quod conficimus corpus ex virgin est: vere vtique caro Christi, que
crucifixa est, que sepulta est. This which is by us done, is the body taken
from the virgin: For it is truly the fleash of Christ, which was crucified,
which was buried. Do we say, that good, and badd, do receive Christ corporaly;
the good to their salvation, the badd to their damnation? so do they: Ibidem.
cap. sieut Judas.
Corpus enim and sanguis Domini mini nihilo minus in illis erat etc. The body
and blood of Christ was no less in them of whom the Apostle said, he that
eats unworthily does eat judgment to him self. Do we say, that it is not
only a figure, but also the truth? so do they: Corpus Christi and veritas and
figura est: Ibid. cap. vtrum sub figura.
veritas dum Corpus Christi and sanguis virtute Spiritus sancti in virtute
ipsius ex panis and vini substantia efficitur. Figura vero est id quod exterius
sentitur. The body of Christ is both the verity and the figure: the verity
when the body and blood of Christ is made by the virtue of the holy Ghost, of
the substance of bread and wine, in the virtue of him. That is the figure,
which is externaly perceived.

Now if you ask me, why in so clear concourse with our opinion, M. Rider, so
resolutely assures these Decretals, and Popes to be against us: I answer,
only because he loved, Joan. 12.
gloriam hominum magis quam gloriam Dei; the glory of men more then the glory
of God. And to conuice him palpablye of a seared, or cauterised conscience, not
so much by another, as by himself; consider his words in this place; You take
the fleashe of Christ which is the true meat, to be the fleashe which was
borne of the virgin and suffered on the Cross: but the popes of Rome say
contrary. Else where before, and after he says, that the primative church, and
ancient Fathers, supposed the contrary to our opinion so specified a whole
thousand years after Christ. But this, by him self, shall be wholly overthrown
against him self, in his debating Kemnitius his opinion. S. Augustins words
(says he) be these: Qui de carne Mariae carnem accepit: August. in Psalm. 9^.
and quia in ipsa carne hic ambulauit etc. ipsam carnem nobis manducandam ad
salutem dedit, etc. Which took fleashe of Marie, and because in that fleashe
he walked here upon earth, he gave to us that fleashe to eat to our
salvation, etc. So that M. Rider confesses in express terms, that by the
words of S. Augustine, the same Christ which took fleashe of the virgin MARIE,
and who walked here on earth, gave us that fleashe to eat to our salvation:
therefore what before he said in our opinion to be contrary to Popes of Rome, and
the Fathers, here he vnsayeth, in declaring such to have been the opinion of S.
Augustine, as he confesses we do hold.

The 21. untruth.
Has not he then made a large rowme to seat here his own Dan. c. 13.
as David was to the discordant Judges? Leaving him therefore, as the Apostle
Jude says; Jude versic. 13.
Despumantem suam confusionem; Vomiting his own confusion; I advertise him for
a shutinge up of this point, not to speak so prophanly of Christ words, and
presence in his sacrament, as perpetualy to term them carnal, and carnaly
understood. For although, we sometimes understand Carnal, and Corporal, or
Substantial to be al one; yet in the mysteries of religion we reject such
phrase, as bearing often in common speech a badd and odious construction of
sensuality, and voluptuousnes. It is in deed used by protestants, to make our
doctrine more odious, to the ears of simple people: yet is it more to their
own reproache, professing them selves Christians (to tax, and reprehend
Christ's doctrine, and the mysteries of religion, for carnal) then to ours: we
disalowing no less the term then such interpretation thereof, and meaning:
for as we say, Christ was borne of the B. Virgin, entered among his disciples,
rose, ascended, truly, substantialy, corporaly, and yet not carnaly: so use we
the same form of speech, of his being in the sacrament, and eschew the other,
if not for heretical yet for Capharnaical. They otherwise which would first
exclude corporal, and also spiritual, (as appears in the 26. number)
contented with only figurative; their final scope is, to exclude also Christ's
corporal, and true conception, Castal. in praefat. Bibl. ad Eduard. 6.
nativity, and whole life and death, and with Castali^ to say; the more they
pondre, and peruse, the word of the Lord, the less they find the Messiah to
be yet come.

For if Beza, one of the principal of them, be believed, as commonly upon his
words Protestants in our contryes, or at least Puritans, do depend: then
Christ had bestowed no other body upon Christians in the Sacrament, either on
them that believe only figurative receiving, or on them that believe both
corporal and spiritual, then he did upon the Jews from the begyning: saying;
Beza lib. con. Heshus. fol. 284. Colloq. Mompel. fol. 77. Epist. theol. 65.
page 283, In Diallact.
that they had his true body not only by efficacy, but also by essence and
nature even in the time of Abraham. To which words, M. Rider among the rest,
subscribeth in this place, saying of Christ's presence in the sacrament, whereon
all the faithful feed by faith, as well before Christ's incarnation, as since
his ascension. Such men, by degrees, as I said, practice to abolishe all
belief in the true body of Christ, truly borne, truly worshipped by the
kings, truly conversant with us, and truly dead, and buried for us; whereas they
say, that after his birthe, whom we esteem to have been Christ our Lord, we
had no other body of Christ either in essence or nature then the Jews had in
Abraham's time; so long before the very mother of Christ or Christ him self had
taken any body. If then they follow the phrase Carnal, and Carnaly, to tell
only that we believe contrary to them, that since Christ's birthe, by his
institution of the Sacrament, we have a more true, corporal, and substantial
body, then had the Jews in Abraham's time; we will accept such phrases
gratefully: otherwise, in manner aforsayd, we disclayme them. See in the 34.
number.

47. Rider.
But I will of these your former improper and impertinent testimonies out of
the sixth of John conclude, and urge no further but this one argument against
you and them, and then let the indifferent Reader judge whether you have not
deceived Gods people by misunderstanding the holy Scriptures or no:

Whosoever teaches that there is a carnal real presence of Christ in the
Sacrament before consecration, is a liar, a deprauer of the truth, and a
deceiuer of the people. But some late Popes, the new church of Rome, This is
unanswerable.
with the college of Cardinals, new created Jesuits, Semynaries, and all the
Romish Priests now in Ireland teach, that there is a carnal real presence of
Christ in the Sacrament before consecration.

Therefore some late Popes, the new Church of Rome, with the college of
Cardinals, new created Jesuits, Semynaries, and all the Roman Priests now in
Ireland be liars deprauers of the truth, and deceivers of the people. The
mayor or first proposition is your own doctrine: for you teach that before Hoc
est corpus meum be pronounced, there is no consecration. The assumption or
later proposition is as clear, for you persuade the simple people to believe
that these texts out of the sixth of John prove a carnal presence of Christ
in the Sacrament, a year before Hoc est corpus meum was by Christ pronounced,
or the Sacrament by Christ instituted. Therefore the conclusion, that you be
liars and deceivers of the people, is inevitable.

Thus the Catholics of this kingdom by the rules of your own religion you
have deceived, in teaching Christ's carnal presence in the Sacrament, a year
before either Sacrament or consecration in the Sacrament, were instituted. And
this your leaden divinity without care or conscience you thrust upon the
simple people as sound doctrine. But if there were no other error or heresy
held and taught by you, but this one point, it were sufficient to make all the
Catholics in this kingdom, nay in Christendom, to forsake your opinion,
considering your ignorance or malice presuming to justify that which holy
Scriptures, ancient Fathers, Gods Church, (yea and the particular Church of
Rome, with their Bishops, Archbishops, and Popes) for a thousand years after
Christ's ascension never spoke or heard of, and therefore it is no old faith
taught by them: but a new heresy invented by you. But now to the rest of your
proof.

Of M. Riders Arguments, and their sufficiency. And how the 6. chapter of S.
Ihon does belong to the B. Sacrament, notwithstanding it was before the
Consecration.
Fitzimon.
47. AS paynters that by skill could not make difference betwixt a cat, a horse,
and a dog, were wont to tell by words under their pictures, this is a catt,
this is a horse, and this is a dog: even so M. Rider when he makes an
argument, in his own opinion substantialy, yet least you should not so
conceive, thereof he adds before, or behind, or in the margent, this is an
unanswerable argument. Whereof you have an instance before the 38. number, and
in this place. Yet I undertake to aunswear this argument breefly, and
sufficiently, and only by saying, as before in the 41. nu^bre, by consent of
Catholics and protestants: that we teach Christ's real presence in the
Sacrament, but after, and not before consecration; yet, that such gift was
promised, and specified, for the future time, according to the words of
Christ, the bread which I will (not that I do) give etc. in the 6. chapter of
S. Ihon, not that by such promise it was given at that time, but after; as the
words importe. What parcel again of this argument, is now vnaunswared, either
according to Catholics, or protestants? Yea, or according to M. Riders
deduction, saying, that eating of Christ, after the institution of the
Sacrament, is proved out of the 56. verse of the sixth of Ihon, in such manner,
as it were damnable to doubt thereof. How is it thence proved, unless such
verse, and chapter, belong to the eating of Christ? Therefore by him self, The
22. untruth.
is made aunswerable this unanswerable argument, and thereby the 22. untruth
acknowledged.

Luther. tom. sept. defens. verb. ^ene. fol. 397.
Against whom, and his brethren in this opinion, Luther (whom they intitule
Father of truth) thus discribeth the arguments which they call unanswerable.
Their greedines to defend their credit, makes them madd, that whatsoever they
take hold of, though it be but a straw, yet they imagine it to be a sword or
spear, and that at every stroke they kill thowsands. Again: They think to
have said passing well, Luther ibidem fol. 394. 405. 381. 382.
and much to the purpose, although they touch not one argument. And again: In
their books, there is noe pithe or substance, but only frivolous cracking. By
whom could ever this be more verified, then by my good friend M. Rider? whose
dealing in every point, being so seely, and defective, toward Gods word,
Fathers, Decretals, and his own brethren; yet how he supposes, that riding
like a second Perseus, upon Pegasus, he has transformed all his adversaries
into pillars, by taking all power of aunswering from them. O confident
Champion! But let us accompagnie him forwards, and observe how little his
discourse amendeth.

Math. 26.26. Christ took bread, did bless it, and brake it, Catholic
Priests.
and gave it to his Disciples, and said: take and eat, this is my body, This
is my blood of the new Testament which shall be shed for many for remission of
sins.

48, GEntlemen: this is your proof out of Christ's own words, Rider.
and this was delivered by Christ's own mouth at the time of the institution of
the Supper, and the night before his blessed passion, and either this must
help you, or else you are helpless: but Christ willing I will plainly show
this your proof to be your reproof, and I pray God for Christ his sake, that
the eyes of your understanding may be opened to see the truth: and your hearts
touched to receive and confess the truth; and renounce your errors, and so
cease to deceive Gods people and the Queens subjects, least a worse thing come
unto you.

All the doubt and controversy of this question betwixt us, dependes on this
Text which you say must be taken properly and litterallie: we say,
Sacramentallie, improperlie, figuratiuelie, and misticallie. And our opinion
(God willing) shall be proved by Scriptures, ancient Fathers, and Popes, and
the old Church of Rome,

The third part of the Catholics, first proof by Scriptures.
48. THe Psillians a people in Afric, near the Garamants, Fitzimon. Sabel. l.
4. c. 9. Herod. l. 4. and Goll. l. 6. c. 11.
being molested with Southern wynds (to which their contry lay open) in most
simple manner armed them selves to a conflict with them. Such would be my
follye, if I would arm my writings to incountre a bagg-pype; or sack of wind
only, especialy it being not of the sweettest. But let him conioyne any matter
true or false, and I will attend thereon to auowche, or avoid it.

Rider.
49. But this is strange, that men of your great learning, (as the Catholics
(...) you to be) will deal so childishlie and weaklie in so weighty a matter.
Be not offended that I say you handle this childishlie: for in Schools he
that alleges for the probation of a proposition, the proposition it self:
for the probation of a text, the text it self:, is counted childish, and it is
a childish point of Sophistry, and a falacie to be used among young scholars,
not to be practiced among simple Catholics.

The Catholics demand of you how you prove Christ's carnal presence in the
Sacrament: and you bring in Hoc est corpus meum, which is the proposition
whereupon all this disputation and contention depends. After the same manner
a man may prove the blessed virgin Marie to be John the Evangelists mother,
Ihon 19.27.
and say still notwitstanding any text brought against him, as Christ said,
Ecce matter tua, B^hold thy mother, say what ye will, the words be Christ's
words, therefore they must be true, they need no interpretation, Christ is not
a liar. And if a man ask a confirmation, and say how prove you this
proposition of Christ to be true literallie and in deed as Christ spoke it?
This is a loose kind of Logique.
You bring in for confirmation of the proposition, the proposition it self,
and say, Ecce matter tua: Behold thy mother. Th^^ when the Catholics demand
of you, to prove your proposition of Hoc est c^^pus meum, whether it must be
taken corporally or spirituallie, grammaticallie o^ misticallie, In Schools it
is called Petitio principij.
then you bring the proposition it self, and say, Hoc est corpus meum to
prove Hoc est corpus meum: and so you would prove idem per idem, which is
very childish, and a begging of that as granted which is yet in question
betwixt us and undetermined.

Whether the words; Behold thy mother, had one, or like sense, with the
words, This is my body.
Fitzimon.
49. WE approve our sacrament to be the true body and blood of Christ, because
he being the Truth, and whose saying (as the prophet says) is effected, Joan.
14.6.
Dixit and facta sunt, mandauit and creata sunt; he spoke and it was done,
Psalm. 32.9.
he commanded, and they were created; because he, I say, 1. Cor. 11.24. Matt.
26.28.
him self, did affirm it to be his body which was to be delivered, and his
blood which was to be shedd: and consequently, his true body, and his true
blood; which truly, and not only figuratively were delivered and shedd. These
powerful words of Christ (which your great Melancthon says, Melanct. l. 3.
epist. Zuing. and Oecolamp. fol. 132. Mat. 24.35.
will be one day thunder to the misbeleeuers) and which words when heaven and
earth will fail, will remain; are our foundation. If the blessed Virgin
Marie, be said to be the mother, and S. Ihon the son; it is said in such
manner, as only to give to understand, that he should honor and cherishe her
as his mother, and no otherwise, and so the scripture shows he conceived it:
as being without any circumstance conjoined, to conceive otherwise. But in the
B. Sacrament, Christ a whole year before, in the sixth of S. Ihon, haueing
forwarned, Joan. 6.55. etc.
that he would give to be eaten his true fleash, which should be their meat
truly, and his true blood, which should be their drink truly, at the last
supper, making his new testament, all being very attentive, in solemn manner he
took, blessed, and broak bread, saying, this is my body etc. So that it is not
an idle proof, or idem per idem, to prove it to be Christ corporaly, when we
show Christ our omnipotent Lord, to have affirmed it, with the former
circumstances: more to this effect shall follow God willing in our 62. number.

50. But you should have proved by other places of Scriptures, Rider.
that Hoc est cor^us meum changes the nature and substance of bread and wine:
and you should have proved by the Scriptures, Esaias. 7.10.
that the Prophets foreshewed this strange con^eption of Christ to be conceived
of bread, as well as they did foreshew his con^eption of the virgin. And you
should have proved by the Scriptures that it is ^ot only a Sacrament, but a
sacrifice, not only Eucharisticall, but as well pro^itiatorie: and not only
profitable to the quick, but also to the dead: nay, not ^nelie for plagues
among men, but murren and diseases also among beasts. Cum ^ultis alijs quae
nunc, etc.

Now show by the Scriptures that Hoc est corpus meum has such a sense, that
the simple people may repose themselves more securely upon your opinion and
proofs. But till you prove it (which you can never do) they must know, you
have and do deceive them with false expositions against verity, antiquity,
au^horitie, yea and consent of the old Church of Rome.

Whether Christ's words do testify a change of nature; And whether it was
prophesied.
50. THe nature of bread and wine must be changed, Fitzimon.
when they are turned into the body and blood of Christ, and one proof serves
to prove the one and the other. What proves Eua to be a woman, Genesis 2. Exodus
43. Exodus 7.17. Joan. 2.8.
proves her not to ^e a bone whereof she was made. What proves Moises rodd
turned to a serpent, and after into a rodd; the rivers of Egypt turned into
blood; water turned into wine; and all other such alterations, proves the^ not
to have been what thy were before. The prophets did show this, not conception,
but transubstantiation, when they fortould that Christ should be a priest
according to the order of Melchisedech, who sacrificed in bread and wine:
whereby was signified, Psalm. 109.4. Hebr. 5.6.20. c. 11.17. Iuel. in his reply,
art. 1.
says Iuel, the sacrifice of the holy communion. I say, who sacrificed by
confession of Whitaker, as also did Christ according to his being a priest of
that order: and that can not be conceived of either of both, but in bread and
wine. For the other cruental sacrifice of his passion, was done not actiuely by
Christ but only passiuely, and that rather according to the order of Aaron,
then of Melchisedech. Malach. 1.


The prophets did show this transubstantiation, when they fortould that among
the Gentiles, from east to west, there should be a clean oblation offered to
Gods name in every place etc. Which can not be understood of any thanksgiving,
or praises as you imagine; such being not peculiar to the Gentiles, Chrysostom.
hom. in ps. 95.
but frequent among the Jews. Upon which words says S. Chrysostom; Behold
how clearly and plainly he has interpreted the mystical table, which is the
unbloody Host. Yea besyds all other proofs by Scripturs, and Fathers, which by
the mercy of God shall be afforded in our treating of the Mass, take this also
from your Beza, Beza in cap. 22. Luc. u. 20. Regius in 2. par. operum. resp. ad
2. libros E^ky de missa. c. 7. Bibl. l. 1. de paschate Israelit. page 25. 26.
Vrbanus Regius, Tremelius, and Bibliander; That before the coming of Christ,
the ancient Israelits were commanded to celebrat a figurative communion in
bread and wine, in token that the Messiah would institute no figurative, but
true and substantial communion in the same. By which is proved to the full
contentment, even of the least indifferent, that for whom soever Christ offered,
it may be proffitable, be they quick or dead, such sacrifice, containing
truly, and substantialy, the same Christ, will be also in the same manner
profitable. Whereof see afterward, in treating of the Mass. As also it is
palpably demonstrated, that the sacred body of Christ, supplying the place of
bread, by his saying that bread was his body, the substance of bread was no
longer exta^t: for being bread, it could not be his body personaly united to
his deity; unless he had been impanated, as he was incarnated.

Rider.
51, And here I am sorry I must tell you so plainly; that you wrong greatly
and grievously Gods truth, and the Queens subjects, in thus misalleadging this
text.

1 First, by Addition of a word. 2 Secondly, by misunderstanding and
misapplication of another word. 3 Thirdly, by omission, nay plain subtraction
of a whole verse.
Addition.
For the first, which is: Addition, you add this particle (it) which is neither
in the Greek, nor in your Roman Lattine Bible, no nor in your Rhemish
Testament, nor ever seen in any Doctor of antiquity, and this fillable
alters the sense and peruerteth Christ's meaning, and is added by you to
maintain that which the Text otherwise could not have any show to bear.

Fitzimon.
51. This sorrow of yours is as true, as the rest. For your toyle-some wreasting
your brayns to aggrauat every least shadow of a fault, and to run after your
simple imagination as a catt ronneth after her own tail, as if you had espied
a fault; does show you would be inwardly gladd to observe any true fault. But,
from my will, I assure you, right, and synceritie shall only proceed: I trust
also my skill, in this matter, will not be behind. Concerning the addition of
[it] that it should alter the sense, and pervert Christ's meaning, it makes up
apparently the 23. untruth. The 23. untruth.
For what Christ took, it he did bless, it he did break, it he did give. No
more, nor no less, is signified with it, then without it. And for my part,
that it be omitted, so it be conceived, I leave to your choice. That it should
be conceived, appears to all capacities. Nether in so small a slipp will I
want the defense and example of M. Rider him self, in his active and passive
discourse following, upon the word fregit: which he construeth, he brake it;
whereas (but for the sense,) it should be said only, he brake: if you may add,
it, for better understanding, lawfully; why would you reprehend me, and that so
heynously, to have inserted it?

52. Secondly, you misunderstand and misapplie this word (Bless): Rider.
Misapplication. The. Test. 1. Cor. 11. Sect. 9.
for we say it signifies to give thanks with the mouth, and you say to make
crosses with the fingers: we say it was spoken by Christ to his Father, you
say it was spoken to, over, or upon the bread and challice, and that he used
power and active words upon them: we contrary will show out of the word it
self, that it has no such signification.

When M. Rider cites, or omitteth our Authors?
52. YOu in your Dedicatory epistle, Fitzimon.
and else where did vaunt, that you would confound us by our own Fathers,
quoting our own books, our own print etc. This indeed is performed only, when
what is affirmed, being truly understood, makes nothing for you: or against
us. But we complain on you, to your self, that in true accusations, which
would make heynously against us, you cite no author, no books, no points, but
as I said before, upon your own bare word having misinformed, you pursue your
own relation, thereby (as it was behoofull for your cause) eschueing your
controversy. For examples sake, who of us told you, that Christ's fleash given
for the life of the world, is Christ's only body separated, as you affirm, from
his soul? Which of our books record, that Christ with all his merits is
received by infidels, dogs, catts, and other beasts, as you inform in the 43.
number? When did any of us teach a carnal real presence of Christ in the
sacrament, before consecration, as you affirm in the 47. number? And when, or
were did any of us certify you, (as you here, and a little after report) that
to bless is not to give thanks, or to pray, but only (as we vaynly and
foolishly teach, say you) to Cross with two fingers and a thumb, with
mumbling words and charming Crosses, whereby we forgive synns past, and
preserve that day from future dangers? Why in these, and the like, are not our
authors, books, pages, and prints, alleged? The true aunswear is; qui enim
mal^ agit odit lucem; Joan. 3. n. 19.
for he that does wickedly hates light, that his woorks may not be
reprehended. But, good Lord, if you had intended, as you lately pretended, that
you would prove your opinion true, that Christ is not properly and litteraly,
but only sacramentaly, improperly, figuratively, and misticaly, in the
sacrament; why would you seek digressios and by-maters of blessings,
charmings, and mumblings, and gallopp after them in so long discourse? But,
since we must have patience, perforce, without reason, or remedy, let us wait
upon our wandering knight; who may above all writers of him self affirm, out
of Ovid: Ovid. Nunc huc, nunc illuc, and vtroque, sine ordine, curro.
Now here, now there, and both, unorderly, I run.


Rider.
53. One part of the original word (in Greek) signifies in English (Speech)
uttered with the mouth, not a magical crossing of, or with fingers. And the
other Greek word which must be judge betwixt us, does signify to laud, to
praise, and to bless: and blessing, praising, and thanksgiving are all one, as
anon you shall hear Christ himself so to expound it, and all the
Evangelists, and Paul agree in one congruence touching this matter against you.
How bless and blessing are used in Scriptures.
But first I will show the simple how diversely this word (Bless) is used in
the Scriptures.

To bless God is to praise him, and give him thanks for all his mercies, as
you have in Luke: Luke 24.53.
and the disciples continued in the Temple lauding and blessing God: I hope you
will not say they crossed God with their fingers or consecrated him to make him
more holy, but praised him with their mouths. For if you take blessing of God
in that fingered sense, then see the absurdities you fall into.

Ioh. 1.18. Ioh 4.24. Anthropomorphitae.
First, against Scriptures, you must hold that God the Father it not a Spirit,
but has a bodielie shape that may be touched and crossed with our corporal
fingers: if this you hold, join with those ancient Heretics of Egypt, who
held that God had a body and members as man had.

What it is for one man to bless another. Genesis 27. Gen 48 Nu^. 6.23. Let your
High priests of Rome, and you low Priests of Ireland, learn of Aaron Gods
High Priest, how to bless Gods people: and so cease to deceive them any more.
And the second absurdity (nay blasphemy) is this, that you should make, GOD
(who is holiness it self) the holier by your crossing: but I hope you will
not take blessing in this sense, but join with the Disciples and us, that
blessing of GOD signifies praising of GOD, or praying to GOD: for one man to
bless another, is nothing else but to pray for them, and to beseech God that
he would bless them, that is, defend them, protect them, and be merciful unto
them: So Isaac blessed Jacob, and Jacob the sons of Joseph. And so the LORD
commanded Moises to speak to Aaron, and to his Sons, saying: Thus shall ye
bless the children of Israel, and say unto them: The Lord bless thee and
keep thee, the Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be merciful unto
thee, etc.

A Christian pattern not only for Priests, but also for Pastors and Parents
daily to practice, the one for his flock, the other for his family: yet both
in the Lord, and from the Lord. Which blessings are derived from Gods mercies,
and hang not on the ends of Priests fingers. Again, you see blessing is praying
with the mouth. not crossing with the fingers, as you vainlie and foolishlie
make your Ghostly children believe, that if you cross them with your two
fingers and a thumb, they are pardoned for their sins past, and preserved
that day from future dangers and evil spirits. Which fingered blessing of
yours is as powerful to pardon sin, and fear away spirits, as three sups of
the Challice is to cure the chinne-cough. This blessing was commanded by God
to be practiced by Aaron the High Priest, and the rest of the Priests upon Gods
children, but how far your blessing differs from this the simplest may judge.

For first, God commanded this blessing: the Pope your blessings. This was by
mouth only, yours with some mumbling words and charming crosses with your
fingers. This blessing was a prayer to desire God to bless: and you teach,
that in your breath and fingers there is a power and a certain working or
impression of some blessing upon them by means of your said mumbling and
crossing. But your Priests agree with Gods Priests, and your blessing with
fingers, with Gods Priests blessings with prayer of the heart and mouth, even
as well as truth and falsehood, light and darkness, superstition and
religion, Christ and Belial. And if the Catholics will but diligently read
this commandment of GOD, given to the High Priest and Priests in this place;
touching the manner how they should bless Gods people. I am resolved that few
Catholics, in this kingdom hereafter will kneel at your feet, or beg at
your hand any finger benediction or crossing, because is has no warrant from
Gods word, and therefore ten thousand of them not worth a farthing. How the
Priests bless the Sacrament.
You cross the cup or Challice with a set number of crosses and gestures:
sometimes blowing over the Chalice, sometimes crossing it, sometimes hiding it
that none must see it: then joining and disioyning of your thumb and two
fingers, with many more such Apish toies, childish tricks, and charming
prankes, which have neither foundation nor relation to Christ's actions and
institution. How the Preachers of the gospel bless the bread and the cup.


But we in administering this holy Sacrament, confess the greatness and
grieuousnesse of our sins, that can no otherwise be pardoned but in Christ's
bloody and bitter passion: and we give thanks to God for Christ's blessed
obedience to the shameful death of the cursed cross, by which he has,
satisfied Gods wrath, and wrought our reconciliation in the blood of the same,
and continue this Sacrament as he instituted and commanded in reverence and
rememberance thereof, without addition, alteration, or subtraction. And pray
that our unworthiness and want of faith hinder not our spiritual union and
real presence with Christ, which is offered in the word of institution, and
sealed in the right receiving of the Sacrament. This is the force and effect of
this word (Bless): the true use whereof Christ by his practice delivered, the
Primitive Church, Fathers, and we imitate. Now whether your blessing in the
Sacrament, and your blessing by crossing the people, or ours come nearer to
Gods word and Christ's practice, let the best minded to Gods truth judge, and
then with GODS truth join. Thus much for your Addition, misunderstanding, and
misapplication. Now to your Omission or Subtraction of a whole verse. Omission
or Subtraction.


You bring for proof of your carnal presence, the 26. verse and the 28. verse
(...) Calvin proceeds further, Calvin. 1. Cor. 10.16. Jewel. co^. Hard. art.
1. diuis. 9. pa. 23.
confuting Erasmus, and all others who endeavor to confound as all one,
blessing, and giving thanks. Jewel tells, that the meaning of Christ's
words, Hoc facite, is, take ye bread, bless it, break it, and give it in my
remembrance. Now, to my thinking, reason would have advised our adversaries, to
have made a clean contrary inference: that if the greek usual word (...) to
give thanks, be some time, and especialy in our controversy taken to bless;
that the propre word to bless, especialy to so solemn a ceremony, ought not
to be taken only to give thancks.

Somewhat also must be said of the blessing by making Crosses, Rider applaud to
him self, for not haueing disadvantage in any thing he has propounded. First
then even by Scripturs is it manifest, that when the angels were commanded to
mark Gods especial elected, Ezech. 9.4.

Niceph. l. 2. c. 42. Basil. l. de Spiritu sancto c. 27. Tertull. l. de corona
militis. Athanas. l. de incarnat. verbi. Hieron. ep. ad Demetriade^. and epist.
128. August. tra. 18. in Joan. Cyrill. 4. Catech. Illuminat. Chrysostom. hom. 21.
27. 36. ad pop. Antioch. Ambros. Sermon. 45.

August. sermon. 19. de Sanctis.

Idem. trac. 118. in Ioa^. vide Gretseru^. de Cruce l. 3. c. 6.

Hieron. ad Pam. ad Rustic. and in vita Hilarion. and Antonij. August. epist.
59. lib. 22. de ciu. c. 8.

Beda in hist. Augl. l. 3. c. 26.


the mark or character to have been the leter thau, or our leter T. in their
forheads: which is a perfect Cross, to all men's eyes. Also by relation of
Nicephorus of S. Ihon Evangelist; Vbi se signo crucis muniuisset, in monumentum
descendit. When he had fortified him self with the sign of the Cross, he
descended into the monument. S. Basil and Tertullian affirm, to make the sign
of the Cross, to be an Apostolical tradition. Tertullian, Athanase, Hierome,
Augustine, Cyrill of Jerusalem, Chrysostom, Ambrose, and all Fathers without
exception, do exhort and advise all Christians, at rising, appareilling,
washing, sitting, eating, at every action, and time, to arm them selves with
the sign of the Cross, as propre to Christians. Whereof says S. Augustine; Hoc
ad victoriam prouehit, hoc veneficia destruit, and omnia daemonum machinamenta
ad nihilum redigit: this aduaunceth our victory, this distroyeth witchcraft,
and frustrateth all attempts of the devil. Without which says he again, and
all other Fathers, noe Sacrament is thought duly ministered. Saint Hierom
tells you how thronges of people flocked to have S. Epiphanius and Hilarions
blessing to them and their children. And writing to Rustic bishop of Narbon, he
blames him for disalowing a simple secular priest, to bless the people,
saying; Benedicere populo non debet, qui Christum etiam meruit consecrare?
Should not he bless the people, who deserves to consecrat Christ? S. Augustine
relates, him self, and others to have used like devotion. Beda tells, how
in England, the godly Christians would trudge before in high ways, and cross
passages, to obtain preests blessing, by mowthe or hand. For the one does not
exclude the other. So that it is time M. Rider, to leave this form of
argument, by one truth to exclude the other, when both may consist together. I
grant you spent this travail against the Cross, when you were a puritan, now
perhapps you dare not Christen a child without it. In the mean time, by your
great wisdom, you have made to Catholics, and protestants, many good points
God be praised known, which had been more to your behoof unrevealed.

Rider to read these, and those, in greek; gentle Reader, he bids us to do
for ostentation what he can not do him self. For in my particular knowledge,
and experience, a blind man has as much sight in his eyes, as he has good
greek in his head. And if we had found in greek what he pretends; you now
understand, how little it had been to his proffit, or our hinderance. The 24.
25. 26 27, untruth.


that we teach our spiritual children, they be pardoned from synns, and
preserved from dangers and spirits, if we cross them with two fingers and a
thumb. The 25. that the pope, and not God commands our blessing with the
Cross. The 26. that we use mumbling words and charming Crosses. We leave
charmings and coniurings for heretics. Nota sunt commercia haereticorum cum
magis; Tertul. de prescrip. c. 43. Vide number. 100. Ezech. 9.4.
the intermedling of heretics and magitians, says Tertullian, are notorious.
Our crossing is no charming, unless God, and his angels, were charmers: of which
see after in the 100. number. The 27. that we teach a certain power to be in
our breath, and fingers. Such matters as these would seem to deserve our
allegations, where we teach these points. But it is sufficient, that unless they
be believed upon puritan faith, troth, and honesty, there is no other proof to
auerr them. Now, I will in this convict M. Rider, both to be a puritan,
(although the puritants respect him not) and also to mis-informe our doctrine,
and that by the protestants, even of England, and that before his Majesty, in
the conference set forth by Barlow, anno 1605. page 73.74. as his royal
Majesty doubted not to acknowledge, saying: I am given to understand by the
bishops, and I find it true, that the papists them selves did never ascribe any
power, or spiritual grace, to the sign of the Cross. Such a testimony is a
lawful defense, I trow, against M. Rider, both that he degenerateth from the
doctrine of the bishops of England; and falsifyeth our doctrine; which is now
lawfully warranted to think so of the Cross, as the best protestants do
approve it. The 28. untruth.
The 28. that our blessing agrees with Gods priests blessing, no more then
superstition with religion. For I have showed it, to have proceeded from God,
by his Angel; to have been practiced by his Apostles; and received by all the
Fathers, and primative Church. The 29. 30. 31. untruth.
The 29. 30. and 31. (at least) are included from the parcel, your Apish
toys, childishe tricks, etc. to the end; so perspicuously, as no auditour
most favorable, would take in his accounts, and discharge him more sparingly.
Now let us give place; M. Rider is at leyngthe to tumble into his matter in
controversy, after his long peregrination to crossings, charmings, greek, and
reprehensions.

Rider.
54. But now to the rest of the body of the text and controversy.

Wherein first let us examine whether your two propositions, this is my body,
and this is my blood of the new Testament, etc. be proper or figurative:
litterall, or Sacramental. For if they be improper, borrowed, figurative and
Sacramental, they prove neither your Transubstantiation: nor your carnal
real presence, but even plainly disprooue them. Augustine de doctr.
christiana, lib. 3, cap. 16. page 23. Parisijs. 1586.
Saint Augustines rule before recited, if you would be ruled by it (but neither
Scriptures nor Fathers can rule you, but you will over rule them) would
presently satisfy you, that these two propositions must be figurative: the
latter you confess, but the former as yet you will not. His words again for
the Readers good I will repeat: and they be these: If the scripture seem to
command any vile or ill fact, the speech is figurative; as, Except ye eat the
flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, you shall have no life in you:
Facinus vel flagitium videtur iubere, Christ seems to command a wicked act,
(that is, carnally and grossly to eat Christ's flesh, Either confute S. Aug. or
confess your error: the first is impossible, the second were commendable.
Read it: it contains but 6. or 7. lines.

The marginall note there, condemes your litterall fence


etc. it is therefore a figurative speech. So that Augustine thus reasons
against you. To eat Christ's flesh and drink Christ's blood corporally, is a
heinous thing, therefore Christ's words be figurative: so that if to eat
Christ's flesh with our mouths, and tear his flesh with our teeth, as also
actually drinking of his blood be heinous and wicked: why do you so eagerly
press the litterall fence of these your two propositions, against truth,
against faith, and the ancient Fathers,

Augustine in that short 15. chap. of the same book immediately going before,
wishes always the interpretation of these and all other figurative speeches,
to be brought ad regnum charitatis, to the kingdom of charity, to have their
true exposition. Now if you expound this litterallie and properly, you
forsake Augustines rule, charities kingdom, and the Apostolical and Catholic
exposition. It is but small charity to devour the food of a friend, but to
eat and devour corporally and gutturallie the precious body and blood of
our Christ and Savior, it is no charity. Nay (says Augustine) it is plain
impiety, and a wicked and a most damnable fact. And so to prove the action
lawful, Augustine would have you Catholics, but you will he Caphernai^^ and
Canibals.
the kingdom of charity has ever taken these and the like propositions to
be figurative, and the sense to be spiritual. Therefore if you will be
loyal subjects of charities kingdom, show your subjection to her charitable
and Catholic exposition, otherwise you will stand indicted of spiritual and
uncharitable rebellion.

That protestants by their own principles, can not affirm Christ our
Saluiour, not to be spiritualy it self in the Sacrament. Also that S. Augustine
disproueth them.
54. HIs late saying, that he has my hand, Fitzimon.
to the great errors (which most safely he keeps with him) I grant to be
true, yet not to, but against the errors which to his perdition most safely
(as he says) he keeps with him: which as a candle by fingers snuffed,
leaves blacknes, and burning, to the snuffers hands, remaining by their
detraction, more clear, and in it self mor delytsome. As in all our process
by Gods grace it has, and shall, more and more appear. It is first the 32.
untruth, The 32. untruth.
that if these words of Christ be figurative, and Sacramental. This is my
body, this is my blood of the new testament; they will plainly disprove our
transubstantiation. For it has been often professed, that we allow (but not only
as you do) spiritual, and figurative sense of these words, not excluding real
substantial, and literal. It appears in the numbers 14. 15. 31. 34. 40. 42.
46. 49. etc. You have bownd your self in your first position, for which you
replye, as it is engrossed by your self, to stand upon a spiritual presence
only, to the faithful believers. Therefore no testimony or allegation will
avail you, where in, only spiritual, or only figurative is not comprised. Nay,
if it co^tayne the word spiritual, it must be also impertine^t to your
purpose, unless you recant your agreement with the protestant martyrs: who
sealed with their blood, as Fox delivers, Fox. Acts and Monum. page 1529.
that the difference of doctrine between the faithful and papists concerning
the Sacrament is, that the Papists say that Christ is corporaly under, or in,
the form of bread and wine, but the faithful say, that Christ is not there,
nether corporaly, nor spiritualy. Behold how you are engaged, that nether can
you hold corporal, or the so much spoken of spiritual, Caveat in answer to
our allegation of Tindal c. 1,
unless you degenerat from your protomartyrs, and primative protestantcie, to
whom, and which, you have bound your self in express words to agree in
unity and verity of doctrine.

Augustins words; First, he does not say, that they be figurative, only; and
consequently are not against us, (as appears in the numbers lately specified)
nor for you. Secondly, he disputes not against our belief, but against the
Capharnaits: August. tom. 9. trac. 27. in Joan.
of whom he says; Sicut illi intellexerunt carnem, non sic eg^ do ad
manducandum carnem meam; as they understood fleash, not so do I give my fleash
to eat. But how, says he, did they understand fleash? Quomodo incadauere
laniatur aut in macello venditur; As it is torn from a carcas, or sold in a
shambles. In such sense only, and to such conceits, would S. Augustine have
Christ's words to be esteemed figurative; to wit in regard of them who as S.
Cyrill (l. 4. in Joan. c. 22.) says; Ad immanes ferarum mores vocari se a
Christo arbitrabantur, incitarique vt vellent crudas hominum carnes manducare
and sanguinem bibere; They surmised that they were provoked after the savage
manners of beasts, to eat man's raw fleash, and drink his gore blood. Whereas
Christ did far otherwise intend it, as that he would be eaten in the lykenes
of bread and wine, which were figures of his operations in our souls. But to
say, that for the seeming of Christ's words to be horrible, or to be taken
figuratively, his substantial, and real presence should be excluded; August.
tom. 6. con. aduer. leg. and prophet. l. 2. c. 9.
is most remote from S. Augustins inte^tion, and all his writings. Behold here
but one, yet infallible and palpable, proof thereof. Mediatorem Dei and hominum
hominem Christum Iesum, carnem suam nobis manducandum, bibendumque sanguinem
dantem fideli cord, and ore suscipimus: quamuis horribilius videatur humanam
carnem manducare, quam perimere, and humanum sanguinem potare, quam fundere;
We receive with faithful heart and mowthe, Jesus Christ man, Mediator betwixt
God and man, giving his fleash to eat, and his blood to drink: although it
seems more horrible to eat the fleash of man, then to kill, and to drink
the blood of man, then to shedd it. Does is seem horrible to eat Christ's
fleash, according to S. Augustine, and to drink his blood? yea more horrible
then to kill? yet he assures us, that not withstanding such seeming, we should
eat and drink, not his figure, but his fleash and blood; not in faithful
heart only, but also by mowthe. Alas let S. Augustine alone, in life a Catholic
Friar, or Monk; in his books, a Catholic doctor; in both, an enemy, and
triumpher, against heretics. Hitherto you have never brought S. Augustins
testimonies, ^. Reg. 11.
but as Vrias took infortunat leters, to his own destruction.

Aug. l. 3. de. Ciu. c. 16.
Further S. Augustine would have these figurative speeches so long charity
consist with their meaning. Out of which you infer, that Christ can not be
eaten corporalye, it being, say you far against charity. But this
consequence, is far against Charity, Ex Sermon. de verbis Euan. Citatur a Beda
1. Cor. 10.
and verity. Witness, the same S. Augustine, saying: Quis inuitauit? quos
inuitauit? Et quid preparauit? Inuitauit Dominu^ seruos, and preparauit eis
cibum seipsum. Quis audeat manducare Dominum suum? and tamen ait: qui manducat
me viuit propter me. Quando Christus manducatur, vita manducatur. Nec occiditur
vt manducetur sed mortuos viuificat. Quando manducatur reficit, sed non
deficit. Who has invited? whom has he invited? and what has he prepared?
our Lord has invited his servants, and prepared him self meat to them, Who
dares devour his Lord? yet never the less he says: who eats me, lives
because of me. VVher Christ is eaten, life is eaten. Nether is he killed, that
he should be eaten, but he quickneth the dead. When he is eaten, he feeds,
but is not impaired. Lo, whether S. Augustine thinks it inconvenient, or
against charity, for any to eat his Lord, himself being the inuiter,
himself the preparer, himself the food! Lo, whether the eating of Christ,
be a tearing, digesting, or consuming of Christ! Tom. 2. epist. 50. ad Bonifac.
in fine Tom. 5. de Ciu. l. 2. c. 25.
But would you know what is to be against charities kingdom? S. Augustine
answers: Non est autem particeps diuinae charitatis, qui hostis est
vnitatis: he is not partaker of divine charity, who is an enemy of unity. No
catholic says he no fruitful communion.

Rider, Aug. To. 10. de verb. Apo. ser. 22. circa fine^.
let this goulden exhortation of S. Augustine take place, after so many
mis-informations of his persuasion. Would God, says he; they would not fear
them to whom long time they have sold error, for they respect them: they are
ashamed toward humane infirmity, and not toward invincible verity. And they
fear to be expostulated with all in this manner. Why therefore have you deceived
us? why have you seduced us? why have you affirmed so much ill, and falsehood?
They should answer, if they feared God: it was humane to err, but diabolical
through animositie to remain in error. And a little after: Let them say to
their believers we have failed together: let us retire from error together.
We have been guydes to you, and you followed to your fall: will you not follow
us when we conduct you to the Church? I pray God this exhortation may take
effect, according to the intention, and worth thereof. In the mean time, it is
the 33. untruth, that we overrule Scripturs, and Fathers. The 33. 34. 35. 35.
37. untruth.
The 34. that we confess to be figurative (that is as you understand, only
figurative) these words of Christ: this is my blood of the new testament. The
35. that Augustine reasons against Capharnaits, who would not believe the
words of Christ, no more them protestants in these times. The 36. that by our
literal exposition, we forsake Augustins rule, charities kingdom, Apostolical
and Catholic exposition. The 37. that we be Caphernaits and Canibals. I will
not requite his Theons style, and bad demeanure; knowing, that it is for want
of matter, because; Eccli. 21.
non est sensus vbi est amaritudo; there is no sense, where there is bitterness.
If vaunting were victory, reproaches reproof, dispising disconfiting; M.
Rider had been as victorious as Caesar, or Alexander; as subtle, and solid a
disprouer, as a second prophet Daniel; as great a vanquisher, as the fair king
Arthure.

Rider. Amb. lib. 4. de Sacrament to. cap. 5.
55. Ambrose is of the same opinion with us against you, saying, Fac nobis
(inquit) oblationem ascriptam, rationabilem, acceptabilem, quod est figura
corporis and sanguinis Domini nostri Jesus Christi: make unto us (says the
Priest) this oblation, that it may be allowable, reasonable, and acceptable,
which is a figure of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. And Ambrose
presently after, says, the new Testament is confirmed by blood, in a figure
of which blood, we receive the mystical blood: By these words the Reader may
see, that Ambrose and the Church in his days, took it not for the natural
body of Christ, but for a figure of his body, and therefore cease to brag
here to the simple, of Ambrose, and Augustine, for they are not of your
opinion.

Innocent. Papae lib. tertius ca. 12. Fol. 148. and there shall you see the
foolish and fantastical reasons the Pope gives for those said crosses.
And in the Canon of the Mass, you have these words of Ambrose in that part
which begins (Quam oblationem) but you deal deceitfully with Gods people: for
you leave out these words, quod est forma corporis, and there dash in five red
crosses, and still teach the people, it is Catholic doctrine and the old
religion, but these iuglings with the Fathers must be left, or else good men
that follow those Fathers, will doubt that Gods spirit has left you.

How dishonestly S. Ambrose is treated by M. Rider.
Fitzimon. Ambros. l. 4. de Sacram. c. 5.
55. S. Ambrose is as fowly, or rather worse used then S. Augustine. Compare M.
Riders words and these together, in the very same chapter. In sanctis manibus
suis accepit panem. Antequam consecretur, panis est: vbi autem verba Christi
accesserint corpus est Christi. Deinde audi dicentem: accipite and edite ex eo
omnes, hoc est enim corpus meum. Et ante verba Christi, Calix est vini and
aquae plenus. Vbi verba Christi operata fuerint, ibi sanguis efficitur qui
plebem redemit. Paulo post: Ipse Dominus Jesus testificatur nobis quod corpus
suum accipiamus and sanguinem. Numquid debemus de eius fide and testificatione
dubitare? In his sacred hands (says S. Ambrose) he took bread. Before it be
consecrated it is bread: but when the words of Christ come, it is the body of
Christ; then hear him saying, take and eat of this all: for this is my body.
And before the words of Christ, the chalice is full of water und wine, When
the words of Christ have operated, the blood is made which redeemed the
people. A little after: Our Lord Jesus him self testifies unto us that we
receive his body and blood: should we doubt of his truth and testimony? Could
you M. Rider, Ambros. l. 4. de Sacram. c. 5.
in either godly, or honest disposition, conceive S. Ambrose thus speaking to
think that in the sacrament was not the natural body of Christ, but only a
figure thereof, because he mentioned (as we profess) a figure to be therein?
Could you mistake without deep hypochrisie these words of his: but when the
words of Christ come, it (which before consecration was but bread) is the body
of Christ: the blood is made, which has redeemed the people? Is not this a
shameless resolution in making denials, affirmations, an act of such a
careless man as is mentioned in Horace, who had forfetted his credit abroad
among all men, friends, and foes, yet feigned to them of his private howshould,
that all went well, and nothing against him? saying: Horacius lib. 1. Satyra.
1. Populus me sibilat at mihi plaudo ipse domi. The world does hiss at me, but
yet I applaud to my self at home.



For opposition, of S. Ambrose, to protestantcy, Causeus said, he was bewitched
by the devil. And truly in this point, as after in treating of him in
particular shall God willing be notifyed, none was ever more opposite to them,
then he. How loud, therefore, The 38. untruth.
has M. Rider made his 38. untruth, that Ambrose, and the church in his
days, thowght with him against us? But a mercenary mind to please man sells
it self, rather then it would seem disproueable. S. Aug. late exhortation (I
fear) will not benifit one of this humor.

56. And Augustine else where says, Rider. Aug. in ^narratione Psalm. 3. page
7. col. 1. Printed at Paris. anno 1566.

August. tom. 6. contra Adimant. cap. 12.


Christ commended and delivered to his disciples the figure of his body and
blood. And Origin says. Not the matter of bread but the words recited over it
does profit the worthy receiver, this I speak (says he) of the typical and
figurative body, which is in deed the Sacramental bread: Upon the 15. of
Matthew.

Augustine confuting Adimantus the Heretic, that held that the blood in man
was the only soul of man: answered, it was so figuratively, not otherwise:
and to prove it he uses this proposition of Christ, Hoc est corpus meum, this
is my body saying, Possum etiam interpretari illud praeceptum in signo positum
esse: non enim dubitauit Dominus dicere hoc est corpus meum, cum signum daret
corporis sui. I may (says Augustine) expound the precept of Christ
figuratiuelie: for the Lord doubted not to say this is my body, when he gave
the figure of his body. Augustine says, Hoc est corpus meum, is a phrase
figurative, you say no, but it is litterall. Now let the Catholics take this
Friendly Caveat to heart, for they have no reason to follow you, that forsake
the Fathers: and here may you see that our exposition is ancient, Catholic,
and Apostolical, yours new, private, and heretical.

Tertullian an ancient Father says, Acceptum panem and distributum discipulis,
Tertull. lib. 4. contra Marcion. page 133. line 26.
etc. The bread which was taken and given to his disciples Christ made his
body, by saying, this is my body, that is, the figure of my body, what could
be more spoken of them for us against you. Hierome super 26. Math. Ambrose in
1. Cor. 11.
And Hierome calls it a representation of the truth of Christ's body and blood,
and not the body and blood. And Ambrose seconds his former sayings in these
words: In edendo, etc. In eating and drinking the bread and wine, we do
signify the flesh and blood which was offered for us: so that they do, but
signify the flesh and blood, they are not the flesh and blood. And Chrysostom
says, Chris. in hom. 17, in Hebr. and super 1. Cor. 11.
Offerimus quidem sed ad recordationem; and afterward. Hoc autem sacrificium
exemplar est illius, etc. We offer indeed but in rememberance of his death,
this sacrifice is a token or figure of that sacrifice, the thing that we do is
done in reme^berance of the thing that was done by Christ before, etc. Here is
a manifest place against you, Chrisost. in hom. 11. Math.
which you shall never answer. And elsewhere he says, in the same sanctified
vessels there is not the body of Christ indeed, but a mystery of the body is
contained.

Clemens Alex. in padago. lib. 1. cap. 6. page 18. line vlt. and page 19. line
1.
And Clemens Alexandrinus who lived 1300. years ago says, Comedite carnes
meas and bibite sanguinem meum, etc. Eat ye my flesh and drink my blood,
meaning hereby under an allegory or figure, the meat and drink that is of
faith, of promise. And the same reverend Father in his second book and second
chapter of his Padagogi, and 5. page and line 21, 22, 23. has these words:
Ipse quoque vino vsus est, nam ipse quoque homo, and vinum benedixit, cum dixit
accipite, bibite, hoc est sanguis meus, sanguis vitis, etc. For our Lord Christ
used wine, and blessed wine, when he said, take drink, this my blood, the
blood of the vine, (the word) which is shed for many for the remission of
sins, does signify allegorically the holy river of gladness.

Out of which I note: First, it is sanguis vitis, the blood of the grape
properly, and that is wine. It is called Christ's blood Sacramentallie, and by
way of signification. Seco^dlie, it appears to be figurative in this word
(shed) for the blood of the grape (which is wine) was not shed for many, but
the blood of Christ. But you will say it is true, before consecration but after
consecration it is Christ's very natural blood. No says Clement immediately
following, Quod autem vinum esset quod benedictum est, etc. And that it was
wine which was blessed, he shows again, when he says to his disciples, I
will not drink of the fruit of the vine, etc. Out of which premises I note
three things: Read Clement. follow Clem.
First, that that which you call consecration, this learned Father calls it
benediction. Secondly, that after consecration the nature of wine remains
still, and it is not changed as you imagine. Thirdly, that the phrase is
figurative and not proper. Beda in Luc. 22. page. 476.
And venerable Beda our countrieman tells you, that in England in his time, the
text was taken figuratively. The solemnities of the old Passover (says he)
being ended, Christ comes to the new, which the Church is desirous to
continue in remembrance of her redemption, that in stead of the flesh and blood
of a LAMB, he substituting the Sacrament of his flesh and blood in the figure
of bread and wine, might show himself to be the same to whom the Lord swear
and will not repent, etc. Beda called it not the natural body of Christ that
works out redemption, but a remembrance of our redemption and a figure of it.

Thus the indifferent Reader may see that Augustine, Ambrose, Origin.
Tertullian, Hierome, and Clemens Alexandrinus, Beda, and many others, which I
omit for breuities sake, all of them being ancient approved writers, and all
of them of your own Prints, do hold with us against you, that your
propositions be not proper but Sacramental, improper, significatiue,
representative, allegorical, and figurative, which greatly wounds the body
of your cause; and will weaken your credits with the Catholics.

How the Fathers granting a figure, yet deny a figure as it is taken by
protestants.
56. I Grant with S. Augustine the B. Sacrament to be a figure of Christ, but
require that you show him to approve it, Fitzimon.
a figure, only. I grant with Origin, it is Christ's typical body: grant you
the rest of his opinion in his own words delivered. The law of God (says he)
now, not in figurs or images as before, but in the very form of truth is
acknowledged. Origin. hom 7. in lib. Number.
And what before were in an obscurity shaddowed, are now acclomplished in their
form, and truth. It follows: Before was baptism in a figure in the clowd
and in the sea; but now regeneration is in form in water and the holy Ghost.
Then was Manna in a figure meat: now in form is the fleash of the word of God
true meat; according as he said, my fleash is meat truly, and my blood is
drink truly. I crave no more then Tertullian affoordeth, Tertull. l. 4. con.
Marcion.
(as appears in the numbers cited in the 54.) That Christ made the bread
which was given to his disciples his body, by saying this is my body; that is
the figure of his body; in owtward appearance, as in the foresaid numbers is
auowched: Tertullian. l. de resurrect. Carnis.
Grant you also, with Tertullian, that Caro corpore and sanguine Christi
vescitur vt anima de Deo saginetur; the fleash (and not only the soul) is fedd
with the body and blood of Christ that the soul may be fatt in God. Hieron. ad
Damasum de prodigo filio.
Withs Hierom I consent, that the Sacrament is a representation: do not you
also impugn him, saying; Ipse Saluator est, cuius quotidie carne vescimur,
cruore potamur; It is our Saluiour him self, Ambros. l. 4. de Sacram. c. 14.
with whose fleash we are daily feed, whose blood we drink. I subscribe to S.
Ambros, that it is a signification: do you no less, that after consecration it
is the fleash of Christ. I allow with S. Chrysostom, it is a remembrance,
Chrysostom. hom. 60. ad pop. Antioch.
and exemplar of Christ's sacrifice upon the Cross, (for of that he speaks:)
do you no less when he says, that in the Sacrament Christ is with us; non
fide tantum, sed and ipsa re; not in faith only, Clemens Alexandrin. loco
citato a Ridero.
but in very realitie. I profess with Clement Alexandrinus, to receive Christ
(as he speaks, (which is nothing to M. Riders intention) and all other ways
it may be interpreted) under an allegory, or figure, as meat of faith etc: I
confess also; Ipsum Saluatorem intra pectus suscipi; that our Saluiour him
self is received into the breast. I grant all, Beda in Luc. 22.
that you allege out of Beda: do you also, not contradict your own pretended
witnesses, but profess in the figure of bread and wine, is the Sacrament of
Christ's fleashe and blood.

Rider you have purchased, that all which you have here produced (excepting
untruths) is freely and liberaly permitted: but far from your purpose, or
proffit. Is it because a figure, or allegory is witnesed and that not only, or
without contradicting the substance, that you and your only figure should seem
benefited? I say with Gods word, and mark it well; that Christ is a figure,
Sap. 7. 2. Cor. 4. Hebr. 1. Coloss. 1. Ephesians. 5. Luc. c. 12 c. 22.
and image of his Fathers substance: will you infer, that therefore he is not
the self same substance, with the Father? I say Christ is spiritualy and
figuratively the head of his Church: will you infer, that therefore he has
not a material head? I say that his baptism, and Cross, are taken some time
spiritualy, or figuratively: will you infer, that therefore his material
baptism, and sensible suffering, should be excluded? I say that he was habitu
inuentus vt homo; Philip. 2. in shape found as a man: will you say that therefore
he was no man? It is no less against Scriptures, and Fathers, to do the one,
then the other; to exclude substance in the Sacrament for being together a
figure, and to do it in the instances alleged. Therefore as I grant, and show,
figure and verity, spirit and letter, shadow and substance, by every autheure
by your self produced; so reciprocally do not misinforme any longer, but say,
although they affirm figure, spirit, and shadow, so they do not contradict,
verity, letter, and substance. Otherwise every Reader will condemn your
honesty, words, and learning, as but a figure without verity, a spirit
without letter, and shadow without substance. Isichius, in leuit. l. 6. c. 22.
So certifyeth, saying. He receaueth by ignorance, who knows not this to be
the body and blood according to the truth. Which is as much to say; as who by
faythles faith receaueth a figure, without truth of the thing figured; he has
received according to ignorance, and infidelity.

But to your 4. Notes, 1. grownded upon Christ's blood called Exodus c. 7. To^.
2. Genesis 18.
As for example: Aarons rodd deuowred their rodds: whereas they were now no
rodds but Serpents. Raphael is called a young man; three angels three young men,
according to their only outward resemblance. I answer to the second, and last,
that the name benediction does rather approve the consecration, then disanull
it, and the name figure not exclude propietie as aforsayd.

The 39. untruth.
to be, that his exposition is ancient, Catholic, and Apostolical, ours new,
private, and heretical. Pardon him, being of their fellow shipp, whose spirit
consists, as Vincent. Lirinensis cap. 26. says, in contrariety; vt
ignorantia scientiae, caligo serenitatis, and tenebrae luminis appellatione
fucentur, that ignorance with them masketh under the name of knowledge, clouds,
of cleernes, and darkness, of light. So that as Luther him self confesses,
the days are come; in quibus omnia libentissime docemus and audimus praeter ea
que sunt an^iquae and solidae veritatis. Luth. l. cont. Catharin. VVherin he
and his compagnie, do most willingly hear, and teach all things else, besyd
things that are of ancient and solid verity. Therefore as I said pardon him, in
following his trade, and their train which is now described, when he claymeth
his profession to be owld, and ours new. Let us only be his Referendaries for
escapes, or untruths not to be omitted in his confession, when God of his
infinite clemency will grawnt him grace (for which I pray, perhapp as much as
him self) to repent. The 40. The 40. 41, 42. untruth.
untruth that we might never answer his objection out of Chrisostom: as also
that in the 11. hom. upon Matthew he has any word of what is by M. Rider
alleged. The 41. that Beda tells, in England in his time, the text was
taken figuratively. The 42. That these Fathers do howld against us; whereas we
profess in every place, as much as from them can lawfully be challenged. Let
fouer or five small untruths pass among the rest, that it be known I keep
the bulk as small as is possible.

57. But you will say these testimonies of these Fathers, Rider.
though of your own Prints, yet they prove nothing against you, unless the
Church of Rome should receive and allow that exposition of the Fathers to be
Catholic. If you should so reply, surely it were a weak replication, and
subject to many exceptions, and you would wring (I cannot say wrong) the
church of Rome, that she should hold a doctrine against all the old Doctors.
But if you will thus reply to bleare the eyes of the simple, yet will I
frustrate your expectation: for now I will show you that the ancient Popes and
the ancient Church of Rome held as these Fathers did: that the proposition
(Hoc est corpus meum) to be significatiue and improper, and therefore
figurative against your opinion. You shall hear the Church of Rome deliver her
own mind with her own mouth, which you cannot deny, her words be these:
Ipsa immolatio carnis quae sacerdotis manibus fit, Christi passio mors
crucifixio dicitur, non rei veritate sed significante misterio: That offering
of the flesh which is done by the hand of the Priest, is called the passion,
death, Did. 2. de consecratione canon: Hoc est: page 434 You cannot den^^ but
this Pop^ was a Protestant, and if this canon be Catholic, then is your
carnal presence antichristian.
and crucifying of Christ, but not in exactness of truth, but in mystery of
that which was signified: and the gloss there makes most plain against you.
Dicitur corpus Christi sed improprie, vt sit sensus, vocatur corpus Christi id
est significat corpus Christi: It is called the body of Christ but improperly
(that is figuratively) that this be the sense: it is called the body of
Christ, that is, it signifies the body of Christ.

Fitzimon.
57. How M. Rider abused the decretals, and how by them he received utter
destruction to his cause is demonstrated in the 46. number. Yet now again he
kicketh against the prick: well then, does the text, and gloss say, that the
immolation of the priest is called improprely the passion and death of Christ?
Truly, and so will all Catholics say the same. For who ever heard the mass of
the priest to be proprely the cruental act of the Jews against Christ, or
called the cruental sacrifice on the Cross? This is as much against us; as
when we grant it to be true, we loose no more thereby, then a candle does in
giving light to another candle, reserving as much light in it self, as if it
had lighted none. So although we affirm all that is now produced, M. Riders
suit is granted, and our light nothing deminished.

Rider.
58. I will allege in this case other Popes, and the faith of the Church of
Rome in another age, whereby the Reader may plainly see, that the ancient
Popes and ancient Rome had the true succession in doctrine which we stand now
on, not that false succession of the place, and a rotten worme-eaten chair
that you brag of: De consecratione did. 2, Panis est in altar, Glossa ibid.
page. 435.
the gloss speaks thus against your litteral sense of Hoc est corpus meum:
Hoc tamen est impossible, quod panis sit corpus Christi: yet this is
impossible that bread should be the body of Christ.

Not possible by their own confession that bread should be the body of
Christ.
Now gentle Reader see the wrong the late Popes and Priests offer to the
Catholics of this kingdom: they would have them embrace that for faith, which
the old Church of Rome held for heresy: that for possibility, which she says
is impossible. Why, would you have us to believe that which you your selves say
is impossible. This all the Jesuits and Priests in Christendom cannot answer.

If you say these two Popes and the Church of Rome then taught the truth, why
do you now dissent from the old Roman faith? If you say the Popes and
Church of Rome then erred, you will be counted an heretic: and therefore in
Gods fear confess the truth with us and the old Church of Rome, and deceive
the Catholics of this kingdom no more, with this litteral sense of Hoc est
corpus meum, which you borrow from the late Popes and late Church of Rome, and
is a new error dissenting from the old Catholic faith.

Fitzimon.
58. Here is great want of integrity. In the gloss alleged, is affirmed, that
the saying, it is impossible, that bread should be the body of Christ, should
be taken, according to a sound manner: to wit, during the being thereof, bread.
For, the saying, that of bread is made the body of Christ; Ita vt post
consecrationem, non sit iam ibi panis, sed verum corpus Christi; So that after
consecration, bread is there no longer, but the true body of Christ; is towld to
be the sound manner, and meaning intended in the very same text, and gloss.
Whether then, can he seem to any men, Catholics or others (which had the face
and conscience to misreport this gloss, and to inform the decretals, thus
distroying protestantcie to stand for protestantcie) worthy to be houlden a
lawful Preacher, or a faithful witness, or conscionable informer, or as being
a godly, spiritual, honest preacher, (when so many others his betters are in
great extremity) to have yearly above 1500. raziers or cowmbs of corn, besyds
other commodities, in such a choice deanery? I know not how many untruths
(besyd all other faultines) any other would skore up in these words, which I
calculat but for the 43 untruth only. The 43. untruth.
Let others imagine, what coffeehouse and tediousnes, any religious mind
might conceive, to incountre so contrarious a spirit, or such a spirit of
contradiction, against known truth.

59. And I will add one other Popes Canon, Rider.
Corpus Christi quod sumitur de Altari, figura est, dum panis and vinum
videntur extra: Did. 2. can. Corpus Christi page 438. col. 4. You cannot deny
this Pope to be a protestant in this point.
veritas autem dum corpus and sanguis Christi in veritate interius creditur.
The body of Christ which is taken from the Altar, is a figure so long as the
bread and wine are seen vnreceiued, but the truth (of the figure) is seen
when the body and blood are received truly, inwardly and by faith into the
heart.

Now the gloss in that place expounds the text and says. Corpus Christi est
sacrificium corporis Christi, alias falsum est quod dicit. The body of Christ
in the text signifies the sacrifice of the body of Christ, otherwise it is
false.

Out of which I note, the Church of Rome calls the outward Elements Christ's
body, that is, a figure of his body, being not received though consecrated.

Secondly, that the body of Christ, whereof the Sacrament must be a figure, The
Popes gloss against the Popes text.
must be received by faith into the soul, not by the mouth into the stomach:
Now the gloss says, the text is false, unless, etc. But I leave the jar
to be reconciled by you, who be the Popes friends, yet this I say, And Gelasius
another Pope more ancient then those against Eut. is of this opinion.
Maledicta glossa quae corrumpit textum.

These three Popes and the Church of Rome in those days (it was before the
birth of your Transubstantiation and your carnal presence) jumpt with all the
old Fathers, and the Primitive Church that lived the first six hundred years
after Christ, and say it is called the body of Christ, the flesh of Christ,
the passion and death of Christ, but not rei veritate, not indeed and truth,
but mistically, significatiuelie, improperly, figuratively, and by way of
representation, and that it is impossible otherwise to be the body of Christ.

Yet when we speak of figures in the Sacrament you mock us. When we say the
phrase is figurative, therefore the sense must be spiritual. You deride us, as
misinterpreters of Scriptures and Fathers. But if your leisure and learning
would afford you but favor to read with a holy devotion, the canonical
Scriptures, and the ancient doctors of Christ's Primitive Church, that left us
these lessons for our learning, you should see that we learn what they taught,
and do what they said, and you follow not what they commanded, because you
know not what they have recorded.

Fitzimon.
59. As he goes forward, according to the Apostles saying; Proficit in peius;
he increases in ill. This same text, is cited in the 46. number, according to
the express sense thereof, and title prefixed to this chapter: to signify our
believing Christ's body both substantialy and also figuratively, in the
Sacrament. If any learned man conferr this said text, and as it is interpreted
by M. Rider; I request him not to spyte or spitt at his memory, but to pity
it. For, to have thus construed, it is a figure as bread and wine are scene
extra owtwardly; he translateth, as they are seen vnreceaued. Secondly, for
what he should interprett; but it is the verity, as the body and blood of
Christ in truth is believed inwardly; he inserteth a parenthesis, making the
truth to be of the verity of the figure, and not of the body of Christ. I
protest before God and his Angels, that grief, and shame of his misdemeanure,
do auert my mind from being employed to unfold, and refute him, and procure
me to ouerslipp much filthe, deserving to be sharply, and in the most heynouse
manner reproved. But I pray you, considre notwithstanding these faults apparent
to all eyes, in these words of his in the text, and margent: This all the
Jesuits and priests in Christendom can not answer: you can not deny this pope
to be a protestant in this point: confess the truth with us, and the owld
Church of Rome. He that told you before him self, that S. Bernard living in
the year 1190, was in the palpeblest time of grossest supersttion meaning
thereby papistrie, here forgetting him self, informs, that the decretals, and
popes therein alleged, collected by Gratian at the same time of S. Bernard, (by
his saying most superstitiouse) do stand for protestantcy. He that would not
be tried but by the Fathers of the first five hundred years, professing the
world soon after to have apostated into papistrie) is now come to claim the
decretals compyled after a thousand years. He that in clayming the same
Fathers, as appears in the 46. number, the number precedent, and in this
present number, is beyond all controversy, utterly foiled and forsaken of
them; and therefore justly does multiply the 44. and 45. untruth, (that the
least be spoaken) in the foresaid bowld, assured, and reiterated protestation.

The 44 45. untruth. Lactant. l. 5. c. 3.
Anaxagoras is generaly Have we not found an heyer to him, who can face out
black to be white, that is reproofs to be approbations, denials affirmations,
owld to be young, falshod to be truth, darkness to be light, substance to be
figurs, preaching to be communion, the owld testament to be as fruictfull as
the new, the primative Church and Fathers to have been late sectaries,
Catholic to be heretical, etc. I bequeath then, as in my testament, to ensuing
posterity, that hereafter, when men desyer to specify any readers of such
resolution as had Anaxagoras, and his foresaid successor; they bestow on them,
for a perpetual memorial, of such ancestors, not that they are impudent,
contentiouse, frantic, deprauers, desperate, falsifiers, corrupters, against
all pregnant and palpable truth, but only without all injury, that they ride,
or are Ryders. As for his annotations that the church calls the outward
elements according to their appearance, a figure; and that the body of Christ
must be received into the soul; unless he doted, he would not think any
prejudice thereby to our cause. For we grant both to be true: but without being
only a figure; or food of the only soul. His opposing the gloss, and text,
as contrary, they being evidently most co^cordant, and the gloss only telling
the text to be intended of Christ's body not in extensiue manner, but as it is a
sacrifice; also his addition that because it enters the soul, it can not not
enter the body; what stupiditie does it not contain?

60. Rider.
Now briefly I will acquaint the Reader only with the times when these Doctors
lived, and the places where they taught this doctrine: and then we shall see
whether this your litterall exposition, of Hoc est corpus meum, be Catholic
or not.

Clemens Alexandrinus was divinity Reader in the famous city of Alexandria
in Egypt. In the year of our Lord. If you will read advisedly these Fathers,
you shall see plainly your own errors.
107 Origin was his scholar, and succeeded Lectures in the same place, 204
Tertullian Divinity Reader in Carthage, in Afric. 206 Ambrose Bishop of
Millaine in Italy. 370 Hierome Divinity Reader in Stridona in Hungaria, and
sometime in Slauonia. 387 Chrysostom Bishop of Constantinople in Gracia. 406
Augustine Bishop of Hippo in Affricke. 426 Venerable Beda a famous learned man
in England. 570
And thus you may see, that neither Alexandria, Carthage, Milano, Stridona,
Constantinople, Hippo, nor Rome which are famous Cities. Nay, which is more:
neither Egypt, Italy, Hungaria and Slauonia, nor England, which are famous
kingdoms, Nay which is most of all, the three parts of the world, Asia,
Affricke, and Europe, never heard, or had such a litteral exposition, of Hoc
est corpus meum, for at least eight hundred years after Christ, and yet your
Jesuits and priests will have their doctrine to be Catholic, Vincentius
aduersus Hereticos. That is, truly catholic says he. Quod semper vbique and
ab omnibus est creditum.
which cannot be, unless it were at all times, and in all places, and of all
persons received; for so your Vincentius defines Catholic doctrine. And
here you see that for the three parts of the world, and for many hundred
years after Christ it was not known. And therefore it is neither Apostolical
nor Catholic.

Fitzimon.
60. One that fails to be a physician, might perchance not be an ignorant
musition; or not being a gardener, might yet be a hors-corser. So in degrees of
learning, he that can not write well, might yet perhapp indyte well; he that is
no rethorician, might yet be a grammarian; he that is no poet, migt yet be a
linguist; he that is noe divine, might yet be an antiquarist or chronicler. But
to fail in all degrees, and sciences, without knowing any one faculty
soundly, and yet to profess a general skill universally, and to possess such a
deanrie intierly, shows the Muses to be stepmothers to his constitution, him
self to have lost great time in following some other more convenient
profession, and that Church livings are run cleene out of their wonted
chanel, as soon to a Dunse, as a Doctor.

Sarcerius in postilla domin. 10.
A reforming brother, by name Sarcerius, makes this plain Iam fere in
prouerbium abijt, satius, and tutius esse, in rebus ciuilibus cum Mercatore
Papista agere, quam cum eo qui se euangelicum iactat. It is now almost gone
into a proverb, to be more expedient, and safe, to deal in civil matters (for
the point of belief, and true protestations) with a Papist Merchant, then one
that boasts him self a preacher of the gospel. Experience in all times, and
places, has, and does discover these good gospellers to deserve to be thus
mistrusted by their approved legertimain in their informations, and
protestations; wherein they sell, or exchange their conscience and credit, for a
short applaud of ignorant popularitie. For it is not only their profession,
says S. Ireneus, S. Iron. l. c. c. 15. S. Greg. Naz. ora. 2. de pace.
and S. Nazianzen, but their perfection, by false sleights to disguise
falsehoods, for truethes; that every of them is so much preferred to his
compagnions, by how much he does excel him, in impudent forgeries. Do not you
behold, how contries, cities, and places are now towld to have been formerly
Protestant; and so towld, as the particular times, situations, and many other
particulars, are numbered for greater persuasion, by one of them, who in the 21.
number deny all antiquity, desclaime all Fathers, and in the 34. number
confessed a late begyning, and light, never before known in other places? Do
not you consider, how both parts of this contradiction, are as vehemently, and
contentiously affirmed to be true, by preachers of the Gospel, as is possible,
although it be impossible that both could be true? Conjecture then, whether
these former foul imputations be not by them deserved. But let us examine
point, by point.

Rider by mangled evidences, stowtly auowched Clement Alexandrinus, Origin,
Tertullian, Ambrose, Hierom, Chrysostom, Augustine, and Beda, to stand for him,
and to impugn our opinions. In which numbers, all that he alleges out of
them for the most part, being granted to him; yet is it showed, that he is as
naked for any favor from them received, as Adam (after his rich reckening to
have been as God) remained, when he had eaten the prohibited aple.
Nevertheless, he knitteth up his accounts with a total sum of all Doctors,
for these foresaid eight; all cities wherein they dwelled, by way of consent to
their verdicts; all contryes, wherein such cities were, by conformity in one
and the same belief; and consequently, Asia, Africa, Europ, are inferred, to
concur in their persuasions. I grant also, this collection, or summing of
accounts, to be allowable among Catholics: although among reformers, it has
no manner of sequel. For, if Cartwright in succession of time be alleged, to
affirm, or deny any matter: will it be supposed that Whitgift consents
(think you) thereto? The same I might by induction delate of the residue: as
after is testified, upon the article in the Creed, In the 21. numb.
of the Communion of Saints. Whereas therefore, by testimony of all principal
Protestants of all sects, in the world, the foresaid Fathers to whose belief
Asia, Africa, and Europe are by M. Rider linked, do belong to us; and also,
whereas in the foresaid numbers, and in all this book, they them selves do
confirm the same: can M. Rider escape, from condemning his own profession, to
have wanted approbation in all Asia, Afric, and Europe, if there be any
worth, or wit, in such his deduction?

Beda, whom he should know best. Although he might find in his own relation,
that he lived, in the year 731. and also longer, until the year 776. never
thelesse M. Rider places his life, anno 570. Which if it be not confessed
erroneus, and false, he makes Beda to have been 206. years owld: then which,
what could more absurdly be affirmed? The 46. untruth. Beda l. 5. c. vlt. in
fine. Et in ep. de Equinoctio iuxta Anatolium. ad Frat. VVicrhedam. Vide Baron.
de etate Beda.
I should therefore do him great wrong, not to calculat in this gross
miscompting, the 46. untruth. And that Beda peculiarly does ratify all points
of our religion (as well for the real presence, as for all other, of Masses,
Matins, Purgatory, Crosses, Relics, Religious professio^s, Vows,
Pilgrimages, Miracles, etc,) is distinctly, and undoubtedly appearing, in his
ecclesiastical English history, translated by D. Stapleton, and conjoined to
the Fortress of Faith.

As for his puritanical tearming, Clement Alexandrinus, and others, Hoc est
corpus meum, was once heard of; adding 230. years of his own allowa^ce: if he
obtain of him any resolution, having any litteral sense; I will think it
worthy to be chronicled, for a monstrous miracle. Mark well, I do not say,
that he can give no arithmetical sense, by him practiced; but literal sense.
For it is his profession, how ignorant arithmetic so ever he uses in a point
of learning; yet to use in a point of leasing a skillfull Arithmatick, to make
every 570, to stretch at least to 800; or else to fail of his purpose. And in
this knowledge, he accommodateth him self to their manners, who are by his
brethren puritans, touched to the quick, in the acts of parliament anno 13.
Elizab. c. 10. and cap. 17, although in doctrine he detesteth them, as after
shall be testified. I might give some other, a like question, to propound him:
for from what person, or City, or Contrie, has he inferred Asia, to be
against us, or for him? I find none specified, belonging to Asia. I imagine, he
also will have a answer, without all literal sense, or none at all. Yes
suerly, his truest answer will be, that Asia followed his forsaid inductio^s, as
well as other his deductio^s, his controversy.

Question. 4. de existentia corporis Christi in Eucharistia page 154.
61. And a late Friar and friend of yours, old Father Josephus Angles, brings
in Cardinal Caietans opinion writing upon saint Thomas Aquinas in this
manner. Per Euangelium non possunt catholici hereticos conuincere ad
intelligenda verba haec (hoc est corpus meum) proprie: sed tenendum hoc esse
solum ex authoritate ecclesia, quae ita verba consecrationis declarat. That is,
the Catholics cannot convince or enforce the Heretics by the Gospel to
understand these words, (hoc est corpus meum, this is my body) properly, but
this exposition must be fetched and held from the authority of the Church, So
this your religion is none of Christ's because it is not warrantted by the
gospel of Christ,
which so expounds the words of consecration. See I pray you, what one of
your leardnest Friars reports out of one of your skarlet Cardinals of Rome:
that you cannot prove by Christ's Gospel these words, (this is my body) to
have a proper and litterall signification. So that CHRIST'S Gospel condemns
your litterall and proper exposition: and so your carnal presence of Christ
must be maintained, from, and by, the authority of the church of Rome, though
Christ and his Gospel say no.

Alas, with what conscience dare you teach the Catholics this heresy, Super
quaest. 75. Art. primo. Fol. 236. Printed at Venice. 1593.
which by your own confession has no warrant from Christ's Gospel? And
Cardinal Ca^etane himself writing upon your saint Thomas Aquinas speaks to
the same purpose, that the Scriptures speak nothing (express) expressly of
Christ his carnal presence in the Sacrament, but only in these words (hoc est
corpus meum) which words (says he) are two ways expounded: first, properly:
secondly, metaphoricallie. But (says he) the master of the sentences is to
be taxed, Lib. 4. did. 10.
who held too much with the figurative interpretation. And there you shall see
that he blusheth not to say, that your litterall sense, is not from the
Gospel, but from the church of Rome.

And if your Roman Church may be both party, witness, and judge, there is no
doubt but the verdict must sound on your side. And there the Cardinal handles
Duas nouitates valde mirabiles, which being duly examined parturiunt montes,
etc. with many other forgeries and fooleries to maintain your carnal kingdom
of your Breaden-god. Thus much concerning your two consecratorie propositions,
which by the testimony of Scriptures and Fathers be figuratiuelie to be
expounded as we say, not properly and litterallie as you untruly teach.

How Caietan, and the Master of Sentences, are by him falsified.
61. I Confess that a late Friar, might be owld in age. Fitzimon.
But I would feign be instructed, what proof is affoorded, that concerning
Angles, by him declared late and owld, is not showed little pithe, or method, in
such medlie: Angles then affirms, (says he) that heretics can not be
co^uicted by the gospel, to understand, This is my body, properly. Why, can
any doubt thereof, that has any common sense? Do we not behold, that heretics
notwith standing the gospel, do deny it? Do we not behold, that M. Rider
among the rest, immediately before affirmed, that it was unheard of, in 800.
years after Christ; and thereby is made an heretic, by his own alleged
late, and old, Angles? Should we not remember the open protestation of a
Protestant: Bullinger decad. 5. de caena apud Schluss. lib. 2. art 16.
Zuinglianos non posse credere Christum esse in coena praesentem, vero suo
corpore, licet omnia in mundo Concilia, omnes Angeli, and Diui id iubeant
credere; The Zuinglians not to be able to believe Christ to be in the supper
according his true body, although all the Concils of the world, all Angels,
and Saints did command to believe it? To infer, also that what can not be
proved out of the gospel, is condemned by the gospel; is a blasphemous
Riderian sequel. For nether the holy Trinity, nor manifould principal parcels
of our belief, mentioned in the 33. number, can be proved by the gospel: yet
are not condemned nether by the gospel, nor by condemned enemies of the
gospel.

And could impudence it self inform, and infer, in the words Caietan
professed Christ, and the Gospel, not to stand for the true, propre, and
litteral sense of these words, Hoc est corpus meum? Caiet. in 3. part. D. Th.
q. 75. a. 1.
O desperate deprauations! Thus Caietan discoursed. Habemus igitur ex veritate
verborum Domini, in sensu proprio, corpus Christi veraciter esse in
Eucharistia; and hoc est primum quod ex euangelio habemus circa hoc
sacramentum. We have therefore out of the verity of the words of our Lord, in
their propre sense, the body of Christ to be verilye in the Eucharist: and
this is the first that we have out of the gospel belonging to this Sacrament.
Behold now the forhead of M. Rider, and think in equity, whether impudence
inioyed ever a more ordinary tabernacle, to seat, and plant it self, then
therein. Caietan, (says M. Rider) affirms that the Scriptures speak nothing
expresselye of Christ's carnal presence. I leave the word Carnal, to the Carnal
interpreter) in the sacrament. Contrary to which, says Caietan him self: the
words of our Lord, in their propre sense, teach the verity of Christ verilye
being, in the Eucharist. Again: He blusheth not (says M. Rider) to say, that
your litteral sense is not from the gospel. Contrary to which (worthy to
wreast blushing out of a flint) says Caietan, and that in the same place
cited: this we have out of the gospel, belonging to this Sacrament.

Is it not therefore, the 47. untruth, that we are said, not to be Prou. 29.
Verbis non emendabitur seruus durus: Si enim intellexerit, non obediet; By
words (either of God, or man) will not the stiff servant be amended: for
although he understand, he will not obey. Is it not the 48. The 47 48 49. 50.
51. untruth.
untruth, upon such premises, that Christ's gospel condemns us? The 49.
that by our own confessions, we have no warrant, from the gospel? The 50.
that Caietan relates proofs against us? As loud, and lewed, is the 51.
untruth, Caietan to reprehend the Master of Sentences, for houlding to much
with the figurative interpretation; he only reporting of him, that he pursues
their error, who esteemed such words should be taken metaphoricalie.

S. Augustine: S. August. l. 2. con. Petil.
We are constrained, to hear, debat, and refute these tryfles, only because
the seely by them be not entangled. For otherwise what grief could be
greater, then to spend time, and pain, in incountring him, whose protection is
to pervert disproofs into proofs, affirmations into negations, falshods into
truethes, foes into friends, and not to weye synn, or shame, because he would be
spoken of, and for a short time might escape vncontrowled? Upon my conscience,
and honesty, if I could, I would not follow him, but by only mildest method,
and modestest manner: but his inueterated, and reiterated falsifications, and
blasphemies, by no Christian mind might be less rigorously pursued, then is
done by me. Who could in any piety, or peacable disposition, say, or do less
to his blasphemy against the B. Sacrament, among so innumerable others,
tearming it a carnal kingdom of a breaden God; then to apply the words of S.
Cyrill, S. Cyrill. l. 10. con. Iulia.
Nihil facilius est scurrae, quam mentiri, and temere vituperare; there is
nothing more easy to a scoffer, then to forge, and disprayse? Such scurrilitie
against the B. Sacrament, Pagans (as after in the 147. number appears)
frequented, and commended to their successors in impiety,

S. Bern. ser. 66. super cantica.
Who, as S. Bernard says; nec rationibus conuincuntur, quia non intelligunt:
nec authoritatibus corriguntur, quia non recipient: nec flectuntur suasionibus,
quia subuersi sunt. Probatum est, mori magis eligunt, quam conuerti. Horum
finis interitus: horum nouissima incendium est; By reasons are not convicted,
because they understand not: by authorities are not corrected, because they
allow them not; by persuasions are not inclined, because they are perverse. It
is approved, they had rather die, then be reclaimed. The end of such is
destruction: their conclusion is fire. The only thing that I entreat of the
honester sort of Reformers, is this request of S. Augustine: S. Aug. l. 1. de
morih. Cathol. Eccl. cap. 18.
Audite Doctos Ecclesae Catholicae viros tanta pace animi, and eo voto, quo vos
ego audiui: nihil opus erit 20. annis quibus me ludificastis: long omnino,
long breuiore tempore quid intersit inter veritatem vanitatemque cognoscetis.
Hear the learned of the Catholic Church, with like peace of mind and desyer
as I heard you. There will be no need of 20. years, in which you beguiled me:
in far less, far less time, you will perceive what manifest difference
there is betwixt verity, and vanity. And in the same book in the 34. chapter
he says; Tum videbitis quid inter ostentationem and sinceritatem, inter viam
rectam and errorem, inter fidem and fallaciam (etc.) intersit; Then will you
behold what is betwixt vaunting and verity, right and straying, says and
fraud, etc. Which otherwise unless you help your selves that God may help you,
you will not discover, but still remain deceived.

Rider.
62. But yet you perchance will demand the reason why Christ called it his
body, if it be not his body: Let me first ask you another question, and then
I will resolve you this: Genesis 17.10.11. Romans 4.11. Exodus 12.11.
Why did God call circumcision the covenant, when in deed it was not the
covenant, but (as God himself says) a sign of the covenant. Why did God call,
the Paschall lamb the Passover, when it was but a sign of the Angels passing
over the houses where the blood of the lamb was sprinkled? one answer will
resolve both our questions. It is the usual manner of the holy Ghost in all
Sacraments both of the old Testament and new, Wheresoever the holy Ghost
speaks of Sacramets the phrase is tropicall, mitonymimicall and figurative,
attributing the name of the thing signified to the sign signifying, as in
these examples the phrase adds a dignity to the sacrament, but changes not
the nature of the sacrament
to term the visible sign by the name of the thing signified, as circumcision
is called the covenant, the Lamb is called the Passover, so Baptism is
called the fountain of regeneration, and bread Christ's body, and yet in deed
they are but outward signs, and to the faithful only seals graced by the
holy Ghost, with the names of the things they represent and confirm, the more
to move and stir up our affections, and to edge our zeal with a religious
preparation to receive the same, and to lift up our hearts and souls by faith,
to behold, consider, and feed upon (Christ crucified) the thing signified. Yet
for your further satisfaction, I will entreat Augustine to answer your doubt,
who says: Aug. epistol. 23. ad Bonifacium:
Si enim sacramenta quandam similitudinem earum rerum quarum sacramenta sunt
non haberent, omnino sacramenta non essent, ex hac autem similitudine plerunque
etiam ipsarum rerum nomina accipiunt. Sicut ergo secundum quendam modum
sacramentum corporis Christi, corpus Christi est, sacramentum sanguinis Christi
sanguis Christi est, ita sacramentum fidei fides est: In English thus. If the
Sacrament had not some certain similitude and likeness of the things whereof
they be Sacraments, they should be no Sacraments at all. And of this similitude
many times they have the names of those things themselves, as the Sacrament of
the body of Christ is after a certain manner the body of Christ, and the
sacrament of his blood is after a certain manner his blood. So the Sacrament of
faith (or Baptism) is faith. Out of which we may note: first: they are but
Sacraments, or similitudes of the thing signified not the things themselves:
secondly, that bread and wine are the body and blood of Christ but secundum
quendam modum, after a certain manner and shows, how by an example, as the
Sacrament of faith is faith, so the Sacrament of Christ's body is Christ's body,
but the Sacrament of faith is not faith naturally, substantiallie by a change
of substance, but by change of quality or use, therefore the Sacrament of
Christ's body, is not changed into the substance of Christ's body, Theodoret
dialog. 2. cap. 24. page 113. and dialog. 1. cap. 8. page 54. read them I pray
you.
but only in quality and use, as Theodoret says in his first dialogue: not
changing nature, but adding grace unto nature. And the same Father in his
second dialogue explaines this more plainly, saying, the mystical signs after
sanctification, Non recedunt a sua natura manent enim in priore substantia and
figura etc. they depart not from their nature, but remain in their former
substance, and figure, and may be seen and touched as before: Out of which
ancient learned Father I observe three necessary points for the Catholics
instruction, Consecration unknown to Theodor, therefore it is a new term. The
change is in the name honor and use, not in the nature.
and your confutation: First, he says, Post sanctificationem, after
sanctification, then your new coined term of consecration was not known in the
Church of God, but sanctification and benediction. Secondly, I note out of this
Father, that though the Sacraments have gotten a new divine quality, yet they
have not lost their nature they had before, as you untruly teach. Thirdly, I
observe that he confuted by the example of bread and wine in the Sacrament,
certain Heretics who held that Christ's body was changed into his deity
after his ascension: for this is the Fathers proof against those heretics.
Either answer this fully or confess the truth.
That as bread and wine are truly bread and wine after sanctification, as they
were before sanctification, even so is Christ's body as truly a body now
after his ascension, as it was before his ascension. So now the Priests of new
Rome cannot say that the bread and wine have lost their true natures and
properties in the Lords supper after sanctification, unless they will also say
with the Heretics, that Christ has lost the nature of a true body now after
his ascension. And Chrysostom seconds Theodoret saying: Chrisost. ad Caesariu^
Monach. Marck this well ye Pre^sts and Jesuits.
Ante sanctificationem, etc. Before it be sanctified we call it bread but the
divine grace once sanctifying it by the ministry of the Priest it is delivered
from the name of bread, and counted worthy to be called the Lords body, though
the nature of bread continue there still. Out of which I note first the father
calls it sanctification, not consecration. Secondly it is called bread before
sanctification and is bread in nature after sanctification. And thirdly after
sanctification it is called the Lords body yet it is not the Lords body in
deed because the nature of bread remains. What can you say to these
pregna^te proofs to satisfy the doubtful Catholics?
And therefore in that it is called the Lords body, it must be so
Sacramentally, figuratively and improperly. And Gelasius your own Pope whom
you dare not contradict says plainly; Non desinit esse substantia panis vel
natura vini. There seaceth not to be the substance of bread and the nature of
wine.

Of the Circumcisions being called the Covenant; And the Paschal Lambs being
called the Passover; as if the B. Sacrament no otherwise is to be called the
body of Christ.
62. FIrst in this discourse, M. Rider deals friendly with me, Fitzimon.
and fraudulently with others. Friendly; in obiecting against my profession a
stale objection, that Circumcision is called the Covenant; and in affoording to
me an answer to avoid it, that in the same place it is called, a sign of the
Covenant. So that I need not trouble my self for other answer, such
exposition being conjoined with the objection; and no such in the Sacrament
against which it is brought; but rather many contrary clauses testifying it not
to be only a sign. Fraudulently; in affirming that one answer will resolve
both questions: in heaping diverse dissonant matters, as consonant: in wreasting
and perverting Scriptures. For the first, one answer can not resolve both;
Circumcision being called a Covenant, and the exposition being conjoined to
such tearming thereof, only as being a sign. Whereas in the B. Sacrament nether
is there any such exposition conjoined; nether can the words adjoined be
understood of a sign, that it is the body which was to be delivered, and the
blood which was to be shed. For what infidelity were it to affirm, a sign
of Christ's body to be delivered for our redemption, and a sign of his blood
to be shedd for the remission of our synns?

A heaping of dissonant matters is perceived; when it is affirmed; Victima
transitus Domini; the sacrifice of the passing of our Lord; and therefore is
distinguished from being the very passing it self: which is otherwise
observed, as I said, in the B. Sacrament. These objections being then to no
purpose, in our purpose; they also are odious by their first author, to such
their application. Zuinglius him self, confesses the author, in these
words: That he haueing preached, how the word [is] in this is my body,
Zuingl. tom. 2. in subsid. de Eucharistia fol. 249.
stood for it signifies; The Notarie in the Senate of two hundred, excepted,
that howsoever such gloss might stand in parables, it could not stand in
Sacraments. He troubled with such a replye, went to bed; At midnight an
Aduiser, whom he knew not whether he was black, or white (his language, and
discourse, will easelie disguise what angel he was) said: Why thou Dunse,
answer out of Exodus, 12. v. 11. Est enim phase, id est, transitus Domini; it is
the paschal, that is the passing of the Lord. The conclusion now is, that if
this were a good angel; Zuinglius must be confessed a Dunse. If a badd angel; I
would wish all honest Protestants, to be no longer disciples to his doctrine.
Howsoever, good, or badd, nether ought he to be able to seduce us from the
doctrine we have received: nor is there any material force in his objection
against us vnaunswered.

But at the words following, Christians, stopp your cares; That Tit. 3.
but only an outward Sign thereof, and that to the faithful. O pestiferous
puritantcie! Could not S. Paul bridle you, from ryding against his express
testimony, that we are saved by the lauer of regeneration? Could not the
majesty of Gods sacred word, Mat. 3.11. Mar. 1.8. Luc. 3.16. Ioa 1 32 Acts.
2.38. Mar. 16.
every where extant, hinder you from euacuating also that Sacrament? It which
brings the holy Ghost? It which gives remission of synns? it which besyd
belief, is necessary for remission of synns, and eternal life? It by which,
and the word of life, we are cleansed, Acts. 2.37 38. c. 22.17. 1. Pet. 3.21.
from, synn, and saved, as truly as Noe, and his family, was saved by the arc
and water supporting it? But of this God willing, in the 122. number, and else
where, Vide number. 36.
when I prove M. Rider a profund puritan. Whereof also not a little is forspoken,
in the 39. number; where is demonstrated these very two sacraments only left, to
be esteemed forcelesse. At least, this counterpoint to Gods word, in making
Baptism no regeneration, but a naked sign thereof, is the 52. untruth. The 52
untruth.


Augustine, is Ridericaly also interpreted. By the first note, he makes
sacraments for having similitude with that they signify, (such as Christ's
body, and bread, by nourrishing; and Christ's Passion, and Baptism, have by
clensing) to be nothing else but similituds only, and not the things them
selves. Which if it were true; Christ being said in Scripture, Sap. 1.2. Cor.
4. Hebr. 1. Coloss. 1.
to be the image or lykenes of his Father, should not be one with his Father;
He being said to be in shape found as man; should not be man. By the second
note he infers; that because S. Augustine says, bread, and wine, are the
body, and blood of Christ, after a certain manner; (meaning in resemblance of
feeding) therefore they should not be such truly. Which if it also were true;
when Christ was invisibly among the Jews, he might be said not to have been
truly among them, because he was only in a certain manner among them. Likewise
if Tertullian say truly, lib. de praescrip. c. 51. Non possunt dici penitus
ipsa, quae sunt in aliqua sui part vitiata; they can not altogether be said to
be the same, that are blemished in any part: it would follow, that any that is
blinded or mayned would not be him self, being but in a certain manner the same.

therefore the Sacrament of Christ's body is not changed, but only in quality.
By as wise a therefore, might it be inferred; Gods word (which is more
powerful then S. Augustins words) terms Christ a Lion, the Apostls salt,
and light: therefore because by such calling they were not changed in substance,
nether-was there any other thing, wine, rivers, rodds or any thing else, changed
by Gods word in substance: and so Scriptures would be denied, creation
distrusted, and all belief perverted. It is also no merueil, that Thodoret, or
Gelase, (whom all others cupple in this objection) affirm, the mystical signs
after sanctification not to depart from their nature, figure, or substance (to
wit by outward appearance, and sensible imaginations, and effects;) whereas the
gospel does signify the water substantialy turned into wine, to have been
water, saying: When the master of the feast (or ceremonies) had tasted water
turned into wine; it being then no more water, but wine. Also M. Rider a little
before, said, the outward signs by the holy Ghost to be graced with the names
of the things they represent. And consequently, bread appearing in outward
sign, may be called bread in substance, by M. Riders rule against him self.
But a more worthy (though not a more weighty) adversary shall impugn him; S.
Lanfrancus, Bishop of Canterbury, who lived long before Innocent the thirds
time, the hatcher, and patcher, (if M. Rider forge not) of all our opinions.

S. Lanfrancus in suo lib. con. Berengar.
Corpus Christi vocatur panis, vel quia ex pane conficitur, vel quia intuentium
Whether consecration be a new name, in the 64. number will apareare. By the
way, in a word, M. Rider; Does S. Chrysostom say, that the nature of bread
does continue still? You bidd priests, and Jesuits, in the margent to mark:
which is the common phrase, of Faulconers. They mark, and behold, you to be
the Faulconer, Proverb. 10.
of whom the scripture says: Qui nititur mendacijs hic pascit ventos, idem
autem ipse sequitur aues volantes. He that groundeth on untruths, he leads
wyndes, to pasture, and he the very same, follows birds flying. They may
marcke you often at such your game, and your wynds, and birds, skipping, and
straying from your reach; but no such matter (as in the 113. number will be
manifested) was ever dreamed by S. Chrysostom, that any yet could ever mark.
This then the 53. The 53. untruth.
untruth.

Rider.
63. But you here will obtrude your oulde slanderous objection, that we accept
of the Sacraments no better then bare figures. No, we acknowledge a change and
an alteration, but not of the substance but of the use. Is not this a marvelous
change wrought by the holy Ghost in the due administration of the Lords supper
according to Christ's institution that of commen bread and wine such as daily we
feed our bodies with, is made the dreadefull and reverend mysteries of Christ
crucified: where by we neither look upon the bare naked elements as common
creatures, but as sanctified food: And in such sort that even as the bread does
nourish our bodies, and the wine does comfort our spirits: so truly, reallie,
and unfeignedly does the heavenly food of his body crucified, and his blood
shed for our sins, by faith in the time of the holy Supper, feed and
nourish our souls into everlasting life: and so is made and sealed our real
conjunction with Christ, not by his bodily and local discention into our
stomachs, but by our spiritual ascension to him by faith. This is our
doctrine touching these figurative propositions, warranted by Scriptures, and
witnessed by the auncientest Fathers. Clem. Alex: Theod: August. with many more
never heard of consecration but of santification and benediction.
Hitherto has been plainly and directly proved, that your two propositions
be figurative, not proper. Secondly, that the substances of bread and wine
remain after consecration, and therefore there can be no such carnal presence
of Christ by Transubstantiation under the forms of bread and wine as you
deem. Now I am come to your two maine pillars that support and underprop your
carnal presence, which if they fail you, then your foundation is sandy, and
your buylding will not be able to abide the least blast of Christ's breath. The
first is consecration: the second transubstantiation: for unless there be
consecration, there can be no transubstantiation, and then no carnal presence
of Christ in the Sacrament. And then neither your mass nor matiens worth two
pence. And so the souls then in your imagined purgatory may cry, and yell
for lack of a dirge and a mass of Requiem.

How M. Rider does avoid our objection, that they accept of the Sacraments, no
better then of bare figures.
63. WHat I have said in the 39. number, does testify, Fitzimon.
whether they can think any better of Sacraments then as bare figures. Vide
nu. 78.
Listen to hear it a little before lowdly affirmed by M. Rider him self. So
Baptism is called the fountain of regeneration, and bread Christ's body, and
yet in deed they are but outward Signs. In this place, he says, it is a
slanderous objection. But by your leave, you are made to object so slanderously
to your face, as slanderous shame follows. Do not you affirm them to be
outward signs, and figures, are they not all one in this article? Why then do
you not confess, that you are your own slanderer? But we part not so. Then he
says: No, we acknowledge a change and alteration, but not of the substance but
of the use. First of this change I pray you observe this annotatio^ of Fox,
saying: Here is to be noted that Peter Martyr in his answer at Oxford, Fox.
Acts and Men. page 1255.
did grant a change in the substance (and not only in the use) of bread and
wine, which in Cambridge by the Bishop D. Ridley was denied. So that M. Rider
has given doctor Ridley a knock, for denial of a change. I think you would
now know, how this change is wrought, Attend the means, and manner. We look
(says he) upon the dreadful and reverend mysteries of Christ crucified, not as
upon bare naked elements, but as sanctified food. I ask you first, 1. Pet. 3.
(in confidence that you are ready always to satisfy every one that asks
you a reason of that hope that is in you; according as S. Peter advises) since
when these mysteries, in your religion, have been allowed to be called
dreadful, and reverend? In the foresaid 39. number, the meanest sermon of a
Puritan minister, is made more auaylable then they. They are then declared
superfluous, but among forgetful persons: no better, then bare beggarly
ordonances: no more to be regarded, then any other common bread, etc. Yet here
they are made very terrible and venerable, as in the last words is contained.

I can not among other observations conceal, that by imputing Paul, were not
comparable in operation to our sacrament in controversy, S. Aug. l. 3. de
Trin. c. 4.
is said by S. Augustine: Nether the tongue of Paul, nor his paper, nor ink, nor
words, nor wrytings, de we esteem as the body, or blood of Christ: so far
was he from thinking that any Puritan sermon was so effectual as this
sacrament. Secondly, I crave, how your supper is sanctified? For the Cross, or
blessing, you will not allow: and of prayer, and the word of true Scripture,
in this discourse you make no mention: and other sanctification you can not
justify. Thirdly, how by only looking, you make the food, to be sanctified?
Have you any Gorgonical virtue in your looking, that all that you look on, is
sanctified; as all that looked on Gorgons head, were said tra^sformed?
Fowerthly, how for all this dreadful, and reverend change, there is any
alteration from a bare figure, considering, that the Jews ceremonies, were as
much sanctified, and looked at, as your supper; and also by all protestants of
your sort, equaled thereto? Fifthly, how has your looking changed the use of
bread, which is only to nourish; you confessing the use thereof in the sacrament
to be no other, then to represent Christ's feeding, and conforting our souls,
as bread does feed, and confort our bodies? The use therefore thereof, seems to
me not to be changed.

Because I know these dema^ds insoluble by your whole profession, and that I
see your extremity, and perplexity, by your figures, and dark words, never
at an end, or stay; but that by means of your figures and signs, you can not
tell whether to use great or small terms, or devotion toward them; nor do not
constantly determine what conceils may be had, or held, of them; but some time
kneeling thereto is requisite, and some time sitting thereat will suffice, and
some time (as Barlow in the sum of the conference before the K. Majesty, page
98. says) it must be received in ambling thereto, whereof the indecencie is there
said to have been very offensive. I will conclude in the words of S.
Epiphanius: S. Epiphan. l. 2. c. 12 cont. Cerdon. Vide number. 36.
Veritati non credentes, in mendacio autem volutantes perdiderunt panem verae
vitae in profundum vmbrae iacentes: similes Aesopi cani qui panem reliquit, in
vmbram autem eius impetum fecit and perdidit escam. Not believing truth and
wallowing in falsehood, they have lost the bread of true life, tumbling in the
bottom of a shadow: like Esops dog, who left the bread, and snatching the
shadow, lost his bayt. Then which sentence, never was there any more pertinent
against our figurists. For, their glosing the sacrament with dreadful and
reverend words, having euacuated the fruict thereof; and making it but a
shadow, when shadows are changed into substance and truth; how could any
thing more aptly be applied unto them, then by saying, they had left the bread,
snatched the shadow, and lost the bayte?

64. But first I must tell you, the word is new, Rider.
neither used by Christ or his Apostles in the institution of the sacrament,
nor heard of in any ancient Father, for many hundred years after Christ.
Again, never read in any author, sacred or profane, that consecration should
signify to change one substance into another, for the nature of the word will
not bear it. Now seeing by Christ or his Apostle Paul, it was not used, nor
ancient Father ever took it in this sense: Again, the nature of the word has
no such signification: I see not but you deserve much blame in binding the
Catholics consciences to believe that which is against divinity, antiquity,
and common sense. Now Gentlemen pardon me, to demand of you but this question,
what words be they that consecrat? that is: which turn the substances of bread
and wine into the natural and substantial body and blood of Christ?

Me thinks I hear you Jesuits and Priests calling me a fool for demanding
such a question, Such fathers as lived next to Christ's time, should know best
the practice of the primitive church, and these fathers you refuse and chose
others a thousand years younger, and therefore they be of less credit.
considering (as ye pretend) that the Church of Rome and there learned men have
ever from Christ's time held with one consent one manner of consecration, with a
certain set number of words without addition or alteration, and therefore my
question is frivolous and needless: and no doubt you make your Catholics
believe so, but alas you deceive them, it is not so: for I will show you
many several opinions amongst your learned men, yea Popes themselves one
contrary to another. I pray you let me and the Catholics of this kingdom
therefore be certified and satisfied by Gods word and the practice of the
Primitive Church for the first six hundred years, which be the words of
consecration that works this miraculous alteration of substances, which if
you cannot prove (as I am sure you cannot) then the Catholics have good
cause to look to their consciences, and to follow you no further then you
follow Christ according to his word. For if any man, nay all men, nay if an
Angel, nay all Angels, should come from heaven and preach otherwise then
Christ and his Apostles have taught, let him be accursed. If Angels, nay all
Angels from heaven, must not be believed bringing contrary doctrine to Christ
and his Apostles, Gal. 1.9.
will you then bind the Catholics of this kingdom to believe you, only
coming from Rome and Rhemes, whence you bring new doctrine not only
contrary to Gods truth, but to the Fathers of the Primitive Church And to
begin with Guido in his Manipulo curatorum.

Whether Consecration be a new term.
Fitzimon.
64. ALas! is consecration a new term? First your principal Doctor Beza
tells, you are grievously deceived, Beza in 1. Cor. 10. v. 16. S. Ambros. l.
4. c. 14. de Sacram.
informing you that by the word (...) is signified the same in S. Paul, as
consecrare, and sanctificare, to consecrat and sanctify. So then by this
testimony it is as old as S. Paul's so teaching. You told us a little before,
that Ambrose did not use the word of Consecration. If you may, and please, I
crave how would you interpret this his saying; Vbi accesserit consecratio, de
pane fit caro Christi. Should it not be thus, or can it be otherwise? When
consecration comes, of bread is made the fleash of Christ. I think also, S.
August. de consecr. d. 2. c. nos autem.
all Scholars would thus translate these words of S. Augustine: Fideliter
fateamur ante consecrationem panem esse and vinum etc. post consecrationem vero
Carnem Christi and sanguinem; Before consecration let us confess faithfully to
be bread and wine, etc. but after consecration to be the fleash and blood of
Christ. Remember also what words of his, are to the same effect in the next
precedent number.

Now as our manner is, we must make M. Rider him self account The 55. untruth.
untruth, in aunswering beneath, our allegation out of S. Ambrose, The bread
is bread before the consecration: but when it is consecrated of bread is made
the fleashe of Christ. All this (says M. Rider) we grant to be true.
Assuredly you must then grant to be untrue, these words of yours ( The word
consecration was not heard of in any ancient Father (such he acco^pteth S.
Ambrose nu. ibid) for many hundred years after Christ) it being confessed by
you to be truly vttred by S. Ambrose; And, that so often beside as you have
made an observation against it, as but lately frequented, so often you have
informed idely, and untruly. It is an old proverb; Bis interimitur qui suis
armis perit; He is twyse defeated, who perishes by his own weapon: which is
here, and not seldom before, breefly and apparently verifyed against my
Copes-mate.

65. And to begin with Guido in his Manipulo curatorum. Rider. Guido cap, 4.
page 23. 24. 45. But more you may see in the cautels or sleights of your mass
concerning the necessity of the crosses, words of the cano^ of the mass, and
the priests inte^tion.


Who says there be four several opinions amongst the learned Rabbis of Rome,
touching the words of Consecration.

The first sort (says he) will have besides the words of the. 3. Evangelists
and Paul, the intention of the Preiste ( In the cautels printed at Venice.
1464.
and so says your Mass book) and the precepts of the Church to be duly
observed, jumping with your said Mass book: that unless the Priests
intention be to consecrate, there is no consecration, though he use all
Christ's words, and Paul's. And if the priest omit precepta ecclesiae, that is,
the commandments of the Church of Rome in his consecration, mortalissime
peccaret, he sins most deadly, and is to be punished most grievously. But
Abbot Panormitane, de celebratione missarum, page. 220 is of another mind
saying Etiamsi sacerdos celebret vt Deus perdat aliquem, tamen been consecrat.
Not witstandinge the priest say Maste with intention that God would destroy
some man, yet does he consecrate well. What Christian heart does not loath this
devilish intention, and hellish religion?

Here let all Catholics mark, As the people are not sure of the priests
inte^tion, so they are not sure of Christ's carnal presence, and so commit
idolatry in worshipping bread being not consecrated.
that this first opinion holds that Christ's institution is not sufficient
without the priests intention. (For if his head be otherwise occupied, he
consecrates not) and the due observation of the precepts of the Church, which
partly consist in words, partly in gestures, etc. so that by this opinion,
those that simply and plainly (for the first eight hundred or a thousand
years next after Christ) used the form of Christ's institution only, never
consecrated rightly: no not Christ himself nor Paul, and so till of late
days there was no Consecration, Transubstantiation, or carnal presence.

So that this opinion proves your own transubstantiation and carnal
presence, not to be either Apostolical or Catholic but new, invented, and
fantastical The second opinion is of master Doctor Subtilis (for so he calls
him) and he flatly contradicts the former opinion and says, If you say
Christ's institution were sufficient, then your canon of your mass is
superfluous: if you say it is not sufficient without your mass canon then.
Christ's institution were imperfect Which to think is blasphemy.
that all the words from qui pridie to simili modo in the Canon of your mass
book are necessarily required to consecration, and therefore the former
Doctors shot short. But Gentlemen, you know that the Canon of the mass was not
made by one Pope, nor by ten Popes, but in many hundred years it was in
patching together, I hope you will not say that those Saints and Marrirs of
God from Christ's time, to the making of that Idolatrous Canon of the mass,
being many hundred years, had not the right consecration, when they
practiced Christ's institution.

Alij dixerunt, there is a third opinion of diverse Doctors which held contrary
to both the former, but because it is but fabulous and not worth reading,
therefore I will scilence it, as not worth the writing.

Whether there can possiblye be any discord among Catholics in points of
belief.
SVddenly as I remarked M. Rider intermedling among scholasticks, my thoughts
exclaimed; Fitzimon.
Number and Saul inter prophetas? what is Saul among the prophets? Considering in
quam alienum chorum pedem posuisset; in to what unsuitable assemblye he had
inchroached. But his meaning was to make sport to his adversaries. Forward
then in the name of God. First he says, that we among our selves have great
dissension in our opinion of Consecration. I will not calculat up an untruth:
1. Cor. 11.16.
but will say; Nos talem consuetudinem non habemus, neque ecclesia Dei; We
have no such custom, nor the Church of God. For if any be of a contrary
belief among us, obstinatly, we discarde him presently in to the rank of
heretics, by commission of Christ; Math. cap. 18. Thom. waldens. doctrinalis
fidei. l. 2. c. 21.23.
Si Ecclesiam non audierit sit tibi tanquam Ethnicus, and Publicanus; If he do
not hear the Church let him be unto thee as an Ethnic and Publican. Because;
Ecclesiae iudicium sequi debet lector Christianus, sub poena perfidiae, si ad
fidem res pertineat; sub poena contumaciae, si non pertineat; A Christian
reader must follow the judgment of the Church under the pain of disbeleefe
if it belong to belief; or under the pain of obstinacy, if it does not
belong. Whereby all Catholics are warranted, that never dissension can possibly
have place in their profession if it be obstinat: In the disputations of
Doctors, when the Church authority or judgment is not as yet pronounced,
August. con. Faust. l. 11. c. 5. Et epist. 48. ad Vincent.
according to S. Augustine; Liberum habet lector indicium; The reader has a
free choice to judge, to take, or leave. Yea concerning his own wrytings he
licenseth the same most religiously saying: Quae vera esse perspexeris, tene,
and Ecclesiae Catholicae tribue. Ibidem.
Quae falsa respue, and mihi qui homo sum tribue, etc. What soever thou find
true, embrace, and impute it to the Catholic Church. what soever thou find
false, reject, and impute it to me which am a man: Quia totum hoc genus
literarum, Ibidem.
non cum credendi necessitate; sed cum iudicandi liberate legendum; because
all this kind of learning is not to be read with necessity to believe, but
with liberty to judge. Every Catholic, and I among the rest, do thus offer
our whole understanding, and all our wrytings at the feet of Gods holy
Church, to say, and unsay, according thereto. So that if you could find no
other diversities among us, then several disputations, being altogether knitt
in one submission to Gods Church, you have labored as wisely as one that
would contend, that many musicians disagree in consort, or simphonie, because
they were not in one vnisone, but in several tunes. Which gross misconceit is
excellently refelled by S. August. l. 2. de baptism. con. Donatist. c. 3.
saying; the differences betwixt Catholic writers, to be; Sine vllo typho
sacrilegae superbiae, sine vlla inflata ceruice arrogantiae, sine contentione
liuidae inuidiae, cum sancta humilitate, cum pace catholica, cum charitate
Christiana, donec plenario totius Orbis concilio quod saluberrime sentiebatur,
etiam remotis dubitationibus firmaretur; To be without any whirlwynd of
sacrilegiouse pride, any puffed arrogant neck, any comention of maliciouse
envy, with holy humility, with universal peace, with Christian charity,
until by a full Concill of all the world, what was soundly supposed, should be
undoubtedly confirmed. Now in particular to these 20. diverse opinions among us.

Panormitan is all one with the former; differing only, that it says: to
consecrat in a badd intention, even to kill, does not hinder consecration. I
answer that a swords making, Note.
is not hindered by the purpose to abuse it: no more, is celebration, by the
intent to misaply it. Note then courteous Protestant, his great wisdom in so
simple a conceit against this opinion, as for it, to name our religion,
hellish. Note secondly, how this deep learned, and Christian doctor,
affirms, that Christ himself, the Apostles, and whole Church wa^ted
intention in the institution, and ministration of the B. Sacrament. I surmised,
(by the want of method) the second opinion to have been of Panormitan, Scotus
in 4. d. 8. q. 2. a. 2.
but here I find it most confusedly ascribed to Scotus. Truly Scotus
requires to the essential form of consecration, no more, nor less, then
according the doctrine of the Church: to the greater explication of all
circumstances, he requires (as also the Church does) the whole Canon; Which
Canon (for the essential part) was ever unvariable from the begyning: but for
more ample declaration, it has in succession of time received new additions
but always, out of traditions, Scripturs and Concils. Unless that after in
particular I did intend to unfold the antiquity of all parcels of the Canon,
and show the signification, original, and allowance of the least syllable, to
be above a thousand years ratified; I would in this place prosecute it. The
third opinion by him self he silenceth, as not worthy the writing. Truly
nether are the residue produced, worthy relation; especialy to testify our
pretended disagreement: considering, that never sobre man can hitherto collect
any discord in these two opinions, either among them selves, or with the
Catholic established doctrine.

Rider.
66. But Guido his opinion is flat contrary to them all, and says precis^ly,
that hoc est enim corpus meum does consecrate without any more help. So Guido
is contrary in opinion to the former three opinions, and every of them all
contrary one to another. Here now the Catholics may see the consent and
unity of the late Church of Rome touching consecration: Yet I will bring you a
learned Friar which has tossed this question like a tennis-ball. Josephus
Angles in lib. 4. sententiarum. Printed by king Philips privilege. 1572. page
108. and. 109. de essentialibus Euch.
This Friar says in his conclusion: Christus Jesus his verbis, hoc est enim
corpus meum Eucharistiam confecit, etc. Christ Jesus in these words, for this
is my body, did consecrate the Euchariste, and so has continued still by the
custom of the Church, etc. But presently in his Appendix he checkes that
opinion and says, yet it is to be believed that Christ consecrated with other
words then these that he used in the institution, and there be many of this
latter opinion says he, as Innocentius, etc. so that it is a palpable discord
amongst them touching the very words of consecration.

Two other contrary opinions.
And in the same page he delivers two other opinions, one of Thomas Aquinas,
the other of Scotus, the one contrary to the other, which (if you want
opinions the book) I will show you.

Page 109. Soto says, if Qu^ pridie being the Priests words, be not used as
well as Christ's. Tu^c incertum est, etc. Then it is uncertain whether there be
any Transubstantiation at all. What wise catholics will believe this your
uncertain doctrine?
And in the same page he shows, that hoc est enim corpus meum be the words of
Christ, and that Qui pridie be the words of the Priest, so that Christ's words
without the Priests words work nothing or are nothing worth. And the same
Friar delivers the opinion of Doctor Soto touching the intention of the Priest
in consecration of the cup, but checks his Doctor ship in his immediate
conclusion very sharply (I will not say shamefullie) saying Magister Soto hoc
in loco sibi repugnat: Master Soto in this place disagreeth with himself: and
old Cato tells us, that he that disagreeth with himself, cannot agree with
any.

page 113. Read the place.
But in the next pages he sets down six several opinions touching the form
of consecration, one contrary to another, and all of them held and maintained
very stiflie for the truth, whereof five of them must needs be false. But I
assure you there is none of them of Christ's institution, and therefore neither
true Apostolical nor Catholic. If they were not fabulous and frivolous, I
would pen them down verbatim. But if you list to see their errrors, I have
truly quoted their places, you may see them without pain, and I trust you
will not read them without d^slike.

Now let me entreat you to hear some other of your friends speak, that lived
in another age, that the Catholics may see your uncertainty in this point,
that none of you all know what to say, nor what to believe, and the reason is,
because you have denied and refused the clear waters of Gods truth, and
therefore drink of the puddels of men's inventions, which are nothing else but
fables and lies, without certainty or verity.

Gabriel Biel. lect. 36. Mark this you Priests and Jesuits.
Gabriel a learned man on your side, says. Christus potuit sine verbo tanquam
verus Deus substantiam panis, and vini consecrare, vel potius verba quaedam
secreto proferre, and per illa consecrare: vol per haec verba, hoc est corpus
meum, consecrare potuit, vel potuit prius consecrare, and postea distribuere:
vel primum distribuere and postea consecrare: Behold I pray you the
uncertainty of your consecration and therefore cease to deceive. Petrus de
Aliaco: in 4 lib. sent. Q 5.
Quid autem horum fecerit ex sacris scripturis non constat: Christ as being
very God, might consecrate the bread and wine without any word: Or else he
might speak certain words in secret, and by them consecrate: or else might
consecrate by these words. This is my body: or he might first consecrat, and
after deliver: or else first deliver, and then consecrate: but which of all
these he did, by the holy scriptures it appears not. But Petrus de Alliaco
crosses them all, and says, that Christ, consecrated before these words of
Hoc est corpus meum, Mark this good Reader.
for (says he:) Quia nisi ante fuisset corpus Christi, Christus non vere
dixisset hoc est corpus meum. If it had not been Christ's body before. Christ
could not have said truly, This is my body. This now touches your freehold,
for he says plainly, unless consecration go before these words, This is my
body, both Christ and priest should lie. This tramples your consecration in
the dirt.

And your Antididagma printed at Collen, How blasphemous this is, let the
learned in Christ judge. Bonauentura in 4. lib. Sententiarum did. 8. q. 2.
with the approbation of all the learned Doctors in that age, says preciselie,
that the bare words of Christ's institution without the words of the Canon of
the Mass, are not sufficient to work consecration. And Bonauentura is not
ashamed to say, that if we will rightly consecrate, we must not seek to the
Gospel of Christ, but to the Canon of the Mass. Now Scotus (though he be
master Doctor Subtilis) is put to his dumpes what to do, in this doubtful
case of consecration, when there be twenty several opinions one contrary to
another, and all contrary to Christ's truth, in the end this is his
resolution. Quod ergo est consilium? Dico quod sacerdos intendens facere quod
facit ecclesia, legens distinct verba canonis a principio vsque ad finem, vere
conficit, nec est tutum alicui reputare se valde, peritum in scie^tia sua, and
dicere volo vti praecise istis verbis pro consecratione. The matter being so
doubtful, what then is your advise? I say, that the priest intending to do
whatsoever the Church does, and reading the words of the Canon distinctlie and
plainly from the beginning to the end, does verelie consecrate: neither is it
wisdom for a man to account himself very skillful in his knowledge, and to
say I will use (without all doubt) these, or these words to work consecration.
Here your champion Scotus cares not a point for your three Evangelists, nor the
Apostle Paul: for reading of the Canon distinctly is sufficient: Oh damnable
heresy, that renounceth Christ's institution, and follows man's inventions.
And the words of your Masse-booke are distinct, secret, and attente. And
also it must be pronounced vno spiritu, nulla pausatione interposita. If the
foresaid cautions be not performed by the priest, your consecration and
appliccation is marred, and not worth a pin. Now Gentlemen: these be your
Doctors, and this is your doctrine: here betwentie several opinions of
consecration in several ages, and none tells the truth. Have you used Gods
people and the Queens subjects Christianlie, in persuading them that all
Churches, and all Fathers, in all ages, with one consent, have embraced this
your opinion touching consecration, for Catholic without discord or
dissension? I tell you no, for in this you have cracked their conscience, and do
hazard their souls to maintain your superstition. But perchance you will
persuade the Catholics, False witnesses examined a sunder must needs be taken
tripping and found liars, for how should you agree in that ye know not, nay
in that which is not.
that though these Doctors grossly erred, yet the Church of Rome ever held one
manner of consecration, but that is as untrue as the rest. For I will show you
plainly, that your late Popes and Church of Rome since three hundred, or three
hundred and seventy years last past, knew not what to hold, nor what to
affirm touching the form of consecration. And therefore in this your new
doctrine there is neither unity, antiquity, universality (nor verity) with
which terms you so long have deceued the people.

66. Fitzimon.
Whereas the doctrine of the Catholic Church is manifoudly expressed, that
consecration is essentialy wrought by the very, and only words of Christ; Hoc
est corpus meum, hic est sanguis meus; This is my body, this is my blood: let
all indifferent readers maruayle at M. Rider, for affirming Guido, and Angles
teaching by his own declaration the very self same doctrine, in evident
terms, to be repugnant one to another, or with Gods Church. And if these all
did assuredly determine, that Christ either in more words or in fewer, did
consecrat: are they not confessed thereby to have believed a consecration, to
have been instituted by Christ? Is not M. Rider therefore, a sage Scholastic, or
sobre scholar, producing them to confess, what he has reported they did not
believe? As for Innocentius, if he supposed consecration to have been
accomplished in the blessing of the bread, and wine: may he be said in any
learning, or wisdom, to differ from the residue, in belief of the truth of
Consecration? Then are browght in Thomas, and Scotus; as he says, differing
one from another: But it is so palpable a delusion, as one may view in their
wrytings, by me alleged, (for my good friend omitteth citations when they are
most needful as is above declared) as it shows, he had a forhead of brass
to auerr any thing that auerreth it. The opinion of Soto, is confessed
belonging to another matter, and therefore cannot be opposite to the former, as
being not of the same: for, opposition must be concerning the same. Then six
repugnant opinions are related in a dumb show, not one of them either defending
or impugning another, but in M. Riders assurance. He is not ashamed here to
affirm, that he has truly quoted the citations of these six opinions. Thereof
let your very eyes be judges.

Gabriel insueth, telling that Christ by thought might have consecrated Rider
approve, he must be of opinion, that Christ never made heaven, Note.
and earth, before he had a mouth to speak. And Gabriel says also truly, that
the Scripture does not declare, by what precise words, or sole means, Christ
had consecrated. Who would infer these deductions, as inconvenient but
especialy as repugnant, besyd my mate? Then succedeth Petrus de Alliaco,
saying, that Christ consecrated before the words of consecration. And this
sentence also, to whom is it opposite of the rest, unless any of them had said,
that thoughts are not precedent to words? For in his judgment, Christ's
intention, in a thought of time, had effected consecration, before the words
were fully related. In the Antididagmate, there is noe such matter; but the
contrary: that they consecrat not well, who omit the foresaid form, contenting
them selves, with the sole words of S. Paul to the Corinthians. Lastly Scotus,
for his aduising every priest about to consecrat, to read the canon distinctly,
and intierly; M. Rider falls into this Apostrophe: Oh damnable heresy that
renounceth Christ's institution, and follows man's invention! Why good Sir, is
the Canon of the mass any other then Christ's, and his Apostles institution,
containing only all which in the Scripture is reported to be done by him
concerning the Sacrament? Is it because they are conjoined, and to be read
distinctly, and intierly, that therefore they contain a damnable heresy, and
man's invention? Now Jesus! in what time of the day did M. Rider vttre these
sobre illations? The principal untruths in this matter shall be calculated
together.

67. The Pope and Church of Rome (as this Canon testifies) was of opinion,
Distinct. 2. de Consecratione sub figura in fine.
that the Priest must recite verba Euangelistarum, beginning at qui pridie,
etc. in hoc ergo creatur illud corpus. The Priest must recite the wholle words
of the three Eua^gelists, beginning at the day before he suffered.

Out of which we may see that this Pope will have the words of the three
Evangelists, which contain the causes and effects of the whole institution,
and not hoc est enim corpus meum only, etc.

Again, there is used a most shame full and blasphemous word, Creatur, unless
you will have Christ to become a creature, and the Priest to become a creator:
your master the Pope was too forgetful that this had not been dashed into his
Index expurgatorius.

But I must allege another Pope to contradict this Popes opinion. De Conse.
distinct. 2. Canon quiae corpus. page 432.
In another age there was a Pope, who with the Church of Rome, held that there
was an invisible Priest that consecrated and changed those visible creatures
into the body and blood of Christ, not by virtue of those known words, hoc
est enim corpus meum, nor by all the words of the three Evangelists, as the
other Pope did, but secreta potestate, by a secreet and hidden power, which you
visible Priests know not. This Pope will have an invisible body and blood of
Christ. What is more contrary and absurd then this? This Pope has brained
your hoc est enim corpus meum, being your ordinary consecration, and records
all other Popes and you Jesuits and Priests for heretics, in holding that hoc
est corpus meum does consecrate.

But yet I will be so bold to ask this Pope this question. If this discord
of Popes you had not shrouded in an unknown tongue, the Catholics had
forsaken Pope, Preiste, and Rome, long since. De sacra. Altaris mysterio lib.
4. cap. 6. page. 105. 166.
Who is that inusible Priest? where is that Priest? what is his secret power?
does it consist in speaking, or crossing, or both, or in neither, or in some
other dumb shows. The holy Scriptures teach no such Priest, speak of no
such secret power, and so this is a fable as is the rest, and no sure
foundation for the Catholics to stick too, therefore I wish that the well
minded Catholics of this kingdom would not believe this uncertain vanity,
but stick to Christ's written verity.

I will add one Pope more, whose opinion I know you will not gainsay, for if
you should, I must come upon you with an old school point. Contra negantem
principia non est disputa^dum. This is Pope Innocentius the third of famous
memory, under the warmth of whose wings, your transubstantiation in the Synod
of Laterane was hatched, at least one thousand and two hundred years after
Christ's ascension: This Pope records three several opinions touching
consecration, and one contrary to another. The first hold, it is made at
Benedixit: The second sort teach, that after benediction, when either is by the
Priest made some print on the bread, as it were by crossing and some word
spoken over and to the bread, then hoc est enim corpus meum consecrats
whosoever says nay. And this sort holds that it is (credibile) credible, that
Christ first delivered the bread, and then consecrated the bread, which things
make your fingring and blowing upon or over the bread more palpable, because
one must hold the Elements while you enchaunte them, rather then consecrate
them. The third opinion crosses both the other, which is, that Christ
consecrated virtute diuina by his divine virtue, and afterward laid down for
posterities a form, after which they should bless or consecrate.

Thus there were three several opinions that this Pope spoke of, yet it
seems he liked but one of them, which was the second, which he seems to
justify in the chapter following.

Magister Sent. lib. 4. did. 8. fol. 56: which are alleged out of Ambrose.
But Magister Sententiarum comes nearer the matter and asks a question to
make the matter plain; Consecratio quibus verbis fit? attendite quae sunt
verba, accipite and comedite, accipite bibite, etc. with what words is
consecration made? give attention, these be the words. Take ye, and eat ye
all of this, this is my body, take ye and drink ye, this is my blood
drink ye all of this.

Here you see that this master checkes Pope and Prelate, for none of all
these twenty and odd opinions ever put in these words, Take ye, eat ye,
take ye, drink ye, as the words of Christ, but as the words of your Canon.
And that these words be not necessary parts of Christ's institution, but only
show the use of the institution, but that is neither Canonical nor Catholic.
And if you list at your leisure to read Cardinal Fr. Constantius Sarnanus his
work, Printed at Roanne. 1592. page 144. 145. 146.
entitled Sum Theologica, dedicated to this Pope Clement the eight now
living you shall see that he repeats other several iarres that are now among
your Roman Prelates touching consecration as contrary as these, and therefore
as absurd as the former.

Now Gentlemen, how can you salve this sore, and reconcile these iarres,
Doctors, Schoolmen, Canonists, Text and Gloss, Popes, and great Prelates
dissenting most shamefullie about consecration, none of them relying upon
Christ's plain institution, and therefore behold their deserved confusion.

Now blame not us for discovering your discords, and for forsaking your errors,
but blame your Doctors, Schoolmen, Friars, Monks, Legendaries, Canonists,
your Popes Canons and your own Mass book, these are come to our hands, we
have read their works, and discovered some hundreds of their heresies, and
sent them to the view of the Catholics. But howsoever you blame us. God and
the world will blame you, in keeping the people from reading Gods book, and
good writers, which would instruct and confirm them in true religion, and
revoke them from your gross superstition. Thus much concerning the
uncertainty, absurdity, and blasphemy of your consecration. Now the true
Apostolical consecration is this, when the elements of bread and wine are set
apart from their common use, and applied to a holy use, according to Gods word.

Fitzimon.
67. The Fox, that by all attempts could not attain grapes placed in a height,
began after to dispraise them as sour; and seemed ^o despise them: So M.
Rider, who before had assured him self of ^he decretals number. 46; finding his
conceit frustrated, in great choler ^ayleth, rebukes, and in his opinion
refuteth them in this place. What he says, was intended by the first Pope,
(such is his skill, to think S. Augustine had been Pope: for they are his
words) I assure him he may find in all Missals, to be prescribed generaly,
and to be practiced in all Masses, at all places: which shows in all places
an universal consent, and uniformity. The next Popes offense (he should have
said, if he knew what he said, Eusebius Emissenus, but the name Pope is such a
sting in his heart, that of the abundance of grief wrought thereby, the mouth
ever speaks) was to have mentioned an invisible Priest. A man that truly,
and not faynedly had been familiar in the Fathers, Chrysostom. hom. de prodit.
Iudae. August. 4. de tr. c. 7. and 14. l. 10. de Ciu. c. 20. Cypr. ep. 63.
Ambros. super psa. 38. Theoph. ad Hebr. 5. Anselm. ibid. 10. etc. Conc. Trid.
sess. 22. c. 1. 2.
would never have excepted against such speech, as at a novelty. S.
Chrisostom says, Cum videris sacerdotem offerentem, ne ipsum consideres hoc
facientem, sed Christi manum inuisibiliter extensam: when you behold the
Priest offering, do not considre him working this, but Christ's hand inuisibly
extended. S. Augustine says, ipse offerens, ipse oblatio; it is he (Christ)
which offreth, he is the oblation. The same is affirmed by S. Cyprian, Ambrose,
Theophilact, Anselme, the Councils of Lateran, of Florence, and of Trent. All
these witneses declare the speech of Eusebius, to be usual, and sound:
Eusebius him self testifies it to be ancient, for he lived anno 350.

The third Pope must not be different in this point, if it were he that hacthed
it. For if he hold in this, other then we hold, he could not be author of
this that we hold. Marry Innocentius in deed tells there are three general
sentences in this matter: to wit of some, that would have consecration begone at
the word Blessed; of others, that after; of diverse, that Christ consecrated by
divine virtue, and left a form to consecrat for posterity. Of these the two
first differr not otherwise in the point of consecration, but that one tells
it was begone in the first words; the other that such words were rather a
preparation, then consummation, of it. I should think these two not to differr
so much, as if one would say: you M. Rider came from your father; and the
other: that you came from your grandfather. For all difference alleged is of
less diversity, as being of what is believed to be the same substance, whereas
you are of distinct substance, yea and state, as you came from your
grandfather, and father. Your school point, being the first and last savoring
any smack in logic, (for only two grammarian sentences, cum multis alijs: a
tribus ad centum, were hitherto heard of) it also bewrays the authoure (by
being not apliable to an argument of authority, but only of Maxims, or
grounds) to be void of skill.

The arguments or school points to supporte any authority, Aristotle are
only, Arist. 2. Top.
two: 1. In vsu verborum, sequenda est vulgi consuetudo: 2. In sententia de
rebus ferenda, iudicium sapientium. In use of words, the custom is to be
followed. In sense of things, the judgment of the wise, is to be embraced.
Your additions to the second opinion are more remote from sincerity, then your
former school point, from subtilitie. The text of Innocent has thus. Nec
etiam est credibile, quod prius dederit quam consecerit; Nether also is it
credibile that he gave first before he had accomplished: Which being a palpable
negation, in playnest terms as every half penny scholar may conceive; M.
Rider either for want of skill, or for want of fidelity, makes it an
affirmation. Verilye, this ignorance or iugling deserves at least to have your
hoode (in the schole lane) pulled over your head. I know not what should
torment his mind in the third sentence, unless it be, that divine virtue is
asscribed to Christ: or, that he had left us a form to consecrat: which two in
Gods word, and godly mynds, are undoubted; although in protestancie, Christ is
said to have had no more divine virtue, then Socrates, or Trismegistus. see in
our 24. number. As little do I know, what he may cavil at, in the next opinion,
of the master of Sentences; (reporting it truly without his own commixtions)
as but only telling, for complete, and prefect consecration, (not only for the
essential, but also for the ceremonial, and historical part,) all that is
prescribed by the Church, to be observed. By all which accusations examined,
they being so idle, so confused, and intricat, as wanting, all method, and
matter, and so remote from disproueing consecration, as they all are confessed
(being disputations, not whether there be any consecration, but such presupposed
to be undoubtful, in what sort there is any) to approve it, and withal so
untruly reported; all men, friends, and foes, to our profession, may perceive,
that nether late, or owld, true, or false, settled belief, or opiniatiue
disputations, do contradict our persuasion: and, that diversity, can not, or
has not been among us, in any other sort, then by their impudent report, who
with squinted eyes, and dazeled brayns behold us; thereby thinking, like
gogle-eyed dronkards, every candle to be twenty.

Now must we out of the whole heap, intimat only some of popes contrary one to
another. The 57. The 56 57. 58 59. 60. 61. 62. 63. 64 65. 66. untruth.
that Guido numbreth four diverse opinions: that he, or M. Rider, have quoted
any of the six opinions by him said to be repugnant one, to another: that we
know the Canon of the mass to be in patching many hundred years: that any
fabulouse opinion is related, or mentioned, by Guido: that Guido is of
different opinion to any other, by him related, in allowing consecration: that
our religion is hellish. The 58. that Christ, and his Church, for the first
eight hundred years wanted intention, in institution and use, of the B.
Sacrament. The 59. that there is any such matter, in the antididagmate, as he
informs. The 60. that Bonauentur so judged. The 61. that S. Augustine, or S.
Eusebius were popes. The 62. that transubstantiation was founded by Innocentius
the third. The 63. 64. 65. false allegations, additions, and alterations of
negatiues to affirmatiues, in repetition of Innocents. discourse. The 66. that
M. Rider has discovered hondreds of heresies in our writers etc. Upon my
creditt, I liberaly ouerpasse, for breuities sake, ten times as many more
impious untruths, (easy to be viewed, by every Christian obseruer) only
because I loath to reveal a sink out of which vamped so odiouse a stench. The
best rule toward such a reporter, is to have all that he says in suspicion,
until his allegations be viewed: which to him, and he to them, are ever found
contrary.

68. Rider.
And when the lawful minister has taught the prepared communicants the
grieuousnes of their sins: the greatness of Gods wrath: What true
consecration is which the Gospellers teach.
the sufficiency of Christ's merits fully to appease the same: the nature of
the Sacrament, which is a commemoration of that passion, the office of faith to
apprehend and apply Christ's merits promissed in the word, and tendered in the
due administration of the Sacraments, then is there I say, aright consecration
of the Sacrament. Now whether this consecration of yours, is warranted by
Christ his words, let the indifferent Reader judge, and with the truest and
ancient opinion join. Thus much concerning your imagined and newstamped
consecration. Now to your second pillar, which is, transsubstansiation. First,
I must tell you in this, Transubstantiation.
as in the former, that the term is new, lately invented and compounded by
your selves. And as your consecration was never found in the new Testament.

What the true consecration is which the gospellers teach: and whether it be
according to Christ's institution.
68. I Had thought to have kept back my self at this point, Fitzimon.
of the protestant consecration, by occasion of the words lately spoken by M.
Rider in the 66. number, to wit: Oh damnable heresy, that renounceth Christ's
institution, and follows ma^s inue^tion. But this clause of his now is my
text: whereupon I inte^d to reuye (as the phrase of players is, or reply, if it
dislyke any) haueing hitherto seen al his lays, and exceptions. First in this
his discourse (borrowed out of Iuels; reply against Harding, art. 1. diuis. 8.
page 19. to which Bullinger decad. 5. ser. 6. Calvin, Instit. l. 4. c. 17. n.
15. and others of that sort, accord.) I can not perceive Christ's words of
institution of the Sacrament, nether contained, nor mentioned, either as it is
used by us, or propounded in the Communion book. What more puritantrie? Is not
this, Christ's institution to be renounced, and man's invention followed? The
sequel thereupon is in my forsaid text, by conceit for brevity sake, here
reiterated. But we will not so depart. The substance of bread and wine when it
is (says he) set a part from the common use, and applied to a holy use
according to Gods word. The commmon use of bread, and wine, is to nourishe. I
ask how you separat them from nourishing? especialy when you often said before,
that as they nourish the body, so Christ the soul, not by his discending, but
by your ascending in faith. If then the substance of bread, and wine, be set
a part from their common use, which is to nourishe; what relation have they to
Christ's feeding our souls? 1. Timo. 4.
I pray you for our understandings sake; make this plain. 2. In deed I find,
in S. Paul, all meat is lawful, that is sanctified by the word and by prayer.
So has Musculus in locis com. cap. de caena page 336. Bullinger decad. 5. ser.
6.
Do you therefore intend by application to a holy use, that such sanctification
of meat, had operated any mutation in your bread, and wine? Fie, say you, noe.
For blessings, charms, or words of sanctification and operation we abhor.
Then I require, both how you interpret your intricat conceits, and also what
warrant for this whole discourse is any where else in scripture? If you bring
none, (as I am sure there is none, yet known to your purpose) remember my
text, being your own words, how unfortunately it tumbleth upon you.

According breefly to my promise in the beginning I will not Decad. 5. ser. 6.
Witness Bullinger, pronowncing in plain terms, there is noe virtue at all in
rehearsing the words of the Lord in the Supper. Zuingl. to. 2. resp. ad
confess. Luth. sol. 431.
And he confirms it by authority of Pliny, a pagan. Witness Zuinglius,
Saying: that none can ever give any sound reason, or authority, Joan. Schut.
l. 50. causarum. cap. 13. Fox acts and Mo^. page 666. 667. Buchanan hist.
Scotic. l. 15. page 523. Suingl. to. 2. expos. fid. Christ. fol. 563. 564.
Bulling. in ep. ad Hebr. c. 10.
that commands the words of Christ's institution to be redd in ministering the
supper. Witness John Scut; that the Caluinists do so hate the words of Christ's
institution, that they cannot abide either to see, or to hear them. Witness Ihon
Lassels, one of Foxes martyrs, that Christ's words should not be spoken in the
institution, considering that S. Paul durst not mention them. Witness one George
Sephocard, a Scottish protestant martyr, ministering the communion without
Christ's words of institution. Witness the protestants in Switzerland, where, by
declaration and approbation of Zuinglius, and Bullinger, the people sit all a
long in order upon forms, and give ear to one reading the 13. chapter of S.
Ihon, without Christ's institution. In the mean season is bread carried about in
paniers, and wine in glasses one giving bread and wine to another, and so
ends, say they, the communion. Witness others of England also practicing the
same profane indecencie toward their supper: of whom we have treated numb. 39.
Witness Beza, aduising to ministre the communion, Beza epist. Theol. 2. page 27.
when there is no bread or wine at hand, in any other food: contrary to Christ's
institution, and Christendoms practice: Witness the Scotishe communion book, In
the administration of the L. supper. Luth. 10.7. de. ens. verb. caene. fol. 383.
where the words of Christ's institution, are carefully avoided. Witness lastly
Luther, saying of this sort of people: They fear least they should stumble
and break their necks at every syllable, which Christ pronounced. If I were a
good preacher, I should not so long have omitted my text: Oh damnable heresy
that renounceth Christ's institution, and follows man's invention. I might have
more amply witnesed their hatred against Christ's words, if I had intended to
flourish in abundance, and prolixitie. Only to conclude, let us not be ignorant,
that Swenkfeld flowteth Christ's words by testimony of Schlusselburg.
Schlusselb. l. 2. theol. Call. art. 32. Dialog. Comment. in lib. Reg. Vide her.
apud Feuardent in entroma^gerit.
Peter vermil (otherwise called Peter martyr) first terms hoc est enim
corpus meum, for this is my body, but a five woorded proof, next he trembled
not to say; non tam verbum diuinum, quam etiam verba naturae sequenda esse in
theologia; The divine words owght not to be followed so much in Divinity as
the words of Nature. victorius no less blasphemously says: Sinistro oculo
respiciendum est ad verba Christi, dexrro vero ad naturas, etc. we must look
with the left eye at the words of Christ, but with the right, at naturs of
things.

This disdain toward Christ's institution revealed, let us next examine the
causes thereof. I find them several. Some think, that Christ had not power to
give us his body, and together to be in heaven. I find it in Calvin, in Robert
Bruce, in Beza, in Sureau, Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 17. n. 29. Instit. l. 3. c.
23. n. 2. Co^me^t. in cap. 23. Isa. l. de eterna prodest. Admonit. vult.
L'Espine, yea and Calvin, thryse to my own knowledge, denies God to be
almighty absolutely. And Beza says; that the Angels speech to our Lady, Beza
l. 2. con. Heshus. Disputatio Parisie^sis. Rob. Bruce in his sermons page 158.
how nothing is impossible to God, owght to be believed universally. The residue
affirm, that God could nether understand, nor will, not woorcke, that the body
of his son Jesus Christ could be together in many places, nor any other thing
contrary to the course of nature once by him (as Bruce says) established. Go,
and tell these men, that Christ's body can as well exceed nature in being in
many places together, as be borne of a virgin, walk on the sea, be invisible,
issue out of a sepulcher, enter among his closed disciples, penetrat the
heavens, Articles of the family of Love printed in London an. 1578. art. 43.
etc. They will answer co^fidently. For the first of Christ's merueylous
birthe, (I mean them of the family of love) that he was borne of the virgin
Marie, no otherwise then he is borne of their fleash For the second. of his
walking on the sea, I remember not to have heard them disprove it; nor for his
inuisibilitie. For the third of his resurrection, Colloq. Malbrun. Act. 6.
Marlor. in nou. test. fol. 167. and in 20. Joan. Thalma^. in c. 28. mat. Calu
in Joan. c 20. 19. Et lib. 4. Instit, c. 17. n. 29. Et in harm. Luc. 24.36.
Pet. Mart. in dialog. de loco Corporis Christi fol. 94. 95. Vtenhouius page
185. 186. Feuard. Entremangeries. page 263.
they tell, that the angel had made passage, and that there was noe miracle
perceived therein. For which opinion of Vermil, Gautier, Sureau, L'Espin, and
Beza, diverse of them selves have repyned: as appears in the conference of
Malbrown, in Marlorat, in Benedict Thalman, etc. For the fouerth of entering
among his enclosed disciples, I can hardly relate their variable shifts to
escape it in few words. yet I will attempt to comprise succinctly their
diversities about it. Calvin says First, that he fownd the doors shutt, but
knocked, and obtained entry. Secondly, that by his divine virtue he secreatly
had opened them. Bullinger says, that an Angel had opened them. Aretius; that
they opened of their own grace. Peter Martyr; that he entered by the windoe.
Simonius, that he entered by the chinkes of the door. Thalman, that his body
diminished it self like a thread and so passed thereat. Others, that he entered
at the tonnel of the chimnie. etc. And if you tell them the Scripturs declare a
miracle, whereby the Apostles were afraid; etc. they will awnswer, as to the
words of Christ's institution aforsayd, you must look wih you left eye at
Scripture. etc. For the last, they affirm (contrary to Scripture) that by many
weighty reasons they are persuaded, Page 57.
the heavens not to be hard, but easily passable: and consequently, that Christ
might have entered, or passed, throwgh them, not only without miracle, but also
without resistance. So Ihon Brouant, in his Aphorisms, and replications.

Note.
All this outrage proceeds against Christ's institution of the B. Sacrament,
because if it be true; these miraculous mysteries of Christ's nativity,
resurrection, ascension, etc. may stand. If it be not allowed, in the literal
sense; these other mysteries, testifying Christ's true substantial body to have
surpassed the bonds of natu^re, as much, as if it should be in many places at
once, must likewise ^n this protestant guise specifyed, be contradicted.
Abissus abissum ^nuocat; One bottomless misery and absurdity trayleth with it
another. For this same cause, Beza professes to have translated falsely the 21.
Beza in cap. Act. 3. v. 21.
verse of the third chapter of the Acts of the Apostles; of purpose says ^he,
to keep Christ's presence from the altar; whereat Calvin, Illiricus, and other
protestants greatly murmured. For the same cause, Call. in c. 26. Mat. v. 27.
Colloq. Monpelgartense^ in actis. Vide Feuard. in c. 1. Pet. and l. 5. c. 16.
Theomach^a. Call. Cureus in Spongia^ fol. 239. Erastus page 29. Aulakius 45.
page Osiander con. Morlinum. Bauar. con. Selneccerum.
least thou should have any belief to receive Christ's blood, Calvin
tells, that they are furiously madd, who affirm any blood to be longer
conjoined with his fleash. Whereby his scholars, Aulakius, Bauarus, Cureus,
Erastus, Osiander, and the Antilutherans of Witberg, affirmed, that such blood
is long since putrified, and lost, in earth; no longer in nature, and is
fruictles toward our salvation. Whereat the Count or Earl Mont-Belial, said
that his whole body trembled; and the conference was presently debarred (for
such foul blasphemies) by the Duke of Witemberg. Notwith standing all this,
of M. Riders own and his brethrens hate against the words of Christ's
institution, of so many mysteries of religion, and testimonies of scripture, so
impiously distrusted, disdayned, and abiured; two things may seem
incomprehensible: First, how ministres can brave, and face out, with sugared and
assured words, their hypochrisie. Secondly, how they can obtrud any longer
their filthy fancies, now so plainly discovered to their own consciences, and
to all others, who may so easily, and by only natural sight behowld their
abomination. In the mean time, I end, pronouncing my text, since M. Rider to
all men's view, omitteth Christ institution. Oh damnable heresy, etc.

69. So transubstansiation was never found in the new nor old. No, Rider.
I do not remember that in all my Grammatical travels and studies, that ever I
read it. Yet we contend with you not for names and words, but for points and
articles of faith,
I can show you Dictionaries many, and Grammers more, of diverse prints, and in
diverse ages, printed in several Universities of Christendom, but none of
them makes mention of this word transubstantiare, much less of the sense,
which is to change substances of several kinds, one substance into another.

Whether Transubstantiation had been anciently known. And whether new names
may consist with old doctrine.
69. IT may seem the more strange, that M. Rider, Fitzimon.
who made such a Dictionarie, (wherein, beyond Thomas, Thomasius his
pyke-deuant, and all other like words formerly unknown in dictionaries, M.
Rider found out, turlererehiskum, and diverse others as good ornaments to his
said Dictionarie (could yet not find the word Transubstantiation. But it is
the less admirable, that he that sought it, had a veil upon his heart toward
the effect of transubstantiation, and a mist upon his eyes toward the word. In
all your brethrens writings against it by express name, might you not have
found it? Broualdt has it, saying in his Aphorisms; Page 2. and 26.
that one named Lanfrancus Italian (long before Innocent the third) brought it
in to the Church: and after in the year 1051. it was established by Leon the
ninthe in the Council of Versel. Might you not have found it in Peter Martyr, in
Calvin, and in the whole crew, saying it not to have been before Innocent the
third; which also your self often do profess? And yet you say, you never
remember to have read it. A better mind, will bring a better memory; In the
mean time be recorder of your oune 67. untruth 67.
untruth.

But what mean you to think it strange not to find (especialy In his sermons.
page 4. 12. VVestphal. in apol. page 5. Muscul. in locis com. page 292.
Clebitius in victo. argum. 12.
Sacrament: yet Robert Bruce tells, that it is not used in Scripture, nor to
be used by Christians: So does Carolostadius, Musculus, Clebitius, etc. But at
other times, says VVestphalus; the Caluinists because they find the word apt
for them to shift and lurk under, do greedely embrace it. I require
remembrance be taken of this admonition, when M. Rider will stand upon the name
Sacrament, as upon a brazen wall, as Calvin terms it. So likewise of all
times in our profession, to signify an old belief with more efficacy, a new
term is imposed: as (...), to signify Consubstantial, (...) to signify the
mother of God, Transubstantiatio for the conversion of bread and wine into the
fleash and blood of Christ, In con. Nic. In con. Ephesians. Conc. Trid. sess 13. c.
4. August. epist. 174. Cic. l. 2. ad Heren.
etc. which words are to be measured according to the propriety of them, and
the authority whence they proceed, rather then according the antiquity of
them. But, because S. Augustine says; it is a most contentious part, to contend
about the name, when the thing is known; and as Cicero says; Calumniatorum
proprium est verba consectari; it is the propriety of Cauillers to pursue
words, by the definition of Transubstantiation, we will be instructed, how
sound, and ancient it is.

70. But briefly, Rider.
as the word cannot be found in Gods book nor ancient Doctor: so the sense
has neither warrant from holy Scriptures, nor Catholic writers.

For this is your opinion, that after consecration (which yet you know not what
it is) the substance of bread and wine should be converted into the natural
body and blood of Christ, the accidents of bread and wine, as witness,
roundnesse, breadth, weight, savor and taste of them only remaining.

You may as soon and to as good a purpose, prove a transaccidentation as a
transubstantiation. But as there is no change of the former, so not of the
latter, but a mere F^iers fable, and therefore frivolous. And whereas the
Fathers use these words, change, conversion, mutation, transelementation, they
always expound themselves in their several works, that it is a changing of
the use, not of the substance: neither can you show any one Father that ever
meant such a change, of one substance into another: for every change of one
thing into another, carries not with it at all transubstantiation of one
substance into another: for there may be a change without conversion of
substances, but conversion of substances cannot be without a change: for there
is as much difference betwixt change and transubstantiation, as betwixt the
general and the special: for change is the general, and contains under it
transubstansiation: but not contrariwise.

And as there is a change of substances, so there is a change of accidents, to
wit, of qualities, of times, of places, of habits, and such other like things,
according to their natures, and to the predicaments under the which they are
comprehended,

These Logical rudiments I hope you have not forgotten.

Our regeneration is a change, not substantial, but accidental that is: We
confess a change of name, and of use, but only during the actio^ not after to
be a sacrament, no more then water in the font after that baptism is finished
by the minister.
it is not a change of the substance of our bodies and souls into any other
substance, but the change is in quality: which is, from vice to virtue, from
sin to righteousness, etc. and this our change now in question is
sacramental, not substantial, of the use of the creatures, not of the
substance.

But if you will needs have a change of substances, speak like scholars, and
tell me for my learning in what predicament I shall seek it, and yet I think
I shall never find it. But I will not be tedious in transubstantiation,
seeing the great Rabbynes of Rome can no more agree upon this, then they could
about consecration, as also because we have confuted it in such places, where
we prove bread to remain after consecration: for so many Fathers as prove
bread to remain after consecration: confute transubstantiation. I will only
give the best minded Catholics a taste of the rest of your late
School-doctors, by alleging one Grand captain instead of the rest. Whose
words be these. Magister Sent. lib. 4. di^t. 11. page 58.
Si tandem queritur qualis sit illa conuersio, an formalis. an substantialis,
vel alterius generis, diffinire non sufficio: But if it be asked me (says
this your great Moderator) what kind of change is made in the Sacrament,
whether it be formal, or substantial, or of any other kind, I am not able
to define it unto you.

Will you hear your own friend Cuthb. Tounstall Bishop of Dirrhum deliver his
opinion, de modo, De Eucharistia lib. 1. page 46.
quomodo id fieret fortasse satius erat cur^osum quemque suae relinquere
coniecturae, sicut liberum fuit ante concilium Lateranum. Of the manner of this
change or conversion how it might be done, perhaps it had been better to leave
every man that would be curious to his own opinion or conjecture, as i^ was
before the Council of Laterane left at liberty.

Is this your antiquity, universality, and consent? you see it is a jarring
novelty, void of verity. Why then will you take upon you to teach that which
you never learned, and persuade the Catholics to believe that which the
chiefest on you^ side makes a doubt of? nay all of your side cannot prove:
nay which is in deed but a fable without truth, Absurdities follow the
granting of Transubstantiation.
for one thousand and two hundred years after Christ never heard of: And
therefore seeing it is neither Apostolical nor Catholic, no man's consience
is bound to believe it. Now I will only show some gross absurdities that
follow the granting of it, and so proceed to the rest.

What the sense is of Transubstantiation, and how old it is.
Fitzimon.
70. TRansubstantiation (in our purpose) is a conversion of the whole substance
of bread into the substance of the body of Christ our Lord, Conc. Trid. loc.
cit.
and of the whole substance of wine into the substance of his blood. So that if
the Fathers ever taught the whole bread in substantial matter and form to be
converted in to the fleash of Christ, and the wine into his blood, without any
substantial part or parcel of them remaining; they can not be denied to have
taught Transubstantiation. Vide Zuar. 3. par. q. 75. d^sp 50. sect, 1. The name
creation is added out of S. Augustine. de conseca. d. 2. c. vtrum sub figura.
whereby is only intended what here in other words others have.
For the evidence whereof; first, let us learn what names they used to express
this conversion. For breuities sake, I will only relate such as in the proofs
of their opinions in Zuares are specifyed: to wit, A transmutation, a making,
a creation, a mutation, a conversion, a translation, a transelementation,
transformation, a transmigration, transfusion of bread, and wine, into the body
and blood of Christ. Every one using the most forcible word he bethought, to
testify the same, which the Council of Trent does say, conveniently, and
properly, to be called Transubstantiation.

Secondly note, these few proofs of the primative Fathers, and Cyprian. de
caena Domini.
First S. Cyprian; Panis iste quem Dominus discipulis porrigebat, non effigy
sed natura mutatus, omnipotentia verbi factus est caro; The bread which Christ
delivered his disciples, not in resemblance, but in substance and nature
changed, by the omnipotency of the word is made fleash. O confortable and
Catholic testimony, of fourtene hundred years antiquity! Cyril.
Hierosolimit anus catechist. 4. mystagogua.
S. Cyrill of Jerusalem; Hoc sciens; ac procertissimo habens, panem hunc non
esse panem, qui videtur, etiamsi gust^^ panem esse sentiat; This knowing, and
howlding for most certain, this bread not to be bread which seems, Ambros.
de sacram. l. 4. c 14. lib. 6. c. 1.
althowgh the taste do the judge it bread. S. Ambros; Panis iste panis est ante
verba sacramentorum: Vbi accesserit consecratio, de pane (...) caro Christi;
This bread is bread before consecration, but when it is consecra^^d, of bread it
is made the fleash of Christ. S. Augustine; August. did. 2. cap. hoc est de
Consecr.
Caro eius est quam ^^ma panis opertam in sacramento accipimus: and sanguis
eius quem sub vini ^ecie and sapore potamus; It is his fleash which under the
lyknes of bread covered, ^e receive in the Sacrament; and his blood which under
the show and taste of ^yne we drink. S. Cyrill of Alexandria; Cyril. Alex. in
Joan. l. 4. c. 13.
Qui videtur panis non est panis ^^iamsi gustu ita appareat, sed corpus
Christi; That which seems bread is not ^read, although in taste it so appear,
but the body of Christ. Beda; Beda lib. de mysterio m^sse. Remigius in psalm. 21.
Ibi sorma ^anis videtur, vbi substantia panis non est; There the form of
bread appears ^here the substance of bread is not. S. Remigius; Panis and
vinum a Chri^^iana veritate dicuntur, non quod naturam panis and vini post
consecrationem ^etineant, sed quod nutriant; Bread and wine are said in
Christian verity, ^ot that they retain the nature of bread and wine after
consecration, but that ^hey nourish. S. Bernard; Hostia quam vides, iam non est
panis, Bernard de caena Domini.
sed caro ^^ea: similiter liquor iste quem vides iam non vinum, sed sanguis
meus. Quem^dmodum illic speci^s cernuntur quarum res vel substantia ibi non
esse creduntur: ^ic res veraciter and substantialiter creditur, cuius species
non cernitur; The host that thou do behold, is not now bread, but my fleash:
likewise the liquoure which thou viewest, is not wine, but my blood. Even as
the lyknes are seen, those things or substances are believed not to be there:
so the thing is truly and ^ubstantialy believed, whose shape is not perceived.

Will all theses testimonies, whereof every one alone had been ^ufficient to the
most partial or least indifferent protestant, being ^o pregnant, so precise to
the matter, so godly, and from so godly (as every one of them has been
accounted at least these 400. Bullinger decad. 5. de caena fol. 370.
years a Saint) reclayme our adversaries? Bullinger a great protestant
answers negatiuely, saying: Zuinglianos non posse credere Christum esse in
coena praesentem, vero suo corpore, licet omnia mundi concilia, omnes angeli
and diui id iubeant credere; The Zuinglians not to be able to believe, Christ
to be present in the supper, in his true body, although all the Councils of
the world, all Angels, and Saints did command it to be believed. Yet I trust
in the mercy of God, that diverse reading this manifestation of error, and
justification of truth, will instantly open their hearts to let shadows and
figurs depart, and to embrace Christ, and verity. Let me dye a badd death, if
I would, otherwise then to purchase that good to deceived souls, spend only to
incountre M. Rider such precious time in displaying or disprouing that
infidelity, which is incident to him for his profession, which of it self is
notorious and every day vanishing, and consuming without our labor. And for
your learning M. Rider, you may peruse Zuares, in tertiam partem, tomo tertio,
quaestione. 75. disputatione 47. sectione 2, and be instructed by him
particularly, in what Predicament is Transubstantiation; and so have
resolution, in conceit so impossible.

I am truly weary in summing up untruths, they are so manifould. The 68 69.
70. 71. 72. 72, 73. 74. untruth.
The 72. and 73. that the master of the sentences, or Tonstal, doubt of the
conversion of bread into the fleash of Christ, they only disputing how it is
wrought: which is noe more to deny the mather in question, then if one should
confess you to have the rich deanrie of S. Patricks, and muse by what means,
whether by assured Simonie, or unknown desert, or blind choice, you came
thereto. The 74. that we see Transubstantiation to be a iarring novelty, and a
fable without truth. These are but glossing imputations of M. Rider to dazel
the mynds of his Readers, that they do not conceive when truth is represented
to their eyes by us, or when falsehood is inculcated by him; denials without
shame; affirmations with remorce, and torture of conscience; exprobrations
without regard of fidelity; protestations repugnant to all truth, and
sincerity.

Rider.
71. This fable of transubstansiation overthrows sundry articles of our
faith, and therefore it is abominable. It teaches a new conception of Christ
to be made of bread by a sinful priest, and every day, and in every place
where it pleases the priest, contrary to the Article of our faith: which is,
that Christ was conceived by the holy Ghost, and borne of the blessed virgin,
and but once: for such Christ as you tender to the poor ignorant Catholics
is not a true Christ, neither can be, for many respects, which are before in
the beginning alleged. Secondly if Christ be in the Sacrament, he is not
then ascended, and so there is another article of our faith destroyed by this
damnable fable. And thirdly, if he be couchant or dormant in the pixe, then
the Scriptures deceive us, in telling us he shall come from heaven to judge
both quick and dead, and so another article of our faith is overthrown. And
if your doctrine were true, Christ should have eaten himself corporally, but
you confess he did eat himself Josephus Angles page c. 110. 4 conclusione
secunda.
spiritually. If your doctrine of transubstantiation were true, then the Lords
supper were no Sacrament, and the reason is this, for every Sacrament
consists of the outward sign and the inward thing signified, and they must
both still remain during the outward action of the Sacrament. Now if bread
which is the visible outward part of the Sacrament be changed into Christ's
body, then there is no Sacrament, because there remains but one part of the
Sacrament, which is the thing signified, and then you utterly deceive the
people, which tell them it is the Sacrament of the Altar, when it is no
Sacrament at all. Again, another absurdity follows upon it: for if the
substance of bread be changed, then there is no proportion or analogy betwixt
the sign and the thing signified, because accidents cannot nourish. For the
likeness or resemblance betwixt bread and Christ, consists chiefly in this,
that as bread nourishes the body, so Christ's body crucified nourishes the
soul: but if the substance of bread be changed into another substance, then
the proportion and property, is so changed, that it must cease to be the thing
for which it was first ordained and so the best you would make of the Sacrament
is but a shadow without a substance.

Another unreasonable absurdity will follow, that Christ has two bodies, one
of bread made by the Priest, another of the blessed virgin conceived by the
holy Ghost.

Again, if his own body shall be in many places at once, that is contrary
to a natural body, and is as void of learning, as the other of religion: and
by this your new thirtheenth Article of your new faith, you would maintain the
being of qualities without a subject, and the being of quantities without a
substance, which both are impossible. But Because the opinion is false and
forged, without Scripture or testimony of ancient Father, I will allege no
more absurdities at this time till I be urged.

Whether the article of Christ's Ascension, be not rather a proof, then
disproofe of the Real presence.
71. SAint Augustine ever according to his wont, Fitzimon. August. 22. de ciu.
c. 11.
pertinently answers sectarists, and now in these words answers to M.
Rider; Ecce qualibus argumentis omnipotentia Dei, humana contradicit infirmitas
quam possidet vanitas; Behold with what arguments, humain infirmity possessed
by vanity, contradicts Gods omnipotency. Now to the first: It teaches no
new conception of Christ, according to S. Ambros; being; Non alia plane caro,
S. Ambros. loc. infra cit.
quam quae nata est de Maria, and passa in cruce, and resurrexit de sepulchro;
Noe other fleash plainly, then was borne of Mary, suffered on the Cross, and
rose out of the sepulcher. To the second; his being ascended, above the order
and propriety of a natural body, does rather auerre, and assure his being in
the Sacrament beyond the bare nature of a natural body. And to that end, Joan.
^.
Christ him self in his instructing the Jews that his body was truly meat,
to have them believe his words, forwarned them that they should see his body
mount and ascend. By the one, being beyond nature, confirming the other to be
possible notwithstanding nature. To wrest then his Ascension against his being
in the Sacrament, is; Maledicta glossa quae corrumpit textum; a wicked gloss
corrupting the text. That made Luther to confess, that we are bound to believe
Christ's real presence in the Sacrament: Luth. tom. 7. defens. verb. coena. fol.
394.
for that both the Scripture, and articles of our faith, asure us thereof most
constantly. Is it not therefore a strange assertion to say the articles of faith
are impugned, when they are conioyntly with Scriptures consonant in this
controversy? To the third, I answer out of the Psalmist; Neque dormit, neque
dormitabit qui custodit Israel; He sleeps not, nor noddeth, who preserves
Israel. His being in the pix hinders not his coming from heaven, no more then
his being in heaven sitting at the right hand of God the Father, Psalm. 109.
until his enemies be made his foote-stoole, hindered his being viewed in earth
by his Apostle S. Paul, Act. 9.17. c. 22. c. 26. 1. Cor. 15.
in the high way to Damasco, and that after his Ascension: which is an
insupportable ad inevitable thunderboult against them that affirm Christ's body
nether to have been, nor possibly able to be, in many places at once: especialy
being confessed by M. Rider after, that a true Apostle must see the Lord Jesus
in the fleash. Wherefore S. Paul being assuredly a true Apostle, did behold
Christ in fleash, at his first election to be such Apostle:: which was in the
high way to Damaso. And consequently, Christ then, and still, being at the
right hand of his Father, was in fleash, in two places at once, in heaven, and
in the way to Damasco. To the fouerth, we confess both spiritualy, and
corporaly (as has often been declared) and not only spiritual, or only
corporal. To the fifth, it is rather against you, saying there is only an
external sign and no inward grace. We for the external sign show the form of
bread and wine; for the internal grace, Christ's precious body and blood. To the
sixth, accidents (strengthened by Christ's support) may, and do nourishe. Ambros.
de co^secr. did. 1. c. omnia quecunque.
To the 7. although it be all one with the first; S. Ambrose again informs
you, saying: Corpus illud vere, illud sane, quod sumptum est de virgin, quod
passum est, and sepultum, quod surrexit, and in coelum ascendit, and sedet ad
dexteram Dei patris, and quod est venturum iudicare viuos and mortuos. The same
body truly, the same body certainly, which was taken from the Virgin, which
suffered, and was buried, and rise, and ascended, and sits at the right hand
of God his Father, and will come to judge the quick and the dead. To the eight,
it is not contrary to a natural body, but beyond it: and is testified by
Scripture to have infallibly happened. And good M. Rider, if it be impossible
that qualities can be without a subject, how did God make light, Genesis 1.
without a subject? for nether firmament son, moon, or stars, were yet made;
and other subject is not mentioned. It is strange that you dare affirm that
impossible, which the Scripture assures posible. Besyd the argument to the
contrary, that nothing beyond the condition of a natural body is possible,
implies there will be no resurrection of the, dead there was no birthe, walking
on the sea, entrance among the enclosed disciples, resurrection, and ascension
of Christ, as being beyond nature. Glory be to Gods divine Majesty for so
grounding us on truth, as that we can not be impugned, but Gods Omnipotency,
the Scriptures, and chief mysteries of Religion must first be denied.



AN EXAMINATION OF PROtestancie concerning the 12. articles of Belief, in
general.
IT has ever been among sectarists, Athanas. de Synodis. Socrates l. 2. c. 7.
Sozom. l. 3. c. 5. Cassian. l. 6. de inca. Epiph. her. 73.
a principal difficulty, prouidently to collect, and resolutly to embrace, any
form of belief, whereunto they would remain tied, and inuariable. The Arrians
by testimony of the Fathers, four times in few months changed, and revoked
their Creed. To abrupt other inductions; When late Reformers presented their
confession, entitled of Augusta, to which they generaly subscribed, bynding
them selves thereto by solemn protestation, (whereupon they were named
protestants; and to this day they only among the learned are so called, who
avouch the foresaid Augustan confession) although they had as prouidently, and
politickly compyled it, as they might not be ashamed upon future deliberation
to justify it: yet never did Chameleon alter his colors more often then it.
Chlebitius in sua victoria and ruma Papatus saxonici.
And therefore a famous Lutheran one William Chlebitius, was constrained to say;
Non expedit coram plebe recensere, quoties and quomodo confessio Augustana sit
emendata; It is not expedient before the people to number, how often, and in
what manner, the confession of Augusta has been amended. Another exclaimeth,
that it has been; Versa, peruersa, conuersa, Hosius in Antibrentio.
mutata, deprauata, mutilata; turned, perverted, converted, changed, depraved,
maimed. Then which kind of lamentations, nothing is more frequent in Lutheran
writers.

Osiander apud Hosium ibid.
Behold I pray you; the confession, collected as studiously, and iudiciously,
as might be possible, to the maintenance whereof all masters of Art by oathe
were obliged, even as to the fouer Evangelists (and all opposite thereto) as was
also determined; Cassimiriani Matheologi in sua admonitione cap. 4.
A veritate and verbo Dei aberrant, and tanquam alieni a vera Dei Ecclesia
iustissime condemnantur, vitantur, and velut Lupi a Christi ouilibus arcentur;
Do stray from truth and the word of God, and as separated from the Church of
God, are most justly condemned, eschued, and as wolves from Christ's sheepsowlds
repulsed; Behold I say, how miserably it has been, like a cock of hey in
summer time, tossed, toyled, and tormented; changed, fashioned, reformed, and
deformed; as if it contended with courtiars of late times, to be in as many new
fashions as they. I will not unfold any thing of the English communion books
diversity; A survey of the pretended holy discipl. Lo^d per Ioa^. woolfe. Anno
1593. page 3. 13. 77.
because puritans shall not be offended with me, for intermedling in their
charge. Their milenarie suffrages against it, their exceptions against 150.
articles thereof, their saying, that the government of the Church of England,
is Antichristian, and Diabolical, and that none but betrayers of God do
defended it, is more then sufficient, to be said to my purpose.

2. Where as there are three forms of Creed, one from the time of the Apostles;
Another of the first general Council of Nice (which after for further
explication added in the Council of Constantinople, bears commonly the name of
the Constantinopolitan Creed: whereof godw lling I will treat in the
explication of the Mass.) The third of S. Athanasius, which to this day is
readd in the Sunday office, eu^n among protestants: although these three
according to their order more or less, have been in all Christendom hitherto
irrefragable, yet now, the second displeases for the word Luther con. Iac.
Latom.
homoousion: and all founders thereof, are termed, but a congregations of Beza
in epist. theol. 81.
Sophisters. Also the third, for standing to much upon and for the blessed
Trinity, is mis-named, for the creed of S. Athanasius, the creed of Georgio
Nigro, Stanislao, Sarnicio, Blandrata, Lisma^ni^, etc. apud Stanchar. l 6. 7.
and in pref. de mediatore.
Sathanasius. Against the first, of the Apostles, diverse exceptions are made;
First by Calvin Calu. apud Lindan. pa op. page 112.
that he doubts whether it should be of authority, not being contained in
scripture. Secondly by Brentius Bre^t. in sua catechesi.
inclining not so much to doubt thereof, as to be assured it should be
distrusted. Thirdly, by Anabaptists, denying it in general, and particular. To
these may be reduced profane and impiouse Erasmus, (or rather all they to him)
affirming; (praef. paraphrasis suae in Matthew.) Nescire se number symbolum illud ab
Apostolis manauerit; whether this form of belief ever came from the Apostles.
O unworthy and unchristian distrust! Worthily is it said vulgarly: Erasmus
innuit, Luthers irruit: Erasmus parit oua, Lutherus excludit pullos: Erasmus
dubitat, Lutherus abnegat. But, by that which follows may best appear, that
protestants are in great dislike toward it. Lauath. in hist. sacramentali.
Amisfort. in pura doctr. euang. Gallus in Thesib. Sur. ad an. 1557.
Lauatherus a Zuinglian, Amissortius and Gallus Lutherans, and Surius a
Catholic, do conformably recount, how the Dieta of Ratisbon, anno 1557.
September. 4. enjoined 12. choice protestants to establish a form of belief,
not after at any time by any to be contradicted. They met, and eftsoons
deliberated, without any conclusion. Then three days farther consultation for
better advise, were had; and those also being expired, seven other days
requested, and granted; yet nothing was determined. They were so far from
consenting to either the Apostles belief, or any other; that seven of them
excommunicated the other five, as being the only impediment of agreement: yet
nether could these seven, either then, or ever since, deliver any form of
belief, to which they, or others, would stand or abide irreuocably.

3. As S. Augustine says, they that believe of scripture what they list, S.
August. con. Faust. l. 16. c. 3.
and what they list not, do not believe, they believe not the scripturs but
them selves. So is it in the believers of the creed. Therefore he that offends
in one, is made guilty of all. Or as S. Chrysostom says; S. Chrysostom. in
epistola^ ad Galat. S. Ambros. ad Demetriadem virginem. Symbol. S. Athanaesij.
verse. quam nisi quisque integre etc. Ephesians. 4.5. Hebr. 11.6.
he corrupts the whole doctrine, who overthrows the least particle thereof.
Or as S. Ambrose says; He is rejected from the number of the faithful, and
lot of the holy, which in any one point dissenteth from the Catholic verity.
So that if protestantcy be found opposite to any one article, although it
profess the residue, yet may it not be said auaylable or a true belief.
Nether can there be other then one faith, as there can be but one only God. And
without this true and only faith, it is impossible to please God, how honestly
soever misbeleeuers live in the world. Wherefore all sectaries must be repugnant
to this true and only faith, and far from salvation, who have no other
evidence of their faith the one above the other, but bare challenges of
scripture, common to all late and ancient heretics.

In particular let them assure them selves, that the true faith Math. 16.18.
to wit, against the power of Pagans, and malice of heretics: such being
Christ's infallible assurance to the only faith of his Church. Next let them as
carefully provide that the faith by them esteemed true, be not lately revealed:
for thereby, both is it known to have been prevailed against, if it were at any
time extinguished; and also we are admonished by Gods word, 1. Joan. 2. Romans
16. Galat. 1.
that it remain in us, and we in it, which we had heard from the beginning.
and, if any preach otherwise then we had already received, to hold him
accursed. Whereof some what is disputed before. Thirdly, let them noe less
eschew, Hebr. 13.
that it be not mutable: as being forwarned by S. Paul, not to be misledd by
variable, and strange doctrins. So that if these observations tendered by the
holy Ghost in sacred Scripture, be opposite to their belief; it is a manifest
demonstration, they should suspect, and reject it.

Romans 10.17. 2. Cor. 11.14.
4. True faith is by hearing the word of God, revealed to us by his holy
Spirit, whether in writing, or by tradition. Whereas thetfor Satan may
transform him self into an angel of light, we are forwarned not to believe
every spirit, but to depend upon the faith of Gods Church the pillar of
truth, 1. Io^. 4. 1. Tim. 3.
governed by the holy Ghost; which if we do not observe, 14. Joan. Mat. 18. Ex
ipso Galu. l. 4. Instit. c. 1. n. 17. 22 4.
we are no nearer salvation, then Ethnicks and Publicans. This is the faith
contained in the creed of the Apostles to be now examined. Therefore it could not
be less then a rash precipitation in late founders of pretended Reformation,
Guliel. Bibliothecar. l. 3. Vince^t Beluac. in spec. Erasm. Alberus de
Carolostad. Luther. tom. 7. p. 228. per Thom. Kelug. Zuinglius subsid. Euchar.
fol 249. tom. 2. Staphil. in resp. con. Jacob. schmidelin. page 404.
to depart from their first belief, at the sensible suggestion of Satan, and
by delusion of dreams; as by their own confession, and no otherwise it
hapened. Of Berengarius, that he was directed, and assisted visibly; by Satan,
all sorts of Authors, Catholics, and Protestants do record. Luther and
Zuinglius testify the same both of them selves, and of Oecolampadius and
Carolostadius. Calvin acknowledges, that he was not so much guided, per
ingenium, vt genium, by his own disposition, as by his gobblins.

Other successors of Luther, confess that he was, Somniator, quod uttered for
the pure express word of God. Also other disciples of Calvin, Lindan. dial.
3. c. 1. Dubitan.
do certify, of Geneua preachers; Ioa. Spangeberg. in veraci narratione
beneficiorum etc. Ochin. dial. con. sectam terrenorum Deorum. Schlusselburg.
proem. lib. de theol. Calvin.
Quod noctu somniarunt id cartis mandant, excudique curant, suaque scripta and
verba, pro oraculis haberi volunt; That which they dreamed by night, that they
ingrosse in papers, and cause to be printed, and strive to have their wrytings
and words to stand for oracles. Another says of them; Clarum est Caluinistas
Somnijs a nigro Demone instillatis testamentum filij Dei labefactare and
euertere; It is clear that the Caluinists by dreams suggested from the black
devil, endeavor to destroy the testament of the Son of God. I omit for
breuities sake, how Fox martyr-maker, Acts and Momuments page 90.
confesses a spirit to have instructed him during his musing in bed, to count
the 42. months mentioned in the Apocalips by sabboths: which spirit to have
been false, appears by the express word of God, saying the said 42.
months to be 1260. days, or three years and a half, and not as Fox
calculated 294. years. This is abundantly sufficient to manifest, that he that
departed from his former belief, upon such guids, governed by such spirits
and dreams, is in wisdom to enter deeply in to this exammation following.

5. For better information in this point, Acts and Momuments page 402.
the definition of protestant faith is to be propownded. Fox defyneth it thus.
Faith in Christ is that every one should believe particularly that his synns
are forgiven him whereupon, says he, he is justified. And this tutchstone of
truth and doctrine, was revealed first to Luther, by an owld man, says M. Fox
whereby the ice was broaken to all that followed. Calvin, Calu. l. 3. Instit. c.
n. 7. 15. 16.
and protestants universally subscrib to this suer, and certain knowledge, in
particular, that by believing Christ's promises of salvation, none can perish,
as being perfectly justified, made an elect, and predestined; Call. Instit. l.
3. c. 2. n. 38. 39. 40. Cap. 24. n. 6. 7. 8. Brent. in Apol. Conf. Wittem. par.
3. p. 703. Luther. tom. 2. wittem. fol. 405. an. 1551. Confess. Geneu. Beza, c.
4. n. 20.
so assuredly as nothing can seperat him from God. For this faith (say they)
being once had, may never be lost. And Luther instructed herein, by the owld
man, confesses that he was angry, that the Apostle had not sufficiently
extolled this faith: and therefore, that he thought good by addition of a word
[only] to make the text affirm, that only faith justifies. Whereupon by good
consequence, he sustained, that only infidelity deserves damnation; that Gods
commandments belong not to Christians* that sacraments are superfluous; as is
before declared.

Bucer, Brentius, Mayor, Lutherans, profess, that he is not a kind Christian,
Disput. Ratisbon. page 463. vide Sleidan. l. 16. page 263. Zuingl. tom. 1. fol.
268.
who believes not with the same assurance that him self in particular is
elect, as that Christ is the son of God; nay more, quoth Zuinglius, that you
can not be damned unless Christ be damned, nor he saved unless you be saved,
you haueing as great right to heaven as he. Acts and Momuments page 1335. 1338
1339 (...) cap. 2.20 21. 2. Cor. 7.15. Philip. 2.12. Vide Modzenium l. 2. de
Eccl. c. 2.
And if you labor to make this your justifying faith assured by good woorks,
you shame (say the English protestant Martyrs) the blood of Christ. Go tell
these men, that S. James is of a contrary mind that faith alone justifies
not; that the Apostles, and Evangelists, were especial favors of good woorks
as being necessary to salvation, that they in fear and trembling wrought
their salvation; that being guiltles in their consciences, yet they reputed not
them selves justified, etc. it will be answered Pomeran. ad Ro^. 8.
they wrote wickedly; Luth. in sermon. de pha^is. and public. Beza in Luc. cap.
22. Vide nu^. 26. pos^ med. Calvin. l. 4. Instit. c. 8. n. 4.
they are noe true evangelists; and in like manner according as is specified in
our 26. number: and also; Si Apostoli sint ne garriant quicquid collibitum
fuerit; if they be Apostles, let them not babble all that they list, etc.

6. This Symbol and creed of the Apostles is of such ancient reputation,
Council. Bracharen. 2. c. 1. Conc. Leodicen, c. 46. Conc. Romans Sub Martino 1. De
consecr. d. 4. c. non licet. c. ante viginti. c. Baptisandis. August. l. 8.
Confess. c. 2. Oe^s DD 2. 2. q. 2. a. 8.
in the Church of God, as all primative Christians must necessarily have
known the contents thereof in particular, at least according to the substance
if not according the words, or order of articles, under danger of damnation.
Yea none were permitted to come to Baptism, being of years, who knew it not
at least twenty days before their baptising, as wittness the Fathers. And all
Divines to this day conformably do affirm, that it is an assured cause of
damnation, to be ignorant in the substance of the contents thereof, in manner a
foresaid: as also that it is a most urgent obligation under grievous sin, to
godfathers and godmothers, to provide (if parents be negligent or otherwise
defective) that their spiritual Children be not ignorant thereof. Omitting all
other prefaces, (because any prolixitie, S. August de tem. ser. 115. Ruffin. in
pref. expos. symbol. Apostolorum. S. August. loc. cit.
is longum proemium audiendi cupido; a long prologe to a greedy attendant.) I
only advertise, that the Apostles by testimony of ancient Fathers, before their
separation, to have conformity in all christendom, every one in order
delivered an article, amounting consequently to twelve. Which as they were
spoken, being specified by S. Augustine very particularly, I intend not to
change their order, but to examine succinctly, whether Protesta^tcy and they
agree, or not: supposing, that not only in general, but also in particular, it
indeuoreth either to infringe every one of them; or at least that it is in some
measure erroneous concerning every of them. Other order I might have followed
for the division of articles acc^rding to the Catechism of the Council of
Tre^t, had I not to deal with them, Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 14. n. 25.
who reject the Council of Trent, admitting S. Augustine whom I follow, to be
fidelissimum testem antiquitatis; the most trusty witness of antiquity.

AN EXAMINATION OF PROTESTANTCYE CONCERNING THE twelve Articles of belief in
particular.
1. Article of S. Peter. I believe in God the Father almighty. I believe.
7. FIrst it is necessary, that belief should be resolute, Luther. ser.
Conniual. fol. 158. and in pref. tom. 1. Vide tom. 2. Ien. fol. 9. in pref.
lib. de abusu Missae. Item in Sermon. conniual. fol. 10. 158. 273.
and not any ways doubtful. Such first was not Luthers belief, when he said;
Sperare se, vbi horum temporum curiositas saturata fuerit, breui monumenta sua
interitura; That he hoped as soon as the curiosity of these times should be
satiated, his monuments would decay. And again; Istas cogitationes nonquam ex
animo demitto, quin optem hanc me causam nonquam incepisse; I never dismiss
these cogitations, but that I wish I had never begone this course. Such
distrust, and remorse, had secondly Zuinglius, when he said; Nihil tamen
definimus, Zuingl. epist. ad Alberum. Bolsec. in V. Call. c. 22. Vide number. 38.
and conclusionem huius defensionis.
sed nostra in medium proferrimus; Yet we defyne nothing, but only deliver our
opinons. Such thirdly had Calvin, Beza, Oecolampadius, Melancthon, etc. as by
them selves in places quoted appears. Secondly, it is necessary, that he
bind not his belief to the reach of reason. Such was not Vermils belief,
when he said (as is in the 68. number) Gods word ought not so much to be
followed in divinity, as the words of nature; Nor Victorius, when he
affirmed: we should look with the left eye at the word of Christ, but with
the right, at naturs of things. Calvin (in Joan. c. 6. etc. 7.) declares of
his brethren, that by means of their carnal conceit of Chrsst, they cannot
attain to perceive him, worthily; and that by corrupt interpretations, they
are come to a contempt of the euangile: for when the reason of any thing
appears not unto them, they suddenly despise it. See more in the foresaid 41.
number. Thirdly belief in this cause, requires to believe beside scripturs,
holy traditions: for this belief, is not known by scripture, but by
tradition; and who are enemies to traditions be enemies to it. Such Protestants
are known general to be.

In God.
8. They believe not in God, who are Atheists: such as by D. VVhitgifts (who
was pastor, and primat, of protestants, and had best cause to know them)
confession, Whitg. a page 31. ad 51.
the congregation of England is repleanished with all. For by signification of
the word Atheist they renounce and disclaim all love, or believe of God.
Secondly nether they who believe in God authoure of evil, Luth. tom. 2. de
seru. arbitr. fol. 461.
do believe in God, whom the Apostle says, does tempt none to evil; of whom
only this form of Creed, treats. Such mystake God, and as Calvin,
confesses, Vide Calvin Turcism. page 691. ad 701. Zuingl. de prouidentia Dei
tom. 1. fol. 365.
transform him into the devil. Which notwithstanding is the doctrine, of
Calvin, Peter martyr, Zuinglius, Beza, etc. Of whom Zuinglius says; Quando
facimus adulterium, aut homicidium, Dei opus est motoris, authoris, atque
impulsoris. Latro Deo impulsore occidit, and saepenumero cogitur ad peccandum;
When we commit adultrye, or murder, it is Gods work, as the mouer, Vide
Caluino Turcis, loc. cit.
author, and inforcer. The thief by Gods impulsion does kill, and is often
constrained to offend. Behold, well-beloved, to what God these men conduct their
followers. I confess to deal sincerly; most other Protestants, do inueigh,
and argue against this doctrine; but in deed for no other intention, then to
have credit, during their meditatio^s how to bring their hearers by other
degrees from all belief in God. Thirdly, they believe not in God, who account
questions concerning him to be but trifles, and things indifferent, Beza de
hereticis a Civilly magistratu puniendis.
and not necessary to justification. Such is Beza, who affirms, such to be
the questions of Christ and his office; of his consubstantialitie with the
Father; of the Trinity; of predestination; of Freewill; of God; of Angels,
etc. For in true belief the reputation of God, and questions thereto belonging,
is of greater importance, then all other things in heaven, and earth.

The Father.
Calvin. l. 1. Instit. c 13. n. ^. Lib. ad Vale^tin. Ge^til. Epist. 2. ad
Polo^. Och^m. Dialog. l 2. toto dial. 19 and 20. Ed. Rogers cont. familiam
^o^dinis an. 1579. art. 24 25. 26. Luth. in Enchirid precum 1543. Cont Jacob.
^atom, Beza ep. 81. Symler. an. 1560 in vita Bullingers ^ol 33. Bredembach. l.
7. c. 19.
9. They misbeleeue the Father, who acknowledge noe Trinity Such is Calvin,
saying, he would the name of Trinity were buried; and the prayer, holy
Trinity one God have mercy upon us, to be barbarouse and impropre; rejecting
out of his prayer books, the clause, glory be to the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost. Such was Ochin now a Turk, but before one of the Apostles of England in
K. Edwards days; saying, the name of Trinity to be a Sathanical name. Such
is the family of love, rejecting the Trinity, and divinity of Christ, as
papistical fictions. Such was Luther, disclayming the foresaid prayer holy
Trinity etc. and saying, that his soul did detest the word, homoousson, or
consubstantial betwixt the persons in the holy Trinity. Such were the
Seruetians tearming the B. Trinity a three headed Cerberus, or hell hound.
Such the solemn legation of all Caluinists in Polonia, to Zurick and Geneua,
to have the mystery of the Trinity abolished. Such was the Caluinian Synod.
at Vilna, anno 1589. May 11. by public decree forbidding ministers in sermons,
to mention the name of Trinity. Secondly they misbeleeue the Father, Calvin.
l. 1. Instit. c. 13. n. vlt. Ibid. n. 13. 23. 24. Melanct. loc. com. an. 1539
fol 8. and 10. 1545. fol. 53. 1558. loco de Filio. Symb. Athanas.
who with Calvin affirm it foolishnes to think that God the Father does
continualy begett his Son. Whereas by his continual understanding he must ever
produce a word, which is the wisdom of the Father and his Son. Thirdly all
they misbeleeue the Father, who exclude the Son, and holy Ghost, from infinite
divinity, and coequalitie with the Father, as does Melancthon, Calvin, Beza,
etc. For such as is the Father such is the Son, such is the holy Ghost. If
he infinite, they also must be infinite, and e contra. Whereof after at the holy
Ghost.

Almighty.
10. Of this parcel, I have in the 68. Vide number. 68.
number manifested manyfould principal Protestants, resolutly denying the
omnipotency of God. Besyd citations out of Calvin in the said number, seel. 2.
Instit. c. 7. n. 5. and 24. lib. 4. c. 17. n. 24. and in ps. 37. v. 4.
Therefore for avoiding superfluity I referr the reader thereto. And for more
abundant proof, if Calvin be also perused in the citations of this margent,
you shall find him flouting at our doctrine that God is almighty, and tearming
it blasphemous. Here is a pitiful spectacle exhibited toward the first, and
principal article of our belief, and every word thereof. Far has it been
from my intention, or wont (in which protestation I refuse not my greatest
enemies verdict) to falsify or pervert any testimonies alleged. Let it
therefore be every careful Christians resolution, not to slumber in the main
chances of religions purloyning (by fair benedictions) out of his heart;
considering these authors so much offended with this belief, are the
principal founders of protestantcy. And consequently, that they failing in the
very foundation, must likewise have little soundnes in the rest, and deserve
wholly to be suspected.

2. Article of S. Ihon. Maker of heaven and earth.
11. First it is necessary for the right belief of this Article, to confess,
that the Son, and holy Ghost, created as much as God the Father, they not
being distinguished one from another, as they are God; and consequently their
doings are, and must be, all one in external operations: such as is the
creation of the world. Calu. con. Valentin. Gentil. and l. 2. Instit. c. 14. n.
3.
Contrary to this Article, is Calvin: first in saying, the name of God,
peculiarly to belong only to God the Father, Secondly, in saying, that Christ,
considered according to his person, may not be called creator of heaven and
earth. Which impiouse paradox being allowed to be true, besyd all other
absurdities, Christ according to his person should not be God; or at
least-their should not equality or God head be believed. Thirdly, in saying:
(in c. r 4. Genes. v. 18. Et in c. 6. Joan. v. 57.) Christ our Lord to be but a
second king next to God, and a second cause of life. If he had any regard to S.
Paul affirming (Philip. 2.) Christ not to have thought it any robbery to be
equal to God; would he have adventured to disinherit him in this manner, of his
coequal Godhead? But why should he have regarded S. Paul, when the very deity
of our Savior Jesus Christ, could not retain him, from this abominable
blasphemy? Fourthly, in saying that God in heaven is not dutyfully, and
sincerly served without sin, even by the angels them selves. Calu. in cap. 1.
Colos. v. 20. Whereby is insinuated contrary to Scripture. Apoc. 21. that in the
heavenly city there is some thing defiled. When therefore, all belonging to power
and government, to the Father; of wysdom, knowledge, and doctrine, to the
Son; of benignity, liberality, plenty, and sanctification, to the holy
Ghost, is imputed, and appropriated; the meaning is only to ascribe all good
among the three persons, and not to exclude any, good from any one of them, as
being all three equaly God, and consequently not vnequaly fountains of all
good, as well in particular, as in general. But more touching this article will
follow in treating of Christ's ascension to heaven.

3. Article of S. James. And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord.
Vide number. 24.
12. Most Protestants to be against this article, appears (besyd what is said
in the precede^t article) in our 24. n. For some affirm, that Christ is not
the Messiah; some, that the name of Christ is a filthy name; some that he was a
deceauer of the world; some, that he was not God; some, that he had but a mean
measure of Godhead; Edward Rogers against the sect of the family of love,
London. 1579.
some, that he was ignorant, his discourses absurd, and him self no more God,
then Socrates, and Trismegistus, etc. The same blasphemies are extant in the
first and second article of the Famile of love. The same also, are employed by
the Proto-Puritan Cartwright, saying, that he could not be persuaded, the
Israelits to be so mad, Cartwr. 2. replic. page 191.
as to believe him to be the living God, whom with their eyes they did behold
to be a miserable, and simple man. These, I say, demonstrat, that Christ for
taking our infirmites, is distrusted by these compagnions, to be the liueing
God, and our Lord. Secondly those are against this Article, who equal them
selves in Gods favor and right to heaven, unto Jesus Christ, Gods only first
begotten, consubstantial son our Lord. Whereof in this examine, in the 5.
number and after, somewhat is to be found. Thirdly they believe not in Jesus
Christ our Lord, who distrust any part of his doctrine, whether it be of the B.
Sacrament, or otherwise, because they can not conceive it in their
understanding. Calvin in cap. 6. and cap. 7. Ioannis.
Caluinists generaly to be such, is confessed by Calvin saying; When the
reason of any thing does not appear unto us, such is our great pride that we
esteem it nothing. Fowerthly contrary to this Article is Calvin, saying; Vide
number. 9. pr^^ce^.
It is foolishnes to think that God the Father does continualy begett his
son. For thereby God the Father is made sometime not to understand, which is
his begetting; and the Son is abolished, who is not otherwise actualy Son
of the Father, but by determinating actualy the relation of the Father to him
self. Besyd all other demonstrations of their blasphemies (that every one may
know that I charge them not undeservedly) and hatred against Jesus Christ the
Son of God, mentioned in the foresaid 24. number, harden your hearts to hear
Luther saying; Nihil mirum, si Arius, Iudaeus, Mahumetes, Luther. disp. de ^e^
these. 18. Tom. 2. Wittemb. latin^.
and totus Mundus negent Christum esse Deum. It is no merueil, if Arius, if a
Jew, if Mahumet and all the world deny Christ to be the Son of God. It is no
meruell in deed that besyd. Arius, Jews, and Turks, the Lutherans be so
persuaded, considering Luther thus teaching among them is so principal an
Evangelist.

4. Article of S. Andrew. Who was conceived of the holy Ghost, borne of the
Virgin Mary.
13. First they are contrary to this Article, Vide Maldonat. in cap. 1. Math.
who blasphemously affirmed, the holy Ghost to have been Father to Christ, in
manner of other Fathers toward their children: as appears in Maldonat. Vide
Caluino Turc. page 530 531. Greg. a Valentia de virginitate S. M.
Secondly all they, who believe Christ to have been only conceived, but not
borne of a virgin. such are Beza, Maytyr, Bru^aut, Molineus, Bucer, Fortunatus,
and all Anabaptists, and Familists. To whom also anneereth Calvin saing most
impiously; that the B. Virgin had in manner of other women been weakened in
travail upon Christ. M. Rid. in his cau^a.
And although M. Rider honorably terms our lady a blessed Virgin; yet, by his
own words, that he believes nothing but that which the written word of God
warranteth, although all doctors and prelates should swear it, he does bind
him to the same misbeleefe with the rest in this article, and toward the
residue: Archibald Hamilton. Ca^u. confus demonst. l. 2. c. 3. fol. 151.
because both the creed in general, and this article in particular, is not
extant in Scripture, but only a tradition. Thirdly they are contrary to this
Article, Calu. consus. demo^str. ob. 2. cap. 3. fol. 151.
who commonly equal or prefer them selves to our Lady, as diverse in Scotland
by Hamilton, and in England by experience are known to do. For in this creed
and Gods Churches faith, she had the prerogative to be blessed above all women,
and to conceive and bear a child, and he the God of heaven and earth; which
no other woman ever had, or did. Fowerthly; They who make Christ's body as much
in Abraham's time, Beza. l. con. Heshusiu^ fol. 284. and Colloq. Mompel. fol. 77.
as when it was conceived, and borne, by the B. Virgin Mary, not only in
efficacy, but also in essence, and nature, as Beza did; As also they, who in
more express terms, with the Conference of Mompelgart say; That Christ's own
body, etiam temp^re Abrahae extitit; Was extant, even in the time of Abraham.
Whereby is employed, that Christ was true man in essence, and existence, before
this Conception and birth here mentioned; that consequently the Angel said not
true to the sheepherds, natus est vobis, hodie, Saluator; this day, is borne to
you a savior; Auctor diallactici vide bellum 5. Euangel. page 98. Colon.
1595. Symlerus in pref. l. de aeterno Dei Filio.
That the B. Virgin Mary was not his mother, etc. Fifthly, they also who make
Christ to have two bodies, one delivered in the supper, another borne of the B.
Virgin Marie: because thereby they forge another Christ, then was her son.
Sixthly, they who affirm that Christ was not eternaly, but began only at the
time of his birthe; do deny our Savior JESUS, son of the most sacred
Virgin MARIE, who was according the same person eternal.

5. Article of S. Philipp. suffered under Pontius Pilat, was crucified, dead,
and burged.
These are alleged in our 68. number toward the end.
14. Many principal Caluinists, as Cureus, Arastus, Aulachius, the Geneuians,
etc. are first repugnant to this Article by euacuating the passion of Christ.
First, by saying, his blood is putryfied in earth. Whereby must follow, that by
it we were not redeemed; as also confesses Faustus, 1. Pet. 1.
Socinus, etc. For according to the Apostle; we were not reedeemed by any
corruptible price. See before in the 39. number. Secondly, Molin. in harm. eua^g.
they euacuat the passion of Christ, according all other parts, who with
Molineus, of all other his merits say; Nihil proderant nobis, nihil poterant,
sed sola mors Christi; they proffited us nothing, they were of noe force, Iac.
5.20. Ione. 3. Numer. 22.7. Math. 19.26. Mar. 10. Euc. 18. etc.
but only the death of Christ. His preaching is made again leesse auaylable,
then of other men, who by preaching do cancel multitudinem peccatorum; the
multitude of synns; his fasting and prayers less then of the Niniuits, who
thereby eschued the wrath of God, and less then of Moises who purchased to the
Israelits Gods favor; his voluntary poverty, his innocent life, his
circumcision, his woorks of mercy, are made of noe benifit, whereas in any
other, all, and every of these had been a sufficient price for heaven, and can
not be denied to be of infinite price in Christ, and consequently of
sufficiency, all and every of them, to redeem thowsands of woorlds, unless
Christ be denied to be of infinite dignity. Wherefore all Christian Diuins, to
this time of Reformers, Omnes theologi in 3. part, vbi de Christ meritis, and
in 1. 2. q. 114. tota.
were of settled belief, that Christ's death was a demonstration of excess Vide
n. 83.
To the former opinion consents M. Rider, saying after; Christ's birthe and
life (thowgh both innocent) were not sufficient to cleanse my synn. Yea contrary
to this former opinion of Christ's death is his cruel saying, that a bloody
spear went into his blessed side, before man's sin could be satisfied, Gods
wrath appeased etc. For this, being done after Christ's death, his very death
is thereby declared not to have been a sufficient satisfaction for synn, or an
appeasment of Gods wrath etc. and consequently, nether his life nor death, are
allowed to be meritorious, or fit, to redeem us. But tolerat this; there
insueth more. Thirdly, they euacuat Christ's death, who make Christ
vnuoluntarily to have suffered for us. For, as omne peccatum est voluntarium,
every synn is voluntary, so is every merit. Calvin says, Calu. in c. 26. Math.
v. 39. Calu. Instit l. 2. c. 16. n. 10.11.12.
that Mediatoris officio defungi renuit; he refused to discharge the office of
a mediator. Fowerthly they euacuat Christ's death, who with Calvin repute Christ
at the time of his passion, to have had noe sufficiency above other men, and
that in his praying, did not appear placida moderatio; That; torquebatur
conscientiae anxietate; he was tormented with dowbtfulnes of his conscience;
That, diuinae maledictionis horrore perculso, metuque abyssi horribilis exitij
duriter cruciato, elapsa est desperationis vox; astonished with the horror of
Gods malediction, and tormented with the fear of the bottomless pit of
horrible destruction, he burst out into a voice or cry of desperation; That,
desperatione obrutus ab inuocando Deo destiterit, etc. being overwhelmed in
desperattion, he ceased to pray long to God. Which doctrine also Beza,
Marlorat, Beza in c. 27. Math. Marlorat. en Ps. 22. Heshus. apud Clebiti^ in
Victoria par. 2. garum. 6.
and all principal Caluinists do conformably confirm. Fifthly, they euacuat the
passion of Christ, who affirm him with Heshusius a Caluinist, to have been our
deliverer only, and not our redeemer: as also they, who reject the name of
merit, and with Calvin affirm, if any, Christum opponere velit iudicio Dei,
Calu. l. 2. Instit. c. 17. n. 1.
non sore merito locum, quia non reperietur in homine dignitas quae possit Deum
promereri; would oppose Christ to the judgment of God, there would noe place
remain to any Merit, because there is not in man that dignity, to deserve any
thing of God. Holinshead in the year 1579. pap. 1195
Behold, and be amazed, that Christ's merit even of death, is impugned, and he
affirmed to be only man, and not God. Sixthly they euacuat the passion of
Christ, who in plain and express terms say; For Acts. page 468. 487. 1335.
Stows in Elizabeth. page 1195. Calu. con. Heshu^. page 39. Beza in colloq.
Mompel. 1. p. 522. Bucer. super Joan. page 34. Muscul. in loc. theol. fol. 363.
367. Zanchius in Miscellan. p. 3. 200. 206. Aret. apud Schlusselb. l. 1. a. 6.
25. 26. and l. 2. fol. 42. theol. Call.
Eius sanguinem, mortem, and passionem, nihil contulisse ad redemptionem
generis humani; His blood, death, and passion to have nothing auayled to the
redemption of mankind; Christus omnibus suis operibus caelum non est
promeritus; Christ by all his works deserved not heaven. Such were some of
Foxes most famous martyrs; such are Familists; and many English ministers, by
confession of your Chroniclers. Lastly they euacuat Christ's passion, who
affirm his death and passion proffitable only for the predestinat, so that
other might have noe benifit thereby. Such is Calvin, Beza, Bucer, Musculus,
Zanchius, Aretius. Whereby follows, that he is not redeemer of all, or
mediator for all offenders, not intending their salvation.

Sixth Article of S. Thomas He descended into hell, the third day he rose again
from the dead.
25. First this article is impugned in saying with Carlisle, it to be a
pernitiouse heresy, that Christ descended: and by Beza, saying; per
oscitantiam irrepsisse, Carlisle in his book, that Christ descended not into
hell. printed at Land. 1582. Beza. Apol. 2. ad Zantes. page 385. Vide Caluino
Turc. p. 567. Zuingl. tom. 2. fol. 458. Luthapse De Couc. and PP. p. 276.
it to have entered into the creed by inaduertisme^t. Secondly, by making his
descension, only to have been his pangs upon the cross, where not only his
humanity, but (o execrable blasphemy) his divinity endured payns; yea death.
So says Luther; Christum suum saluatorem se nolle agnoscere, si sola humanitas
ipsius passa suisset; Did clearly, and manifestly profess, that he would not
acknowledge Christ to be his Savior, if only his humanity had suffered. And
Calvin, secondeth faithfully all such impiety of Luther, saying; Hie est eius
ad inferos descensus, quod eam mortem pertulit, quae sceleratis ab irato Deo
instigitur; This is his desce^sion to hell, that he suffered that death, which
God in his anger inflicteth upon the wicked. Omnes (inquit) in anima luisse
paenas, Caelu. in catheches. c. de fide. Calu. l 2. Instit. c. 16. n. 10. and
in cap. 26.27. Mat. Item ibid. Beza.
quae Deo vindice a damnatis in inferno expetuntur; He suffered all the payns in
his soul, which by God in reuengement are exacted of the damned. Again. Nihil
actum erat, si corporea tantum morte fuisset defunctus; It had been of no
account, if he had dyed only a corporal death. In which doctrine is contained
besyd Christ's death of body, a death of his soul, yea of his divinity; and
after enduring such death, him to have suffered all punishments of the damned.
Thirdly, this article is impugned by making this descension nothing else but
Christ's burial in his sepulcher. Vide Feuardent. in sua Entremanger. c. 27.
So Zuinglius Oecolampadius, Bucer, Calvin, Musculus, Tremel, Marot, Beza,
Carlisle, etc. affirm: because the common name for hell in hebrew does signify
some time a grave or fosse. But elswher Calvin confesses, Vide Caluino Turc.
page 567.
that the said name, more vsualy and proprely, does signifye hell, Act. In cap.
32. Deuteronomy. etc. 16. number. Calu. in Annot. in cap. 2. In 1. Reg. c. 2. In number. c.
16. In Deuteronomy. c. 32. In Psalm. 6. In Job. 2.26. In Amos. c. 9.
the place and estate of the damned. And diverse or the residue as Bucer,
Oecolampadius, and other principal protestants, as Peter Vermil, otherwise
misnamed Martyr, Paul Fage, Sebastian Munster, Castalio, and Flaccus Illyricus,
do oppose them selves against Beza, being most ernest in the former opinion,
shewingby manifould texts of scripture, the hebrew word Scheol, the greek
word (...), the latin word infernus, to signify an infernal propre place of
damned, (or at least of included) by their right usual and natural
signification, as much as panis, Beza in c. 2. act. in c. 11. Math. in c 10.
and 16. Luc. In Apoc. c. 20.
in latin, signifies bread. Yea Beza him self confesses, that the greek,
and latin word contain no less, but the hebreu word some time signifies
grave. And therefore to avoid Christ's discending to hell, thereby to maintain
former blasphemies of his suffering the payns of damned, on the cross, and to
euacuat the deliverance of the Fathers out of their Limbo, (whereby also is
employed the doctrine of purgatory, if it once be granted, there ever had been a
third place of inclusion for sowls) to avoid I say, these blocks in his way, he
translateth by his own confession, as aforsayd, contrary to greek, Beza in c.
2. Act.
and latin interpreters, and Fathers. And in his confession of the faith
printed anno 1564. to frustrat all disputation about the matter, he thought
convenient to omit wholly this part of this Article. And although he be driven
consequently to translat Christi anima, not Christ's soul, but his carcas, not
his victory, over hell, but his victory over the grave (which the English
bibles of an. 1562. 1577. eschued, but it an. 1579. approved) and many other
such deprauations, contrary to sacred scripture, yet would he not desist, Beza
in c. 16. Luc.
until he had occasion to refute Brencius supposing there is no hell, or
infernal torments but only metaphoricaly. And then forgetting him self,
proves by scripturs and fathers, upon the 16. of Luc. that Christ descended
into the earth, into the receptacle of those who were long restrained.

In their 2. reply against D. Whitg. page 7. and in there. 2. admonition to the
parliament. page 43.
(out of which there is no redemption) the Puritans ernestly reprehended the
creed of the Apostles made in english meeter among the psalms, (wherein is said:
his spirit did after this descend, into the lower parts, to them that long in
darkness were, the true love of there hearts) and also egerly inueyed against one
of their chief martyrs, for professing the same belief. And so forwardly
pressed into their anger against this article, that in all late bibles, as
Carlisle him self confesses, Carlisle in his book against Christ discension
fol. 144. 116. Humfrye l. 2. de rat. interpret. page 219. 220
they have corrupted and depraved the sense, obscured the truth, deceived the
ignorant, and supplanted the simple, following darkness more then light, and
falshod more then truth. To which accords D. Humfrey of Oxford (behold the
verdict of both your universities) saying, the foresaid hebrew word, should
not be translated, grave, but hell, if the authority of the holy ghost be
observed: and consequently, Beza in Act. c. 10.46. edit. an 1556. Iuuenal
satyra 2.
to peruse what Beza him self writes against such late translators, as follow
new fangled and doubtful interpretations in Scripturs, refusing familiar and
accustomed words, if he will observe a Verres condemning others of theft, a
Clodius dispraysing others for leacherie, a Catelin disprouing others for
prodigality, a Gracchus reprehending others for sedition. Fowerthly, this
article is impugned by Bullinger saying, Bullinger in 1. Pet. c. 4.
that Christ descended noe otherwise to hell, then as he daily descended to us,
Spiritu and virtute; only by spirit and virtue, interim vt nemo putet corpus vel
animam eius discendisse, in such sort as none surmise his body or soul to
have descended* To which anneareth Brentius, Beza ad alteram partem libri
Brientij. Aug. lib. 3. de Doctr. c. 10.
affirming there is no other but a figurative, imaginatiue, and spiritual hell,
without other torments then metaphorical. How deservedly did S. Augustine
fortell, when the mynds of any are preoccupated by error, all that scripture
has to the contrary, they affirm to be but figurative? Josias Simlerus in
vita Bullingeri. fol. 35. Vide Alan. Cop. dial. 5. c. 18.
They began first to make sacraments but figurs, they followed next to affirm
all promises by Christ, made for good woorks, to be but hyperbolical; diverse
mysteryes of his life to be Calu. in sua harm. in c. 24. Luca v. 38. Beza in 1.
Cor. c. 15.23. Hollinshead an. 1579. page 1195.
by Calvin, saying that Christ wanted some perfection of a glorious
resurrection; and by diverse reformers affirming as Beza confesses; Christum
nunquam resurrexisse, sed adhuc iacere mortuum; Christ never to have risen, but
yet to remain dead. By others also (if laufull inferences be admitted) who
affirmed before, besyd his bodily death, a death of his soul and divinity. By
others who ernestly except against the feast of easter in remembrance of such
resurrection; especialy as it is a Christian solemnity, desyring it be
abolished, or restored according to the Jews ceremonies. Luth. l. de
concilijs. Bale l. 3. c. 25. de Scrip. Zuingl. to. 2. respon. ad Lutheri librum
de sacram. fol. 465.
Such are Luther, Bale, and the Puritans, as appears in D. Whitgift. Sixthly,
this article is impugned by Zuinglius saying, Crassus Lutheri Praetor, rubris
indutus caligis, eo modo quo Christus monumento exiuit, egredi potuerit; the
gross Praetor of Luther, appareiled in his read hose, in like manner as Christ
went out of his sepulcher, might also have issued. Which is most impiously
blaphemed, whereas Christ after his death issued by his own force, as all
Doctors, and Fathers affirm, without removing the stone placed upon the
monument. To which accords against the foresaid blasphemy, the late
Protestant conference at Malbrun, alleging many scripturs and Fathers in
approbation of such miraculous resurrection. The same is also fulfilled by
Marlorat, Thalman, and at length, upon better advise, by Calvin, and Beza.

The seventh Article of S. Bartholome: He ascended into heaven, sits at the
right hand of God the Father almighty.
16. This article is first contradicted by Lutherans affirming, Vide
admonitionem Caluinist. ad librum Co^cordiae, and Daneum con Osiandrum. Calu.
l. 2. Instit. c. 14. n. 8. Beza in cap. 3. Act. v. 21. Call. Instit. l. 2. c.
14. n. 3. Vide Intermangerie page 157. Vide Neuerium in bello 5. euang page 72.
Apud Iosiam Symleru^ in vita Bullingeri fol. 35. 55. Apudque. Luther. to. 7.
Witteb. fol. 408. 409.
heaven to be below in the bowels of the earth, and hell in the highest parts
of the world. Next by Calvin saying that Christ's sitting at the right hand of
God will continue no longer then till the day of judgment. Thirdly by those
who affirm his being at the right hand of his Father, to hinder his true being
in the Sacrament: as is before declared number 68. Fowerthly by them who deny
that by his power he could surpass the qualities of a natural body, and
consequently not ascend: as also is there manifested. Fifthly by those who
affirm his being at the the right hand to argue an inferioritie or inequality
with God the Father: or that God the Father had a spiritual kind of body,
haueing hands, etc. Sixthly by Calvin saying, that it is not to be imagined there
is any place in heaven whereunto is ascended, or accepted the humanity of
Christ. Seventhly by many principal protestants, as Brentius, Illyricus,
Musculus, etc. Christ's ascension is made nothing but a disapeering, without any
motion upward where he was before.

The eight article of S. Matthew. From thence shall he come to judge the quick
and the dead.
17. This article is impugned, Generaly all protestants.
first by such as by granting one judgment in general, at the day of dome
affirm Christ never judges every one in particular. Luther. vt supra.
Secondly by them who affirm only infidelity to be subject to judgment;
whereas Christ does promise to call into account every idle word, and omission
of charity. Thirdly by such as say God will judge unjustly, as Luther saying:
that as, illic gratiam and misericordiam spargit in indignos, Luther to. 2.
fol. 461. de serve arbitrio.
hic iram and seuetitatem spargit in immeritos; there (in this lyffe) he pou^red
grace and mercy upon the unworthy so here in judgment he powers anger and
severity upon the undeserved. Which Gods injustice in judgment and
condemnation of the wicked, is employed by the common doctrine that God is the
author of evil, not only by provocation, but by impulsion, and inforcement.
For being said to be the inforcer to evil, how can he punish justly them, that
obey him. And such doctrine is universal, as is demo^strated, among the greatest
protestants, Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, and Beza: as appears in the first
article. Lastly they misbeleeue this Article, who affirm that Christ who
should come to judge, is dead according both to humanity and divinity. Such
was Ihon Islebeus, and especialy Musculus, Gzecanouius says: Siluester
Czecanouius de corruptis moribus. ^^riusque partis a. 3.
Musculus non veritus suit palam dicere (profiteri ac spargere) diuinam Christi
naturam quae Deus est, vna cum humana mortuam suisse in Cruce; Musculus doubted
not to mantaine publicly (to profess and to spread) etc. If he remain dead,
he is not risen and ascended, or from heaven to come to judge the quick and the
dead.

The 9. Article of S. James of Alpheus. I believe in the holy ghost, the holy
Catholic Church.
Beza con. Heshustum. fol. 284 and colloq. Mompelg. fol. 77. Zanchius l. de 3.
elo^im. Siml^rus ^n praef. l. de aterno Dei. filio.
18. First, they believe not in the holy ghost, who affirm it to be blasphemous
and idolatrouse to consels Christ to be god, or to have ever been according any
deity before his birthe of the B. Virgin Marie: for thereby the holy Ghost
proceeding from the son, no less then from the Father, is also denied.
Secondly, all they who impugn the holy Trinity, do it more to reject the holy
ghost, then for any thing else: of whom look in the first article. To the
disgraceing whereof considre how roundly Calvin discourses, saying: Vnus Deus
id est, Galu. epist. ad Polon. page 946.
Trinitas: Creditis in Deum, id est Trinitatem. Vt cognoscant te vnum Deum, id
est, Trinitatem. Hoc non modo tanquam insipidum, sed prophanum quoque
repudiamus: One god, as much to say, the Trinity. You believe in god, Vide
Conrad. Schluss^lbur. in Th^ol. Call. l. 2. fol. 2. 8. 14. 20. 26.
as much to say, the Trinity. That they should know the one god, as much to
say, the Trinity. This, as not only unsavory, but also as prophan, I do
despise. Nether did other protestants dissemble at this blasphemouse derision,
but rebuked him for it in superlatiue terms of scoulding. Hence among his
disciples, Prateolus in heresibus lib. 10. c. 10.
as every one was more learned, so irrisit spiritum sanctum asserens nihil in
scripturis sacris veteris aut noui testamenti, de illius diuinitate haberi; he
flowted at the holy ghost, affirming nothing in holy scripture of the old or
new testament to be had of his divinity. Heerevpon a great protestant
exclameth; Cave Christian lector, Stancharus in epist. con. Calvin. n. 4 5.
and maxim vos ministri omnes verbi Dei, a libris Caluini cauete, and
presertim in articulo de trinitate etc. Beware Christian Lector or Reader and
especialy you ministres Joan. Schutz in l. 50. Causarum causa 48. Adam Newser
apud Schluss. loc. cit. fol. 9. and in catal. haeres. l. 1. p. 4.
and especially in the article of the Trinity, etc. Another says he opens
a window and gate to Arianisme, and Mahumetisme. Another: Arianismus,
Mahumetismus, and Caluinismus, tres fratres and sorores, tres caligae eiusdem
panni; Arianisme Mahumetisme, and Caluinisme are three brethren and sisters,
and three breeches of one cloathe. Another: qui timet sibi ne incidat in
Arianismum, caveat Caluinismum; who fears to fall to Arianisme, let him
beware of Caluinisme. Some print books with inscriptions, Printed in Iene an.
1586.
that Caluinists are not Christians, that they do Iudaize, that heed is to be
taken of their leaven.

But none are more forward blasphemers against the holy Ghost, then English
puritans, and Familists. Joan. Matthew. de cauendo Caluinistaru^ Fermento.
And all this is confessed by Protestants: whose evidences only I imploye in
this informations. Thirdly, they impugn this article, who make their fanatical
imaginations, the very inspirations of the holy Ghost, and all there bad, and
impious inclinations his motions. Zuingl. tom. 2. in Actis Tiguri. fol. 609.
Simi^ia prorsus apud ^uth. to^. 5. ad Galat. c. 1. fol. 290.
So Zuinglius having his doctrine from such spirit as aforsayd, yet says he,
certo noui doctrinam meam non esse aliud quam sacrosanctum verumque euangelium:
-- huius doctrinae testimonio iudicabo omnes and homines and angelos; I know
for certain my doctrine to be no other, then the most sacred and true gospel:
-- by the testimonye of this doctrine, I will judge all both men, and angels. So
Luther: Luth. tom. 2. apud
certus enim sum, Christum ipsum me euangelistam nominare, and pro ecclesiaste
habere; I am assured, Christ him self to name mean evangelist, and to approve
me his preacher. So Calvin: Calvin. de vera Eccles. reformandae ratione 463
Calu. de lib. arbitr. con. Pighium l. 1. page 192.
res ipsa clamat non Martinum Lutherum initio loquutum sed Deum per os eius
fulminasse, neque nos hodie loqui, sed Deum ex celo virtutem Behold, if each
one of these most repugnant among themselves, be not as secure of their own
persuasions, to be from the holy Ghost, as they are doubtful of Christ's, of
his Apostles, and of his Churches doctrine, to be sound, apt, literal, and
authentical.

Fowerthly they impugn this Article, who derogat from sacred scripture, the
authority due thereto by being by inspiration of the holy ghost. Zuing. tom. 2.
Elench. con. Anabaptist. fol. 10. Vide Jacob. Curio ^em in Chronolog. An. 1556.
page 151. Basilea. Ochinus l. 2. dialog. page 154. 155. 156. 157.
This is done by Zuinglius, saying: quasi vero Paulus epistolis suis iam tum
tribuerit, vt quicquid in ijs contineretur sacrosanctum esset: quod est
Apostolis imputare immoderatam arrogantiam: as though Paul did arrogat so much
to his epistles, as to think all in them contained to be authentical: which
is to impute to the Apostles immoderat arrogancy. Does this man, think you,
remember what he immediately before said of him self? Ochinus proceeds
further: non debemus plura credere quam crediderunt sancti federis So that
hereby, all the new testament is together abolished. Luther was more curteouse
in only excluding three evangelists, Vide numerum 34.
Matthew, Mark, and Luke, S. James, and some few others; and the rest of
Reformers in only excepting against Toby, Judith, Hester, VVisdome,
Ecclesiasticus, the two books of Machabees, S. Luke, To the Hebrews, James, 2.
of Peter, 2. and 3. of Ihon, Jude, Apocalips; to which others add the prayer
of Manasses, the song of the three Children, the history of Bell canticum
Canticorum; and lastly, Calvin adds the sixth, and Beza the eight of Ihons
gospel. Luther in sermon de Moise.
You shall also behold by Luther the ancient testament as resolutly excluded
all together, as was the neweby Ochinus. Ne ingeratur nobis Moises: nos in nouo
testamento Moisem, nec videre nec audire volumus: let not Moises be thrust upon
us: we in the new testament will not either regard, or hear him. tom. 3. Ienen.
in 1. part. The same was done be others against Moises as testifyeth Iac.
Curio loc. cit. That he had rather never preach, then propound any thing out
of Moises. That he that does allege any thing of his, does deprive Christ of
the hearts of men. That Moises belongs nothing to us. That he receaueth him
not: for otherwise he should also receive all Jewish ceremonies. That his
government is failed, and him self dead. That Moises belongs only to Jews,
and not to Christians.

Sander de Schism: Anglic. lib. 2. page 272. Persons exame^ part. 3. page 332.
To the same, concerning the new testament. Bucer: if all be true, which the
evangelists do set down, Christ must be truly, and realy in the Sacrament.
But whether we be bound to believe absolutely every thing set down by them, to
be true, or not, he would not be judge. By which appears that what these men
list to believe, being but of their own imaginations, they make it to be
inspired by the holy ghost, to be the most sacred scripture, them selves to be
evangelists, their testimonies

Neither in this are they yet satisfied, but certify that the holy ghost him
self, suggereret tantum quaecunque Christus ante ore docuerat, and hanc
restrictionem attente esse notandam, could suggest or teach nothing but what
Christ before delivered by mouth, and such restraint and limitation to be,
says, Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 8. n. 8.
Calvin, heedfully noted. Yet Christ him self telling in his gospel that he
had many things whereof as then they were not capable, which the holy ghost
should in time reveal, as also teach them all truth; S. Chrysostom? saying:
ideo spiritui seruata est mayor doctrinae portio, ne putarent illum minorem.
Hom. 1. in Acta.
Therefore etc. Joan. 16.13.
What is said of impugning the holy Ghost for scriptures, belongs also to
traditions, such as few of them but consent to part of them, although they be
not extant in Scripture: as to the blessed Trinity, and consubstantialitie of
persons, the perpetual virginity of our Lady, the observation of Sunday not
of the Sabbath, the baptising of infants, the communion, receiving, fasting,
the feasts of easter, etc. which traditions as all other acknowledged by the
Church, Joan. 16.13.
have issued from the holy Ghost, according Christ's promise that he should not
only teach (vz by word) but also suggest (by inspiration) all truth. If I
affected not brevity, what Fathers monuments for traditions, what foul
dealing of Sectarists against them, mentioned in Martins discovery cap. 2.
could I allege?

Fowerthly, S. August. in quaest. ex vtroque test. q. 102.
(according to S. Augustine) they impugn the holy Ghost, who impute evident
miracles frequent in Gods Church governed by the holy Ghost, to the devil.
Upon which occasion, of the Pharisees, saying that in Beelzebub Christ cast out
devils, Christ our Saluiour, entered to discourse of the synn against the holy
Ghost; showing thereby to pertayne to the holy Ghost all miraculouse operations.
But of miracles, which are lawful, and how to be known we are after to
dispute. For to conclude, what there Irrisit Spiritum sanctum, seque diceret
volle potius redire in coenobium, quam credere in Spiritum sanctum; Did flowt
at the holy Ghost, saying he would return sooner to the cloistre then believe
in him. Prateolus l. 10. c. 10.

Fifthly, they impugn the other part of the Catholic Church (which in deed
should be a distinct article) who can not abide the name of Catholic, as
appears before, nor the name of Church in their principal Bible of the year
1562. but excluded it wholly without redemption, placing for the name Church
the name of congregation. And whereas they wear confounded at such profane and
odious interpretation, (considering it showed a hatred against the chaste
spouse of Christ; a distrust to be tried by the church; whom who hears not
is as far from salvation, as any publican or Ethnic; and argued a public
revolt, or rebellion from Christ him self head of the Church) they amended it
Math 16.18.
with worlds shame; yet so nicely, as in one cheef place of Scripture where
Christ said to S. Peter, upon this rock I will build my Church, the bible of
the year 1577. retained still in liew of Church the name of congregation;
which properly belongs only to beasts, and by application is transferred to
men.

Sixthly, they impugn this second part, who affirm the Mother Church may err
in any point of belief, considering Christ's promises, Math. 16. Luc. 22. Joan.
14. Act. 2. Luc. 22.
that the gates of hell (nether by error, nor by violence) should never
prevail against it, the faith thereof should never fail; the holy Ghost
teacher of all truth should perpetually remain with it: that it is a spotles
spouse, without all wrinckle; that it being converted should confirm all
others etc. Fox Acts. page 1359. Jewel. repl. con. Hard. art. 4. diu. 14. and
21. page 249. 268. Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 2. n. 2. 3. etc. Vide Camp^ani
ration^m vlt. De Luther. Vide number. 17. Calu. Instruc. con- Libertin. c. 13.
Such mother Church, to be it only of Rome all Fathers, and most sectarists
them selves profess. Nether can it be denied considering it only has
universality, consent, and antiquity, as appears n. 4. Considering also
that no other peofession has holiness in life or doctrine, which accompany on
another as the good and bad fruict the good and bad tree. Witness first for
doctrine, all hithertho (in this examination) alleged, and secondly Luther
saying: the commandments of God not to belong to Christians. Witness next
Calvin saying in other men's name but in his own doctrine: Concupiuit quis
vxorem proximi sui? ea potiatur si potest: certo enim scit se nihil alienum a
voluntate Dei facere. Audacter eripiat vel vi, vel fraud, fortunas proximorum:
nihil enim suscipiet nisi Deo volente vel probante: has any coueted his
neighbors wife? let him inioye her if he can: for he knows assuredly he does
nothing contrary to the will of God. Let him bouldly snathe by force, or fraud,
his neighbors substance: for Zuingl. tom. 1. in actis disp. Tigurinae fol. 628.
and approve. Witness thirdly Zuinglius: Deus obligauit, and astrinxit se,
caelum tribuere; non est opus vt pro eo assequendo laboremus: God has bound
him self to give us heaven, we need not travail to attain it.

Luther tom. 1. in c. 8. Math.
For the fruits ensuing such doctrine, witness again Luther: De euangelio sic
loquuntur quasi sint angeli, sed si opera spectes sunt mere diaboli. Iteru^:
Credunt sicut sues, and sicut sues moriuntur: they speak so of the gospel,
Idem narrat. in 1. Cor. 15. fol. 161. 162. Calu. de Scandalis page 118 127.
128. Ibidem.
as if they wear angels: but if you regard their works, they are mere
devils. Again: they believe like hoggs and as hoggs they dye. Witness again
Calvin: Pastores, ipsi inquam pastores qui suggestum conscendunt etc.
turpissima sunt vel nequitiae, vel malorum aliorum exempla. -- Et tales
scilicet in contemptu se esse apud plebem, aut etiam ludibrij causa digito
monstrari conqueruntur. Ego autem potius vulgi miror patientiam, quod non eos
luto and stercoribus mulicres and pueri Witness thirdly Zuinglius: Zuingl. tom.
1. fol. 115.
Aestum carnis in nobis feruere, negare non possumus, cum huius opera nos coram
ecclesijs infames reddiderint: We can not deny the heat of the fleash to be
ardent in us, whereas the works thereof have made us infamous to the Churches.
To descend from the three principal pillars of protestantcie, witness Jews
Hetzer, by Luthers relation, defyler of four and twenty married women, Luth.
in Colloq. mensal. fol. 415. Calu. con. Libertin. page 654. Erasm epist. ad
Fre^s infer. Germ. 1. page 82.
beside mayds. Witness Quintinus, by the same reporter, neying after women, as
stood horses after mares. Witness an apostata friar, who as Erasmus records
married three wives together. But of this pudle, sufficient is found in our
first 17. number; and little obscurity is there in the matter.

Considering again, that besyd this Romain Church, no other profession, has
any stabilitie, or constancy, in their whole doctrine; in their sacraments; of
their scripturs. Witness (beside what is said toward the beginning of this
examination 7. number of most principal protestants repentance and doubtfulnes
of their courses) Luther by Zuinglius his declaration, appealing: Zuingl. de
Luthero. tom. 2. resp. ad Luth. in prefat.
Ad eos duntaxat libros quos intra quatuor aut quinque annos conscripserat; to
these only of his own books which he had written four or five years before,
and no others. Witness of Zuinglius against him self, saying: Zuingl. to. 2.
com. de vera and salsa relig. c. de Eucharistia fol. 202.
Retractanius igitur hic quae illic diximus, tali lege, vt quae damus anno
aetatis nostrae 42. propendeant eis quae 40. anno dederamus: We do therefore
recant here what we said there, by 42. year of our age, take place of what was
given in the 40. year. Witness Beza: Beza in Colloq. Mo^pel. page 150. 268. 388.
Fateor me multa scripsisse quae velem a me scripta non esse. Vtinam memoria
omnium earum aboleretur communi consensu; I confess to have written many
things, which I wish had not been written. I would to god the memory of them
all wear abolished. Witness lastly all their translations, their confessions,
their communion books, their whole writings, (although they wear assured as
before, that they had all by true revelation) never twyse appearing in one
lyknes. And truly it is ane important point to be considered, that these men,
of all others the very chief leaders to this dance of reformations, could not
dwell constantly in their entreprise, whereas the simple sort who lightly
embraced their doctrine, adventured to abyd fire, and sword, rather then to
forsake it; being according the proverb (who so bold as blind bayard,) not
only more resolut therein then their preachers (of whom few or none but fledd)
but also, as every one was most simple, weauer, glouer, cobbler, and principaly
women, so were they Ihon old Castle, Cromwell, the Duke of Northumberland, and
others of the wyser sort, made by Fox martyrs, For Acts and Mon. of these his
Martyrs.
yet according to their wisdom, when they could live no longer in the liberty
of the gospel, they cried, peccaui, and recanted their licentiouse belief:
but as I said obstineat idiots, and wilful women, dyed in their infidelity.

Seventhly they impugn this article of belief, who after reuolting from such
Church as aforsayd, had no other refuge to maintain them selves from blame of
novelty, particularitie, and lightness, but to appeal to an invisible Church,
removed from all senses, like a Platonical Idea, separated from all knowledge,
not extant in any country, not mentioned in any history, in which noe voice of
epistle or gospel has been heard, no sacraments ministered, no men or women
known; and all this, because their consciences informed them the true,
visible, known, ancient, and universal Church (wherein Christian name, the
scripturs and sacraments were preserved) stood with us against them. Against
which there Fanatical, Melanc in loc com. c. de Ecclesia an. 1561. Call. 4.
Instit c. 2. n. 2. Oecol. n. c. 2. Isa. Illyric. in 1 Matthew. Bren. in. c. 17.
Luc. Luth. in. c. 9. c. 52.53. Isa. tom. 4. Buillng. in Apoc. conc. 62. 87.
and poetical imagination, of a Church invisible, all learned protestants
ernestly wrote; Melancthon tearming it a monstruouse speech; Calvin,
Oecolampad, Illyricus, Luther, Brentius, Lutherus, Bullinger, and all others
refuting, and rebuking, it, as a desperate opinion, proceeding from profound
infidelity. Consider because a natural body, say they, could not be but in a
visible, and particular place, and god him self not to be of power to dispose
otherwise of such natural body; they I say as more powerful then god, Martyr.
defens. con. Guard. par. 1. object. 147. object 7.
dispose of all former Christians (notwithstanding their natural bodies) in a
congregation invisible, and out of all naturalitie, and natural circumscribed
places; because, they could name no visible city, province, or Kingdom,
professing Christianity, but was of our religion. Prou. 18.
Impius cum in profundum venerit, contemnet; the impiouse man when he comes to
the depth (of impiety) he contemns, what truth he contradicts; what
falshod he mantayneth; saying (as before I said) in his mind: Populus me
sibilat, at mihi plaudo ipse domi, all men shout at me, Horace l. 1. Sat. 1.
yet I applaud to my felfe in my home, in my private conceit, in my self
pleasing

Eighthly they impugn this article, who (in the other extremity, to have a
visible Church) remass and collect all sorts of Sectarists, into one
consenting congregation. Such is Crispin Hamsted, and Fox. In whose monuments,
especialy of Ihon Fox, how all sorts of malefactors are raked, and assembled,
together, and as discordant sectarists as ever wear Catts and dogs,
intermedled, appears abundantly in the late learned books of the three
conuersions of England, of the hunting of the Fox, etc. by N. D. authoure of
the Ward-word. What communion they had, shall also appear in the next Article.
For conclusion; sweet, and true is that sentence, S. August. tra. 33. in Joan.
of S. Augustine: Credamus fratres, quantum quisque amat ecclesiam, tantum habet
and Spiritum sanctum; as much as every one loves the Church, so much he
has of the holy Ghost. By which appears, that these articles are not
impertinently united, by some, in one.

The 10. Article, of S. Simon. The communion of Saints, the forgiveness of
sins.
19. Whereas by this article there should be a comunication and unity betwixt
the old and new, and the living and dead Christians, in faith, hope, and
charity, in Sacraments, in ceremonies; in succors, in all concourse; they
impugn this article first, who deny all correspondence betwixt the saints in
heaven and men in earth; as also they impugn scripturs (to be produced in our
controversy of the invocation of Saints) conformable to this Lutherani
(inquit Sturmius) libris public editis, Sturnius de ratione contradict.
incundae. page 24.
Ecclesias Anglicanas, Gallicas, Belgicas, Scoticas, Helueticas, tanquam
haereticas condemnant, eorum matyres, martyrs Diaboli vocant, etc. The
Lutherans, (quoth Sturmius) in their published boooks do condemn the Churches
of England, Epitome colloq. Maulbrune. an. 1564. page 82.
France, Flandres, Scotland, Zuittzerland, they call their martyrs martyrs of
the Devil, etc. Again: quod scribunt Zuingliani se a nobis pro fratribus
agnitos, id tam impudenter, tantaque vanitate ab illis confictum est, vt
illorum impudentiam mirari satis nequeamus. Nos vero vt in ecclesia locum illis
nullum concedimus, ita etiam pro fratribus minime agnoscimus, quos spiritu
mendacij agitari deprehendimus, and in filium hominis contumeliosos esse: what
the Zuinglians write that they by us are accounted brethren, that is so
impudently and vaynly forged by them, that we can not sufficiently admire there
impudency. For we, as we account them not in the Church, so also do we as
little repute The Caluinists wear not slack in requyting Lutherans,
Schlusselburg. Theol. Call. l. 3. a^t. 6. Joan. Iezlet. Zuinglio Caluinista. l
de diu tur bell. 1 Eucharistici page 25. 80.
as is evident by Schlusselburg, saying: Quod Caluinistae nos Lutheranos volunt
habere pro fratribus, quos tamen vt haereticos damnant; The Caluinists would
account us Lutherans as their brethren, whom notwithstanding they condemn as
haereticks. And so betwixt them, says John Iezler: Litigandi, scribendi,
declamandi disputandi, condemnandi, excommunicandi, inter Lutheranos and
Caluinistas nullus est finis; There is no end of chyding, writing, accusing,
disputing, condemning, excommunicating betwixt Lutherans and Caluinists. Idem.
ibid. page 79.
In the year 1555. quoth Iezler, the K. of Denmark, the stats of Hamburg, and
Maritimal cities, under great penalty forbad any lodging to be permitted to
the Sacramentarians.

For brief resolution in this matter, consider according the narration of
Vtenhouius being him self one among 175. Flemishe, French, English, Scottish,
and Polonian fugitives in Queen Maryes days, under the conduct of Lascus
superintendent over the congregation of strangers in England; how first after
long tossing on sea, and other incommodities of navigations, they came at
length to Coldinga in Denmarche. Where haeing exhibited a most lamentable
supplication to the King being Lutheran; First they could not obtain any
allowance to use their religion: secondly, haueing received a gift of a 100.
crowns, and their charges defrayed, they could obtain no abode, for Joan.
Vtenhouius, in sua simplici narratione de instituta, ac demum dissipata
Belgarum, altorumque peregrinorum in Anglia Ecclesia.
there also Palladius superintendent, informed of their profession,
notwithstanding their pitiful inplorations of compassion, and declarations of
the tempestuous weather, the sharpnes of could, the seas and lands covered with
ye, the cries of women in travail, Childrens whynings, and old men's weakness;
yet noe respit, nether of a month, or week, but only of three days would be
afoorded to dwell even without the gates. Exclamations, and thundering threats
of Gods anger against such hardness of heart would not avail, but that the
master of the shipp was commanded under pain of death, by noe means, or
contrariety of wynds, to stay any longer then eight a clock on the third day,
and never after to return. Altogether like intertaynment had they at Rostoc by
George Riken, at VVismar by Henning and Lubec, by Peter Briccius; at Hamburg by
VVestphalus, being hunted out of their Inns, spitted at in streats, repulsed
with all disdaynfulnes: not without as detestable cruelty in the Lutherans, as
public and manifest detestation of their profession who were so hatefully
eschued.

The most apparent demonstration of their eternal discords is, that partly to
avoid this heynouse imputation of being thus divided, partly by authority of
princes the kings of Denmark, Sweuland, Norwey; the Duks of Saxony,
Lunebourg, Pruss, Brunswick, Vide Bellum 5. Euangelij, cum Ministromachia,
Intremangerie, librum nullus and nemo, Vlenbergij causas. etc.
VVitemberge, Deuxponts; the Marquis of Brandenbourg, Lansgraue Hessen; the
Earls of Palatinat, Mansfeld, A^halt, etc. Being desirouse to see some settled
form of belief mutualy agreed upon: they commanded sundry and diverse tyms,
these reformers to assemble into a Synod or Congregation, and by all means
possible to join in a fraternal atonement. So then they met, at Souabach,
Smalcald, Ratisbon, VVitberg, Constance, Worms, Spyre, Basil, Zuric, Arouer,
Hidelberg, Malbrun, Altenbourg, Baden, Monpelial, Frankental; but with such
iarrs, strife, malice, that in the conclusion the chief protestants confess;
Schlusselburg. l. 2. art. 15.
Clarissimum esse non expectandam esse Synodorum aut generalium, aut
particularium definitionem; to be most clear, noe definition of either general,
or particular Concils to be expected; because all composition is impossible,
Idem ibid. in proem.
nisi magnus Domini dies interuenerit, litemque hanc diremerit; unless the great
day of the Lord hasten, and shutt up this variance. Truly said the prophet
Esaias; Non est pax impijs; there is no peace among the wicked. Isa. 48.


D. VVhitg. trac. 18. page 685. trac. 11. page 559. 560.
who as D. Whitgift says, seek to transferr the authority of pope, prince,
bishopp, to them selves, and to bring Prince and nobility into a very
servitude. They are, (say the Brounists, or rather Barroists) pernicious
impostors, presumptuouse Pastors, Jewish Rabyns, Balaamits, dissembling
hypocrites, smell-feasts, Barrowes Discovery page 16. 19. 39. 98. 145. 174. 192.
Proverb. 13.
Apostats, sowldiours of Antichrist etc. Fullfilling thereby, the proverb;
Inter superbos semper sunt iurgia; among the proud there are always iarrs. Is
this not a sweet communion of these saints? Is not this a gratiouse
brotherhood. Thirdly they are repugnant to this article, who affirm it
blasphemy to give titles to Saints in heaven which them selves give to
sinners in earth. Witness, Aschams epigrame to our late Queen, on whom he
bestows liberaly as much as any Catholic attributes to our B. lady, the
mother of Christ.

Salve Diua tuae patriae decus, Optima salve
Princeps Elizabetha, tuis Dea Magna Britannis.
Pande tuis iam fausta noui noua tempora saecli
Ciuibus, imperium placidum tempusque benignum;
Laetaque temporibus nostris da tempora Diua.
Ascham. inter epist. fol. 255.
Tu Brittonum tu sola ^^lus, tu sola Columna. etc.
The same in English.

Hayle Englands fame Divine, Hayle Princes bright
Elizabeth, the Brittons Goddess great.
Give us new tyms new bliss, by rulyng right,
Appease this world from furies hateful heat.
Grant joyful times, for joy we humbly pray,
Thou Britons only Bliss, and only stay.
In like manner Calvin, Vita Caluini cap. 12.
not enduring any honor toward Saints, alexicacon, or remedy against all
mischawnces; he awnswered; grieve at it till you burst, and after hang your
selves. Fowerthly they are repugnant to this article, who are at difference
about the chief principles of religion, as about Scripturs, Sacraments,
Virtues, Synns, etc. Such are late reformers, Gallus in the sibus ac
hypothesibus.
as relates Gallus. Non sunt parua certamina inter nos nec de minutis rebus,
sed de sublimibus articulis doctrinae Christiana; they are not slender
contentions which are among us, nor of small matters, but of the principal
articles of Christian doctrine. Noe noe, it is not my intention to discourse in
this treatise of debats for capp or rotchet, organs or bells, etc. I show by
your own brethren, your kingdom is divided, and consequently tending to ruin.

Fowerthly for the other part of forgiuens of synns, all protestantcy faith
only iustifyeth; and consequently being once in the protestant faith, (which
say they once inioyed can never be lost) they can never after be sinners: Luth.
de seru. arbitr.
partly by making God the author of all evil, and them selves but bare
instruments; and consequently not them selves, but God to have need of the
remission of synns: Thirdle, by saying that man has not freewill, and
consequently can not synn. For every synn, is voluntary: Lastly, Joan. 20.
by saying that synns can not be forgiven in the Church, contrary to Christ's
express doctrine. Yet in their first belief, they clearly granted, that the
minister might absolve the sick from his synn, in this form: By his authority
committed to me, The Communion book in the visitation of the sick.
I absolve thee from all thy synns, in the name of the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost. Amen. But this treatise is dashed and casheered out of the
communion book. Let it of baptism stand suer against many puritan assaults:
which if it do, as great power in it is grawnted to man, as by penance to
absolve synns; the one being a washing, of one spotted, the other a loosing of
one bownd.

The 11. Article, of S. Jude. The resurrection of the dead.
20. Luth. tem. 7. Witt^ ber. defen. verb. cana fol 390.
First Luther says of Caluinists concerning the resurrection of the dead:
Certum est eos spectare ad manifestam in hoc articulo apostasiam; it is
certain they tend to a manifest apostasy concerning this article. It is also
confirmed by Villagaignon, that in his own hearing, Villag. epist. ad
Geneue^ses and in praefat. lib. 1. de Eucharisti^.
and after notice was signified to be taken, yet the Caluinists preached,
repeated, and justified, that spes vitae non est corporum sed animarum; the
hope of life not to belong to the bodies, but to the sowls. Caesar. lib. dial.
d. 5. Calu. in epist. ad Farellum. fol. 194.
Almaricus one of Foxes martyrs, as Cesarius affirms, held that there is noe
resurrection of bodies. Caluins resolution is perspicuouse in these words: Quod
tibi res incredibilis videtur huius carnis resurrectio; nihil mirum; that the
resurrection of this fleashe seem incredible to thee, it is nothing admirable.
Zuingl. to^ 2. Elench. co^. Anabaptist. fol. 39.
As for the libertyns, they deryde the resurrection openly. The next impugning
this article, is to deny men's sowls to be immortal. Whereunto Luther inclined
saying; Ex hoc loco patet, Luth. to^. 4. in. Eccles. c. 9. v. 5.10. In cap. 25.
Genes. in cap. 49. v. 22. Calu. in prof. Psichrmachiae, and in prof. Gallasij.
mortuos sic dormire vt nihil prorsussciant. -- Hic alius locus est, quod
mortui nihil sentiunt: out of this place appears, the dead feel nothing. To
which Calvin also anneareth in these words: Se scire nonnullos viros bonos
quibusista de animarum soneno placuit opinio; that he knew certain good men to
whow this opinion of the sowls sleep, seemed sownd. Him self to have been one
of those goodmen, appears, by his saying the sowls to be but dead shadows;
(in ps. 130.) them of the wicked to be adnihilated (so that they are not in
hell) Instit l. 3. c. 25. n, 12. and the residue to be shadows, imaginations,
fantasies, idols, dead.

Also from others, (who would not subscrib their names) was Negamus aliquam
animam post mortem manner; we deny any soul to remain after death. To be
brief, at Geneua, in a solemn disputation, when they had long consulted how
to avoid purgatory; they determined; dicamus animam cum corpore extingui, and
statim sublatum erit purgatorium; let us affirm the soul to be extinguished
together with the body, and so purgatory will be spedely abolished. This doctrine
of purgatory seems to these reformers so urgent, that they are persuaded it
can not be well denied, until the resurrection of the dead, and immortality
of the soul also be denied. And certainly Vrbanus Regius, (whom most learned
Protestants intitule, Ducatus Luneburgensis Euangelestam, and Episcopum
primarium; the Evangelist and principal Bishop of the Duchy of Luneburg)
Says that, Urban. Regius prima part operum: in formula cauta loquendi. fol.
86.
nemo pias preces pro defunctis reijcit nisi Epicurei and Saducei; none
rejects deuowt prayers for the sowles departed (and restrained in purgatory)
but Epicures, and Saduceit not believing the immortality of the soul. But why
is purgatory so annected to this article, that these reformers are driven to
this extremity? because they observed, that God often forgiueth offenses, yet
reserueth a chastisement for satisfaction: as in Adam, in Moises, in David,
etc. whose offenses being forgiven yet Adams remained subject to death, and all
other miseries endured; Moses never entered the land of promise; David's Child
begotten in synn, must have dyed. So likewise, because God is ever one, and
like him self, such as repent late, or slackly, might be forgiven at their
death, yet for satisfaction remain in purgatory: therefore, the most expedient
way seemed to make short work, and to deny this article, to be able to deny
the other.

The 12. Article of S. Mathias The life everlasting.
21. Contrary to this article are all those who deny God, who deny heaven, who
deny resurrection of the dead, immortality of the soul, our redemption by
Christ, etc. of whom sufficiently is spoken in the former articles, to discover
them to be our late reformers; qui in caecitate quam tolerant, quasi in
claritate hominus exultant; who in the blindness and night of darkness wherein
they are wrapped, do (as S. Gregory says) vawnt, S. Greg. l. 1. mor. cap. 26.
and glorify, as in the clearnes of light. Whereof, there never was a more
perspicuouse demonstration, then in these words of Beza (whose blasphemies are
among the most exorbitant) saying of him self: This my exposition, if a man
compare with such things as not only Origines, but also sondrie other of the
ancient fathers, albeit for godliness and learning most famous, have written
upon this place: Beza ad Romans c. 4. v. 11.
he shall dowbtles find what great abundant light of truth, the Lord in this
time has powered out upon us. Light in deed of the transforming angel, light of
owls, light of pirates to train to shipp wrack, light extinguishing all
Christianity and belief in the Son of God, as amply appears.

The conclusion.
22. Have not I had a flinty, and brazen, heart think you, to go throwgh this
examination, without faynting, or sownding, at every so detestable blasphemy;
in every article so often reiterated? Certainly I never hitherto experienced a
greater torment or corrasiue, then to have so much endured in this discourse;
which for the importance cowld not be shorter, and for the heynousnes, seemed
most prolix. Twenty times my mind loathed, my hand trembled, my intentions
relented, to proceed in vnfowlding them; and often for many days I refrayned
the sight and thoughts of them: yet at last, for thy benefit Christian, I have
powered, and shutt them away to thy consideration, rather then by due
amplifications and aggrauations (or the heft and hate they imported) delivered
them; Eusebius. l. 7. c. 6. citat. Dion. 3. c^. de baptismate, ad Philem. Presb.
Romanum.
Let it be licenced to apply to me in this case, what Eusebius related of S.
Dionysius, of Alexandria, that diverse did admonish him how by reading heretical
books, his mind would be greatly tormented, and also probably defiled; and
that he did acknowledge him self, they wrought no less in him: yet, for a
voice incouradging him forward, and saying; haec causa erat cur abinitio ad
fidem Christi vocatus fueris; this was the cause, why from the beginning thou
wast called to the faith of Christ; he willingly yielded to the pains incident
to such study. Such, in verity, was my often adminition, and chief
impulsion. It is to Jesus Christ the Son of God, that I offer and present the
time employed in this replication: whose image I acknowledge, and honor, in the
sowls bowght by his sacred blood, by heresies beguiled. For to tell the truth,
it is not the scope of my travails to awnswer my adversary, who has no other
wisdom then of the spirit of contradiction, and no other regard then to delud
by most disdainful imposturs, the simple Christians understanding (according
as is after said, in the numbers 116. 119. etc.) and to wynn time of falling
into discredit and infamy. S. August. l. 6. de tiu.
To whom seems spoken what S. Augustine says; Ea putatur gloria vanitatis,
nullis cedere viribus veritatis, it is the glory of vanity not to yield to
any power of verity. So that, I account Quintinians grave sentence pertinently
belonging to me against him: persequi quos quisque vnquam contemptissimorum
hominum dixerit, aut nimiae miseriae, aut inanis iactantiae est, and detinet
atque obruit ingenia melius alijs vacatura; to examine all that every most
contemptible fellow says, Quintil. l. 1. c. 13.
were (quoth Quintilian) a great misery, and needles search of glory, which
wowld hinder, and cloye understandings, that might be better employed. Truly
few cowld be better employed, then I: few less desirous to be fruictlesly
employed then I.

What part or parcel of belief to repeat in gross, slightly, and Sanderus
l. 1 de schis. Anglicano. Caluino Turcis. l. 3. p. 480.
hope, or charity, but is distrusted, abiured, blasphemed, by these Reformers,
and that by their principal pillars? Many autheurs recompt of a consultation in
Irland, when S. Thomas of Canterbury was by sentence of K. Henry the eight
degraded, The owld Justice Plunkett of Donsoghlye, was present at this
consultation.
and forbidd to be honored as a Saint; how the inhabitants, (near a
chapel, which had been formerly dedicated to the said S. Thomas) being at the
kings appointment, to elect another Patron; when one coueted to choose S.
Peter, another S. Paul, etc. At leingth, by advise of one of best judgment,
they elected the B. Trinity for their Patron; saying: If the king for other
respects, wowld also degrade, or depose S. Peter, and Paul, yet if any would
maintain their state against him, none cowld more forcibly, then the B.
Trinity.

In the 9. number of this examination.
But alas! how in this examination, in diverse articles, is the Christ Jesus, is
not his birthe, and sacred Mother, his merits, his wisdom, his duty to his
Father, his whole passion, his promises, his miracles, In the first 24. nu^bre
in the 8 9. 10 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16 17 18 of this ^^amination. Of the holy
ghost exam. n. 18.
his resurrection, ascension, his divinity, his soul his body, his life, his
death, no less then apparently contemned, and altogether drawn into
distrust? Of the holy Ghost, for his deuinitie, eternity, coequalitie, of his
operation in inspyring the holy Apostles, in conseruing and preserving the
Church, in sanctification by Sacraments; of his being good, and not the
autheur of evil; In the 16. and 20. numb. of this examination.
of his authority beyond the written word, and the like: how cowld he more
abhominably be misbeleeued, then by these Mates? Of heaven, and hell, of the
sowls immortality, of any truth hitherto in Christian belief, what more
disdaynfull dowbts, exceptions, or falsifications, then are produced by their
palpable speeches, cowld even by satan him self be vomited? And (which is
worthy of principal deploration) they who have thus transformed God into a
devil, making him authoure of all evil; they who have defied, and denied
Christ's dignity, life, death, and all his merits; they who have thus impugned
the holy Ghost; they who from one God, and three persons, have to their power,
wreasted all omnipotency, wisdom, and verity; Exam. numb. 10. Vide in
principio an. 21. seq. Exa. 18. and 19 numb. Exam. numb. 1. 4. 7. 18. and before
n. 38.
they who have misdoubted Church, ane Saints, heaven, and earth, life of
bodies and sowls, these men, I say, confessing their persuasions received by
dreams, and devils; professing the infidelity, and impyetie, insueing thereby;
acknowledging their shame, and repentance, of their own doctrine; living, and
dying, detestably, by their own open declarations; yet, that they have had,
and as yet have, so many, so otherwise, plausible in their natural
dispositions, so desperately and lamentably remaining in the pernitiouse courses
by such begun. For my part, Calu. in 1. Cor. cap. 4. v. 19.
I committ their amendment to Gods great mercy, perclosing this examination to
Calvin, and all late reformers, in Caluins own words. Your gospel of which
you vawnt so excessiuely, where consists it, for the most part, but in the
tongue? Calu. in c. 14. Joan.
VVher is the renouation of life? where is effectual spiritualitie? Experience
does teach, that you are altogether departed from God, infected, and
repleanished with his hate: and that you obscure the light by your peruers
inventions, Calu. in cap. 21. Joan.
which you have forged in your own propre fantasies.

23. Our first 71. numb.
What articles of the Creed my Aduersarye affirmed were ouer-throwen by our
opinion, are n. 71. testified rather to be much confirmed thereby. And if we
were not assured thereof, we wowld perhapps have excepted against, or suppressed
the symbol of the Apostles as Sectaries have done, either generaly by
disalowing all unwritten traditions, such as is the creed, or paricularly, by
disproueing many articles thereof, according their example, of Christ's
discension into hell, of the Catholic Church, of the communion of Saints,
forgiving of Synns, etc, but our auerring the whole creed, and their excepting
against it, does show us, and not them, to be of consenting faith with the
autheurs of this belief.

72. See now the fruits of your fained transubstansiation, not full four
hundred years old, and yet forsooth you teach it is Apostoliall and
Catholic, whereas it lackes one thousand and two hundred years of that age.

But he that list to see the shifts and wranglings of your Schoolmen to uphold
Lib. 4. sent. fol. 257.
this rotten Romish heresy, Innoce^tius 3. de sacro Altaris mysterio lib. cap.
20. per totum. Distinct. de co^secr. distinct. 2. canon. 1. page 429.
let him read Guillermus and Innocentius the third, a Pope, parent, and patron
of this fable, the first Canon of the second distinction, where you shall find
in the Gloss there, variae sunt opiniones.

Whether Transubstantiation be but 400. years owld.
Fitzsimon. The 75. untruth S. Anselm. in ep. de Corpore Domini.
73. THe numbering up of the 75. gross untruth, at our first recowntre, S.
Anselme, and he a Saint, an Archbishop, and an English man, against his contry
man, challenges to him self, saying: Panis substantiam post Dominici corporis
consecrationem in altari superesse semper abhorruit pietas Christiana, nuperque
damnauit in Berengario Turonensi eiusque sequacibus: The substance of bread to
remain on the altar after the consecration of our Lords body, Christian piety
has ever abhorred, and lately condemned in Berengarius of Tours, and his
followers. Here is transubstantion, and no bread remaining, above five hundred
years acknowledged. Here is assured that Christian piety not only then, but
before, and ever, did abhor to believe the contrary. Here is certifyed, that
Berengarius and his Accomplices, for otherwise surmising, were condemned the
year 1070. after Christ. Therefore it must, by these words, be unchristian
impiety either to howld your opinion, or to affirm Innocent the third (living
above a 150. years after) to have been first autheure of our opoinion.

Lanfranc. con. Berengar. de Sacramento Corporis and Sanguinis Domini.
O how much might I allege out of holy Lanfrancus another Archbishop of
Canterbury, and one of the first and cheifest writers against Berengarius, if
I affected prolixitie, and declined not tediousnes. One only sentence of his I
will ingrosse, in liew of all others. Reliquum est, fidem sanctae Ecclesiae
compendiose exponamus. Credimus terrenas substantias quae in mensa Dominica per
sacerdotale ministerium diuinitus sanctificantur, ineffabiliter,
incomprehensibiliter, mirabiliter operante superna potentia, co^uertiin
essentiam corporis Dominici reseruatis impariu^ rerum speciebus, and quibusdam
alijs qualitatibus: ne percipientes cruda, and cruenta horrerent: Et vt
credentes fidei preimia ampliora perciperent. Hanc fidem tenuit a priscis
temporibus, and nunc tenet ecclesia, quae totum disusaper orbem Catholica
nominatur. It rests that we expound in brief the faith of holy Church We
believe the earthly substances, which in our Lords table by the Priests
ministry are diuinly sanctified, vnspeakablie, incomprehensibily, heavenly
power wonderfully working, to be changed into the substance of our Lords body,
the species of unlike things preserved and some other qualities: lest the
receivers should abhor raw and bloody things; and that believing they
should receive greater rewards of their faith. This faith Church, which
dispersed through out the world, is called Catholic, held from oulde time,
and now holds. You behowld him of set purpose to deliver the ancient faith:
to affirm the change into the essence of Christ's body: the accidents to
remain: the causes of not seeming what is contained, plainly expressed: the
same to have ever before, and then, been the belief of the Catholic Church, as
is now by us believed. What think you, two such holy archbishops of
Canterbury, are they not more worthy of credit, then M. Rider? Alas! it is a
shameful demand to be had in controversy: since therefore he is not worthy, to
be their chaplins equal, will he not blush, if his forhead be not of brass, to
tell hencfoorth, our doctrine not to have been ever the same in the Catholic
Church?

73. That in the Popes Court and in his Consistory, Rider.
there be diverse opinions touching transubstansiation, yet the denial of it,
or the contradicting of the Popes opinion, was Denial of Transubstantiation.
in Rome was no death.
no death, though in those merciless days of Spanish Philip, and Romish
Marie, it was made the thirteenth Article of our faith, and it had been less
danger to have denied those twelve old articles of our old faith, then this
one of your new faith: for the one was dispensed with for money, but the
denial of the other was punished with death without mercy. But you will
reply and say, not withstanding the dissentions aforesaid, yet Christ's words
be true, he cannot lie, he has said, hoc est corpus meum, this is my body,
therefore it is his body.

73. I report me to all considerations, Fitzsimon.
whether they ever observed a style less steeled, as I said before, or more
friuolouse. What might I imagine to awnswer to such pregnant untruths? In the
Popes court and consistory in this point, there is dissension of opinions:
Under spanish Philipp and Romish Marie, transubstantiatoin was made a
thirteenth article of belief (he immediately telling it was made under Innocent
the third, who lived 300. years before Philipp and Marie). Then dispensation to
have been grawnted for money concerning all other articles of belief etc. The
least that I can do, is to score up, of so many, the 76. untruth. The 76.
untruth.


74. We confess these words to be Christ's words, and therefore true, Rider.
but the litterall sense is yours, and therefore false. But, that I, will not
be tedious unto you, I could show you as many several opinions dissenting
about the meaning of hoc: est: and corpus, as I have done in the premises: but
that the Catholics shall know there is no such unity not verity in your
doctrine, as you confidentlie (but untruly) have taught them; therefore I will
give them but a taste till some other time, only pointing you and them to
their Authors and places, and then read advisedly, and judge without partial
affection.

This Friar you heard lately recited your several jarres touching
consecration: Josephus Angles do Essentialibus Euch. page 114. 115. 116.
now hear him with your patience to deliver his and other several opinions
touching the exposition of these three words severally, hoc, est, corpus.

The first opinion is, that this demonstratiue pronoune hoc, must be referred
not to the bread, 1. Josephus
but to the body of Christ, that this should be the sense, hoc est, etc. id
est corpus: est corpus meum. That is, this my body, is my body: but how
absurd this is let the young Sophisters in the schools give their censures.

2. Bonauentura. 3. Occham in lib. 4. 1. S. Thom. 2. Ricar. 3. Scotus. Nec
panem nec corpus sub ratione corporis, sed corpus Christi sub ratione entis vel
Indiuidui, etc. lib. 4. page 182 de sacro Altaris mysterio, cap. 17.
But the second opinion is of Bonauentura, who says, this pronoune, hoc, must
be referred to the bread that must be converted into Christ's body, but not to
Christ's body.

The third opinion is Occhams, and he is of opinion with the first.

There follows three other learned men's opinions contrary to all the former,
and say flatly that this demonstratiue hoc, must not be referred to note
either the bread or the body of Christ, but that this might be the sense, hoc
ens vel hac substantia, quae continetur sub speciebus, etc. This thing or this
substance which is contained under the accidents of bread, is my body: but how
well these opinions with their strange Logical manner of reasoning will
content the learned Priests and Jesuits, I would feign know? for this I am
sure, they sound not either of divinity or learning. But this Friar for a
farewell concludes, page 118. pronomen hoc, nihil. This pronoune hoc signifies
nothing, till the last syllable vm, be pronounced.

Hoc, nihil demo^strat. In the same page
Pope Innocentius the third says, that hoc signifies neither bread, nor
Christ's body, because the whole words of consecration were not spoken: unless
says he, you will say the Priest consecrates at this word Benedixit, he
blessed. But the Pope says, hoc signifies nothing, and his reason is, that
the Priest shows or notes nothing, because he uses hoc est, etc. not by way
of demonstration, but by way of cursorie repetion: Mark this you Jesuits and
priests.
so then, this Pope will have this sense, hoc est corpus meum, that is, nothing
is my body. But in the three of the last lines of that chapter, his wisdom
changed his mind and said, this is my body, that is, what soever is under the
forms of bread is my body. Is not this think you deep divinity for a Pope?
You may see hereein how the Pope uses shameful shifts to cover his sensible
errors, and to deceive Christ's littell flock.

In his Marc. Anton. Con.
Stephen Gardner living but lately, seeing every man's opinion expounding what
hoc should be, he disliketh them all, and faith, it signifies indiuiduum
vagum, as if Christ had said, This (but what it is I cannot tell, but it must
of necessity be some what) is my body.

De consec. did. 2. can. Timorem. Glossa ibidem.
But I will conclude with your own Popes Canon and Gloss, which you hold for
Canonical, though in deed heretical, solet quaeri quid demonstratur per
pronomen hoc. It is a common question what is meant by this pronoune this,
whether bread, or the body of Christ? not bread, for that is not the body of
Christ, nor yet the body of Christ, for it appereath not that there is any
transubstansiation, till the words be all pronounced, yea the last fillable
vm. To this question this must be answered: That by the word this, nothing is
meant, but it is there put materially without any signification at all. See
now whither you are brought, or rather whither have you brought Gods people,
from truth to false hood: if hoc signifies nothing, where then is your
transubstantiation. For if in that word which should first work in the change,
there be no mention of bread, how can that which is no way comprised in them,
be changed by them, and so you speak against your selves. Again, as you are
rent in sundry opinions touching hoc, so also are you touching est: for when
you saw that est would not serve in his proper Evangelical and Apostolical
signification, then you gave him a new exposition. For Bonauenture seeing that
est (as Christ and Paul meant it) would not fit their purpose, What est
signifies, there is great varia^ce amongst the Romish Prelates.

Est i. Fit, Est, est verbum anuntiatiuum non constitutium. Est i. erit
Josephus Angles in loco praedicto page 115.


then he of purpose expounded it by Fit, vt sit sensus panis fit corpus meum,
that it might be thus in sense. The bread is made my body. Yet Occham he
likes not Bonauentures Fit, because he thinks it is too gross and too false:
and therefore he will expound est by erit, that it may carry with it this
sense: this shall be my body, but (says he) it is a very rash and brainsicke
opinion, and alleges as brainsicke a reason, as there you may see.

Yet Caietanus the Cardinal de Eucharistia cap. 7. page 104. col. 2. C. D.
denies est to have any such signification, unless it be in metaphors and
parables. But least that I should be too offensive unto you, I could deliver so
many several opinions of yours, touching the praedicat corpus: one says it
must be meant of Christ's body glorified, no says another, that is false:
but it must be understood of his body, as it was before his passion. And a
third opinion objects certain doubts against both the former.

Magister Sententiarum lib. 4. dinstinct. 12. page. 60. delivers four several
opinions, de fractione and partibus.

Now Gentlemen, I appeal to your consciences (if they be not cauteriated)
whether you have dealt well with the ignorant Catholics of this land, in
persuading them that in all your doctrine there is consent without jarres,
antiquity without innovation, and universality without limittation, whereas
there is nothing but jarres, discords and dissentions, in your consecration, in
your transubstantiation, and in every word almost, nay perticle, as hoc, and
est, be so wrested by your construction, that you have brought both their
proper significations to plain destruction.

Is this exposition Catholic? what ancient father ever expounded it so? let
the Catholics know, or else they with us, will judge, neither you nor your
doctrine Catholic. Will you follow a foolish Friar, an ignorant Abbot, a late
vpstart Pope or Priest that writ (and wrested) within these four hundred
years, and forsake Scriptures and the ancient Doctors of the Church? Now let
the indifferent minded Catholics be judges whether you or we have antiquity
consent and verity on our sides. And who differs from Scriptures, and fathers:
from, and amongst themselves, not only in one point of religion, but almost
in every point and particle of doctrine Thus much concerning your discords
amongst your selves, and all against the auncien^ Apostolical and Catholic
truth.

74. Spectatum admissi risum teneatis, amici? Fitzsimon.
being admitted to behowld this courser, I would say discourser, can you good
friends refrain from smyling? He tells you the third opinion is all one with
the first; and yet that it is the third, and not all one, but a several
opinion. This must needs make up the 77. untruth. The 77. untruth.
Next that the fowerth, fifth, and sixth opinions, are all contrary to the
former; and yet that being different, The 78. untruth.
they are not different among themselves but that they all agree. This is the
78. Then he makes a ragged argument, if nothing be converted by the first
word, all our dealing is undone. Alas, if he would be capable, he might
think, that this conversion is done by Gods infinite virtue in an instant, not
by parts seueraly according to the words Hoc est corpus meum, as if to every
word a sundry part were correspondent; but that to all the form conioyntly
all the conversion is to be referred, so that there be conceived a diverse
substance present, which was not before; not every word but the whole form
being pronownced. Is not this a frantic kind of cofuting, to say only: this
is said. I am suer it is false: how absurd this is let young sophisters judge:
I am suer they sound not of Divinity or learning: is not this deep divinity
for a pope? and no such matter said, but forged by him self; his assurance
childishe; the absurdity only in his conceits; the divinity and learning
impugned so inexpugnable, as nether in his brain is there any reason, and by
his mowth but Riderian blasts, to contradict it.

Therefore to bring disputations of Doctors, thereby to testify a disagreement
betwixt them in their belief of the substance of transubstantiation, they
being only of the time thereof, is as wisely done (especialy by one more
frequent and seasoned with experience in law cowrts, then learned colleges) as
if he wowld assure that laweyers disagree in allowing the law, because they
plead seueraly for their Clyents, of the construction, or time of constitution,
or number of sillables of the law: Or if he wowld say, that philosophers doubt
whether there be wind, rain, and rivers, because they diversely imagine how,
when and whence they have their original. Remember what was informed in the 65.
number, that it is impossible we can have any dissentio^s among us, according
to the saying of the Apostle: Si quis autem videtur contentiosus esse, 1. Cor.
11.16.
nos talem consuetudinem non habemus, neque Ecclesia Dei: If any seem
contentiouse, we have noe such custom, nor the Church of God. Because a
Christian writer among us, must follow, as Waldensis says, Tho. Wald. l. 2.
doctrinalis fidei cap. 21.23.
the judgment of the Church; under the pain of misbeleefe, if it be a point
of faith; or under the pain of contumacie, if it be not. And all Catholic
students among us do read the disputations of Doctors undecided by the
Church, cum iudicandi liberate, with liberty to censure: (according to S.
Augustins words, S. Augustine. co^. Faustum lib. 11. c. 5. Et epist. 48. ad
Vincent.
and his instruction toward himself, and all others) imbraceing whatsoever
they find true, and imputing it to the Catholic Church; and rejecting what
they find false, imputing it to deceaueable man.

This is a privilege of Catholics, to be free from dissentions, and never but
to concur in one Faith. Luther. Zuinglius. Call. n. 19. examinis.
Not so the wicked, not so: as appears in the 19. number of the precedent
examination. They have their faith so inspyred, as they will judge thereby all
angels and men, and be judged by none. And every one of them is in the right,
althowgh by their own confessions they be all fownd, in Fide sua miserabiliter
rotari; and sine fine modoque variare confessiones suas; in their faith most
miserably to be rolled, Colloq. Altemburg fol. 462. Centuriatores Centur. 9. in
prefatione.
and without end or measur to vary their professions. Iam veram doctrinam
probantes, mox eandem damnantes; iam appellantes heresim, quod antea pro
veritate inuicta praedicabant; now approving for sownd doctrine, and suddenly
condemning the same; now calling it heresy, which before was preached for
invincible truth. Nether is there any so meanly a conceited artificer, that
dines or suppeth withowt discoursing on this discord of the holy Reformed
crew. Let therefore our disputations alone, and salve your own irreconcilable
vprors, which hitherto all your Cowncils or Synods, as is showed in the 19.
numb. cowld not so much as mitigat. Take out this beam out of your own eye
leaving to accuse us; among whom discords are as impossible as concords among
you. And it being irrefragably discovered in all other points, of the matter in
hand, take now this decretal demonstration thereof, and inevitable assurance to
Protestants, which your Father of truth, your Elias, and (besyd what is said
in the 17. Fox Acts and Mon. page 404. edit. an. 1563. Luther. in Confess.
breui. to, 2. Germ. fol. 357.
number) alter Phoebus clarissime fulgens, your second Son, most brightly
shyning, delivers, saying. Carolostad wresteth miserably the pronowne [this].
Zuinglius makes lean the verb [is] Oecolampad tormenteth this word [body]
others do butcher the whole text, and some do crucify but half thereof, etc.
So manifestly does the devil howld you by the noses.

Riders words against him self. Orthodox confess. Tygur fol. 105. 106. 107.
Will you follow a foolish Friar, ane ignorant Abbot, a late vpstart Pope (of
Saxony; as the Tygurins intuled Luther) or Priest (as Zuinglius, Carolostad,
Oecolampad. etc.) that writ (and wreasted) within these sower hundred (nay one
hundred) years: and forsake Scripturs, and the ancient Doctors of the Church?
Now let the indifferent minded Catholics be judges (yea and Protestants also)
whether you or we have antiquity, consent, and verity on our syds. And who
differr from Scripturs and Fathers: from, and among them selves, not only in
one point of religion, but also in every point and particle of Doctrine.
Behowld, how good friends, M. Rider and I are become; both agreeing upon one
tale, and meeting in the same form of words. Which speech of his, I account
so favorable on my side, as for it, I will omit to calculat any untruth in
all this discourse, how many soever (which suer are above 20.) have been
offoorded, least I showld seem offended with any parcel of the residue,
wherewith so true, so vndowbted, and sincer declaration is annected, for all men
to know the protestants to follow Luther, a foolish Friar, (and as M. Rider
says an heretical Moncke) who usurped the power of Pope, and lived within one
hundred years; forsaking for his sake Scripture, and Fathers, and cleaving to
a ragged rablement of dissentious teachers?

Is not this to condemn to hell it self his own doctrine so assuredly known
and confessed to be from Luther a Friar, from ignorant and Apostat priests, who
writ within a hundred years, and is so pugnant, and repugnant, so madd, and
mutable, that by them selves it is not denied, saying: Non sunt vtique parua
certamina inter nos, neque minutis rebus, sed de sublimibus articulis
christianae doctrinae; de lege and euangelio de iustificatione and bonis
operibus, de Sacramentis and ceremoniarum vs^; quae nullo pacto componi, vel
reticeri aut dissimulari possunt. Sunt enim merae contradictiones quae
concordiam non ferunt. Nicolaus Gallus sup^ intendens Ratisbonae in thesibus ac
hypothesibus.
Certainly they are not small co^tentions that are among us, nor of trifles,
but of the highest articles of christian religion, of the law and gospel, of
justification and good woorks, of Sacraments and use of ceremonies: which by no
means can be appeased, hidden or dissembled. For they are plain contradictions
which may not be accorded. Is not this by open and plain confession, without
racking, or torturing, to have thieves fall out, and true men to come by their
goods? to have falsehood vnhooded, and truth revealed? to have disagreement
convicted; and the kingdom thereby known Sathanical?

75. Now to conclude this matter, I will show plainly by scriptures, that hoc
est corpus meum can have no such sense as you teach, Rider. Hoc est corpus meum
expounded by scripture.
which is: that bread is not by this or any other words transubstantiated or
changed into Christ's body and blood, but that bread remains after
sanctification, or (as you say) consecration, and that the scriptures speaking
of Christ's body and of the bread, speak distinctlie, not confusedly, that
is, they do divide them, not confound them giving to either of them their
several nature and property, yea after consecration. And whereas we have now
heard too much of the jarres of your late Popes and writers void of unity and
verity: Now let us hear the holy scriptures expound hoc est corpus meum,
plainly and truly by the Evangelists and Paul, who knew best Christ's
meaning, upon whose exposition all Christians may and must only rest
satisfied in spite of Pope and popery.

75. The first promise here made, is, that he will show plainly by Scripturs
that bread is not transubstantiated, Fitzsimon.
but that after consecration it retayneth still his nature. The second promise
is, that he will bring such exposition, from the evangelists, and Paul, that
in spyte of Pope, and popery, we may, and must rest satisfied thereby.

Rider. Dedit. Math. 26.26. Datur Luc. 22.19. Fregit Luc. 21.19. Fra^gitur. 1.
Cor. 11.24 Eis Mark. 14.22.
76. ANd first we will prove it from the difference of the sign and the thing
signified, The scriptures when they speak of bread they speak actiuely, He gave.

But when they speak of Christ's natural body, they speak passiuelie. Is
given. When they speak of bread, they speak actiuelie, He brake it. But when
they speak of Christ's body, they speak passiuelie, Which is broken. When
they speak of bread, they say, To you. But when they speak of Christ's
natural body, they say. For you. Pro vobis 1. Cor. 11.24. Dedit Mark. 14.23.
Effunditur Luc. 22.20. Eis Math. 26.27. Pro multis pro vobis Luc. 22. ac Math.
26.26.
Likewise when they speak of wine, they speak actiuely: He gave, But when
they speak of Christ his blood, they speak passiuelie, Is shed. When they
speak of the wine, they say, To them. But when they speak of Christ's blood,
they speak, For you, or, for many.
76. Here is a discourse pertaining to the single Accidence in Grammar, not
containing any wit, or worth, not so much as to such as would know what is a
verb active, and what passive, in the words of Christ. Now for our Lords sake,
let us examine it. The scripturs, says he, speak actiuely of bread. Yea Sir!
it, that is taken, broaken, and according your wysdom, eaten, by record of
scripture; is it active or passive? Since therefore it is too to evident to be
rather passive, as it concerns bread; it makes the 79. untruth. Secondly,
says he, The 79. untruth.
the words [is giuen] belong not to bread but to Christ's body. By which is
employed, that what Christ gave, it was not given; and what was given by him, he
did not give. If it was bread which he gave, and not bread which was given. If
our late Queen industrious in giving names, termed a dance, abruptly iumping
from point to point, by the name of a Frogg-galliard: how would she have named
this treatise rebou^ding unreasonably from point to point? when Christ said he
did give what was to be given, he is interpreted to give that which was not to
be given. This is the 80. untruth, The 80. untruth. Schlusselburb. l. 2. art.
13.

Tigurini in praef. Apologetica Orthodoxi consensus.

Iezlerus de diuturnitate belli Euchar. page 77.


deserving to be called a blasphemy, by which Christ is made untrue. Wherefore
worthily do the Lutherans exclaim against you saying: quaenam quaeso, per Deum
immortalem, potest iniriconcordia cum Caluinistis qui ipsum filium Dei mendacij
arguunt? etc. What concord, I pray you, in Gods name may be taken with
Caluinists giueing the lie to the Son of god?

But let us discuss the rest. Fregit, he interprets [he brake it]. I grawnt
such interpretation to be true in sense, althowgh the word Fregit, precisely
signifies he brake, withowt the syllable, it. In the 51. number.
But when I had used the same interpretation, in the 51. number, he thus
reprehendeth: this syllable [it] alters the sense and peruerteth Christ's
meaning, and is added by you to maintain that which the text otherwise cowld
not have any show to bear. Tell me, gentle Readers, whether this writer be not
extraordinary, who is made every foot to disprove him self? and showed to
offend in that which he wowld seem most ernestly to amend? Further the
Scripturs when they speak of Christ's body, says he, they speak passiuely.
Frangitur which is broken. You have seely sir, broken your cause, by your good
glosing. For by saying Christ's body was broken, you say truly, but so, as it
must be understood only in the form of bread. For Christ's body was not else
where, or other wise broken, but pierced. And it was fortowld by the prophet
they should not break his body, S. Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. hom. 24.
nor no one bone of him on the Cross. Whereupon says S. Chrysostom: Christum
in Sacramento pati fractione quam in Cruce pati noluit; Christ in the Sacrament
to endure breaking, which he would not endure on the Cross.

So also is the same assured by [Frangitur, is broken] in the present Frangitur
is broken. So also if it had not been the same body which then was given, in an
unbloody manner, with it which was to be given the next day in a cruental or
bloody manner, by other evangelists it had not been interpreted, or said,
[tradetur, shall be deliuered] in the future tence, so that unfortunately is this
active and passive gloss produced by M. Rider against him self, clayming to
have him (by all Protestants careful of their honor) sued to be a Deponent.
For by saying Christ's body was broken in the present tence; it can no otherwise
be understood by all the wreasting of man's wit, then by the being truly
thereof under the form of bread: considering as it was on the Cross, it nether
was broken, and that being at that time it was spoken, to come, it could not be
specifyed in the present tence. Also, as I said, other evangelists mentioning
the same body in the future tence, [tradetur, shall be deliuered] they ascertayne
us, what Christ gave, and brake, the same was delivered; and consequently no
figure only, or only appellation but his true, real, substantial, corporal
body, Yet let us examine further.

Eis, he interprets, to you. A half penny scholar would never have [Eis] to
signifye, [to them]: and so also it is construed by him self in few words
after. Other riff raff in all co^fused manner is intermedled and iuggled
together; to insinuat that Christ gave not that which he gave, but something
else, and that in his words he played at pass-pass, howlding bread, breaking
bread, blessing bread, giving bread, and all as Oecolampadius says, to no
other purpose, then to tell them, Vide Zuingl. to. 2. in ep. ad Math. Rutlin.
de cana fol. 155.
that to be his body which was sitting at the table, which should be given the
next day, as he gave them bread How much is the patience of Readers and
Writers, abused by such futilitie.

77. When they speak of the cup, they speak, In rememberance of me. In meam
commemorationem 8. Cor. 11.14. In remissionem peccatoru^. Mat. 26.28.


But when they speak of Christ's natural blood, they speak, For the remission
of sins.

So when Christ speaks actiuelie, as, he gave, he brake, it is always
spoken of the sacrament. But when he speaks passiuelie, which is given, which
is broken, which is shed, and for you, not to you, then he speaks of his
natural body given and broken on the cross. And this rule is a plain and
sure rule to direct us in and to the true understanding of hoc est corpus meum,
this is my body, In which plain paths of the holy Scriptures, if you would
walk, you might be preserved from wandering.

77. When the Scripturs speak of the Cupp, says he, they speak in
remembrance of me. Not only of the cupp, good M. Rider, but also of the bread.
For so tells S. Paul, if you will allow him, S. Luke. c. 22. v. 19.
in the next verse before. And S. Luke conjoined such clause for remembrance,
to the bread only, omitting to conioyne it to the chalice. These good
compagnions accept willingly all remembrance of their lyquour, and cupp;
Clebitius in victoria veritatis etc. part 4. argum. 5.
and some times in the Church they strive about it. Clebitius, one of the
principal of them selves, shall be my witness, thus expostulating with Heshusius:
When as in the congregation, I would not willingly permit to thee the
administration of the Cupp, did not thou command thy colleague (or compartner)
that in the face of the congregation he showld take the cupp from me by force?
And for that cause, did not I howld it fast, and with both my hands? I know
that others will lawgh at this disordre: but I had rather have them lament,
that in all this dissolut, or disioynted gloss, M. Rider, the words of
Christ's institution, (Hoc est corpus meum, quod pro vobis tradetur, etc. this
is my body which shall be delivered for you, etc.) can not be perceived; but in
lieu thereof, our Lord and Saluiour is made to tripp from matter to matter,
without any one syllable to our purpose in question. Where is here showed, that
bread after consecration, remains still bread? Where is the satisfaction by
the Evangelists, and S. Paul, that we must rely unto, in spyte of Pope, and
popery? What marrow or substance is in these words for any other, then for a
single Sintaxian, to know, that dedit, and Fregit, be active verbs, and Datur,
and Frangitur be passive? etc.

Luthers verdict against his brethren, saying; they fear, Luther. tom. 7.
defen. verb. caena. fol. 383.
least they should stumble and break their necks at every syllable which
Christ pronownced. And this makes them range about, through all the parts of
learning, and not to come to any issue in the main point of his sacred
institution; truly fullfilling the saying of the royal Prophet; Psalm. 11.
impij in circuitu ambulant; the wicked wander in a circuit; and like serpents
trodden on the heads, or henns whose necks are newly cracked, they wreath, and
wrest, up and down, in manifould skippings, spending and wasting their small
time to live, which by being quiet might some what longer continue.

Rider.
78. Thus you see how distinctlie Christ disioynes them, sundring them with
their several properties, Bread and wine remain after consecration by Christ
his testimony, therefore transubstansiation is a forged and false fable,
inverted by new Rome to support your new heresies of Christ's carnal presence.
the sign from the thing signified, not confounding them as you untruly
teach, yea and after that Christ uttered hoc est corpus meum, which you call
your consecration. Now let us compare the phrase and words that the holy Ghost
uses in both the new Testament and the old, and then you will say they are so
like, that they are rather borrowed of the old testament, then instituted in
the new, and of necessity seeing they are both Sacraments, and of like words,
and ordained by one Author, and to one end, they must needs have one sense, so
that the one will best expound the other, and the one being Sacramental and
relative, the other cannot be Grammatical and proper. As it is said in the old
Genesis 17.10.
Testament of the sacrament of circumcition, hoc est pactum meu^, this is my
covenant. So it is said in the new Math. 26.26.
Testament by the same spirit, hoc est corpus meum, this is my body, but as by
those words like to these in sillables, sound, and sense, there was no
transubstansiation of the piece of flesh of the foreskin that was cut off, into
Gods covenant made with his Church, so there is no natural nor miraculous
change made of any part of the bread or wine into Christ's body and blood.

Exodus 12. 1. Cor. 11.24. Exodus 24 8.
And as it was said of the Paschall Lamb, hoc erit vobis in memoriam, this
shall be to you a rememberance, so it is said of the Lords Supper, Do this in
rememberance of me

And as it was said in the old Testament, hic est sanguis faederis, This is
the blood of the covenant, yet was not the covenant but a sign of the covenant.

Luc. 22.20.
So is it said by Christ himself, This cup is the new Testament in my blood,
yet the cup was neither the Testament, nor the blood, but a sign,
representation, and rememberance of Christ's blood.

And the new Testament is an obligation or bond wherein God for his part binds
himself with most sure couenaunts: and seals it with word, oath and
Sacraments, that he will receive into his protection and favor the believer
and penitent. And the believer and repentant of their parts, bind themselves
by like indented covenants, to perform unto his sacred Majesty, Romans 1.5.
a lively and steadfaste faith with holy obedience.

Now the cup or the wine in the cup, is a representation or commemoration unto
us of this covenant of grace made in the new Testament, as the Paschall Lamb
and the blood of beasts were signs of Gods covenant in the old Testament.
This may suffice for the plain and true understanding of these words, this is
my body, and this is my blood, being expounded according to the holy
scriptures. Now to your first proof out of saint Paul.

Fitzsimon.
78. It is an easy matter upon all the premises to tell us, You see, you see;
when nothing is given to be seen but gross impiety, and futilitie. I
admonished you (dear Readers) that Reformers conceived a Vatinian hatred,
against Christ's institution. Will you now behowld a lively demonstration thereof?
First, he says, that the phrase, and words, used therein, is no new
institution, but borrowed out of the owld testament. Secondly, that the
Sacraments of the owld testament, and new, are so like, as they must have one
end, and sense; and the one not to be literal, more then the other. It is to
be remembered which is mentioned in the 36. and 63. numbers, that by Reformers
opinion, there is noe more benifit by Christ's Sacrament of the Altar, then by
the Jewish ceremonies; which, according to their translation, Saint Paul
says, to have been only bare, Galat. 4.9.
and beggarly ordonances. I request all curteouse readers to spare me the pain
to relate the substance of such numbers in this place, and that they will not
proceed further until they have perused what there is fownd.

Note.
because they have one author, one sense, one end, one phrase, and one
literalitie according to M. Rider. Wherefore, since Joseph in the owld
testament was called, Saluator mundi; the Saluioure of the world, Genes. 41.45.
Joan. 4.42.
and Christ in the same Phrase by S. Ihon is called Saluator mundi; they must
have on end, one sense, one literalitie. And therefore, as Joseph was noe true
Saluioure of our sowls, so also was not Christ. And as Saul is called by David,
Christus Domini, the anointed of our Lord, 1. Reg. 24.7. Luc. 2.26.
even as our Saluiour is termed by S. Luke; they must have one end, one
sense, one literalitie; and by M. Riders consequence, the one be no better, the
the other.

Ochinus: Ochin. lib. 2 dial. 21. Page 154 155. 156. 157. 288. 289.
Cum sit vna Ecclesia and vna fides, proinde non debemus plura credere, quam
crediderunt sancti federis antiqui. -- Perfectam quoque and eandem suisse
Ecclesiam vt Christi, ita and Moisis etc. whereas there is but one Church, and
one faith, therefore we owght not to believe more then the Saints of the owld
testament believed. -- as perfect and the same is the Church of Christ, and of
Moises. This being the fundation, Zuinglius frames this pyle thereupon. If in
the owld testament, Zuingl. to. 2. vbi de baptismo fol. 59.
says he, the carnal and external Sacraments cowld not bring any purity or
cleanes to sinful, and defiled consciences: how much less can such Sacraments,
do us any profit in Christ, in the new testament, where only the Spirit gives
life? What frame does Ochinus him self build upon his own fundation? Ochin.
loc. cit. page 157.
Illos autem non credidisse Trinitatem, non personas coequales,
consubstantiales, aeternas etc, but they (of the owld testament) did not
believe the trinity, coequalitie of persons, consubstantialitie, eternity
etc. Ergo: by the first inference, adieu all Sacraments of Christ, for any
profit, and bringing any purity to sinful persons. By the second inference,
we are not bownd to believe any substance of the new testament, of Christ's
birthe, his miracles, his, and the holy Ghosts, divinity, Trinity, etc.
because forsooth, Ochin. loc. cit. page 154. 155. 156. 157.
alioqui essemus deteriori quam ipsi condition qui ad plura quam illi credenda
obstringeremur; we should be of inferior condition to them of the owld
testament being bownd to believe more then they.

Here is the scope, here is the center declared of these instructions, to equal
both testaments, and after to condemn the new by the inutilitie of the owld;
and that by many testimonies of Scripture: as when S. Paul says, Hebr. 7.
the former commandment to be reprobated, propter infirmitatem eius and
inutilitatem; for the infirmity thereof and inutilitie. Now say they, the new
commandment is no better, the Sacraments thereof noe more proffitable, the
sense, end, and literalitie of both is from one authoure, and of equal
estimation: therefore let us renownce Christianity, and all owld and new
testament, and become Atheists and Mahumetists; Galat. 4.
the owld law being but infirma and egena elementa, weak, and (as they
translat) beggarly ordonances, and consequently the new which is equal thereto
no better. I lament some times to behowld great, and iudiciouse wits, employed
now confuting one point of sectarie impiety, now another; whereas if they had
principaly (save other men's judgment) revealed the drift of these reformations,
to be a stidiouse employment to deforme by degrees, all virtue and religion,
there would many more reclamations (although they be daily revoked in
commendable numbers) ensue. Now as S. Ireneus, Iren. l. 1. c. 35. Hieron. ep.
ad Cresiphontem.
and S. Hierome learnedly observed; Aduersus eos, victoria est sententiae eorum
manifestatio: sententias eorum prodidisse, superasse est. Patet prima front
blasphemia etc. Victory against them is the manifestation of their
professions: to produce their sentences, is to confute them. Blasphemy is
discovered at first view. Their sentences even against the root and pillar of
religion and Christianity being detected, there will many noble wits, and
mynds of our contry, I dowbt not disdain longer, all consociation with such
blasphemers.

Lastly, was it not a ricidulouse comparison, of Christ's words Genesis 17. v. 11.
but only of baptism; the next words evidently and expressly declaring; Vide
number. 78. Joan. 6. 1. Cor. 11.
vt sit in signum faederis inter me and vos; that it be a sign of the covenant
betwixt me and you; whereas contrary wise the words of this institution before,
and after, do auerr it not to be any sign, but the fleashe to be meat indeed,
the body to be that, which was to be delivered for mankyng? Was it not as
ridiculouse to marvel there was no transubstantiation of the forskynn into
Gods covenant, God declaring it (as I said) to be only a sign; and a covenant
not being a substance, into which any thing cowld be transubstantiated? was it
not as ridiculous to leap from circumcision, to the paschal lamb, succeding
many hundred years after, and from thence to half the blood of twelve calves
wherewith Moses sprinkled the Israelits, and having cluttred them together as
one matter, for their bare consonance, or resemblance in sownd with the words
of Christ's institution, to make them equivalent in sense, end, and propriety
with this B. Sacrament?

[this is my bodie] which as their own brethren observe, Joan. Schut. l. 50.
causarum. cap. 13.
they do so hate, that they can not abide either to see, or hear them; at least
according their true signification. Whereto belongs these speeches of Luther
willing to have impug^^^d the said puissant words; Luther. tom. 7. VVittem.
fol. 502.
which says he, in examining, and de^^^ing I took merueylous payns, and
strayned every vain, of body, and soul, to have avoided. For, probe
perspiciebam hac repapatui cum primis me valde incommodare posse. I did well
observe, thereby I cowld notably have interested Papacy. But I find my self
taken fast, and that there is no way to escape. For, textus euangelij nimium
apertus est, and potens; the text of the gospel is too to clear, and violent.
By this is demonstrated, that good will wanted not in Luther, to have conceived
with the Sacramentaries, but says he, these words [this is my body] cannot
easily be shaken, much less overthrown, by words, and glosses devised by
giddy brayns. Luther. ibid.


Rider, that I will not here also collect any untruths further to netle him:
althowgh every one may judge by the premises whether there be not plenty
affoorded. It suffices in general, and particular, to have discovered, that
the sense, end, and literalitie, or dignity of the owld and new testament,
are different and unequal, and noe part of M. Riders discourse vnsuspitiouse to
tend to the abolishing of all Christian religion. Therefore, let heaven, and
earth consent to these words of one of the reforming coniuration, or of their
own holy brotherhod. They endeavor by darcknes, and mists of words, to
obscure the clear verity, and enforce them selves to establish a sentence
clean opposite to the words of the Son of God. Tilman. Hesnusius. lib. de
presentia Corporis Christi.
They blaspheme with an impudent and irreverent mowth the fleash of Christ. --
They blaspheme barbarously, and are culpable of the blood of Jesus Christ, and
murderers of him. They shutt obstinatly their eyes against the clear light:
and by detraction, and malice, affirm that to be obscure, which they will not
behowld. S. August. de unit. Ecclesiae. c. 16.
To which declaration S. Augustine subscribeth, saying: audiunt tam lucida and
manifesta testimonia quae illam toto orb demonstrant: and malunt clausis
occulis offendere in montem, quam, in illum ascendere. They hear so clear and
manifest proofs which demonstrat the truth: and they had rather stumble, their
eyes being shutt, against the mowunt (of Gods Church) then mownt to it.

Catho. Priests.
1. Cor. 11. This is my body which shall be delivered for you: whosoever does
eat unworthily, etc. shall be guilty of the body and blood of Christ. Rider.
79. A Most learned writer in the like case, brings in an Athenian history of
Pharasylaus (a frantic man amongst the Greeks) who whenever he saw any
ships arrive in the harbor thought them all his own, Athenaeus Dipno. sophist.
lib. 12.
and took an Inventory of their wares, and bad them welcome home very
joyfully, as if they had bin his own servants and ships. After the same manner
(pardon the comparison) you deal in the proof of this question. for
wheresoever you find in scriptures or fathers, hoc est corpus meu^, this is my
body, or, this is my blood, or, my flesh is meat truly, etc. or, except ye
eat the flesh of the son of man and drink his blood. etc. or, the bread
which I will give is my flesh, or the like tropical or sacramental phrase,
which ever carries with it a spiritual sense, presently you clap hands, lift
up Stentorian voices, and cry to the Catholics against us poor heretics,
that all these texts of Scriptures and testimonies of Fathers are on your side,
and prove your carnal presence: and condemn our opinion as heretical and
damnable, and then you register in your note-books (as in an Inventory) all
these proofs for your own proper evidence, when as God knows, you are
neither Owners, Merchants, nor faithful Factores. And it shall be directly
proved, that these texts of Scriptures and testimonies of Fathers, belong no
more to the proof of your carnal presence, then the Merchants ships and goods
of Athens belonged to frantic Thrasylaus. But now to prove that I speak,
that the Catholics may see, (yea and let master Henry Fytzsimon truly
censure) we speak nothing without proof, I will begin to examine your
slips and sleights in this place of the 1. Cor. 11.

The fowerth part of the Catholics proof by Scriptures, for the real
presence.
Fitzsimon.
Alan. Cop. dial. 6. c. 27. page 914. Vide Ihon VValshe against M. Gilbert
Brown.
79. THis history, of Thrasylaus, (the application whereof against Protestants,
you may find in Alanus Copus) is every bodies hackney; of one that in his own
only imagination, and not otherwise, had goods, in ships of others, but in
truth had none. Verily any would think this example less pertinent to us
then to our adversaries: as well because we follow not self frantic
imaginations (which they do, according Luthers last testimony of their words
and glosses devised by giddy brayns) as also, because all other clayms in
Christ's words beside ours, Luth. to^. 7. VVittemb. fol. 502.
are fownd suggestions of Satan Father of lies, by the confession of the
competitours them selves; and their shame in practicing to defeat us in our
right, Buter in cap. 6. Joan. and in cap. 26. Math.
has made the^ cry (as being deceived like so many Trasilaus) peccauimus.
Martin Bucer craves pardon of God, that ever he had witnesed against us, and
bewitched any with your opinion. So did Oecola^pad say, Oecolampad. ad
Landgra. Hess. anno 1529.
I would most excellent Prince, that this right hand of mine had been chopped
off when I began to wryt first of the Lords supper against the Catholic sense:
see more hereof in our 41. number, in the examination n. 7. n. 18. where is
demonstrated, that every chief protestant, (as if he had rann to a wrong
opinion, as Trasilaus rann to wrong ships) revoked his imaginations, and
challenges, to the commendation of truth, and infamy of his former follye.

Thrasilaus vaynly clayming, but frantickly withstanding sentence given against
them by God, and man, ancient, and late, friend, and foe. Whereof (that in manner
of Thrasilaus, they refuse all sentence given against their claymes, and
frantickly withstand all Concils, yea and Angels, and Saints, that denownce
them destitut of all truth and title in the institution of Christ's Sacrament)
let this short testimony of one of your own brethren, be arbitrer:
Bullingerus Decad. S. de Cana. fol. 370.
Zuinglianos non posse credere Christum esse in caena presentem, vero suo
Corpore, licet omnia in mundo Concilia, omnes Angeli, and Diui id iubeant
credere: the Zuinglians not to be able to believe Christ to be present in the
Supper, with his true body, althowgh all the Cowncils in the world, all Angels,
and Saints command it showld be believed. Thus much to restore Thrasilaus
Frantic in his imaginations, deluded in his suppositions, and reproved in his
claymes, among his compagnions; who can not believe other men's goods to be
impertinent to them, but are clayming what all the world, Concils, Angels, and
Saints, do sentence to be none of theirs, thereby implying them to have no
other wealth then naked beggarly signs, fruictles figures, and fantastical and
fanatical Thrasilean suppositions, by which (as S. Epiphan: testimony in the
63. number specifyeth) they leave the substance, and like Aesops dog, snatch
the shaddowe.

Rider.
80. First, you bring a piece of a verse, so much as you think by the sound of
your ear will fit your purpose: then you cut off the beginning and ending of
the same verse, which would expound the Apostles meaning, and overthrow your
opinion. Then you join a piece of the 17. verse with the 24. verse, and
ouerskip the 25. and 26: verses, which (all that you left out, and cut off)
does first deliver Christ's institution: secondly, expounds his own meaning in
every particular point that is in controversy betwixt us: and thirdly,
overthrows your opinions. Now, what moved you thus to mangle, cut off,
disioynt, and dismember this place of Paul (as you did with the text before)
let the Reader after my examination of your errors, judge.

But first I must deliver you this general rule observed of allsound Divines,
that all the Evangelists and Aposteles doctrine, being pend by one spirit, do
agree in the matter of the Sacrament, one expounding another, as partly you
heard a little before. So that the three Evangelists must not be expounded to
contradict Paul, not Paul expounded to contradict them, but all duly and
truly in the spirit of humility, being examined according to the Canon and
rule of the word of God, you shall find neither darkness in speech. nor
difficulty in sense, but that the simplest may know Christ's meaning.

Fitzsimon.
80. What I have answered in the 43. number, against his accusations of any
curtayling, cutting by the wast, and subtracting; may abundantly serve for the
like of my ma^gling, cutting off, disioynting, dismembring this place. All are
but practices of the lapwing to cry a far of, most noysomly, that you may
think the nest of her yongons to be there where it is least. Which as it is
there manifested, so here it will be approved. Remember only his saying in this
place, that what I omitted, expowndeth Christ's meaning in every particular
point that is in controwersie betwixt us, and overthrows our opinions. And
that for plain dealing, I should have begone at the 23. verse, and so to the
end of the 29. verse. If you ask him wherefore is he not contented with what I
have produced, considering that he had the less to confute, and was not bownd
to answer to what was omitted: he can answer nothing else, but talk of
omissions, cuttings, and curtaylings, that others might not discern, but that
he had answered pertinently.

Rider.
81. You should have begun at the 23. verse, and so to the end of the 20,
verse, and that had been plain dealing. Christ's institution penned by Paul,
delivers us four observations. First, Christ his action. Seco^ndlie Christ's
precept. Thirdly, Christ's promise. Fourthlie, Christ's caution.

1. Christ's action, He gave thanks, brake bread, and took the cup, etc. 1.
Take ye, eat ye.
2. Christ's precept. 2. This do as often as ye drink it, and both, in
rememberance of me. 3. The minister must show and preach the Lords death till
he come.
3. Christ's promise. 1. This is my body which is broken for you. 2. This is
the new Testament in my blood.
4. Christ's caution or caveat. VVhosoeuor shall eat this bread, or drink
this cup unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.
Thus you see plainly without any dismembring or curtalling, Christ's action,
precept, promise, and caution delivered out of the text,

Out of which place I observe for the Catholics better instruction and your
confutation, two things against you in this your skipping and curtalling of the
text. First, the comforts you conceal from them by this mangling of the text.

A Discovery of more puritantcie in M. Rider; And of Puritan protestations,
how they are performed.
81. FIrst, he is convicted by his own words, Fitzsimon.
that he deals not plainly, considering, he nether begins at the 23.
verse, nor ends at the 29. But will you understand the reason thereof? because
S. Paul says, that him self had learned this institution from our Lord, to
wit, by tradition and not in Scripture; and that he had delivered it formerly
to the Corinthians by tradition, and not by Scripture. For I have received of
our Lord (says he) which also I have delivered unto you, that our Lord in the
night he was betrayed: took bread, and giving thanks, brake, and said. This is
the 23. 1. Cor. 11. v. 23.
verse. Next M. Rider adds to the word [brake] the word [bread] which is
not in the text. Thirdly, by his division into an action, a precept, a promise,
a caution; nothing, toward any edification, or proffit, or learning is
affoorded, but a pranke discovered under the color of method, to distract the
mind, while he does seperat the circumstances asondre, which confirm Christ's
institution of the Sacrament, to certifye his true body being present.
Fowerthly, 1. Cor. 11. v. 24.
this being the 24. verse, take ye, and eat ye, this is my body which shall be
delivered, for you: do this in my remembrance. M. Rider uses these sleights
toward it. First; when he repeateth Christ's precept, he omitteth clean, do
this in remembrance of me, toward the bread, and (as was said in the 77. number
of their care of the liquoure) conjoined it to the drink. Fifthly, he makes
Christ's words, this is my body, to be but a promise: let every understanding
determine, whether not unreasonably, and unlearnedly.

The 25. verse is: likewise and the chalice, after he had supped, saying: 1.
Cor. 11. v. 25.
this chalice is the new testament in my blood, do this as often as you shall
drink in my remembrance. Of this verse, he has wholly omitted the first
half; as also, of the next half, the name of chalice. After drink, he adds
the syllable [it]. Which being once done by me, in the 51. number: thus he
controwled my addition. this syllable it, alters the sense, and peruerteth
Christ's meaning, etc. Then he places according his former skill, such words
among promises. The 26. verse is; For as often as ye shall eat this bread,
and drink this chalice, you shall annownce the death of our Lord till he come.
2. Cor. 11. v. 26.
All this verse is intierly ouer-slipped, as nether action, precept, promise,
nor caveat. So that his division is either defective, as not comprehending all
parts; or his dissimulation notorious, in omitting what might be comprehended,
as well under the precept, as any thing else, and better under the caution, or
caveat, then what is by him contained. Marie, I find the speech of a
Minister, and his preaching, substituted in place of the foresaid verse, which
upon my credit is nether in greek, or latin text, nor ever dreamed of by
Apostle, Evangelist, Council, Doctor, Father. But it is only the pure Puritancie
of Thomas Cartwright, l. 1. page 158. to affirm it a necessary and essential
part of the Communion. yet thereof thus says the answer of Oxford to the
Puritans Petition, page 11. But that it should be ministered with a sermon is
absurd, and has bred in many a vain and false opinion: as if, not the word
of Christ's institution, but rather the word of a Ministers exposition, were a
necessary and essential part of Communion. O how impossible it is for M.
Rider, but to be known a puritan? Now let him take what he can get thereby. The
27. verse: Therefore whosoever shll eat this bread or drink this chalice of our
Lord unworthily, 1. Cor. 11. v. 27.
shall be guilty of the body and blood of our Lord. All this verse he makes to
be a caution, or caveat: I should think it rather to be a threatening
prediction. Secondly he would not call it, the cupp of our Lord, but only the
bare cupp. What is the reason, think you? because it cowld not be called the
cupp of our Lord, unless it be allowed to contain the blood of our Lord; or for
haueing been sanctified to our Lord.

The 28. verse. But let a man prove him self, and so let him eat of that 1.
Cor. 11. v. 28.
This verse in his conceit, belonged not to the institution of Christ, which S.
Paul had penned: because it is not inserted, nether as action, nor precept, nor
promise, nor caution: which according to his skill, are all the members
comprehended in Christ's institution. The 29. verse: For he that eats or
drinks unworthily, does eat to him self judgment, 1. Cor. 11. v. 29.
not decerning the body of our Lord. These verses so omitted, so transposed, so
corrupted by him, yet give audience to his words, as if he had so cunningly
deceived all readers, that they did not behold his industry: thus you see
plainly, without any dismembring or curtayling etc. First I inquyer, in all
these verses, what is contrary or repugnant to my profession? Secondly what
part or syllable of them, do the favor his persuasion, or the only figurative
presence of Christ? Thirdly, how he blushed not to attaynt me, with fraudulent
omission, cutting, wasting, etc. I professing only to deliver my choice proofs
of Scripture for the real presence, without binding my self to take more or
less, then I deemed sufficient, whether they were consequent together, or in
several places; and he, undertaking to use plain dealing, and to have
delivered Christ's whole institution as it is penned by S. Paul, yet to
misdemeane him self in this manner? I use not accusations of deprauations, of
falsifications, and other like, that it man better by all be understood, truth
to be against him, and noe tryfling.

82. Secondly, the errors you still hold them in, Rider,
in concealing the most part of the text, first by following your Latten
translation, and neglecting the holy tongue (the Greek) wherein the holy
Ghost pend this institution. You translate, Which shall be delivered for you,
for, which is broken for you. Out of which I note, first you change the tense,
that is in the Greek, that is, the present tense, for so we have it, and you
follow the L^tten translation, which is the future tense, and therefore not so
comfortable. Christ uses a sweet figure of the time present for the time to
come, Enallage.
to assure our souls and consciences that whatsoever Christ promises, is as
surely to be performed (in his appointed time) ^s if it were already done.
And this tense Christ used to take all doubts from his disciples, who in
respect of their unworthiness might justly have doubted, that Christ would
not have died and shed his precious blood for them, they being such
unprofitable servants, and miserable sinners. But to take away that doubt from
them and the Church, now he assures both, that whatsoever is promised by him,
is as sure to be done, as if it were already done. And this stayed Christ's
Church and every particular member of the same from distrusts, doubts,
grudgings, etc. in and under their several crosses, because they know there is
a joyful I^bile, and freedom for them purchased and prepared, and shall as
surely be accomplished, as if now it were performed

Now your altring of this particle, (is,) depriveth us of all this comfort.
Again, you following still your corrupt Latten translation, say, del^uered for
you, whereas you should say as the Greek is, and as Christ says, Broken for
you, for this word broken, is more Emphatical and piercing then delivered, for
it is one thing for a man to be delivered for to be betrayed for me, another
thing to be broken in pieces for me. Out of this I observe, first the
greatness of my sin: secondly, the kindness and exceeding love of my Savior.

Whether the vulgar Latin translation of the Bible, be to be preferred to all
other translations.
Fitzsimon.
82. I Have three causes, not to justify our latin translation compared with
the greek, against M. Rider. One, because I am privy, that he has no more
good greek, as I said before, then a blind man has sight. Secondly, because I
find that work so learnedly and sufficiently performed by M. Gregory Martyn
in his discovery, and by the preface and annotations of the Rhemish testament,
that nether can I, nor will I add, or deminishe any thing therein. Beza in pref.
noui test. 1556. Molin. pa. 30. Erasm. c. 6. Math. Humfr. de rat. interpretandi
p. 74.
Lastly, because by their most learned pillars, Beza, Molin, Erasme, Laur,
Humfred, etc. the latin is confessed far more pure then the greek. We have
observed, says Beza, that the reading of the Latin text of the owld
interpreter, thowgh it agree not some time with our greek copies, yet is it
much more convenient, for that it seems, some truer and better copy. This
one testimony of such an one, (so great, as D. VVhytaker says, VVhytak. page
12. con. Martin.
he is able to close up all our learned men in a sack, and to ding out their
brayns) shall suffice to controwle and correct M. Riders ignorant meddling in
these matters, there being not a more naked linguist in a contry, or more unfit
proctor for the greek tongue, as shall be shortly testified. It was his chance
during my being in prison, in the presence of Alderman Iians, the Constable,
and others, to have presented a trial of his skill in greek about the words of
the angel to our B. Lady. I confess that my study was much more in other
matters then in the greek tongue, yet, as they above named are witneses I fownd
M. Rider, not only tripping in greek, but mute from ever after mentioning
greek in my presence.

Of the word, broken, and the being thereof in the present tence, [deliuered]
forgets him self a little before saying, that the Evangelists and S. Paul
must not be expownded to contradict one another; and consequently the
Evangelist saying delivered, and S. Paul saying broken, there is no diversity
whether be used: especialy the Scripture using them as having but one
signification [ break thy bread to the hongrie; Isa. 58.7. Thren. 4.4. Exodus
12. Number. 9.
little ones have craved bread and there was none to break to them: which
breaking is all one as deliver bread to the hongry, or to little ones] and the
literal signification of delivering is verifyed in Christ's passion, but not of
breaking. For he was delivered for our sins: but I being able to say that he
was also broken for us in the B. Sacrifice of his body under the form of
bread; and M. Rider denying such his sacrifice, and not being able possibly to
show any other his breaking: do you think, that leaving to talk of delivery,
for breaking; he knows what is with him, or against him?

this is my body, which is broken for you) shows such mates when they can
get a word to wander against the truth (for Christ used then a present
tence, to testifye the efficacy of his institution of the B. Sacrament, in
which his body was presently delivered inuisibly, which was the next day to be
delivered visiblye) thereupon they amplify, and descant at full: whereas upon
the true, and literal institution of Christ, arcording the propre signification
thereof, they walk so nicely, Luth. tom. 7. defen. verb. caenae. fol 383.
as if they were treading upon eggs; Fearing, says Luther, to stumble and
break their necks at every word which Christ pronownced.

83. In the first, that Christ's, Rider,
birth and life (though both innocent) was not sufficient to cleanse my sin.
In the second, Christ would undergo shameful buffets on the face, pricking of
thorns upon his head, piercing nails into his hands and feet, a bloody
spear into his blessed side, before man's sin could be satisfied, Gods wrath
appeased, Satan, death and hell conquered: this our living Christ would have
his body broken for us, he would not leave one sighein his soul for our
sakes, nor one drop of blood in his body vnshed for our sins. These comforts
are expressed by this word broken, which are not, nor can be gathered by this
word delivered.

83. In my Examination of the Creed, in the 14. number, Pitzsimon.
I have showed that every meritt of Christ being of infinite value, had been
sufficient to redeem a thousand worlds; and that his death and passion were
suffered upon his excessive abundance of love, which was not content with what
had been sufficient, but also powered out it self beyond all respect, and
measure, to the last drop of blood in his body, for greater manifestation of
his bountiful charity toward mankind. How comes my Warr-man, and says,
that Christ's death it self was not only not of superabundant affection, but
that beyond his death the very pearcing of his side with a spear, was
necessary to cleanse his sin? Which is blasphemy, against all Scripture, and
Christianity, referring always our redemption to Christ's holy passion, I
know not whence it could come to him, but only to fulfill the saying of S.
Nazianzen: Inter se certant, perinde atque non id metuant, ne impijs erroribus
sese constringant, sed ne in hac re leuius tolerabiliusque peccent quam alij.
They strive among them selves, as if they had no fear to entangle them selves
in impious errors, but that every of them be not behind his compagnions in
less offendinge. Other answer is in the foresaid 14. number.

Rider.
84. Another comfort is concealed from the Catholics in omitting the 25.
verse, in these words. Math. 25.40. Heb. 2.12.13.17. Ioh. 10.27.
The new Testament in my blood. Out of which every man may gather these
comforts to himself by particular application. First, that I am not a
stranger to Christ, but one of his younger brethren, and not only well
known unto him: but also as well beloved of him: which appears in this, that
he did not only remember me in his last will, but also most freely, and
liberally bequeathed unto my soul and body most precious Legacies, where we
may find them registered and most safely kept in Gods book, and daily
pronounced in our Creed, as remission of sins of both guilt and punishment:
peace of conscience in this life: at the latter day rising of my body from
death and dust: and af erwards life eternal both to soul and body. These
Legacies be bequeathed and contained in this Testament, which be has not only
sealed outwardly with Sacraments, but also inwardly with his blood by faith,
to assure us of the performance of his promise, and therefore he adds in my
blood: so that all other Testaments, Wills, Bulls or Pardons, which are not
sealed with Christ's blood, but with lead or war, are but counterfeit labels
stitcht to Christ's testament, by some false forgeries of perjured Notaries,
wherein they do falselie promise remission of sins and the kingdom of heaven.

Fitzsimon.
84. M. Rider shall pull off with his own hands his mask of consolation by
these words [the new testament in my blood] and acknowledge to all Readers his
contentment to be but forged, and his cause, and conscience, to be full of
desolation by means of them. First then, he said in his 78 number, that these
words of Christ, ordained by one authoure, have one sense, one sound, one
end, with these words of the old testament [this is the blood of the
Covenant. Exodus 24.8.
] But the sense of these words of Moises, is, that the old testament was
ratified by true and real blood substantialy sprinkled upon the Israelits:
therefore the sense of Christ's words must likewise be, (if as he says they have
one sense) that his new testament was made at his last supper, and his true,
and real blood was substantialy powered into the mowthes of his Apostles: which
blood delivered them after, as S. Luke says, L^c. 22.20.
was to be shedd for them.

Now Sir, what consolation have you about yourt heart? Are not of Musculus,
saying: In the same supper being then nighe his death, he made his testament.
How did Musculus ground his opinion? because says he, Musculus in locis co^.
Cap. de cana. n. 2. page 332.
that a testament be made auaylably, is required first, that the maker thereof
be at his own liberty: for a slave, a servant, a son in his Fathers
government, can make no testament. This liberty had Christ at his supper, and
not at his death. Also he must make executours: so did Christ make his Apostles
by this institution, appointing them to dispense the grace of this testament,
etc. whereas there was no such matter at his death. I add, that lawful testaments
are made by men before their death when they are in good memory, and not at the
instant of their death. Which according to good protestantcie had great
occasion in Christ our Saluiour, whom at the time of his death they affirm to
have been in desperation, in torments of conscience, etc. as is assured in the
14. and 15. numbers of the Examination. Is not this a good brotherly help to
M. Riders consolation by these words of Christ, [ the new testament in my
blood? Math. 25.40.
] For a testament is not a testament till the party dye. And Christ at his
supper dyed not otherwise but mysticaly as in sacrifice, therefore if there was a
testament made, such sacrifice is to be confessed.

mandatum nouum do vobis; Joan. 13.34.
a new law I give you. Mark this sequel upon this planted foundation: Christ
by confession of greatest protestants made his testament at his last supper;
and M. Rider accords thereto, confessing him in this present place, and
number, to have made his last will; bequeathed legacies, etc. Well then, I
infer, both that he shedd or delivered his blood at this table, and also that
he sacrificed him self, which in effect is all one. For by M. Riders
confession, among his legacies, Ad Hebr. 9.22.
at his supper one principal is, the remission of our sins. But S. Paul
says; Sine fanguinis effusione non fit remissio; withowt shedding of blood
there is no remission. Ergo, or therefore, Christ in his supper shed his blood, by
which he bequeathed such legacy of remission of synns. Now if Christ, as M.
Rider said in the precedent number, could not cleanse his synn without death;
and yet that at his supper he bequeathed unto him by his last will remission of
synns (of both guilt and punishment, as is says he, pronounced in the Creed:
whereof others may be judges, whether he understand his Creed, or not;
considering that to this day, all mortal men do feel the punishment at least
of Adams guilt to be vnforgiuen) as to one not only well known by him, but
also well beloved of him, as his younger brother (they are his own words) It
must follow, that Christ was sacrificed, I mean incruentally to his heavenly
Father, at his last supper; Ad Hebr. 9.16.
both for his making then his testament (vbi enim testamentum est, mors necesse
est intercedat authoris; for where a testament is, it is necessary the death
of the testator happen) as also for shedding his blood, and fullfilling all
figurative sacrifices of the owld law, in which the blood was not only shedd,
but also the things sacrificed were first putt to death; yet this shedding of
blood is not to be understood in any other, then in a mystical and impossible
manner.

No body has engaged M. Rider to confess this truth, but him nondum valet
dum viuit qui testatus est; Ad Hebr. 9.17.
it is not of force, while the testator (without all death, mystical, or
corporal) lives, and thereby ratifyed all papistry, and confownded all
protestantcy; and (which might seem most absurd) allowed a duble death of
Christ, one at his Supper, another upon the cross. S. August. tom. 8. in. Psalm.
61.
Let him answer first for the residue out of S, Augustine: Occultari potest ad
tempus veritas, vinci non potest. Florere potest ad tempus iniquitas, permanere
non potest: Verity for a time may be hydd, but it can not be vanquished:
Iniquity may florishe for a space, but can not continue. And to that heynouse
doctrine of Christ's duble death, let him deny it hardely, and say that at his
Supper was only anticipated in an incruental and incomprehensible manner, and
mysticaly, not in his propre form, but of bread and wine and without violence,
the same death which succeeded in a cruental and violent manner: as it was one
and the same lamb of God sacrificed in both manners, first incruentaly, after
cruentaly.

In teaching this doctrine, first he has it assured to him by the Musculus, an
arche Protestant. Calu. in libell. de caena and de vera Eccles. refor. Zuing.
to. 1. de canone miss fol 183. ^iblia. de Trinit. l. 2. page 89.
Thirdly by the ancient Fathers universally, whom Calvin and Zuinglius testifye
to establishe this incruental sacrifice. And Bibliander certifyeth, it was the
vndowbted belief of the ancient Israelits, that Christ would institute such a
sacrifice in bread and wine. Therefore, Gentle M. Rider, rejoice at those sugared
words of Christ [this is my blood in the new testament] not faynedly, or by
dissembling those remote causes alleged; but for the rich treasure left
perpetualy to Gods Church of so precious a sacrifice, whereby force is given to
all bulls and pardons, necessary for remission of our synns. In truth I had
forgotten to calculate incident untruths in a long time, yet now am
constrained to score up at least the 81. gross untruth: The 81. untruth.
that we teach other remission of synns then by Christ's testament. My good
Sir, afford us some citation of such our doctrine, according to your promise,
to allege, book, leaf etc. or elss we will think that we may lawfully say,
you ride. etc.

85. These deceivers must be told, as Peter told Ananias: Rider.
why has Satan filled thy heart that thou should lie, not only unto men,
but also unto the holy Ghost? Acts. 5.3.
In Ananias heart there was a wicked conceit, in his practices a wicked deceit,
and for his reward a sudden death. You Chaplens of the Pope, do tell the
poor people many ways to have remission of their sins besides Christ's
Testament, and Christ's blood, (which I will deliver particularly if I be
urged) but you are deceived, and so you deceive them, and because you would
keep them still blind, that they should neither see your deceit, nor their
own danger, therefore you kept this comfortable clause from them, The new
Testament in my blood, whithout which there is neither remission of sins, nor
saving of souls. Another comfort you conceal from the devout meditation of
every good Christian, which is, In rememberance of me

We read in histories after Julius Caesar was slain, Suetonius Plutarch.
Marcus Anthonius made an Oration to the people of Rome, in which he showed
Caesar's love and painted out very Rhetoricallie Caesar's bounty to them while
he lived, but in the heat of his speech he made a pause, and showed them
Caesar's robes sprinkled with his princely blood, shed by the bloody hand of
his cruel and malicious enemies: which when the Citizens saw, (remembering
his love) presently they ran upon the murderers and slew them. Did the
Citizens of Rome (being Pagans) revenge Caesar's death upon his enemies,
only remembering his love and liberality? Then with what Christian courage
and spiritual manhood, ought we that profess to be Christians, revenge our
Christ's death upon his cruel, bloody, and malicious enemies, which so
mercilessy put him to death? Romans 4. the last verse.
and these enemies be our sins, for he died for our sins: which, let us
mortify, nay murder them: let us kill surfeiting, by abstinence, adultery by
continency, cruelitie by mercy, hatred by love, covetousness by alms,
superstition by religion, etc. These and the like consorts of sin put our
Caesar (Christ) to death. Therefore when we hear not Marcus Anthonius, but
any man of God out of the book of God, preach unto us Christ's bloody passion
that died in our quarrel, 1. Cor. 11.22.
and shed his blood for our sins: let the remembrance of his precious death
and merciful deliverance, put us in mind to revenge his death, by killing our
sins which slew our Savior, and endeavor to serve him with all thankfulness
in a life spiritual, who has delivered us freely from death eternal. Now
see what comfort the Catholics loose for the lack of this Apostolical
rememberance of me, ad this comes by your omitting of that you should not
pass without expressing the true tenor of it, as you received it of the Lord,
for the profit of his Church. Thus much touching the spiritual comforts
concealed from the people by your skipping of Scriptures: now let us see what
errors purposelie you seek to cover by this course.

85. By this sermon, Fitzsimon,
you see what M. Rider could do if he were urged (for if he be vrgerd, he
often promises wonders) to delate upon Christ's passion. Two things I say unto
him: One, that he mistaketh Christ's words, do this in remembrance of me;
supposing it to be fullfilled by preaching: For Christ at that time, by M.
Riders confession, was not preaching but in action. Secondly, that to such
glosing verbal, and idle talkers (these are Caluins words:) Our gospel of which
we vawnt so much, Call. in cap. 1. ad Romans
where is it otherwise for the most part then on the tongue? where is the newnes
of life? where is the spiritual efficacy? Note in these last words, what others
ever yet, sacred, and profane, called good woorks, here in a puritanical
phrase to be called spiritual efficacy. Note next, that M. Rider to the
Scripture here misaplyed, out of the Acts of Apostles, foisteth in a clause of
his own, to wit [not only unto men] whereof there is no syllable in the new
testament. So great an itching vexes him to corrupt, and deprave, that be it
Canon, or testimony of Father, or Scripture it self, it must not pass
without his falsification. Thus much being said to this sermon, I behowld
nothing else worthy consideration therein. For they are but frivolous words,
having some speciem pietatis, show of piety, but denying the effect thereof. I
am also in great dowbt, whether this relation of the Romans revenge against
them that slew Caesar, be not for the most part, forged. For as I remember, they
fled, and were not together slain. So that I admyre this man's mistaking all
points of learning, of Divinity, of Philosophy, of Geographie, of
Arithmatick, of Histories as well sacred, as prophan, of Greek, of Latin, of
English, of French, of Orthographie, of all and singular sciences, and yet to
take so much upon him, as some time to say; I will lay down what you are to
believe, in spyte of Pope and popery; some time to tax others ignorance; and
at all times to talk Doctoraly.

Rider.
86. First, if you had put down these words, In rememberance of me, and, till I
come, these two had overthrown your carnal presence, Errors.
for if the bread and wine must be received in rememberance of Christ, then
bread and wine are not Christ substantiallie, corporally, Mat. 28.6.
and by way of transubstantiation. And if Christ be risen, as the Angel said,
and as we in our Creed confess, and that we must receive this Sacrament in
his rememberance till he come, then Christ being not come, but to come, is not,
nor cannot be carnally and bodily under the forms of bread and wine, as you
fondly imagine.

Fitzsimon.
86, At the margent of this number, a notorious mark of [errours] is placed: so
that it is like there should be some stuff contained. That these words [Do this
in remembrance of me] distroyeth all our persuasion; it is so just, as cuius
contrarium verum est, for there is not any clause, whereby it is much more
established. First, that he bids us do, and not speak, does palpably
subvert your late surmise, of performance thereof by a ministers sermon.
Secondly, to bidd us facere, to do, in Scripture is not seldom but very often
all one, and to bidd us to sacrifice: as faciet vnum pro peccato; he shall
sacrifice, or do one for sin; Leuit. 15. Luc. 2.
and in the new testament, vt sisterent eum Domino, and facerent secundum
consuetudinem legis pro eo; that they might present him to our Lord, and
sacrifice or do, for him according to the custom of the law. Leuit. 12.
Which commanded a lamb, and pigeon; or two pigeons, or two turtles, to be
offered at such presentation, as appears amply in Gods holy word. Conformably
thereto says S. Cyprian: Oportet nos obaudire, S. Cyprian. epist. 63.
and facere quod Christus fecit; we must be attentive, and to do what Christ
did: who as is showed the number next before, did sacrifice. Martin pope
subscribeth, saying: Martin Papa. epist. ad Burdegal. c. 3.
hoc eum ipse Dominus iussit nos agere in sui commemorationem: For this our
Saluiour commanded us to do or sacrifice in his remembrance; in ara
sanctificata; upon a sanctified altar.

Rider, Christ teaches this to be done in remembrance of him: therefore he is
not substantialy present. I answer, that it is done in remembrance of his
visible passion, on the cross: which visible passion is noe longer present: 1.
Cor. 11.26.
such to be the sense, appears by S. Paul saying: as often as you shall eat
this bread and drink this cupp, you shall anownce his (visible) death till he
come. Whereby appears, this remembrance not to be ane impediment against the
reiteration of his invisible presence in the mass, but only against it on the
cross. Secondly I answer that the remembrance there mentioned is to be
referred not so much to Christ's person absolutely, as to his operation and
institution at that time. For such to be the sense appears not only by
Catholics thereupon fownding their preisthood, but also by Protestants thereupon
grounding their authority to dispense the supper, as they call it, of the
Lord. For no other warrant have they in Scripture so to do, but this only.
Lastly, I answer, to gather, that one must be absent because he must be
remembered, is some what absurd, Gods word aduyseth us, not to forgett the
law: Prou. 3.1. Galat. 2.10.
therefore the law can not be among us. S. Paul was admonished not to forgett the
poor: therefore the poor must have been absent from him. Are these consequences?
Are these our overthrows? Yes truly, the greatest that can be given us.

87. And these words (do this in rememberance of me) condemns all your
Masses, Rider.
that be said in rememberance of He-Saints and Shee-Saints, and no Saints,
M^ssale. Printed at Venice. 1404.
as your Popes, Bishops, and in rememberance of Pilgrims, Mariners, women in
trauaill, and murren of beasts. So that all the foresaid Masses said or sung in
rememberance of Saints, persons, or diseases, be abominable, unless you will
say (which were damnable to think) that those Saints, Popes, Bishopes,
Pilgrims, etc. died for you. But I will cease to speak of those abominable
abuses, until I come to the controversy of the Mass, and yet then nothing
but what shall be found in your own books, whose chapters, leaves, pages, if
not lines, shall be quoted truly without fraud or affection. Another error
you would cover in leaping over the 26. verse, in these words, you do show
the Lords death till he come: Chrysostom Tom. 4. Hom. 27. upon these words:
Facietis commemorationem salutis vestra and beneficij mei. This showing of the
Lords death consiste h in preaching and expounding some scripture, wherein the
communicants must be instructed of the horror of their sin, the greatness
of Gods love, the price of the precious merits of Christ's blessed passion,
which is the remission of sins, and our reconciliation to Gods favor,
through his bitter and bloody passion.

Whether Masses be said to Saints; And whether it be dangerous, now a days,
to honor Saints.
Fitzsimon.
87. DId not you often tell us, that you had your Doctrine from the primative
Fathers? If it be so that you ever knew what S. Augustine said in this matter, S.
August. 20. con. Faust. c. 21.
how might you think these your arguments vnchildish? these are his words.
Sacrificamus non martyribus, sed Deo martyrum, illo dumtaxat ritu quo sibi
sacrificari noui testamenti manifestatione praecepit. We sacrifice not to
martyrs, but to the God of martyrs, in that only ceremony, which he commanded
to sacrifice to himself, in the manifestation of the new tstament. I can not
blame you to have wincked at these words as being little favorable to your
imaginations, and containing all that I said before, of Christ's instituting a
sacrifice, authorizing priests to do the same, ordaining the new testament at
his Supper, etc. By our especial prayers to Saints, conjoined with this
sacrifice, we may not be said to offer the sacrifice it self to them. When
Calvin had abolished to his power other images of Christ and his Saints, he
allowed his own, and to some repyning thereat, he answered; Si quis hoc
spectaculo offendatur, Vita Caluini cap. 12.
vt ne deinceps aspiciat, oculos sibi eruat, vel abeat cito and suspendat se;
If any be offended with this sight, that he may noe more behold it, let him
put out his eyes, or go spediely and hang him self. This man also, when he
had observed diverse Protestants (Hamsted, Fox, etc.) to canonize the fownders
of protestantcie, putting them in Calendars, in redd leters, etc. he thought it
time to mollifye his hatred against invocation of Saints (intending that his,
and his fellows glory, might not be finished by their death) saying: Etsi
solus Deus inuocandus sit, licet tamen homines ad opem nobis ferendam
implorare; Although God be only to be inuoked, Calu. in. Cateches. cap. de
oratione. Luther. lib. 2. colloq. fol. 129.
yet is it lawful to implore that men would also send us help. Luther
thinking, that where ^^ch Saints were honored, Satan also might be comprised
in the same Calendar, and Lytanies, he devoutly inuoketh him, saying; Sancte
Satan ora pro nobis: minime tamen contra te peccauimus Clememissime Diabole;
holy Satan pray for us: For in noe wise have we, offended thee, most clement
devil, etc. Verily for my own part I intend not to exchange my devotion from
the old Saints toward these new, nor think it fit to be done by others. But
by the premises appears, it is not so heynouse a matter to pray to Saints,
as in the begyning Rider, to speak of our abominable abuses, as you say, and
will allege our books chapters, leaves, pages, if not lines, (which hitherto
was never performed as often as any inconueniencie was imputed to us; as is often
showed) let it be done with greater fidelity, then S. Chrysostom is produced
in this place. For upon my credit, nether has he any such Homily upon such
words, nor any such doctrine in all his woorks, as you adioyne to this
citation. Will the other threatened citations be in this sort? Time will
discover. I proceed. It had been convenient M. Rider, that you did show some
authority for your saying, the showing of the Lords death to consist in
preaching and expownding some Scripture: For Christ, and his Apostles, and the
primative church, practiced the administration of this Sacrament before any of
the new testament was written. And if, as you say, Abraham communicated; the
old testament also then wanted. So that either your Scripture here mentioned,
must not be any part of the bible: or else you overthrow your saying in the 46.
number, that Abraham (in whose time there was no Scripture) communicated by
faith, as also all other faithful: and that Christ, his Apostles, and
primative Church were not of your persuasion, in whose time nothing of the new
testament was vulgarly exstant.

88. Riders.
And this condemns your showing of Christ his death by such idle gestures and
dumb shows, without any glorification of GODS name, or edification of Christ
his people, that I dare boldly say, and so God willing will plainly prove
that from your first Introibo ad Altar Dei, which is the beginning of your
Mass, until you come to the last line, Ite missa est, there is nothing but
magical superstition, heresy and idolatry, without verity or antiquity.
Now let the Catholics judge what wrong is done them, when in stead of a
confortable declaration of the Lords death, they have a histrionicall dumb
show, without true signification or sense warranted from Christ's truth. And
whereas you exclaim against us, for allowing tropes and Sacramental phrases in
the handling of this controversy: if you had not concealed this phrase, This
cup is the new Testament in my blood, the Catholics might have seen your
error, and that we in so doing, only immitate Christ, whom you should rather
follow then the precepts and doctrine of men, whose precepts are no warrants
for you nor me to build our faith upon: nor for the Catholics to imitate. And
you with us must either say that Christ used a double figure, or else most
absurdly confess, that not only the wine is transubstantiated and changed
into Christ's last Testament: but that the challice or cup is transubstantiated
into his last testament, and is his testament substantiallie, properly, and
realie, the accidents of the challice only remaining: that is to say, the
height, depth, weight, colors, etc.

Of his cruel threat against the Mass.
Fitzsimon.
88. I Trust M. Rider, you will not be so ill as your word. Will you show in
all the mass, from the first word to the last, there is nothing but magical
superstition, heresy, and idolatry? Is the Psalm of David, Iudica me Deus;
the song of the Angels, glory be to God on high; all the Epistles, and
Gospells, being parcels of scripture; the creed of the first Council of Nice;
the institution of Christ, our Lords prayer (which are all included betwixt the
first and last words of the mass) but either superstition, or heresy, or
idolatry? What spark of Christianity could be in his breast, what hands could
wryt, that David, the Angels, the Evangelists, and our dear Lord and Saluiour
Jesus Christ, had committed superstition, or heresy, or idolatry? For it is
impossible to prove all from Introib^, to Ite missa est, to be such; unless
also this other savage blasphemy against Prophets, Angels, And the Lord of all
Saints, be infallibly proved. But soft M. Rider, your time is not yet come to
abolishe, judge sacrificium, Dan. 8. v. 12. c. 12. v. 11. S. Iren. con. her. l.
4. c 32. S. Chrysostom. ho. 49. in Math S. Hippolyt. orat. de consum. saeculi.
Isa. 16.6.
the daily sacrifice, which is reserved (as the Scripturs and Fathers affirm)
to Antichrist; and yet not to abolish it, but that the frequent use thereof shall
cease in his time. Of M. Rider, and every other petty adversary of the Mass,
may be applied the saying of the Prophet Isaie: Superbia eius, and arrogantia
eius and indignatio eius, plus quam fortitudo eius: his pride his arrogancy,
and his indignation, is more (against this invincible sacrifice) then his
strength. For hell gates can not prevail against the faith, whose principal
act, and obligation is this sacrifice of the Mass. I trust in Gods mercy
before I dye, to justify the least syllable, and parcel thereof, against the
said gates, and all thereto belonging; which is a contradiction of what M. Rider
threatens.

Rider.
89. Now if you cannot deny a figure in the challice, how dare you for the like
or worse inconvenience deny it in the bread. This you thought to omit, hoping
thereby to cover this your error. But it was ill done to deceive the
Catholics, who so liberally relieve you, and so dearly have loved you. And
whereas you translate, challice for cup, telling the people that the challice
consecrated by you, is holier then other usual cups, and that Christ used in
the institution a challice, and no usual drinking cup.

89. Here is an argument; that there is a figure concerning the cupp: Fitzsimon.
ergo also concerning the bread. I answer out of S. Augustine, S. August. c.
31. Super Genes. ad. lit. l. 11.
For the translation of one word, the whole sentence owght not to be taken
figuratively. As for example of the new disciples going to Emaus, is said their
eyes were opened; which is to be understood figuratively, for they were nether
blind, wynking, nor a sleep before: but the residue, Luc. 24.
that they knew Christ etc. is to be understood properly, and literaly. In this
point of M. Rider, Besa in c. 26. Mat. v. 26.
because the cupp stands for what is in the cupp (as Beza confesses; vulgata
and trita omnibus linguis consuetudine loquendi; in the common meaning of all
tongs little or nothing differing from a propre speech; Math. 26. Mar. 14.
as also because by two Evangelists Matthew and Mark, it is specified expressly
in a literal and propre sense, by these words, This is my blood of the new
testament; no such matter being observed of bread, but all circumstances,
precedent, concomitant, subsequent, manifesting the literal and propre
signification thereof) there is no sequel or censequence in the world in the
foresaid argument. For the liberality of Catholics toward us, it being said of
exorbitant envy, I leave to the prophet Ezechiel, in his 24. chap. 18. and 19.
verse, to replye unto it.

90. I say in saying thus, you show your self ignorant in the Greek tongue,
Rider.
wherein Christ spoke it, and the Evangelists writ it: Poter^on.
for they all, and so has Paul but one usual word which signifies a usual
drinking cup, and no charmed Challice, as you ydlie and vainly inform the
Catholics.

And now to your 27. verse, which you would couple to your 24. verse, which
thus you recite very corruptly, who so does eat unworthily, etc. shall be
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, but if you had meant plainly and
truly, you should have recited all the Apostles words in this manner:
whosoever shall eat this bread and drink this cup of the Lord, unworthily,
shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

Whether Chalices were aunciently consecrated, and of what matter they were
made.
90. I Told you often, Fitzsimon.
you would carry your empty cruse so often to the greek stream, that it would
come home broken. What, did Christ ever speak greek? In what greeking will
all scholars think your head to have been, that will read this? Certainly,
Christ, Son of the B. Virgin, borne in Bethelem, living in Palestim or
Iewrie, suffering by Jerusalem, was never yet said by any of reading, or
reason, or wanting reading and reason, to have spoken greek. Without further
hissing at it, (so many other no less, The 82. vntuth.
yea far greater occasions presented to do the like) let it stand for the 82.
untruth, and so remain. Yet this appeal to the greek, is not so to be
dismissed. First our advantages in the greek are specified and assuredly proved
in the preff. of the Remish testament. So that they are superfluous to be
repeated by him who follows greatest brevity, and escheweth borrowed
ornaments. Secondly, who are not the Adders mentioned in the psalmist, may
understand, that nether greek nor latin, but wilful corruption, is the cause
of sectarists, excepting against the sacred Scripture now in this language, now
in that. As for example in their Bibles of the years 1579. 1580. nether greek
nor latin obtained of them, to putt S. Paul's name before the Epistle to the
Hebrews. Some time against Greek and Latin, they demand: to what purpose
should the holy Ghost, or Luke, add this? Some time against Greek and Latin,
Beza. Act. 8. v. 26.
they confess wilful deprauation, as Beza Mat. 10. v. 2. anno 1556. against
the primacie of S. Peter: And Luke 22 v. 20. Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 14. n. 26.
l. c 3. n. 10. in Ps. 58.
against the real presence: as also Acts 3.21. and Luke 1.6. against
justification: etc. So that Greek against Latin, is a bare pretense, and
corruption only is by them intended.

For the blessinge and consecratinge (fie upon this profane term S. August.
l 3. con. Cresen. c. 29. and in Psalm. 113.
S. August. who by Caluins testimony, is, fidelissimus, atque optimus testis
antiquitatis; the most faithful and principal witness of antiquity (
corypheus theologoru^; the ringleader of Divines, as they can not deny) thus
writes; Sed et nos pleraque instrumenta and vasa, ex auro et argento habemus
in vsum celebrandoru^ Sacramentorum, quae ipso ministerio consecrata, sancta
dicuntur, But we have the most part of our instruments, and vessels, belonging
to the administringe of the Sacraments, of gould and silver, which by their
very application, are caled holy. They were so rich in time of grace and
charity, Theodoret l. 3. cap. 11. Vid^ Prudent, de S. Lauren.
as that pagan Emperors, and their Secritaries, in admiration cried out; Ecce
quam sumptuosis vasis filio Mariae ministratur? Behold in what sumptuous
vessels, they honor the son of Marie? But one word more of this matter,
out of Theophilact, Theophil. in cap 14. Marci.
saying. Qui igitur abstulerit discum pretiosum, et cogit vt corpus Christi in
vili ponatur, pretexens scilicet pauperes, intelligat cuius partis sit. He that
will take away the precious plate, and force that the body of Christ, be placed
on a more abject, pretending forsooth the poor: let him know of whose faction
he is: namelye of Judas, as he says, who found fault with cost bestowed, for
like pretense, on Christ. But are the sanctified, justified, and elected
reformers, culpable in this point? Let one of them selves, and he of the
cheifest inform the truth. Clebitius in sua victoria veritatu, and ruma
papatus saxonici argum. 14.
Clebitius therefore chief Zuinglian minister of Heidelberg, writes this of
Heshusius: When the silver pixes were moulten and made away, he caused others
to be made of woodd, and reserved his eucharistical bread in a wodden one, and
the same so sluttish, as was not good inowgh for a cowheard to putt his butter
in it. For the antiquity of pixes, Calu. l. 4. Instit. c. 17. n. 39.
Calvin assures, first Church, and first Christianity to have allowed, and
beloved them. Behold, how contrarious to all christianity, yet how courageous
is M. Rider? how comfortable in him self, and his brethren to Judas his
pretenses, yet how aduenturous to seem a reformer of abuses?

91. Out of which I observe, that you would cover, Rider.
Bread remains after Consecration and therefore no carnal presence. and
likewise the Cup and therefore noe Transubstantiation in either.
and conceal that which overthrows your carnal presence: for if bread
remain after consecration, then there is no carnal presence, but bread
remains after consecration, therefore there is no carnal presence And because
this verse shweth to the world that there is bread after consecration,
therefore you cut off that part of the verse, which is very deceitfully done.
And leave this word bread out after consecration, to blind the eyes of the
simple And also you cut off the next words, to cover other two errors, the
words be these Or drink the Chalice of the Lord vnvvorthely.

91. When I make a Puritan treatise, Fitzsimon,
representing (as I said in the 76. number) the frogg-galyard; rebownding up
and down from one point to another, without ever following, either one tune, or
tenoure; I will not cowche, or comprise that which is precisely pertinent, but
follow and allege testimonies of all colors. But being of other
determination and having a particular controversy to examine; as now only of
the real, and substantial presence, of Christ's body, and not of communion under
both forms, or the like; I thought good, (as men when they make a nosegay, do
not collect all herbs therein, but such as are sufficient for sent, and
variety, to that present use) to dwell in my text, and only to cumble, or
gather, what belonged properly to that one point in question, without rangeing,
prolixitie, or tergiuersation. Is this a fault? If it be; there was never
allowable writer, but both omitted it, and commended it. Well, what stuff is
now objected against us. Mary S. Paul speaking of the Sacrament, names it
still bread: therefore it is not Christ's natural body. I am fully persuaded, this
objection to be so answered in the 56. number, and in the 62. that the
repetition of Riders objection in this place, Vide number. 118.
is rather to blott paper, to fill empty place, to cauil, and delude, then for
any difficulty remaining therein. For there I showed by several Scripturs,
things to bear the name of what they are representations, Tob. 2. Exodus 7.
Genesis 19. Joan. 2. Genesis 2.
or from what they were changed: as Raphael is called a young man; a Serpent is
called a rod, a pillar of salt is called Lotts wife; wine is called water;
Eua is called a bone of Adam, and fleash of his fleash. So here Christ's body is
called bread, both for the representation, and for being made of bread, or
succeeding the substance of bread: yet clearly in this place, is it expressed
(not with standing such name) to be the body of Christ, by saying, 1. Cor. 11.
that, by eating this bread, and drinking this cupp unworthily, they are
guilty of the body and blood of Christ himself; because they did not discern
the body of our Lord: his body which was to be delivered to death, etc. All
which significations uttered by S. Paul, in the same place to certify the name
of bread, not to specify bread, but Christ's body: this objection may be
thought out of date, and as a cracked grot not lawful, or current any longer.
Because not to any desert of M. Riders trauails, but to Jesus Christ, I deuote
my time employed in this answer, I will now beyond sufficiency in this cause,
tender these words of S. Cyrill of Jerusalem, in Catechesi, mystagogica 4.
Non sic attendas haec velim tanquam sint nudi, and simplex panis, nudum and
simplex vinum: corpus enim sunt and sanguis Christi. Nam etsi sensus aliud tibi
renuntiat, fides tamen te confirmet. I would not have you conceive that it is
bare and simple bread, bare and simple wine: for although thy sense conceive
otherwise, yet let thy faith confirm thee. So that how soever bread be named,
or appear bread to the senses, yet the thing so called is assured to be
Christ's sacred body,

But it is expedient to have M. Rider him self brought to disable his own
objection. He then in the 62. number thus speaks. It is the usual manner of
the holy Ghost in all Sacraments both of the old testament, Ca^eat. numb. 62.
and new, to term the visible sign by the name of the thing signified, as
Circumscision (it is his, orthographie so to write) is called the covenant etc.
graced by the holy Ghost, (says he) with the names of things they represent,
and confirm. If it be the usual manner of the holy Ghost to grace the visible
sign, with the names of things they represent, how is it not M. Rider your 83.
The 83. untruth.
untruth, by your own disproofe of your self, that the B. Sacrament
contains nothing but bread, because for representing bread, it is called
bread. As stale, and frivolous, is this other reiterated shift, to say; you
should have recited this, and that; you would cover, and conceal, this, and
that; you cut off deceitfully this, and that, etc. For what belldam, or bedlam
conceit, but might do as much? to wit, to follow headlong a naked refuge,
which nether covers, not defends them, but makes their want, and misery
more notoriouse? More of this you may find in the 43. number.

92. Out of which I note, first, that you keep this back, Rider.
hopinge thereby to establish your half communion under one kind,
Concomitancie some what younger the^ your Transubstantiation both forged by your
selves never known in Christ's Church for a 1000. years at least.
that the Catholics might think that the receuinge of bread were sufficient,
because (you say) Christ's body must needs, even by the ncessitie of
concommitancie, have blood in it, and therefore it is no need to receive the
cup: which if it be true, (but I am sure it is most false) then Christ was
deceived in his wisdom and the Apostles and primitive Church in their
practice, which I hope you dare not say for sin and shame. And therefore give
over these irreligious practices of Additions, Subtractions, Interpositions,
and vain expositions, with new Inkhorne-termes of concomitancie, and confess
Christ his ancient and Apostolical truth truly.

92. It appearing in the precedent number, that my leauings out, Fitzsimon.
cuttings by the wast, dismembrings etc. proceeds by my auerring, the one
only point in question, of Christ's real presence, and avoiding all diuagations,
impertinent to that point, for brevity and plain dealing: it must follow,
that all these reprehensions, are but parerga, or digressions to dazell the
Readers eyes, that under such mist he may clinche, and sneake away, from the
matter, without being perceived. Of the Communion under both kynds; he tendreth
after occasion to answer it among the parliament 6. articles. Therefore,
because, frustra fit per plura, quod potest eque been fieri per pauciora; in
vain should we answer twyse, when one answer may suffice: it shall be remitted
thither. That Christ's body should by concomitancie have his blood conjoined
with it; he saying, it is most false, must infallibly make up the 84. untruth.
The 84. untruth.
For concomitancie being by natural signification, only a conjoined
fellowshipp; our Saluiour Christ having a true natural body, to which blood
naturaly is conjoined in fellowshipp; it must consequently follow, that it has
blood by concomitancie, especialy at all other times, then during his passion
and death. But this shows, that M. Rider is persuaded with the residue in the
14. number of the examination, that Christ's blood is putrifyed on earth, and
was never resumpted by Christ at his resurrection. I know M. Rider for the most
part as soon as your words are uttered, from whom they are, and upon whom they
are builded. In this among the rest, I am not ignorant, that Calvin is your
teacher. In him you fownd (in cap. 26. Math. v. 27.) affirmed: they are
furiously madd, who affirm any blood to be longer conjoined with Christ's
fleash. You there upon being fearful to be furiously madd, denied the
concomitancie or conjunction of Christ's blood with his fleash. But as the
Scripture fortowld, Prouer. 1. God does laugh you to scorn since that which
you feared is fallen upon you; For by denying this concomitancie, or
conjunction, of Christ's blood, with his fleash, you are indeed known furiously
mad, to al them who do not beeleeue the price of our redemption, to have
been corruptible; or to have perrished, and never been resumpted again. Such
are al worthy to be called Christians. Therefore beware of being bound, and
left by concomitancie, among the Bedlamits. Of his argument, if there be
concomitancie, then Christ was deceived etc. As he leaves it unproven, so I
will leave it vnfollowed.

Rider. And therefore they are to new to be Catholic and to strange to be true.
93. Thus much to give the Catholics a taste of the wrongs you offer them, it
lulling them asleep in the cradle of ignorance and superstition, whereas they
would be most willing and ready to obey the ancient, Revel. 14.6. Romans
1.16.2. These. 1.8. The Text is the Lord, not Christ, the writer mistook it,
the Author I blame not.
powerful, and everlasting Gospel of Jesus Christ, if you did not mislead
them by your wilful errors, and keep back from them the reading of the
Scriptures, which holds them and hardens them in Recusancie. But take heed,
least you by this ignorance in which you keep them, and the disobedience to
the Gospel in which you fetter them, you with them and for them, hazard not
that doleful taste and torment prepared for wilful ignorant Recusants of
Christ his Gospel, where it is said: Rendering vengeance in flaming fire to
them that know not God, nor obey not the gospel of Jesus Christ. Now
Gentlemen, if you be authors of their sins, you must be partakers of their
punishments: which both the Lord is mercy prevent. Now follows another part
of your proof drawn out of a part of the 37. verse, in these words: Shall be
guilty of the body and blood of Christ:

Out of these words some late writers since your transubstansiation was
invented would prove two vain questions that are in controversy betwixt you
and us.

1. The first, is your carnal presence of Christ in the Sacrament.

The second, that the wicked do eat the body and drink the blood of Christ.

In handling and aunswering these. I shall hardly sever the one from the
other, b^^ as you infer, that the granting of the one confirms the other:
So must I in confuting the one destroy the other, and so one answer will
serve to confute both.

Fitzsimon. 1. and 2. Elench. 5.
39. There is in sophistry a caption, called, Captio eius quod simpliciter
dicitur, et secundum quid; whereby deceitfully one would reason, as in this
manner: If you be a thief, you are to be executed: but you may be a thief:
therefore you are to be executed. He proves, one, who may be, and may be not a
thief, should absolutely be executed, as if it were out of controversy that he
were a thief. This falacie, is most incident with M. Rider against us, as in
the 91. in this, and the next numbers, abundantly appears. For example. If
bread remain after consecration, then there is no carnal presence: but bread
remains after consecration: therefore there is no carnal presence. Here is an
absolute conclusion upon a conditional proposition, if bread remain etc. which
yet in Luthers opinion of companation, would be false. The other proposition,
is deceytfully supposed true, beyond all controversy, that bread remains
etc. A second: If you be autheurs of their synns, you must be partakers of
their punishment: but (as he deceytfully supposes, or rather, as I think in
my conscience, dissembleth to suppose) we are autheurs of their synns, which
being in controversy, one only proof had been requisite in form of argument:
but that at his hands were to seek woolle at the goats house) therefore etc. If
Mennon Darius lieutenant against Alexander, were among such compagnions; how
often should he be occasioned to cudgel or bastonad them, as he did one of his
sowldiours, reuiling, and reprehending the Macedonians; saying. I keep thee to
fight, and not to scould. For if Memnon like you bereave them of their railing
reasoning; that you keep people in ignorance; that you will taste, as recusants
of Christ's gospel, vengeance in flaming fire; and other such fanatical naked
reproaches; Other fighting of their learning, you need as little fear, as hurt
from a serpent, whose sting, and teeth, are taken away.

94. Thus you record to the worlds wonder, Rider. Rhem: Test. 1. Cor. 11. Sect.
16.
(and Rome and Rhemes shame) against God, Christ Scriptures, and Fathers, that
ill livers and Infidels, eat the body and drink the blood of Christ in the
Sacrament, and your reason there follows: that they could not be guilty of
that they received not, and that it could not be so heinous an offense, for
any man to receive a piece of bread or a cup of wine though they were a true
Sacrament. First, old father Origin shall answer you, who says, Est verus
cibus quem nemo malus potest edere: Origin super Math. 15. page. 27.
It is true meat which no wicked man can eat. Here Origin condemns the
Rhemists, Romanists, and all late Priests and Jesuits, for holding this
opinion injurious to Christ's death, and all true Catholics faith.

But you may object against Origin, and say, the Rhemists laid down their
opinion, and gave reasons to confirm it: But where is Origens reason by which
he proves this former position, that no wicked man can eat Christ's body?
Super Math. 26.
forsooth it is in his Comentarie upon your text, brought forth of matthew in
these words: Panis quem filius Dei corpus suum esse dicis, verbum est
nutritorium animarum: the bread which the Son of God said to be his body, is
the nourishing word of our souls.

Out of which this we gather, that seeing this bread or meat is the
nourishment of our souls, and not of our bodies, he spoke of the heavenly
part of the sacrament. For we know in common sense, that bread and wine cannot
nourish the soul, but the body, and I have proved by scriptures and Fathers
before, that the hand and mouth of the soul, is a lively and justifying
faith, which you and all your side cannot deny but the wicked want. Now if the
wicked have no mouth nor stomach to receive this spiritual food, and digest
it, as the foresaid Fathers have affirmed, why do you say, that the wicked and
Infidels can eat the body of Christ, wanting both hands, mouth, and stomach?

And the scriptures call wicked men dead men: Now you know dead men cannot eat
meat corporal, Chrysostom. Hom. 60. ad pop. Antioch.
no more can the wicked which are dead spirituallie, eat meat celestial. And
Chrysostom says, Let no Judas stand to, no covetous person, if any be a
disciple, let him be present, for this Table receives no such as Judas, or
Magus, for Christ says, I keep my Passover with my disciples.

And to conclude with Augustine, Tract. 26. super Ioh. page 175. Qui non manet
in Christo and in quo non manet Christus pro^ul dubio, etc. He that abides not
in Christ, and in whom Christ abides not, out of doubt eats not spirituallie
his flesh, nor drinks his blood, although carnally and visiblie he press
with his teeth the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, but rather
eats and drinks the Sacrament of so great a thing to his judgment, and the
reason follows, Quia immundus. etc. because he is unclean in heart, and
presumes to come to the Sacrament of Christ, which no man can worthily
receive, unless he be pure and clean in heart: as Christ says, Mat. 5.
Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God.

Out of Augustine I observe against both your opinions these things.

First, he makes a difference of Christ's flesh and the Sacrament of Christ's
flesh, for they be two things, and to be distinguished with their several
substances and properties, and not to be confounded or transubstantiated one
into the other, and so the nature of bread perish, as you untruely imagine and
teach.

Secondly, that the wicked receive and grind with their teeth, and swallow
with throat the outward Sacrament, that is, the outward visible creatures of
bread and wine, Acts. 15.9.
to their judgment or condemnation, because they presume to come without a
clean heart and conscience purified by faith. But the godly eat the heavenly
part of the Sacrament: which is Christ with his benefits, because they dwell in
Christ (by faith) and Christ in them (by his spirit) as has been plainly
handled before.

Part. 3. distinct. 2. cap. 65.
And now I will be bold to urge your own Popes decrees against you: Qui
discordat a Christo etc. whosoever dissenteth from Christ, does neither eat
his flesh nor drink his blood, but the wicked dissent from Christ, therefore
they neither eat Christ's flesh nor drink his blood. And cap. 69. following:
quicunque panem, etc. Whosoever eats this bread the Lord, shall live forever,
but the wicked live not for ever, therefore the wicked eat not this bread the
Lord.

Now Gentlemen, I would feign see how you can dissprooue these Fathers and old
Popes, and satisfy the Catholics in this case: but I shall have a fit place
to speak of the unreasonableness of this opinion in the title of the Mass,
where I must show to the Catholics, the Popes, Priests, and Jesuits
shameful opinions, that you think it no incouenience not only for the
wicked, but also for all such bruit beasts, as cats or dogs, rats or mice, hogs
or swine, to eat the blessed body, and drink the precious blood of Jesus
Christ.

Whether the wicked may receive Christ or not.
Fitzsimon. The 85. untruth.
94. WHat a ful-mouthe word [worlds wonder] is the 85. untruth thrust out
withal, that the wicked receive not the body of Christ? Could ever honest, or
other, countenance a true complaint better, then Putifars wife, or the false
harlot before Solomon, or the wicked Judges, their false accusations? Blame me,
if M. Rider be not here, and every where, found accessorie in like eloquence; to
wit, in most deceitful vehemency, iustifyinge a falshoode, which is by him
self, and al others, for such accounted. For to be truly acquainted with the
truth herein, whether the wicked receive the whole Sacrament; understand the
doctrine of Gods Church, to be expressed in this controversy, above a thousand
years paste (although M. Rider immediatelye before says, S. Gregorius. S.
August. l. co^. Fulg. Donat. c. 6. Idem. l. 2 con. Lit. Petil. c. 40. In Psalm.
10. Theodoret. 1. Cor. c. 11. S. Chrysostom. ho. 8. in Math. in. cap. 11. 1. Cor.
Ser. 3. in c. 1. ad Ephesians. etc. S. Hieron. in Psalm. 54.
that it is an invention of late writers) by S. Gregory, saing. Est quidem in
peccatoribus, et indigne sumentibus, vera Christi caro, and verus sanguis; sed
essentia, non salubri efficientia; The true fleash of Christ, and true blood,
is certainly in sinners, and unworthy receauers; but in essence, and not in
healthful efficacy. S. Augustine more ancient, said. Judas the traitoure
received the body of Christ, and Simon Magus, the good Baptism: but because
they used not well the good, by using it ill, they perished. The same doctrine
he else where manifouldly inculcateth. Theodoret Bishope, about the same time,
said. Jesus Christ did not only give his precious body and blood to eleauen
Apostles, but also to Judas the traitor. By S. Chrisostom is said; The
traitor was made partaker of divine presents. He also of this matter, has
written certain express homilies, plentifully containing, Judas to have
received the B. Sacrament. By S. Hierom; Cibus dulcis est corpus Christi, quod
ipse accipit indignus; Sweet meat is the body of Christ, which he (Judas)
received unworthily.

What need I any witness to convict the 86. The 86. untruth.
untruth in this matter, then M. Rider against him self? Who so often is made
to overthrow him self, that he confirms the saying of Gods holy word.
Micheae l. 7.6. Math. 10.25.
Inimici hominis domestici eius. The enimyes of a man are his own
domesticalles. He then repeating soon after, S. Augustins words; that the
wicked press with their teeth, the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ,
thereby eateing them to their judgment, because they are unclean in heart. What
do we crave more, then that the wicked eat the Sacrament of Christ's body
and blood (and consequently not of his figure only) to their judgment? What
heaps of Doctors and Fathers, might I produce to auerre this doctrine, 1. Cor.
11.
if in this so clear a case (S. Paul so manifestlye auouching, those to be
guilty of the body and blood of our Lord, and to eat their own judgment
(not who did not believe in Christ, or who did abuse a figure of Christ (but
they who did eat and drink his body and blood unworthily, not discerning the
body of Christ) the few testimonies here alleged, and M. Riders own
interpretation of S. Augustine, did not command me to forbear superfluity.
Origin produced by M. Rider, Origin. in Psalm. 37.
tells the 87, The 87. untruth. Origin. in Psalm. 37.
untruth to be, that he denies the wicked to communicate the B. Sacrament, he
saying to the wicked; Doste thou not fear to communicate the body of Christ,
approaching to the Eucharist, as if thou werst pure and clean, and as if there
were nothing in the unworthy? etc. Doste thou think that in all this, thou will avoid the indignation of God? Doste thou not remember what is written,
that for this cause many are become sick and feeble, yea and stricken to death?
Continually you behoulde, that M. Riders sayings, are true like dreams,
rather by being true contrariously, then as they were by him related.

The 88. untruth.
S. Chrisostom also, craves to have numbered, the 88. untruth, that he denies
the wicked, in that homily, to communicate Christ's true body; he only
exhorting, that they who should receive, would omit to be wicked; and to that
end heaping most goulden sentences to persuade them thereto. Is shame and
fidelity vanished out of the world? Can such Fathers, by any honest heart, be
wreasted to deny when they affirm; to affirm, when they deny? Aurifaber a
Protestant, Aurifaber apud Ministro machi^ page 7.
affirms; that Luther on a time complained, that; Post reuelatum euangelium,
virtus est occisa, iustitia oppressa, temperantia ligata, verita^a canibus
lacerata, fides clauda, nequitia quotidiana, deuotio pulsa, heresis relicta;
After the gospel (of pretended reformation) revealed, virtue is slain, justice
oppressed, temperance tied, truth torn by dogs, faith lame, wickedness
continual, devotion fled, heresy remaining. If Luther had known M. Riders
dealing among the rest; think you, would he not applaud to him self, that he
was become a prophet? S. Augustine (whom he by ignorance makes a Pope) claymeth
to have the 89. The 89. untruth.
untruth marked; because, in saying, he that dissenteth from Christ eats him
to his perdition (for as the gloss contains; mali accipiunt corpus de
virgin natum; the wicked receive the body borne of a virgin) he is made by M.
Rider absolutely to affirm, In cap. citatum a Ridero.
that the wicked does nether eathe his fleashe nor drink his blood. The 90.
The 90. untruth.
untruth is, that in the third chapter following, any such matter, as he
informs, is either contained, or mentioned. I leave, and report all
arbitrament, of such proceeding not only to all others, but even to my good
Reformer him self; especialy, if he be not in his furious, but in his merry
mood; wherein diverse times he acknowledges many trueths, whereof otherwise, he
had not been so liberal.

But I must confess by the way, that he affoordeth once a variety, That the
wicked have not a lively and justifying faith, as nether we, nor all our side
can deny. This caption or fallacy, is called; Captio plurimum interrogationum
vt vnius; of sundry demandes, as being all one; As if one would require: 1.
Elench. 4. Note well.
is Peter a man, and a woman? If you answer affirmatively, the Sophist
thereupon infers, that Peter is a woman: and if you answer negatiuely; he
infers, that Peter is not a man. So M. Rider knows, that we will not say,
that the wicked have a lively justifying faith (for how can they be justified
if they be wicked?) and he is not ignorant, but we would, and should say, that
wicked, people may have faith; or that they become not infidels, or heretics,
by every act of wickedness: and thereupon (as if these two were all one) he
infers, that we, and all our side, can not deny, but that they are without
faith, and dead men, and not able to eat spiritual meat etc. How they are
able to eat such meat, namely not to their benefit, but to their perdition, is
often towld, and contained in S. Gregory's words before alleged.

This sophistry of his being discovered, let me I pray you with your
license, try whether by good divinity, and Protestant suppositions, I be not
able to infer against him, that the wicked may eat the Sacrament. The first
of my Protestant suppositions, is; Zuinglius in epist. ad Eissingenses.
That to eat Christ, is to believe in Christ. Zuinglius says; Nos ex Dei
verbo asserimus, Christum edere, idem esse, quod in Christum credere. we by
the word of God do profess, to eat Christ, to be alone and to believe in
Christ. Calu. c. 6. v. 47. and l. 4. Instit. c. 17. n. 5. Calu. Catechism.
dominica 51.
Calvin says. We confess, that we eat Christ no other way, then by
beleeuinge. Again; In beleeuinge that Christ is dead for our redemption, and
is risen for our justification, our soul eats the body of Christ
spiritually. Robert Bruce says in his sermons. By faith, and a constant
persuasion, is the only way to eat the body and drink the blood of Christ
inwardly. Peter Martyr says the same; Bruce sermons page 74. P. Mart. part 3.
page 644. 647.
and M. Rider, and all the holy reformed Caluinian, and Zuinglian church. The
second Protestant supposition, is, that faith once had, can never be lost.
Bruce says in person of the rest; Faith once given by God, Page 279. Calu. l.
3. Instit. c. 2. n. 9. 10. 12. 12. 13.
can not be revoked again: whereof see manifould authors, alleged in our
examination of Protestantry toward the Creed, the 5. number. The third
Protestant supposition, is this; That Christ is as much received by hearing
the word preached, as by communion; nay more, says Peter Martyr: Neque vereor
dicere, multo etiam magis etc. I fear not to say, Martyr. con. Gardinerum
part 2. reg. 5. page 61. part 3. page 547. 644. 683.
rather much more by words, then by Sacraments. Of which I have amplye
treated number. 39.

Upon these three fundations, or suppositions, I thus infer. Who soever
believes the death and resurrection of Christ, do eat Christ: wicked people
do believe the death and resurrection of Christ: therefore wicked people do eat
Christ. The first proposition, or point, is out of the first supposition. The
second is out of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 13.
that wicked men may have, not only faith historical, but all faith (says he)
and thereby transferr mountayns (which is a degree beyond all protestant faith)
and deliver their bodies to be burned, 1. Cor. 13.4.
etc. Yet that they are so far from being justified, that they are nothing, In
prima hgura, modo 3.
that their faith is in vain; nihil prodest; it proffiteth him that has it
nothing. The former conclusion, infallibly follows the premises as being in
true form of argument. Secondly; Who soever may hear a sermon upon the
passion, may eat Christ: the wicked (as adulterers, theefs, murderers,
dronkards, etc.) may hear a sermon upon the passion: therefore they may eat
Christ. The first proposition is the very words delivered in the third
supposition. In cad. figura, and modo.
The second is known to all experience, and understanding; the third
infaillibly follows the premises. Thirdly, whosoever (having faith which can
not be lost (as they say) after it is received) believes; does eat Christ:
the wicked man, during the act of his wickedness, (as fornication etc.)
believes; for he can not loose his faith, as is supposed: therefore the wicked,
during the act of his wickedness, does eat Christ. Unless these be pregnant,
and forcible deductions, never were there any, in all learning hither to
affoorded as having the matter from them selves, and the form from Logic. Let
all humain protestants now beware, to follow such faith: whereby the eatinge of
Christ's body in this B. Sacrament, is so disgraced, as to be compared with
every Ministers preaching, and to be worthelye received, by every heinous
offender, so that he do but believe in Christ, and that, not only after his
wickedness, but duringe the very act it self.

Rider.
95. This you blush not to print, but I protest, my hand shakes and my heart
quakes to write it, because it is so monstrous and beastly a blasphemy to
that blessed body and that precious blood, that suffered and was shed for my
salvation.

Fitzsimon.
95. This tender hearted Gentleman (such he is now lately, by gods permission and
good S. Patrick) is shakinge, and quakinge, to deliver doctrine, by us, as he
says, printed; but indeed, only by him self forged. If he has hitherto been
found to misreport, Scriptures, Fathers, Doctors, and al monuments by him
produced when he had quoted their evidences; who will credit him, when he
quoteth nothing (which he fulfilleth perpetually, as often as any absurdity is
imputed to us) he having said, repeated, and surrepeated, that he would not
omit in all matters, to alleadg our authors, books, chapters, leaves, pages,
if not lines? The ommission of al which together in this place, The 91. untruth.
amounts, at least, to the 91. untruth. I will not forsake this my word of
greater courtesy, to follow the letter, in saing that for leaves, and lines, we
have nothing but leasings, or lies. To term this an untruth, is more
courteous, and expresses sufficiently the matter.

96. Now for this second part of your Remish note upon this place, which is,
Rider.
How can a man be guilty of Christ's body, if he touch not Christ's body?
Chrisost. Tom, 3. Hom. 60. and 61. de fumentibus indignae diuina and sancta
mysteria pracipus de caena Domini and de baptismate.
I had rather Chrysostom upon this text in one of his works should answer
you then I, his words be these: Nam si regiam contaminantes purpuram, similiter
puniuntur, sicut, etc. For if he that has disteined, violated, or polluted the
kings robes, whether it be of purple or some other matter, shall be as
severely in justice punished, as if he had rent them: Even so it shall be with
such as receive the Lords body im pura mente, with an unprepared and unclean
mind, they shall be punished with equal torments which such as nailed him to
the cross.

Out of which I observe, first, that Chrysostom condemns your carnal
presence and corporal eating, in telling you they must be eaten with the mind,
not with the mouth: but of this we have sufficiently spoken of before.

Secondly, by comparrison, he shows you how you may be guilty of treason
against the kings person (though he neither touch nor hurt his person) in
offering disgrace but to his garments, his person being absent. And as he that
contumeliously receives the princes seal (though of ware) is guilty of the
Majesty of the Prince, not which he receives, but which he despises: so he
that eats this bread, and drinks this cup of the Lord without due
preparation (as aforesaid) considering they are seals of Christ's promised
benefits, purchased in his bitter and blessed passion, commits high treason
against Christ: though in deed in substance they receive but bred and wine. And
as a man may be guilty of treason in renting, defacing, or clipping the kings
picture, seal, or coin, though the king be not locallie in place: so the
wicked in the Sacraments which are Christ seals, which being abused by them,
they are guilty of Gods judgments, though Christ be not enclosed locallie in
the bread and wine.

And what Chrysostom speaks here of the Lords Supper, the same he does of
Baptism, and says, a man may be as well guilty of the Lords body and blood
in co^temning Baptism, which is but a seal of his washing in the blood of
Christ, though he never washed but in water, and alleges Paul, Heb. 10 29,
saing, Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall be be worthy which treads
under foot the son of God, and counts the blood of the testament as an
unholy thing, etc. These Fathers have answered you, and I hope will satisfy
fully the indifferent Reader.

Now three sorts of men are guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. The first
are plain Atheists, that are without God or godliness in this present world,
and such eat this bread unworthily, and therefore are guilty of Christ's
body and blood.

2. The second sort have a historical faith, and a general knowledge, Three
sorts of me^ guilty of the Lords body.
and believe that whatsoever is taught in Gods book is true, but they lack
apprehension and application to make a particular and holy use of the same, and
therefore if such come and eat of this bread, they are guilty of the body
and blood of the Lord.

3. The third sort have a lively apprehending and applying faith, yet in their
life they slip and fall, yea sometimes very grieuouslie, yet they awake and
weep with Peter, and repent for the same. All these are said to eat
unworthily, but the first two sorts unto their condemnation.

The third sort for their faults, frailties, negligences, and undue
preparation, are in this life of the Lord corrected, least with the world they
should be damned. The two first sorts eats only the outward elements: the
last sort eats the body of Christ, and drinks the blood of Christ. And now
to your second proof out of Saint Paul.

Whether it be treason to break Images.
Fitzsimon.
96. IF (as he in this place affirms) a man may be guilty of treason in
renting, defaceing, or clipping the kings picture, seal, or coin, though the
king be not localy in place: then consequently and necessarily they must be
guilty of treason toward God, who rent, deface, or clipp his pictures, seals,
or coin. The necessity of such sequel, or inference, is apparent, considering
that any abuse, or contempt in the resemblance of a prince, is not more
injurious to a prince, then the like in a representation of God, is to God.
Nether was there other cause why God did punish Oza, 2. Reg. 6. and 13. but
profaning resemblances of him contained in the arc, and all others that
sacrilegiously misbehaued them selves not only toward his figures, yea
shadows, but also toward vessels, and ornaments, belonging to them. Now then
tell plainly, M. Rider, will you stand to your words, or recant them? what say
you? Never think, says S. Cyprian ep. 73. because you have once failed that
you should therefore blush to revoke. What say you, shall his discourse be
starling, or not?

Me think I behold you frowning, and fretting at me for seeming to VValer the
murderer, vnder-minister of Swoords, who hanged on a gibbet the picture of
Christ crucified, anno 1603. Then woe, and well away, to M. Rider, who only to
have stones to build an oven, to bake bread, (to impouerish bakers of the
city, not having idely or without price, seuenten hundred barrells of corn
yearly as he has,) pulled down the fair cross in S. Patricks, which all
others his predecessors of that profession had permitted unviolated, and to the
same use to have fire, pulled down all the trees therein. This sentence of his
given against him self, and brethren, made his own son, mense Maio, 1604.
when he attempted to pull down ane image, to be by Gods judgment, precipitated
from a height, and altogether crushed: and at the same time his servant to be
stricken with the plague, etc. This shows that it is noe greater treason
against a king to abuse and despise his picture, then against Christ to
profane and distroye his images? What needed this moth, to intermedle with the
candle of learning, whereby his wyngs are so often scortched? What needed him to
implie, that abusers of the communion (according to his surmise, being but a
bare representation of Christ) shall be punished with equal torments, with such
as nailed him on the Cross? Where then will the final Rende vous of
Protestants be, who have abused other his representations, images,
appellations, as well expressing his death, as the Protestant Sacrament? I can
not choose but say with the Poet.

Ingratum genus vestrum quicunque forenses
Admiramini plausus, Euripides Hecuba ex versione Gasparis Stiblini.
(vtinam non essetis mihi cogniti)
Qui nihil pensi habetis amicos laedere
Modo dicatis grata multitudini.
O hateful race of Mercenarie mates!
Searching applauds (o that I knew you not)
Not waying how you harm your friends throwgh hates;
So you the peoples itching ears befott.
If otherwise we be myndfull of Christ? Ochinus apud Andream Iurgiewicium in
bello quinti Euangelij page 102.
Ochinus resolves; Spiritu Dei, non Sacramentis, fidem confirmari; By the
spirit of God and not by Sacraments, faith to be confirmed. If seals be
accepted in stidd of Sacrament, because this word is not in Scripture, as your
brethren before determine: tell us so plainly, and we will not enforce you to
grawnt that your Supper of the Lord, (which your great Doctor P. Martyr says,
in respect of the time it is received, P. Martyr. in 1. Cor. c. 11. page 293.
294.
and of your empty stomachs, should with greater reason be called a breakfast
or dinner) is a Sacrament. Now as I told you before, such hate is conceived
already among the Reformers against this word Sacrament, as it is convenient
you abstain from it. For they say; Bruces sermons page 4. 126. VVestphal in
apol. page 5. Page 126.
about the ambiguitie of this word are risen many tragedies, which will not
cease, while the world lasts: that it is a name proceeding from mere folly of
man: that Carolostad utterly rejected it: and that you must be satisfied with
the word of seal; which says Bruce, God, and Christ have given to his
Apostle, etc. Only if this had been said before, not covertly, but plainly, and
sensiblye, we had never inueyed against your figurative Sacrament, Muscul. in
loc. con. c. de canan. 2. page 327.
but against your figurative seal. And then according to Musculus, had we been
never the nerer. For seal is not fownd so convenient to specifye your doctrine:
as appears by him in these words: the bread is the body of Christ nether
naturaly, nor personaly, nor realy, (mark good M. Rider) nor corporaly, nor,
yet spiritualy (again mark, I pray you for in the 62. number you are showed
to be a falconer and therefore may observe your game in your own phrase) nor
figuratively (good Sir attend) nor significatiuely (you will loose all your
opinion if you take not heed) restat post haec omnia, Westphal. loc. cit.
Clebitius in victoria veritatis and ruina Papa^us Saxonici argum. 12.
vt dicamus panemesse corpus Domini sacramentaliter: it remains after all
these, that we say the bread is the body of Christ sacramentaly. So that this
word Sacrament is nethet allowed, nor the word seal, retained, but Sacrament
says Westphalus, then only observed, when Caluinists may shift and lurk under
it, as in this case tearming it a brazen wall: being at all other times
disclaymed, as notes Clebitius.

Notwithstanding this foisting in of the new fangled word [Seal] [Sacrament]
(as else where against the words Christ, Church, Catholic) traditions,
preests, merit, good woorks, Romain, real, Trinity, consubstantial, Cross,
bless, etc. Yet you shall behold our Reformer, so Catonicaly to censure this
lightness, as if it had not been his, and his brethrens, but our fault. Sic
curios simulant, and bacchanalia viuunt. Yet mistake me not, that I seem to
dissalowe the word Seal in his natural signification knowinge that it is
found applied to Circumcision: Genesis 17.10. Romans 4.11.
but what I endeavor, is only, to tax this translation, of words out of the
owlde testament into the new, without al authority and occasion, to prepare a
way to exclude al Sacraments of the new testament, by proouing them of no
greater force, then the ceremonies of the old law, with whom they agree in
appellation. P. Martyr 1. Cor. 11.
His division of three sorts of faith, is borrowed out of Peter Martyr,
nothing belonginge to any matter in question, S. Chrysostom. hom. 45. in Joan.
nothing true, and containing nothing needful to be refuted. Lastly al his
former discourse out of S. Chrisostom of treason, by the violence toward the
picture, as much as toward the Prince in person; although it overthrows every
way, image-breakers, etc. yet how it overthrows the point in question, is
breefly to be declared. If says. S. Chrysostom, the defylers of the kings robe
be noe less then the tearers thereof punishable: what marvel, if unclean
consciences receiving the body of Christ, be as damnable as the crucifiers of
him? Whereby observe, how this makes against Protestancie: that the unclean
receive the very body of Christ: that it is more treason against Christ to
abuse this Sacrament, then against a king tear to a kings robe: it is no
less then to crucify him, 1. Cor. 10.16. The challice of benediction which
we bless, is it not the communication of the body of Christ: And the bread
which we bless, is it not the participation of his flesh.

97. GEntlemen, ye wrong the Apostles text: first in your abuse of words,
Rider. Verse. 21.
secondly in mistaking the sense. Your words be these, The challice of
benediction: Paul's words in Greek that must be judge betwixt us, and which we
do follow (if we will follow Christ) are these. The cup of thanksgiving. And
the holy Ghost so expounds his own meaning after, calling it poculum Domini,
the cup of the Lord. But you are much to be blamed of all good men, because you
had rather follow some late corrupt translation, and use some superstitious
inkhorne terms lately devised, and so forsake the old Apostolical phrase
which the holy Ghost uses in that holy tongue, and in which it is still
recorded for our instruction: either confess your ignorance in the Greek, or
your malice against the truth, that the Catholics be no longer seduced by
you, that long trusted in you and to your doctrine.

Again, you say, The bread which we bless, we say as Paul said, and the holy
Ghost pend, The bread which we break: Alas, alas, what sin do you
commit in thus seducing Christ's flock, and the Queens subjects, who hitherto
have builded their faith upon your bare words.

Is this plain dealing with Gods heritage? are you Catholic Priests? I pray
you certify the Catholics what tongue or translation has it thus as you pen
it, The bread which we bless: I tell you plainly, (yet in charity) that
you do belie the Text, falsify the tongue, and seek to keep the people in
blind ignorance, and superstitious palpable darkness, to their everlasting
condemnation, unless the Lord recall them, and they repent them. Paul's words
ar these in Greek, and so your own Hieroms translation has them; The bread
which we break. But you are so besotted with the crossing of your fingers,
which you tell the people is the true Catholic blessing, that you forget and
forgo the true blessinge of the cup which is the Apostolical thanksgeuing to
God for our redemption purchased in Christ's blood, whereof the cup is the true
sign.

Again, we say as the holy Ghost indicted it, and Paul writ it, The
communion of the body of Christ: you say as no learned man of the Greek text
ever said, Error in the sense of the Text Rhem. Testament. 1. Cor. 10. sect.
4.
the participation of his fleash. Thus much I have showed how untruly you
deal: First, in abusing the words of the Apostle: Secondly, in seducing and
deceauing the Catholics, Let here the charitable Catholics judge how you
will abuse their ears with fables that dare thus falsify the plain text.

Now come to show how you mistake the sense of the words in the text, seeking
by indirect wresting to make the text prove your error, which it denies in
flat terms and truth. For I assure the Catholics, that nor one word,
fillable, letter or title of this text once sounds of your carnal presence.

You follow the Rhemish, who in this place thus expounds the words of the
Apostle. The cup which we bless, that is to say, the challice of consecration
which we Apostles and priests by Christ's commission do consecrate, etc. and
afterward it follows, the Apostle expressly refers the benediction to the
Challice, and not to God, making the holy body and the communicating thereof,
the effect of the benediction. Now let me entreat you to answer me and the
Catholics, but these necessary question drawn out of this your own opinion.

1. First, by what scripture do you prove that you are Apostles?

2. Secondly, by what scripture do you prove that you are Priests?

3. Thirdly, by what scripture do you prove your commission to consecrate
Challices?

4. Fourthly, by what scripture do you prove, that the holy blood of Christ
is an effect of your benediction of the cup.

5. Lastly, by what scripture prove you that this blessing or thanksgiving is
referred to the Challice and not to God?

Apostles ye are not. Gall 1. 1. Cor. 9.1. 2. Acts. 9.15. Romans 1.2.
Unless you prove these points by canonical scriptures to be true, (which you
shall never do) they bind no man's conscience to believe them or you. Against
the first I thus object, that you are no Apostles, and thus I prove it. A true
Apostle must be called by Christ immediately, and that you are not. He must see
the Lord Jesus in the flesh, which you have not. He must have his immediate
commission from Christ to preach every where, which neither Priest, Semynarie,
Jesuit, Cardinal, not Pope can have, Gall. 2. Ephesians. 8.
as your own consciences full well does know, and therefore you are not
Christ's Apostles. The true Apostles were equal in authority, you disdain it,
nay more, you have made against this, a new article of the Popes supremacy,
and whole volumes of Cardinals Primacies, Jesuits Excellencies, and Priests
Soueraignties.

Tertulian. contra Marcion.
But I will say to you, as Tertullian said to Marcion the heretic: If you be
Prophets, foretell us some things to come: if that you be Apostles, preach every
where, and agree with the Apostles in doctrine. For whosoever preach not the
same doctrine the Apostles did, have not the same commission the Apostles had.
But you late Priests and Jesuits preach not the same doctrine the Apostles did:
Jesuits and Priests be no Apostles. Priests ye are not.

First, Because ye will not offer the flesh of beasts.


therefore you have not the same commission the Apostles had. The mayor has
not difficulty: the minor is so plain it needs no proof: the conclusion is
inevitable.

We read of four kinds of Priests in Gods Book: three of them in the old
Testament, and one in the new. The first after the order of Aaron: and one
other after the order of Melchisedech: and the third after the order of Baall.
After Aarons order you will not be: And after Melchisedechs you can not be: And
concerning the third order, I would you were as free from the ydolatrie of that
false order, as you would be free of the imputation of their heresies.

The last part of the Catholics proof by scripturs for the real Presence.
Fitzsimon.
97. A Serpent that is crushed in the head, wresteth, and wryeth him self up,
and down, infoulding his whole body into many vain circles and turnings;
withal his struggling purchasing nothing else, but that others may conceive the
extremity of his payns. M. Rider being wholly suppressed with this powerful
testimony of Scripture, S. Chrysostom. hom. 24. in 1. Cor.
(that the chalice of benediction (as S. Chrysostom also calls it) is, the
communion of the blood of Christ, and the bread a participation of his
fleashe;) with manyfowld wreathings tumbleth up, and down, to talk of all
by-maters, wishing us to prove that we are Apostles, that we are priests, that
chalices may be consecrated, that the holy blood of Christ is an effect of our
benediction, etc. But especialy he is trubled, that a word by us was
miswritten [blesse, for breake] exclayming at it, as at the most wicked
infidelity in the world. This is he who said in the 51. number, that he was
sorry that he must tell us our fault and yet here so carpeth at a fault of no
importance. This is he, who in telling it, commits ten times a greater
error then it. For first, even in this point and all his printed books, where
he should have said, the communication of the blood of Christ; he delivers
the communication, not of the blood but, of the body of Christ: and next the
very word bless, which he was now to reprehend; he delivers (as if he were
thinking upon some sister in the Lord of that name) Besse. I say nothing else
thereto, but that your Fidd (for so I think you are wont to name Fideworth your
wife) might inioye your mind alone, from all Besses and business, that your
bonds, and bragnes, can not brook; and consequently contain your homelines in
homely matters, without ingageing them in schole points, wherein even by your
phisnomie you are denied to have any interest. Such as is this confusion, he
sustained about the syllable [it] as appears in the 51. and 76. number: by
aggravating small and harmless tripps of the pen, and in that self same
reprehension, through Gods providence toward dissemblers, he, not only
tripping, but stumbling, and tumbling into grievous inconueniencies him self.

Concerning the perfection of the latin translation, and the excellency thereof
above any greek now extant, to much is said for any satisfaction due to M.
Rider: as also for the word Bless, and blessing of creaturs, and consecration
of chalices n. 90. (in which matter S. Cyprian speaks clearly, saying; Calix
solemni benedictione sacratus; S. Cyprian de cana Domini. Vide n. 101.
the chalice consecrated by solemn benediction) and other extrauagant
controversies, both sufficiently, and abundantly is already propounded both for
resolution concerning them, and for manifesting, that as weak, and bedred
people, never consist quiet, but turn from side to side seeking repose; so M.
Rider diuerteth from matter, to matter, to depestre and quiet his diseased, or
crased cause and conscience, never remaining on the point incontrouersie. I
would confute his saying in the margent, that only Christ was a priest
according Melchisedeches Order, if any one proof were brought to make it seem
probable. Against his bare saying, let it now suffice; that as long as either
Sacrifice, or Sacrament of bread and wine, remain by virtue of Christ's words,
do this in remembrance of me, so long must others besyd Christ, be priests
according the order of Melchisedech.

Rider. Secondly none after M^lchisedechs order but Christ only.
98. Now 1. Pet 29. Exodus 19.6.
Saint Peter in the new Testament sets down a fourth order of Priests which
is a kingly or royal Priesthood, but that is spiritual, not carnal, inward,
not outward, common to all believers, not proper (as you imagine) to any
natural order, or ecclesiastical function, For this is sound divinity, which
you shall never disprooue: that the office of sacrificets and sacrificing, is
either singular to Christ, in respect of his sacrifice propitiatory only
upon the cross: or else common to all true Christians, in respect of their
spiritual sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving: neither shall you ever find
this word Sacerdos, ever applied in the new Testament to any Ecclesiastical
order and function of men.

Fitzsimon.
98. Take notice, Right Honorable, of the Council, of this soul puritantcie of
equality or parisitie here vttred against all former, and later injunctions,
of our sovereign Princes, and all parliament statuts. Take notice also, Right
honorable L. Chancelour, (if there be any) and the rest of that sort, that M.
Rider here assures his ecclesiastical authority to be equal to yours. Take
lastly notice, all favorers and friends of Protestantcie, that Luther,
Zuinglius, Calvin, Latimer, etc. are here disauowed, and disclaymed, to be
either your Apostles, or to have had lawful commission, as nether seeing Christ
in fleash, nor haueing immediate commission from him. Here also is S. Paul
denied to be an Apostle, Act. 3.21.
unless he did see Christ in fleashe: if he did see him, here is condemned
that doctrine of Protestants, that heaven must contain Christ, so as, he could
be no where else till the day of judgment. Which doctrine Beza, (whom the
English bibles especialy of the years 1579. 1580. do most carefully follow)
confesses wittingly to have affirmed contrary to the Scripture in all greek
and latin copies, only to frustrat thereby (if he could) the real presence. For
if S. Paul did see Christ in heaven, (the nearest part of the lower heavens
being at lest 1700. miles off) it had been a great miracle, and as great to
behold him in fleash. Nether is such M. Riders meaning, but only them to be
lawful Apostles, who had seen him corporaly, and been conversant in fleash
with him. In which sense S. Paul so often assures this to be the 92. The 92.
untruth.
untruth, as he auerreth himself to be an Apostle; as also all others doing
the same: although in that sense of M. Rider, he never saw Christ in the
fleash.

A NECESSARY DIGRESSION CONTAINING A declaration, what Puritants are, what
they teach, and pretend.
1. Viret. dial. 3. alborit Daemonum.
IT was general in all late Reformers in their first revolt, for incuring the
peoples benevolence, to discommend the tyranie they were kept under by their
bishops: informing them, that such usurped authority being shaken off, as
being repugnant to the liberty purchased by Christ in his gospel, they showld
be free both from all terrors of eccleciastical cowrts and censures, recaue
into their hands, the Church liuinges, Confessed by Zuickius to Calvin, in
Caluins epistles. Epist. 33.
whereby they and al poor and needy poople, at their discretion, might be
relieved, yea and enriched. This plausible motion, buzzed from ear to ear,
the light people (inclined to sedition upon all motions of greater liberty, By
Calvin him self epist. 66. 108. Beza in tract. de tribus Episcoporum
generibus. Viret. dial. 3. alboru^ demonum.
(especialy supported by pretext of reformations, and love toward the word)
consented by heart, and hand, to advance such zealous Reformers, by whose
direction, they might so be exempted from superiors. These Compagnions,
fynding the time, and tide, favorable, spread their sails, discoursing and
exaggerating among the people; the pride, the superfluities, the tyrany, the
wickedness, the ignorance, and other corruptions of prelates: not sparing any
informations, true or false, public or secret, honest or dishonest, to make
them more odious.

2. These instigations, prevailed first about Spyre in Germany, Surius in an.
1502.
where the multitude made a watch-woord among them selves, containing, they
could, not be blessed by reason of the clergy. But those wanting expert and
resolut guids, Thomas Munzer, a quondam priest, Surius in Commentarijs. Luth.
tom. 7. in sermon. fol. 270. an. 1553.
and Luthers disciple, excited his auditors by word, and example, to second
him, and his fellow Phifer an apostat Moncke: who condiscending to these
perswaders not unwillingly, they presently entered into arms and destroyed in
one year two hundred Abbayes, and Castles in Franconia alone. And although, by
the princes armed against them, above a hundred thousand of them were slain,
and Munzer taken, and executed; yet this contagious fury (upon the same
persuasion of liberty to be purchased) took such rooting in France, Germany,
Denmark, and Scotland, that in France, in civil wars thereupon undertaken,
Lauat. hist. Fran. l. 9. fol. 208. an. 1568. Luth. l. de captiuitate Babil. c.
de sacr. ord. Calu l. 4. Instit. c. 20. Beza ep. 41. Zuingl. l. 4. ep. f. 186.
and li. 1. ar. 42.
in the space of three years, are confessed by principal Protestants, not so
few as a hundred thousand (judge thereby of the residue in all other places)
overthrown. The reformers animated them saying: it is a villainous thing,
unworthy, and wicked, that a Christian man, who is free, should be subject to
other laws then heavenly, and divine etc. Again, Princes are to be deposed,
and the government to be mere Aristocratical, that the people be only rulers of
them selves. And to inflame the people to aspyre to this dominion, were
dispersed in heaps seditious libells, and pamphlets; Iunius de potestate
principum and populi, Vindiciae cont. tyran, Alitia, Toc-sayn, Fureur des
Francois, Reueil matin, Council sacre. De iure reg. apud Scotos, De iure
magistratus in subd. Hotto Francog. etc. Whereupon, Vide Bucha^. l. 16. page
590. hist. Scot.
Magistrates were rejected; Emperors contemned, Kings deposed, restrained, and
slain; Queens expulsed; Contries, Cities, places fell to rebellion and
revolted, denying other then puritan tribute, to wit strokes, and Canon
shot: and that hurleburlie every where was excited, as vpsyde was down, laws
were abolished, slaves were Lords, as in the eyes, and monuments of France,
Scotland, Denmark, Flawndres, etc. is abundantly to all lamentation
perspicuous. Wherein, how sparing I am to aggrauat at full against Reformers, by
whom all such perturbations happened, I leave to such indyfferent understandings,
who are not ignorant of my acquaintance with autheurs treating hereof, and
other circumstances, yet not informing but what I do of them.

3. Among these commotions, the people in diverse Contryes, and places
recovering the foresaid liberty, some retained it in their own hands: others
resigned it willingly or unwillingly to their clergy: supposing they would use
themselves with all desyrable and religious moderation. In places where the
magistrate reserved it, and Ministers adventured to incroache into the public
administration against their wills, they were by the Magistrate, violently
extruded out of their charge, and Cities, as Heshusius, Wigandus, Illyricus,
Index, Faber etc. Of Heshusius is said, by Beza.

Beza con. Heshusium.
Quaeritur Heshusius, cur sexta pulsus ab vrbe est.
In promptu causa est, seditiosus erat.
From Cities six exiled, wayleth Heshus:
The cause is known he was seditious.
A Gantois, of t^ consistories in Hollande.
that they do suspect the (pretended good) form of ecclesiastical government;
First, because they fear, least it will degenerat into a worse tyranny, then
the spanishe inquisition; secondly, because they see a censuring of manners
without laws and lawful form of Justice.. In noe place they were so much
overtaken in their wisdom, as in Geneua, by the politic reach of Calvin;
who being admitted anno 1536. by only title of their preacher and teacher, he
most deceitfully insinuated him self over their government: and for being
therein too insolent and imperious, he was banished within nine months, Calvin
epist. 6.
together with his chief consorts, Farrel, and Viret, with this allegation;
Tiranni esse voluerunt in liberam ciuitatem, voluerunt nouum pontificatum
reuocare. They would have bin tyrants over a free city, they would have
revoked a new papacy. This Calvin him self confesses, tearming the Senate of
two hundred, by who^ he was so exiled; tumultuosam perditorum hominum
sactionem; Ibidem.
a tumultuous faction of damned companions. Yet, according to the depth of his
capacity he purchased such favorable commendatorie letters, of al reformed
places: he wrote so against Catholic religion; he dissembled such temperate
moderation; that within little more then two years after, he was revoked to his
former chardg of teaching in Geneua.

4. His fiirst favor was, to be licensed, to frame betwixt him self and
other Ministers, a form of ecclesiastical discipline: yet so, as to remitte it
to the consideration of the Senate, to be allowed or no. This form contaynd,
that twelve chief towns men, should be conjoined with six Ministers: those to
be changed yearly, these to be during life. Their Jurisdiction should extend
only to ecclesiastical causes. This form they entitled a consistory
discipline. It was no sooner viewed, and lightly approved, but the manner of it
and proceeding examined, in the Senate house, great dislyke was as soon
conceived against it. In so much, as Calvin confesses, in laboring to support
it, Calu. epist. 54. Calu. epist. 73. 82. 165.
he was almost oppressed. Also he complains of impediments, saying: we have
to many of a hard and untamed neck, by all occasions aspyring to shake of the
yoke, etc. But not withstanding all possible employments, in pulpits, public
and private conferences, suborning of suffrages: yet the Magistrate suspended the
execution of this discipline, until they had consulted with other reformed
Churches. Wherein also Calvin beyond all comparison, ouermatched them. For he
prevented their informations, inueigled the states to whom they appealed,
beutifyed in such good colors, his foresaid Consistorial disciplyne, implored
the solicitation of the ministers there resident, disgraced so all repugners,
epist. 164 165.
and so, to be brief, frustrated all hindrances, that what by woorking abroad,
what by slye compassing at home, he purchased foreign resolutions, and the
Senats approbations, to his contentment. All this narration is contained in his
own Epistles: wherein is manifested, that never could any attempt be more
impugned, and yet by slightnes of his wit established, then this discipline.
This ecclesiastical authority, disalowed the name of Bishops, Priests, and
Canon law, exchanging them into teachers, Deacons, Elders, Consistorian
discipline, etc.

5. The cause of this repugnance against it, was first, by reason they
perceived, how all others besyds Calvin, served only for a show. Secondly,
because under the color of conscience, by degrees, all law, Read hereof the
order of Excommunication in Scotland. Ae 2.
all authority, all controversies were subjected to this consistorian
discipline. Thirdly, because all small matters, were aggrauated and punished,
more tyranicaly, then deservedly. One insta^ce I think good to inculcat, out
of Caluins own information. In one widow Baltasars house, daunced diverse of
the best of the City. Among whom was one of the four, that year in chief
office: as also a minister, Perrin the Captain of the town, etc. Calvin not
being invited to the sport him self, sommoned them all. Calvin. Farello
epist. 71.
They, for more sear, flatly denied the matter. Whereupon says Calvin,
impudenter nobis, and Deo, mentiti sunt; they impudently lied to us, and to
God. Behold by the way, how he prefers him self to God. He then adjured
them to confess their fault: but all in vain. After he tendered a corporal
oathe: which they refused. The conclusion was; Omnes in carcerem coniecti; all
were committed to prison; except the foresaid Captain, who trusting time would
pacify this angry Prince, retired. But, said he, quicquid agat, paenam non
effugiet; Whatsoever he did, he should not escape. Ibidem.
He being then returned, tasted of the same sower cupp. The issue was, says
Calvin him self, that the people perceived, nullam esse spem impunitatis, cum
primarijs non parcatur; there was noe escape, when the principal were not
spared.

I might here insert, how by the same holy consistorial discipline, Valentin
Gentil, Budneus in annot. Nou. test. ^on. Bezam.
and Michael Seruet, great Reformed preachers, and by Budneus called godly
searchers of the truth; for displeasing Calvin, and Beza, were put to death.
Fowerthly, what with it self, what with the abuses following, not only civil
Magistrates, but also Reforming preachers, Bullinger. ad quendam Episcop.
Angliae. 10. Mar. 1574.
otherwise Caluins friends, signified their great coffeehouse against the
foresaid discipline. Bullinger writes thus thereof. They imitate in my opinion
those seditious Tribuns of Rome, who by virtue of the Agrarian law, bestowed
the public goods, that they might enrich them selves: that is, that bishops
being overthrown, they might inioye their places, etc. Gualter ad Episc.
London. Ieem in epist. ad Episcop. ^lien. 26. Augusts 1574. Ide^ in ep. ad
Episcop Tands. Barlow in his book of the sum of the Conference before the
kings Majesty edit. an. 1605. page 37.
Gualter says; I greatly sear least they bring us, first into the government
of the multitude; which will shortly be converted in to the rule of a few; and
lastly end in a new Papacy. Again; I behold nothing to be more ambitious,
nothing more insolent, nothing more untoward, then these men etc. Again: many
do repent that ever they admitted these men's Council.

6. Omitting the scanning of an apt definition of a Puritan, given by one
Butler in Cambridge, that he is, a Protestant frayd out of his wits; I say upon
the premises that the Puritans now called in our co^tryes, are such, (as
repyning at all other ordo^nances, and injunctions of high parlaments, and of
their sovereign princes) endeavor by hook, and crook, to bring in this
form of presbiterie, and of Geneua Co^sistorian discipline, into England; with
exclusion of all other authority, Temporal, and Spiritual: as I am breefly to
manifest, by their own express protestations. But first I certify; The
begynners, not so peremptorily to have impugned such authority, as the
successors. For the first malcontented reformers with the state, seemed
conducted thereto, only by emulation: as Hooper and Rogers, who aspiring to be
equal with Cranmer, and Ridley disliked the communion book, published by them;
Fox acts and monuments Page 1355.
and set forth another of them selves: whereof, Fox is to be perused. These
were Puritans of the meaner sort, standing only upon tippett, cappe, rotchet,
and the oathe of supremacy. The next I find to have succeeded, was one
Samson, not he against whom Cardinal Pole wrote, Sander. l. 7. de visib.
Monarch. in anno 1563. Page 711.
but another who refused a thousand pound yearly, rather then he would be
conformable to the injunctions of late parlaments. The main pillars of
English Puritans, were, and are, Cartwright, Charke, Reynolds, Trauers,
Egerton, Gardener, Barber, Field, Gellibrand, Gilbie, Sparks, Knewstubs, and
Chaderton; etc. which three last; together with Reinolds, were the Agents and
Ambassadors, for the Millenarie malcontented faction, who became petitioners to
his Majesty. But of these foresaid, diverse recanted for there livings sake: that
now, God be praised, few, or none profess them selves of that coniuration,
because they sailed against the wind. Some others I could enumerate out of our
Dublinians: but because the title is become so infamous, I will not recompt
what Promotheans we have in Dublin.

Whereas therefore I promised by their own express protestations, to convict
them, to malign all other authority, beside their own, I am now to justify
my said promise, if first, I only acquaint their first manner, to come into the
good lyking of the people. In their gate, they affected a gravity. Their eyes
downward, unless by way of compassion, as at some abuse, they lifted up the
whyts of their eyes. Their appareil neat, and of precise quantity, and
quality. Their ruffs small. Their countenances sadd. Their words choice, and
of exquisit and rare novelty. You shall hear of nothing, but sanctified,
deifyed, angelical, super-celestial, thoughts, words, and deeds. Many sighs,
and groans, burst from them. Their reprehensions intermedled with many sugared
Apostrophes: Their exclamations chiefly against plurality of benifices,
marriage of the clergy, their ignorance, superfluities, etc. All their
conferences, to commend frugalitie, parilitie, modesty, and sobriety. Yet if
Barrowes, and Greenwood, Barrowes discovery Greenwood against Giffor.
their own brethren, be true; they are pernicious deceauers; (In all this
description of them by their own brethren, I will keep my hands clean)
glosing hypocrites with God; fasting pharisaical preachers, cownterfeit
prophets; pestilent seducers; sworn, waged, and marked disciples of
Antichrist; deluders, suborners, transformers of good consciences; of whom
Christ is to be understood, saying; Ye are they, who justify your selves
before men, Luc. 16.
but God knows your hearts: They are perfidious, and Apostat reformists;
precise dissemblers; Giddie, and presumptuous intermedlers, in all matters,
public and private; Stoical, and Cynical, watchmen over all actions etc.

7. To come now to my promise, to show their aspyring over all authority, and
that by their own confessions; (although I might bring, a royal, and real
demonstration thereof, out of the sum of Conference before mentioned, page 80.
81. 82. yet I think more dutyfully of the party then to grace Puritans, who
become insolent at the memory of their rebellious violence by having had power
to depose, and dispose of such potentats, with the least breath of his mouth)
First this complaint is confessed by Viret, one of the very fownders (as
appears in several epistles of Calvin) of the consistorian discipline. Viret.
dial. 3. alborum damonum.
The Ministers (says he) that have renownced the Church of Rome, in seeking to
get the Magistrates, and peoples favor (I crave good attendance to these
words, auerring my first declaration in this treatise) against the Pope,
Priests, and Moncks, disgraced so the state of preesthod and clergy, and
contrarywyse, exalted so the state of the Magistrate, that now they find the
smarte thereof. -- They overthrew a spiritual Pope, and erected a temporal Pope.
But I pray you give ear to a strange confession. Who so uses (says he) such
means to reform the sault of the Pope, does not reform, but deforme the
Church. Cartwright, the proto-puritan, in estimation, of England, presumed, and
trembled not, to say; As pastors can not be officers of the common wealth, no
more can the Magistrate, be called properly a Church officer. Else where he says:
the prince submitts his scepter unto the scepter of Christ, Cartwright Co^f.
cap. art. 23. lib. 2. page 420. Vide l. 1. page 180.
and lyckes the dust of the Churches feet. Which is more then ever was done to
Pope. This is rownd puritancie; one way, by showing an insolent pride; and
strange Puritancie another way, by speaking most mildly, when they intend most
ambitiously. Trauers in discourse of Ecclesiast. discipline page 148. 174. Knox
in his exhortat. to England. page 91. Vide Archibold Hamilton. in l. de
confusione Caluinistica. Rennecherius in psalm. 2. page 72.
Trauers his scholar subscribeth saying; Heathen Princes being converted to the
faith, receive no further increase of their power, whereby they may deal in
causes ecclesiastical, then they had before. Knox of Scotland, is most resolute
in this deposition of princes, saying; That all Princes ought to submit them
selves under the yoke of discipline. That what Prince, King, or Emperor
shall disanull the same, he is to be reputed Gods enemy, and to be held
unworthy to reign above his people. Yet, listen to more rownde and plain
dealing in this point. Rennecher says; The political empire is but a
subalterne regiment; and quasi inferius quoddam subsellium; A lower and
inferioure benche, to the consistorial discipline. By saying, it is but a
subalterne government, they intend, Erast. in farrag p. 36.
that Kings and Princes shall only be, honorable executioners (as Erastus
acknowledges) of their appointments. Against all princes, and their statuts,
concludes Martyn Mar-prelat; Martyn. sen. B. 4. C. 1.
That such laws as maintain Bishops, are no more estimable, then they which
maintain stews etc.

8. Their endeavor, to come to this supreme authority, is sometime by
incensing the people against the Magistrates statuts, sometime by hyperbolical
commendations of their discipline, as it, and no other, is to be thought the
express prescript, of Christ and true religion, all other discipline
disproued. Sometime by seditious Pamphlets, tending to make the state
established, and laws, odious, and ridiculous, as both tyranical, and
replenished, Two puritan preachers in Stamford.
with all superstitious defectiuenes. The Lord superintendent of Lincoln (as
all other commanders) opposed him self against the public puritanical fast:
as appears by a leter dated to the Aldermen of Stamford 5. of September in
the same year. Suddenly up started two puritan preachers, the first, said
openly; That without the warrant of fleashe and blood (understanding thereby the
magistrate) and of acts of parliament, they might proceed in their purpose. The
second; That he was of noe spirit who would respect any edicts of Queen,
Counsel, or Bishops: and that their proceeding was not hindered, but by
profane and carnal wretches. Concerning their commending this discipline to
the people understand these speeches follouing. Gilbie p. 211.
The wicked take part with our adversaries: but the Godly join with us. This
ecclesiastical discipline is the ouerseer and custos of the civil government,
Rennecherus p. 74.
that the magistrate does not command his subjects any thing, either contrary to
the Scripture, or against nature, and good manners. It would make men to
increase in wealth. ^ions to the par^^ent page 75. 74. 8. 79.
-- It would cut off contentions, and suits in law. The people should find
out the truth, and perfection of justice. It would bring strength and
victory. Are not these powerful prouocations to sedition? Are not these
dangerous dealings? Are not these compagnions, to be observed? I would be more
prolixe in this point (if the chronicles of Scotland, the two supplications to
the parliament, Cartwrights humble petition to her Majesty. His exhortation to
the gouernoure and people of Wales, The late supplication of a thousand
subscribed puritan Ministers to his sacred Majesty now regnant, The censure of
Oxford thereupon, Their proceeding before his said Majesty delivered out by
Barlow; their Martyn Mar-prelat, Mar-Martin; the work for the Cooper; the
cowntercuffe to Martin Junior; the howles almanach; the pap with hatchet, or
contry cuffe; the epistle to Huffe, Ruff, and Snuff; Hay-any work; Miles
Monop, and now their late Survey of the book of Common prayer, Printed anno
1606. without mention of the place. etc.) were not extant, to certify the
world of their rebellious intentions, and treacherous practices: whereby already
they restrained and endangered even our foresaid sovereign King James, and for
their so doing published a Iustificacation, It was printed an. 1582.
under the title of, A declaration of the just etc. professing the cause to
have been only, because (say they) the discipline of the Kirk wa^ openly
impugned, when as the King by the persuasion of the enemies of the kirk, was
induced to make him self, and his privy Cowncil, Judges in the cognition of
matters mere ecclesiastical etc. Out of which their hate against him, in their
foresaid Survey, they appeach him of perjury to make him odious forsooth
because he disaloweth their discipline, which by oath there expressed, he vowed
to mantayne. And what they did against our foresaid sacred King, the same they
did against other kings and princes, whereof one of them boasting writes to
such effect as follows. A prince of blood royal, overthrown as David was by
satan into sin, Trauers in his defense of Ecclesiastical Discipline. page
127.
endured to be rebuked by the servant of God, and lamented his offense openly
before the public assembly etc. -- Whose example both a crowned King, and
his son, have followed etc. How truly said the sacred Scripture; there is
nothing more insupportable, then the insolency of a slave gotten up in the
neck of his master. Alas, how far otherwise are princes respected by
Catholics, who are by these men (because it behooves to sclawnder with their
own connatural propriety, their adversaries, to prevent and anticipat a due
and ever deserved accusation) termed enemies to princely authority? I referr
the reader desirous to know our loialtie, and resolutions toward our princes,
to these our assertions.

First; Debere Reges curare etiam ea quae ad religionem pertinent; idque
excellentiori modo quam caeteri fideles possunt: nempe leges ferendo pro
veritate, Stapleton. de subject potestatu Ecclesiasticae cap. 20 Contr. 2. l.
5. page 196. H^^ding against the Apology. page 303. 306. 307. In his reioynder
fol. 379. Sander de visib. Monarc. lib. 7. in an. 1447.
and coercendo hosts veritatis; Kings ought to intermedle also with those
things which belong to religion; and that in a more excellent degree then other
christians may: to wit, by making laws for truth, and punishing enemies of
truth. Secondly; Good Kings may bridle the riot and arrogancy of Bishops.
Thirdly Reddite quae sunt Caesaris Caesari, vt pote censum, tributum,
subiectionem: Omnis homo existens sub alio, subditus sit per obedientiam
promptam, ac humilem constitutis a Deo principibus saecularibus: Render to
Caesar what is Caesar's, to wit rents, tribut, subjection. -- Let every one
remaining under another, be subject to secular princes, being constituted by
God, through ready and humble obedience. This is our doctrine, as also that it
is a bond of conscience (which protestants deny, saying it to be only a civil
obligation) to subject them selves to their kings and princes. Joan. 7. and 10.
and 20 Luc. 23.
Christ was slandred but wrongfully, to be, a seducer, to be an enemy to
Caesar, to hinder the paying, of his tribute, to aspire to be a king. S. Paul
was also accused, Act. 14 17.21.24.25. Tertull. in Apol. Justin. in Apol. 2. ad
Antonin. Eusebius. l. 5. c. 1. and 4. Hist. trip. l. 6. c. 27. Paul Diac. l. 16.
S. Greg. Nazian, in laudem Caesarij Fratris.
as a stirrer to sedition but wrongfully. In the persecutions of Nero,
Dioclesian, Antonius, etc. Christians were wrongfully accused, yea and
punished, as burners of Rome, sacrificers of Children, eaters of man's fleashe
etc. S. Athanase was wrongfully abused for a fornicator, witch, and traitor.
S. Siluerius, for inducing the Goths to invade the Romain Empire. To be
brief, It was Julian the Apostats principal endeavor to have the people
persuaded, the sufferings of Christians to have ever been for criminal
enormities and treacheries, and not for religion. So we may be accused and
censured, in like manner, but wrongfully. Far otherwise did my sovereign King
James, toward my self, when it pleased him to exchange my five years
imprisonment, into a banishement to any other choice dominion then his own; by
affoording not withstanding this public testimony of my innocence.

Directed to the L. Deputy and Cowncel of Irland.
After our very hearty commendations to your Lordship, and the rest. VVheras one
Henry Fitzsimon a Jesuit has these five years past remained prisoner in the
castle of Dublin, His Majesty's favorable testimony of my innocence,
notwithstanding my banishment.
on whose behalf humble suit has been made to the Kings Majesty for his
enlargement out of prison: And his Majesty has been informed, that he has
made so good demonstration of his loialtie and dutyfull affection to his
Majesty, and the state, as deserves that he should be used, with as great
favor as a man of his sort and quality may be capable of. You shall
therefore understand, that it is the Kings Majesty's pleasure, that you shall
release the said Henry Fitzsimon out of prison, taking sufficient bond of him,
with good suretyes for his avoiding out of the realm within some convenient
time to be by your Lor. limited unto him for his departure; And that he shall
not at time hereafter return into any of his Majesty's dominions, without
license first obtained by him in that behalf. And so we bidd your Lordship,
and the rest very heartily farewell. From the Cowrt at VVhythall the 12. of
March 1603.

Your Lordships very loving Friends. L. Chancellor. L. Treasorer. L.
Chamberlain. E. Shrewsburie E. Deuonshyre. E. of Mat. L. Cecyll. L. Knollis L.
of Kinless.


For conclusion, others of us, if not I, (how dutyfull, loyal, and subject
soever) may be banished, and yet taynted with remote and repyning minds toward
secular authority, as our innocent predecessors have been in manner aforesaid:
but in our behalf, most true and pertinent are Tertullians words; Tertullian.
ad Schup. cap. 2. In Apol. cap. 31.
Circa maiestatem Imperatoris infamamur: tamen nunquam Albiniani, nec Nigriani,
nec Cassiniani inuen^^^ potuerunt Christiani; We are infamed concerning the
Emperors Majesty: but we Christians could never be fownde Albininians,
Nigrians, Cassinians (who were heretics of those times, subject to the
incident propriety of their puritan brethren): as if he had said for these
times; we could never be fownde, Lutherans, Caluinians, Zuinglians, but
especialy Puritans, whose peculiar spirit it is.

Qui mare, qui terras, and sua regna quatit.
Ovid. in Hermione.
Which seas and lands, and propre Kingdoms trubleth.
The Printer, to the Reader.
After this verse of Ovid, let the gentle Reader turn, to the Reply to M.
Riders Rescript, page 65. paragraphe 3, beginning at these words. But if I
would abrupt. etc. and continuinge to page 71. and ending at paragraphe 2. at
these words. Nam id hominum geuus etc. Which omission and error happened,
partly by receiving the copy in sundry pieces; partly also by
misvnderstandinge the authors direction, and so taking the same verse of Ovid,
in the aforesaid 65. page of the Rescript, paragraphe 1. for this in the
Confutation, page 230. paragraphe 2.

10. To know whether I have impertinently digressed, or wa^dred all this while
from the matter betwixt M. Rider and me; as you behold him to deny inequality
betwixt Apostles; preesthood in the new testament; all preestly function, but
what belongs equaly to all Christians, men, and women; his hate of the name
of JESUS; also of Crosses, and blessing; which Protestants (as appears in the
Censure of Oxford and Cambridge against Puritans, page 11.) confess to be most
ancient, justifiable, and convenient ceremonies; his affirming a ministers
sermon to be necessary in time of communion; Number 81.
and all other points of puritancie in all points of his wrytings: so you are
to understand this last speech against priests to be the substance of
puritancie, which before I demonstrat in particular, I will conclude this
discourse with a pleasant information. On S. Mathies eaue 1602. according to
the English computation, I taking the air in prison on the northweast to were,
M. Rider repayring to visit M. Brown, I requested him to ascend; After a few
words, he besowght me to inform him in a matter, made doubtful to him by a
great stats man: whether I was a Jesuit, or a priest, or both? I answered,
that I was unworthily, both. He replied: would you prefer your self before a
single secular priest? I answered, I never had yet controversy about
preheminencie with any. He now being at a demurr; I craved like favor, in
resolving a not unlike doubt of mine: Whether him self was a bare minister, a
deane, or both? He affirmed he was a minister only, and no Deane, as being a
papistical titel. I replied, then you are a Puritan, in as much as you refuse
the name of Deane: but as you hold the deanrie, you are a Protestant. At that
time he heartily smyled at the conceit of that discourse and so departed. Not
long after his Majesty came to the crown of England; and like a burnd child,
fearing the fervent ambition of Puritans, objected himself against them. The
name of puritans suddenly became odious thereupon. Many well-benificed puritans,
would at that time exclaim against their Consorts, as seditious Schismatics.
I informed some of the crew, of M. Riders former conference: who acquainted him
therwithall* who in great impatience (according to his ordinary manner, and
giving me the lie, calling me ttaytour, etc.) challenged me thereof; denying
that ever he dislyked the name of Deane, or ever was favorer of any point of
Puritantcie. For justifying my self, I will now deliver his own words
containing, as evident concourse with them, as his wit was able to specify:
and consequently, I will desire the greater credit to my former relation. What
other faults soever I have, all my acquaintance will justify me, that I ever
from a child abhorred theft, swearing, and lying.

Rider. The name and office of Priests, abused by Priests.
99. And therefore you deceive the people by this name of Priest, which is no
more proper to you, then to every believing Christian. But it is likely you
will give me occasion to speak of this in the controversy of your Mass, and
therefore I will here be the briefer in this place.

Whether M. Rider be a Puritan. Of this point much appears number 122.
Fitzsimon. Articulus Disciplinae Consistorialis.
99. IT is ordained and observed among the Consistorians, that no names be used,
quae paganismum, vel papatum recipient; which agree with paganism or
Papistrie. By this fundation they eschew the names of Archbishops, Bishops,
Deans, Preests etc. Hereby says Cartwright; Cartwright. lib. 1. p. 112. Idem
in his replye page 159. vide Waitg. defense page 772.
Calvin would have shaken at the name of an Archbishop, and have trembled at
the name of a Bishope. He also for the name of a Priest says; that
translatours should be most careful, that the people should not once hear the
name of a Priest. Whom then (which all this while you have not understood) must
be our Church officers, according to pure consistorian discipline? Cartwright
in his theses set out under the name of Martin, and his children, certifyeth,
saying; These Mart. 12.
The Church is now to the worlds end, to have no other offices in it, but of
Pastors, Doctors, Elders, and Deacons. Here again are priests excluded. And in
all late translations of the Bible, for the name of Priest, you shall find but
the name of Elder; except they would mention preests of Jews or Gentles: and
then, you may be suer, (as also if there be any reprehension annected thereto)
never to fail of the name of priest. 1. Tim. 4.
Only I find in the Bible of the year 1562. (the words of S. Paul to
Timothy: Neglect not the grace given thee, with the imposition of hands by the
authority of preesthod) their penn to have dribled out the word of
preesthood, Bible an. 1562.
I know not by what chance. I will not deny them their right commendation,
when they deserve any.

But what has M. Rider to do with all this puritantrie; Forsoothe Vide number.
115.
Whereby also women are made preests as much as men. Nether is this allowance to
women, only from M. Rider. For Luther expreslie permits, Luth. to^. 2. lib.
de ministris Eccl. fol. 362. 369 372 3^3. P. Mart. 1. Cor. c. 11. v. 5. Zuingl.
to. 1. in explanat. artic. 17. fol. 27. Harborough anno 1559 H 2. Beza annot in
12 Ro^. and Cont. Erastum. Cartwr. l. 1. page 190. Fe^ners Defense page 135.
and justifies that they may preach, baptize, and consecrate. And among many
other things, he disputes against S, Paul (who commends silence in women in
the Church) in these words; Otherwise how should Paul alone withstand the holy
Ghost, who says, Joel 2. your daughters shall prophecy: and Acts 21. Philip.
had four daughters that prophesied. The same doctrine is plentiful in Peter
Martyr, Zuinglius, and in Horns (called Bishop of Winchesters) Harborough,
etc. But think you, among the rest so teaching that our holy puritan Iacks,
will want their holy puritan ^ills in their co^sistorian discipline? No I
warrant you, they must have their vessels of case, when the spirit moves
them. Yea they must have Diaconisces, or widows, to be accounted among Church
Commanders and officers, as Beza, Cartwright, and others first determined: for
upon better deliberation, they are now accounted not comma^ders, but Church
servants, such as Iunius says, Iunius Eccle. l. 2. c. 4.
are more fit then men to be about sick persons, and to healpe them. I must
now convict, all these, he, and she preests, of M. Rider, in showing out of
their own flatt, and pregnant evidences, that in the new testament there is an
order of preesthood, to which is co^ioyned a spiritual function, not allowable
equaly to all christians.

Fulke therefore shall be my first witness, saying; We refuse not the name of
priest, as it comes of Presbyter etc. it is odious to some that know not the
true etimologie thereof. Confut. of the Rhem. page 46. Defense of the English
trans. page 163. 185. Colloq. Worm. and Ratish. artic. protest. de unit. Eccl.
Bucer de reg. Christi page 67. Haerbrand. loc. Com. page 699. Calu. l. 4.
Instit. c. 4. n. 2. 4. Osiand. loc. com. cap. 10. Hemingius Inst. de gubernat.
Eccl. Hunius in com. ep. ad Tit. Gerlach. in hyperas. Dan. p. 30. Iud. Number. 16.
This testimony from such a Doctor gives a great track to M. Riders credit. A
far greater discredit is in the Oxford answer to the puritans petition, page
12. the term of priests to be justified, and that by the notes of Geneua upon
Isa. 66.21. For the name of a Bishope, and his pre-eminence above ordinary
Ministers, thus speaks the whole assembly of Protestants? A Bishope should be
chosen out of many preests, who should rule the Church. Bucer says, the name
of Bishope was peculiarlye attributed unto those chief rulers of Churches.
Haerbrand says. It were a most proffitable order for the welfare of the
Church, if every particular province had Bishops, and Bishops their Archbishop.
Calvin him self says, Bishops to have been chosen; Ne exaequalitate vt fieri
solet, dissidia nascerentur. -- id ad disciplinae conseruationem pertinebat
etc. that by equality as it often chances dissentions should arise -- and
that to belong to the conservation of discipline. Omitting Osiander, Henning,
Hemberg, Hunius, and especialy Gerlachius (who calls them hypochrits, and
Anabaptists, having a vain persuasion of knowledge, and foolish arrogancy,
and reprehenders of S. Paul, who malign the name, and different degrees in
ecclesiastical function) and many other principal Protestants, I conclude with
Melancthon, of whom Calvin had such opinion as he said of his own belief in
any point (note thereby how firm and well founded it was) Si Philippus declaret
verbulo, Calu. defen. 2. con. VVestph.
me a su^ mente deflectere, protenus desistam. If Philip declare in any word,
that I am not of his mind, Apol. Co^fess. August. per Pap. page 305.
I will straight recant. I would to God, (says Phillip Melancthon) I would to
God, it lay in me to restore the government of Bishops. For I see what a
manner of Church we shall have, such ecclesiastical policy being dissolved.
Video postea, multo intoler abilem futuram tyrannidem quam antea vnquam fuit: I
perceive that hereafter, will be a far more intolerable tyranny, then ever was
before. A woeful remorse Melancthon, that by thee, and thy partners means, it
lay no longer in thy power to restore it. Such was Caluins remorse when in a
like cause he said: Calu epist. ad Farel. 6.
God does let us no^ see etc. quantum praecipi^i iudicio vehementiaque
inconsulta, abijciendi ita Pontificis, nocuerimus. What hurt we have done,
that by headlong inconsideration, and rash vehemency, we had so cast of the
Pope. O! that the fear of God, and not other impulsions, had wreasted these
wretched bond slaves of Satan, to confess the truth, and amend the abuse, as
much as in them remained, that they had not been (if Gods judgments would so
permit) eternaly condemned.

By these evidences (among which the censure of Oxford by the vicechancelor,
the Doctors, Proctors, and heads of Howses, confirmed by the suffrage of
Cambridge; betwixt which two universities, is there said, page 31. more learned
men to be fownd, then among all the Ministers of religion in France, Flanders,
Germany, Poleland, Denmark, Geneua, Scotland; this censure I say ought most
to mate, and dismay M. Riders mind, for being contrary to all the sort) may be
conceived, how false and condemned is M. Riders, and other Puritans doctrine,
against Priests and Bishops vocation, and function, as they say not
distinguished from every ordinarye believing man, or woman: as also, whether it
was probable that he uttered such puritanical words as I have imputed to him.
For if he be now fownd concurring with their doctrine, he is the lyker to have
then, (before it was counted odious) consented with their speeches. But I mean
for perclose, or conclusion to propownd him an interrogation. If (as Cartwright
says) imposition of hands be an ordonance of God, Cartw. l 3 page 232.
Demonstr. c. 7. and. 9 Trauer. discipl. Eccl. f. 52. Iun. loc. cit.
which c^^ not be taken away; and as your Demonstrator, and Trauers teach, no
imposition, no minister: how can you maintain, all believers, who never had
such imposition, to be equal with them in function, who had it? Will you say
with Iunius; that imposition of hands, was but a shaking the elected into the
assemblye, by his right hand? Or will you say with the Church of Scotland,
that albeit the Apostles did use imposition of hands, Vide nec essario number 122.
History of the Church of Scotland page 557.
yet seeing the miracle fails, you judge the ceremony not necessary? If you
depart from Cartwright and Trauers, from Gods acknowledged ordonance; from the
Apostles custom, then I bidd all English puritans, to discarde you (as an
illegittimat English Puritan) into Scotland. But why do I so advise, as if by
dispensation you can not be licensed to be of all fashions, and to say with
English now, and by and by, with Scots, and backward, and forward. I pray you
all, not to be ignorant, that they can dispense one with another, to dissemble,
as to take degrees with all ceremonies most odious to their doctrine: so as they
can remain in their offices; yea and wear capp, tippett etc. and yet be never
the more reformed to protestantcie.

I will give two infallible instances thereof, one of Thomas Cartwright, the
other of Beza, two pillars of puritancie. I had, D. Cartwright lib. 2. in the
Epistle.
says Cartwright, the advice of more then a dozen learned Ministers (all were
puritans) who considering if I had the office of a Doctor in the university,
were of opinion (for the good might be done thereby) I might swallow the fond
and idle ceremonies which accompany it. To which I yielded. Snape in his
Letter to Barbon.
To which agrees Snape, after his examination before the commissioners an.
1590. saying: I hear some whispering already (yet among them who favor the
cause) that T. Cartwright has counseled the brethren, rather to use those
corruptions, then to leave their charges. Beza, Feuardent con. Brouault. en ses
entremangeries cap. 14. page 327. Colloq. Montpel. p. 150. 268. 388.
when he induced the Duke of witeberg to invade France; to provoke him the
rather, he publicly made profession of the Lutheran belief; whereof the
foresaid Duke was a member and favorer. And in departing without effecting his
pretense, he said; that he had singularly deceived, Ein Tronkens Bolts, the
dronken nobles of Almaine. Of which dissimulation being challenged by them of
Zurick; he answered them, that it was lawful so to cogge, lie, dissemble, and
deceive, to establishe their religion. So that the protestants, as I said, have
noe cause to applaude to them selves, when any Puritans become conformable to
their injunctions: for by these presidents, they are allowed to counterfeit,
delude, cheat and dissemble as they list, and therefore not to stand in danger by
being of any fashion, or cut of puritantrie (English, Scottish, or wholye
Anabaptistical) to shift their rooms, or rancks, so that only they temporize,
and applaud in countenance, to the predominant humor then in prime, and
preeminence. Yet you shall never find any more bitterly inueyghe then these
dispensers against the Popes dispensations: which nether can be nor ever were,
granted to do any thing unlawful. Whereby we always account all our
dissembling hypocritical Catholics, as remote from God, and godliness, (how
soever we be belyed to dispense with them) when they conform them selves to
protestants, for their temporal commodities, as ever were any heretics, or
infidels. To conclude; their former hatred against the name of priest, has
made them deny, even that Christ him self was ever a priest in this world.
Socinus in lib. de Christi natura con. Volan. page 81.
Christus sacerdos plane inauguratus non fuit, nisi post mortem suam, imo post
suum in coelum ascensum: Christ plainly was not installed a priest, till after
his death, yea after his ascension. Whereby, that ever he offered sacrifice for
us, that ever he was our redeemer, that the scriptures manifoldly auerring his
preisthood are true, is blasphemously denied.

Rider.
100. Thirdly, in what place of scripture did Christ give you commission to
consecrate challices, or to make any challice more holy by your charmed
consecration, then Christ's cup was in his blessed institution, which had none
of your consecration, for this the Catholics must know by the premises
formerly handled, that your consecration is not like to Christ's consecration:
for either Christ's blessing or thanksgiving, with the whole action of Christ in
the institution, was sufficient to consecrate, or insufficie^t: if you will
afford Christ that favor that it was sufficient, then yours is frivolous.

And whereas we use the same sanctification Christ did, how dare you say ours
i^ defective, without blasphemy to Christ's institution; But this your usurped
title of sanctity which ye attribute to your selves, in making the people
believe that you can make one cup (water salt or season) more holy then an
other, by your fingred blessing, is untrue and a pharisaicall brag. This
maintains your Priesthood in glory, pomp, and worldly estimation, but
has brought many of seely Catholics to beggerie, ignorance, and gross
superstition.

Fourthlie, by what scripture can you prove that Christ's holy blood is but an
effect of your consecration, or benediction, of the cup? If Christ's blood be an
effect of your cup benediction, then your cup benedicton is the cause of
Christ's holy blood. O helli^^ and damnable divinity: as if a sinful ignorant
Priest could by his magical consecration, make the holy blood of Christ my
Savior, which was shed on the cross for my sins. Now Catholics look to
your selves, I mean to your souls: for this is the doctrine of Rome and
Rhemes, fitter to be taught in hell by fiendes then maintained in earth by
Priests. You can not prove it either by scripture or Fathers.
Fifthlie and lastly, by what scripture do you prove; (nay by what ancient
Father) that this blessing or thanksgiving is referred to the cup or challice,
and not unto God: scriptures you have none, and fathers of the first six
hundred years never heard of it. And that the Catholics mey see the
antiquity and verity of this our doctrine, and the novelty and heresy of
yours. I will only produce but two learned Fathers with us against you, and
forbear to allege the re^^ till you give me further occasion.

Fitzsimon.
100. We are noe protestants, to use charmings, or other such Sathanical
unlawfulness. If we had been first informed in our belief by the Devil (as all
chief protestants are declared to have been, nu^b. 4. exam.) If we bought and
sold devils, as Conrad Riss (otherwise Zuinglius; as appears by
Schlusselburg. lib. 2. de theol. Calvin. a. 7. Conrad. Riss lib. German. contra
Ioem. Hessum de caena B. 2.
where, as is discovered this counterfeit Conrad, so is showed a huge rablement
of Reformers using under false names to publish venomous pamphlets) tells how
Luther bought a familiar Devil of Carolostad, for a Florin: Arch. Hamilton.
Call. confus. lib. 2. c. 48. page 308.
If we had been, as the Scotishe Ministers are by Hamelton said to be, wholly
addicted to Nigrommancie: (an old propriety of heretics says Tertullian, in
the 53. numb.) then these charming phrases might have some hold against us:
Whereas now they are reflected to the inevitable disgrace of your cause. Further
answer for our consecratcd chalices is to be inquired in the 90. number. And
other matter I find not in all this discourse, requyring either resolution, or
regard. In deed I find him say, he uses the same sanctification used by
Christ; that we usurp sanctity to our selves, and our consecrated cupps; that
we are maintained in glory, and thereby many Catholics beggered; that Christ's
blood is an effect of our consecration; that our divinity is hellishe and
damnable, and fit to be taught in hell; that we can not prove the benediction
to belong to the cupp; that the first Fathers never heard of such our doctrine;
To all which, I can say no less, The 93. untruth.
then that all these being most untrue, may, by liberal allowance, stand up for
the 93. untruth. Verily never did I read before, to my knowledge, so many
disioynted matters shuffled together, without method, or measure, but some one
of them at least, would have relation to the subject in discourse. Now let all
men ad women judge, what have all these related points to do with our
controversy, of wine to be the communication of the blood of Christ, and bread
to be the participation of his fleashe? Or how do all these tergiuersations,
avoid, impugn, or reprove, that which is in controversy?

101. Chrysostom upon this place, calls it the cup of blessing, Rider.
because when we have it in our hands, with admiration and a certain horror of
that unspeakable gift, Chry. super. 1. Cor. 10.
we praise and bless him, because he has shed his blood, that we should not
remain in error: and has not only shed it, but made us all partakers of it.
In like sort did Photius and Occumenius expound this word, which we bless,
Photius and Oecumenius.
which having in our hands, bless him, which has graciously given us his
blood: that is, we give him thanks, or which we prepare when we bless or give
thanks.

Now the Catholics may see by the ancient fathers (whom your selves do brag
of) that they condemn your cup blessed exposition. And the Catholics may see
a^ in a glass, that we join with the scriptures and fathers in the true
sense of these words: The cup which we bless: and that your exposition is
erroneous and superstitious, and therefore to be recanted by you, and shunned
by the Catholics, and my reasons be drawn out of the foresaid fathers, not
made on my own fingers.

Fitzsimon.
101. S. Chrysostom aduertiseth to all the world, that you here deliver the 94.
^he 94. untruth, S. Chrysostom. in c. 5. Math. hom. 11.
untruth: both because he has no such matter as you infer; as also because
else where he has expressly the contrary. Saying; Si enim vasa sanctificata ad
priuatos vsus transfer peccatum est and pericul^m, sicut docet nos Balthazar
qui bibens in calicibus sacratis, de regno depositus est, and de vita; Si ergo
haec vasa sanctificata ad priuatos vsus transfer sic periculosum est, in
quibus non est verum corpus Christi, sed mysterium corporis eius continetur:
quanto magis vasa corporis Christi? etc. If then it be sin and danger to
transfer sanctified (note well M. Rider: for every clause of this speech
will wound your profession) vessels, as Balthazar teaches us, who drinking
in sanctified chalices, was deposed from kingdom and life; if then to
transfer these sanctified vessels, to private uses, be so dangerous, in which
not the true body of Christ, but the mystery of his body, was contained: how
much more the vessels of the body of Christ etc. Here you have sanctification
of vessels; such not to be profaned; Christ to be otherwise with us, then with
the Israelits; and our vessels to have his true body. How like you all these,
toward your imaginations?

Photius you produce against your self, by his saying that Christ graciously
gives us his blood. Why then he gives not only a figure of his blood.
Oecumenius has noe such matter, as never expounding any word beyond the 9.
chapter of S. Paul's epistle to the Corinthians, either of the second, or the
first. And so is discovered the 95. The 95. untruth.
untruth. Where are the promised citations of books, and chapters, leaves, and
lines? Whether you, or I will or not, our dealings will be judged, when we deal
vnsincerly, and impiouslie. For other exclamations of such citations, and
discourses, I can not think them convenient, when your dealings are so
notorious, only I will entreat the glorious S. Augustine, S. Aug. l. 2. de Ciu.
c. 1. ^. 5. c. 27.
to give you your answer, and let you be gone. Quorum dicta contraria si
toties velimus refellere, quoties obnixa from statuerint non curare quid
dicant, dum quocumque modo nostris disputationibus contradicant, quam sit
infinitum, and erumnosum, and infructuosum vides. -- Facile est, cuiquam videri
respondisse, que tacere noluerit. Aut quid est loquacius vanitate? Quae non
ideo potest, quod veritas, quia si noluerit tacere, etiam plus potest clamare
quam veritas. Whose contrary sayings if we (says S. Augustine) would refell
as often, as they with an impudent forhead neglect what they affirm, so that any
way they contradict our disputations; how infinite, toylsome, and how fruictles
it is, you behold. -- It is easy for every one to see to answer, what he
cowld not conceal. And what is more talkeatiue then vanity? Yet therefore it
can not compare with truth, because if it will not be silent, it can exclame
more then truth.

102. First, he says that benediction, blessing or thanksgiving, Rider.
is referred to him that shed his blood for us: I hope you will not say the cup
shed any blood for us.

2. Secondly, this father says, that blessing God and praising God is all
one: and therefore when we say, the cup of thanksgiving, we follow Christ,
Paul, the Greek text, and the old fathers. And when you translate it, The
challice of benediction, it is flat contraire to Christ, Paul, verity, and
antiquity. And there is as great difference betwixt your opinion and the old
fathers faith, as betwixt praising with mouth, and crossing with fingers: nay,
as much as betwixt your superstitious challice and our soulesauing Christ: for
so, if you mark the fathers words, the difference stands.

The text it self offers us three things in a comfortable distinction, and you
would confound them with your new imagined transubstantiation.

1. The first is Christ's body crucified, and his blood shed, with all his
purchased benefits,

2. Secondly, our communion and fellow ship, which all believers have in that
crucified Christ, and those soulesauing merits.

3. Thirdly, the outward seals of those benefits which are called, The cup
which we bless, and the bread which we break, to witness to the world, and
to confirm to our selves, the fruition and possession of all those benefits,

Now if I should say, that the bread and cup being outward seals, were our
communion with Christ: the wicked would laugh at my folly, though the godly
would pity my ignorance in the truth, or my malice against the truth: and
the reason is this, because the seals be things outward, and the communion of
Christ's body and blood, be things inward: the one sensible, the other
spiritual and intellectual: and as much difference is betwixt them, as there
is betwixt outward and inward: sensible, and intellectual: so much difference
there is betwixt the outward seals of Christ's body and blood, and his body
and blood.

And if the seals cannot be changed into the communion of Christ's body and
blood but remain still in their several natures and substances, every one
performing his several distnct office, much less can they be reallie and
substantiallie changed into Christ's body and blood, which are things more
remote, but most impossible. And if you had added the next verse the Apostle
had made it plain in showing you a double communion sealed in this Sacrament.
The first, our communion with Christ and his benefits. The second, our
communion amongst our selves, 1. Soli. 2. Omni. 3. S^per.
which both are proper only to gods church, and to every one of gods church,
and allwaies to gods Church.

Now let the learned judge whether you or we, misconster scripture, wrest
fathers, deceive Christ's flock and the Queens subjects, and pervert the true
meaning of this Text. And now to the next.

102. Is not this a worthy proctor for protestancie? Fitzsimon.
He brings an allegation of three Fathers, and thereupon he infers saying.
[First he sayth] Which he of the three, can you conceive, by these words? His
meaning is of S. Chrysostom. But he has no such matter, but clean contrary, as
appears, in his affirming in the precedent number that vessels are
sanctified, and separated from profane, or common uses: which sanctification
is that we call blessing. Secondly he tells, the text among other conforts,
offers us Christ's body crucified, and Christ's blood shedd. Which he will
never be able to expound but by saying as we say, that it is given us by the
breaking of bread, and the benediction of the chalice, or wine contained in the
chalice. Of his talking of seals, he has nether writ, nor scale for it,
toward this, or any other sacrament of Christ, in all the new testament. For
the communion betwixt him, and his brethren, I have spoken in the examination
of the creed. To say that Chrysostom affirms, benediction in this place to be
referred to him that shed his blood for us: that this text offers Christ's
body, and blood, with all his purchased merits: that the bread, and cupp, vz.
it in the cupp, are not our communication with Christ, etc. these I say, are
beyond untruths, and in propre name, Riderian discourses. S. Cyril says; The
mystical benediction makes Christ corporaly to dwell in us by communication of
his fleash. Li. 10. in Joan. c. 13.
Such communication, M. Rider not only understands not, but also denies. May
not then the wicked laugh at his folly, and the godlypitie his ignorance?

The second Proof by Councills and Fathers.
Catholic Priests. This council consists of 318. Fathers.
Concilium Nicen: cap: 14. Anno: 363. No rule or custom does permit, the they
which have not the authority to offer the sacrifice, should give it to then
that offer the body of Christ. Rider.
103. GEntelmen you are posessed with a threfold error which is the cause when
you read the scriptures Counsels, and fathers, you misunderstand them. Your
first error is, when you understand that spoken of the outward Elements, which
a meant of the inward invisible grace. Your second error is when you refer
that to the visible parts of the body, which they intended to the invisible
powers of the mind and soul. With these three Seph^ticall points you pervert
all the fath^, you bring for this pur^ose and deceive the Catholics.
Thirdly, your former two errors beget a third error which is, your mistaking
the state of our question; And so whereas you should prove the manner of Christ's
presence in the Sacraments: You offer to prove the matter but of that we have
spoken before.

Thus if you will read the scripturs fathers and Counsels with these 3.
cautions or derections, you shall easily see how far thus long you are gone
from the truth and misled the Queens subjects.

Now with Gods permission we will proceed to the due examination of your
proof, as it is alleged out of your own Colen print, Ex officina Iohannis
Quintell Typographi, Anno Domini, 1561. which you cannot deny, it is in the
first Tome and the fourteenth Chapter, and the two hundredth fifty five page of
the first edition, and the Chapter begins thus: Peruenit ad sanctum
Concilium quod in locis quibusd^m and ciuitatibus presbyteris Sacramenta
Diaconi porrigant. Then follows your fraction (very abruptly) in the midst
of a sentence: Hoc neque regula, neque confuetudo, etc.

The sacred Council is aduertized, that in certain places and Cities the
Deacons do reach and give the sacraments to the Priest (all this you leave out,
and then follows your weak warrant) Noe rule or custom does permite etc.

I pray you what one word of this proves your Carnal presence? Let me know
it for my learning and the Catholics better Instruction: if you would gather
out of this word Sacrifice: then you are deceued, for that Council in another
place calls it Sacrificium Eucharisticum, a Sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, not propitiatory.

And if out of these words The body of Christ: the council expounds their
meaning in that which you omit, and purposely conceal, when they call that
Sacrifice, and the body of Christ by the name of Sacraments given by the
Deacons to the priests: for the Deacons delivered them after Consecration to
priests ad still were Sacrame^ta, Sacraments, not the body or blood of Christ
made of bread and wine by the Priest: for the Sacrament and Christ's body
differ as much, as the lamb and the Passover, circumcision and the covenant,
the washing of new birth and regeneration, for the one is the outward seal, the
other the inward grace, and here is another error of yours of the second and
third kind, in referring that to the mouth which is proper to our faith: and
still mistaking the matter for the manner.

The second proof of Catholics for the real presence; By Councils and Fathers.
The first part of the second proof. Of the Council of Nice.
103. I Crave remembrance be retained, Fitzsimon.
how Protestants accounted this first general Council of the world, containing
318. most famous Fathers, Beza epist. thecl. 81.
but a congregation of Sophisters: as before is declared, in our examination of
the Creed. Cartwright so famous a Puritan, as none of that crew but reverence
his remembrance, (as may appear in the Suruay of pretended discipline, wherein
one calls him, the most reverent; another, made a sermon, Cap. 29. page 379.
and sang psalms for his releasment; another says, the government by him set
down, is commanded by God; another, thanked God to have seen him; another
expected, to travail 50. miles to see him) by way of derision says, such
council to have been a notable and famous Council, Cartwr. l. 1. page 93.
And in the same place taxes it for errors in discipline. This advertisement
shows in general, this Council to have displeased them; Now to the particular
application to our coutrouersie. We say, this testimony shows on our side;
First, that priests offer a sacrifice which deacons could not: and consequently
that it could not be only a thanksgiving: both because such Sacrifice of
thanksgiving, belonged to all alyke, as soon to a Deacon as a priest; as also
because it could not be exhibited into the mouth of another. Secondly, that
this Sacrifice is the very body of Christ. But all this, says M. Rider, is
nothing; because the Council makes mention of a Sacrament, and Eucharistial.
Every twiggs shadow is a grateful shelter to a Jonas in extremity. But this
small consolation, wythereth by these words of S. Gregory, recorded in the
decretals; Ob id Sacramenta dicuntur quia sub tegmento corporalium rerum diuina
virtus secretius salutem eorundem sacramentorum operatur. Vnde a secretis
virtutibus, Decret. 1. pars. causa 1. quest. 1. c. Multi Secularium.
vel sacris, Sacramenta dicuntur. Quae ideo fructuose penes Ecclesiam fiunt,
quia sanctus in ea manens Spiritus, eorundem Sacramentorum latemer operatur
effectum. Cuius panis and calicis Sacramentum graece Eucharistia dicitur:
Latin bona gratia interpretatur. Et quid melius Corpore and Sanguine Christi?
For that are they termed Sacraments, because under the couerture of corporal
things, divine verity more secreatly does operat the health of the said
Sacraments. Which therefore are fruictfully made in the Church, because the holy
Ghost their remayneing, does work the effect secretly of the said Sacraments:
of which, the Sacrament of bread and the chalice, is in greek called the
Eucharist: which in latin is interpreted good grace. And what is better then
the Body and Blood of Christ? By which sweet, and sownde testimony, M. Rider
as a conye is ferreted out of all his euasions. For, the being Eucharistial,
and the being a Sacrament, and the names of bread, and wine, are fownde to
consist with the body and blood of Christ, and rather to atestifie it, then to
exclude it: because Sacraments have their names from sacred and secret good,
included under the couerture of corporal things. Which is verefyed in our
Sacrament included under the form, or couerture of bread and wine. S.
Chrysostom. 1. Cor. ho. 24. both elder then S. Gregory, and also a natural
Grecian, signifies the sense of Eucharistical, to be all one and hallowed, or
blessed, saying; Cum benedictionem dico, Eucharistiam dico; When I say
benediction, I say the Eucharist. Your Supper indureth no benediction: therefore
it can not be signified by the word Eucharist, nor the word Eucharist belong
thereto; so that by degrees, all words belonging to this Sacrament, as Sacrament
it self, sign, spiritual, Eucharistical, mystical, are as ernestly abandowing
your profession, as by it the substance of Sacraments is abandoned. In the
mean time the foresaid testimony confirms also, that thanksgiving in this
Sacrament, is rather to be taken for benediction, then benediction for
thanksgiving.

Concilium Ephesinum in Epist. ad Nestorium: Catholic Priests. And this had
20^ Fathers.
We approach to the mystical benedictions, and we are sanctified, being
partakers of the holy body and precious blood of Christ. 104. THis your
proof is truly quoted, page 535. and the Epistle begins thus, Rider.
Religioso and Deo amabili consacerdoti Nestorio, Cyrillus, etc. The Council
calls it a mistical benediction, no miraculous transubstantiation. And this
neither proves your opinon, nor disprooues ours: for you say, ye are made
partakers of the holy body and precious blood of Christ, and so say we: but
you say with the late church of Rome, that you are made partakers of that holy
body and precious blood by your mouth, teeth, throat, and stomach; And we sey
with Scriptures, Fathers, and the old Church of Rome, that we are made
partakers of Christ's body and blood, by the hand, mouth, and stomach of our
souls, which is a lively faith in Christ crucified: as you have heard before.
And thus you refer that to the visible parts of the body (as your mouth,
teeth, and stomach) which the scriptures and fathers meant of the invisible
powers of the soul, as our lively faith, being the spiritual hand, mouth,
and stomach thereof. And here is your error of the second kind. And so your
two testimonies out of these two Councels, are proofs neither proper nor
pertinent, brought only to dazell the eyes of the simple, and to amase the
minds of the weak. But I refer the badnesse of your cause and the weakness
of your proofs, (nay your disproofes) to the censure of the indifferent
Reader. Only giving the Reader this note by the way, that these Councels were
called by the Emperor, not by the Pope, nay the Pope was not president in
these Councels, but other Bishops chosen by the Emperor. And in the Council
of Nice the Popes Legate had but the fourth room, no better account was made of
him. For in deed he then was no Pope but an Archbishop. Thus the Reader may see
that these Councels be against you. And now to your testimonies out of the
fathers.

The second part of the second proof of the Council Ephesin.
104. THe force of this testimony appertayning to prove, Fitzsimon.
that by the mystical benedictions we are made partakers of the very holy body
and blood of Christ, and consequently that there should be benedictions used in
this mystery, and that we should not think what is here sanctified, Isa. 3.
c. v. 3.
contains only a bare figure, and only a bare appellation of such body and
blood: All this he auoydeth without any difficulty, because forsooth the word
mystical is found together with the residue. Certainly it is a rare exception:
as if one would say, in the third chapter of Esaias and third verse, there is
mention, Eloquij mystici, of mystical speech, therefore in such chapter, and
verse, there is noe literal verity. For what hindrance to our controversy is
the word mystical? I find in the last evidence of S. Gregory, that the
Eucharist by whom soever, good or badd, it be dispensed, yet is a Sacrament,
quia Spiritus sanctus mystice illud viuificat; because the holy Ghost does
quicken it mysticaly. By which is demonstrated, that the word mystical does
rather help then hinder our purpose, and rather hinder then help their
imagination, who deny any thing to be mysticaly quickened by the holy Ghost in
this mystery.

What other string has M. Rider to his bow? to trott forsoothe to the Popes
supremacy; and to fail as filthelye in that, as in the rest. Of which
supremacy there follows a peculiar article, wherein it is to be amply
discussed. First, who told you M. Rider, that the Popes legate had but the
fowerth seat in the Council of Nice? Where are your often promised citations, of
autheurs, books, chapters, leaves, lines? Will you never ride otherwise then
like your self? Could the Church of Rome called by S. Cyprian (no very partial
friend to the Popes supremacy); S. Cyprian. epist. ad Cornel. 45. epist. 55.
Ecclesia matrix and radix Ecclesiae Catholicae; Cathedra Petri; Ecclesia
principalis; the mother Church and root of the Catholic Church, the cheyre of
Peter; the principal Church, Could Anaclet before S. Cyprian, and both long
before the Nicen council, Magdeburg. centur. 2. c. 7. col 139. Ibid. col. 781.
782.
attribut to the Romain Church primacie and excellency of power over all
Churches, and the whole flock of Christ, even by testimony of Protestants?
Could it sommon general Concils, bear preheminencie in them, confirm, or
desanull them? could the Nicen Council seem to Beza, Beza in trac. triplicis
Episcoporum generis. ad Scotos, circa annu^ 1579.
to make a way for the horrible papacy of Rome, slyding on, and underlay the
seat of the harlot (an old mark of an heretic, to speak thus of the Romain
sea, as appears in our first number) that sits upon seven hills: and yet
possess but the fouerth place in dignity, in the Nicen Council? Say, and
write what you list M. Rider, you need no longer a visour, your face is of
proof.

For gathering untruths I may be thought forgetful: but in truth although I
would feign forgett them, as I do often dissemble them, yet I can not remove
them out, of either my mind, or eyes, as long as I read his book so
exorbitantly repleanished with them. In the precedet number, Regula in 6.
Decretalium.
he attaynteth us with a threefould error, whereof we being free ( for
vnusquisque praesumitur esse bonus dones probetur malus; every one is to be
accounted in the right, until he be proved in the wrong; Which is not done
against us) that may well stand for the 96. The 96. untruth.
untruth. Soon after he informs (as if it were also proved) that the B.
Sacrament, and Christ's body, do differr as much as outward seal, and inward
grace: The 97. and 98. untruth.
which makes the 97. untruth. The 98. is in this number, wherein he says, the
Concill calls the B. Sacrament, a mystical benediction, no miraculous
transubstantiation; For it expressly affirms such Sacrament to be, Carnem
viuificatricem, and ipsius verbi propriam factam: to be made a lively fleashe
and the very propre fleashe of the Word. What is a miraculous
transubstantiation if this be not? The 99. that the Scriptures and ancient
Fathers, The 99 untruth.
and old Church of Rome, do specify the receiving of the B. Sacrament, to be
only by the hands, mouth, and stomach of the soul, and not of the body. The
100. that these two evidences are our own disproofs. The 100. untruth.
The 101. that the Pope was not president in general concils, The 101. untruth.
either by him self, or his legate, but other Bishops chosen by the Emperor.
The 102. that the Popes legate, The 102. untruth.
had but the fouerth seat in the Nicen Council. The 103. that then the Pope of
Rome was not Pope, The 103. untruth.
but only Archcbishop: of which we are to dispute in the testimonye of S. Leo
following not long after. These strange, exorbitant absurd treatises,
considered; may not I worthily say, Tom. 2. operum S. Athan. fol. 262.
as he in S. Athanasius Qui contentionis studio feruntur, eorum insanum furorem
nulla, credo, potest oration cohibere; sed vt mill quis, eaque inuicta
argumenta proferat, veritatem quidem ille demonstrauerit: at operarijs mendacij
de ea minime persuaserit. I believe noe eloquence, can restrain there mad
fury, who are carried away by error; But although you allege a thousand, and
those invincible proofs, you shall in deed demonstrat truth; but you will not
reclayme the forgers of falsehood. Is not this verifyed in M. Rider? What
wonderful exceptions supposes he betwixt him and the clear light, striving
against him, most forcible? What arguments and proofs does he struggle against,
and by what delusions, and deceits? One said truly (Joan. Maxen. resp. ep. ad
possess.) Quamuis vero semper inuicta manet veritas, nunquam tamen aduersus eam
se attollere desinit falsitas; Although truth always remains unvanquished,
^et falsehood never leaves to assault it.

The flesh is fed by the body and blood of Christ, Catholic Priests.
Tertullian de resurrectione carnis, floruit 200.
that the soul might be sat in God. 105 OVt of this, thus you frame an
argument (as sometimes and old Roman friend of yours did,) to maintain your
carnal presence. Rider.
The soul is fed by that which the body eats, but the soul is fed by the
flesh of Christ, therefore the body eats the flesh of Christ in the
Sacrament.

I might as fitly inuert this argument upon you, as a learned man of our side
once inuerted it, saying, As the soul feeds upon Christ, so does the body:
but the soul is fed by faith, therefore the body is fed by faith, which is
very absurd and improper, yet as partinent and as proper as yours.

And here you should remember the old distinction of the fathers spoken of
before. The Sacrament is one thing, and the matter of the sacrament is another
thing. Outwardly the body eats the Sacrament, and inwardly the soul by
faith feeds on the body of Christ. As in Baptism the flesh is washed by water
(as that old father says in that place) that the soul may be purged
spirituallie: so our bodies eat the outward Sacrament, that the soul may be
fed of God. Again, it is not generally true, that whatsoever the body
eats, the soul is fed by the same. And if you would propound but
particularly this, instance of eating only in the Sacrament, then the
argument proves nothing standing upon mere perticulers.

Moreover, the body and soul are fed by the same meat in the sacrament, but
not after the same manner: For the body is nourished by the natural
properties of the Elements which they have to nourish: But the soul by the
sacramental and supernatural power, as they are signs and feales of
heavenly graces. And we grant that the soul is fed by the precious body and
blood of Christ, but not after a carnal manner, as you say, but spirituallie by
faith.

Again, a mean Scholar in Gods book, may see this phrase is figurative, and
therefore the sense spiritual. For how can a soul be fat in God? will ye say
it is a corporal fatness, such as is proper to bodies? I think ye will not,
I know you should not, then this place is impertinentlie brought, neither
savoring of sense, nor suitable to that you allege it. For if you would have
read the same Father in the same book following, page. 47. printed at Paris:
1580.
he would have told you so, for (says he) the word which was made flesh (which
is Christ) Deuorandus est auditu, ruminandus intellectu, and fide dagerandus.
This word Christ must be swallowed whole by hearing, must be meditated upon or
remembered by vnderstinding, and digested by faith. Now you see Tertullian of
your own Paris print aunweres you, and expounds himself. And seeing no man
can better expound Tertullian his meaning then Tertullian himself, therefore
have I brought him from your own Catholic Press of Paris, to condemn all
Jesuits and Priests that shall set a litterall sense upon an allegorical
phrase, only to deceive the simple plain Catholics, and to abuse the godly
learned Fathers, by an ignorant and sottish construction. And now to the rest
of your profes that follow.

The third part of the second proof. Of Tertullian.
Fitzsimon.
105. THe 104. untruth that we frame any argument upon Tertullians word, The
104. untruth.
and especialy such one. But, since we are invited by example; thus we argue.
The Mayor shall be your own words. The faith of the first five hundred years,
is the ancient, true, and Catholic faith: but that the fleashe and not only
the soul, was fedd with the body and blood of Christ, was the faith of the
first five hundred (yea two hundred, within which Tertullian attained the time
of Christ) years: Ergo, that not only the soul, but the fleash was fedd with
the body and blood of Christ, is the true and Catholic faith. The minor are
the words of Tertullian which herein are so plain, that woeful and vain is
M. Riders wit and pain to strugle against them. He tells of an old
distinction, that the Sacrament is one thing, and the matter of the Sacrament is
another. Be it true, or false; are not the words clear that the very fleashe
is fedd by the body of Christ, and such distinction nothing pertinent, to
affirm or deny them? Secondly, if the body outwardly eat the Sacrament, and
that (as after in him follows) the body and soul are fed by the same meat
in the Sacrament and that he grant the soul is fedd by the precious body and
blood of Christ: How can it possibly be denied, but that the body also eats
the body and blood of Christ? To affirm that we hold, the soul to feed
carnaly on Christ, is in manner declared to ride; that is, to forge, and
shamlesly to slaundre. For we only teach that the soul feeds on Christ's
corporal body not carnaly, but realy, and truly, and yet spiritualy, but not
only spiritualy. So that without any wrong, it is to be accounted the 105.
untruth, to say that we teach otherwise. The 105. untruth.
Should not such an imputatio^ have two or three, or at least one quotation, of
some one, old, or young, noble, or obscure, sacred, or profane, of our
writers? it being so often promised, so often threatened? But M. Rider will perform
these promises in his printed books, when he performs other promises (the
frustration whereof in London was otherwise incountred, then in Dublin) in
Merchands written books. When these be made Catholic, (that is not
puritanicaly canceled, without a benediction; but Christianly marked, with a
fair cross) then all other promises will also be more christian like
accomplished, and many a merchand rejoiced, and many a long expectation
satisfied.

But (says he) Christ recording to Tertullian is to be heard, to be meditated,
remembered, and believed, and so Tertullian faith he, has answered him self,
and his former saying, that the fleash is fed by the body of Christ. All this
he quoteth: yet I doubt, not very faithfully. For I find Tertullian printed at
Paris, to have the book of resurrection (out of which my testimony is
brought) so far beyond the 47. yea and 407. page, even in follio, that I can
not make unto my self any conceit, how these last words are said to be in the
same book following, and yet but in the 47. page. At this I stand not. Only I
crave all courteous wits and wysedoms, to observe how and whether at all,
Tertullian is made to answer him self, and us, by this late allegation,
unless he would suppose that every thing answers every thing. For if what
may be heard, meditated, remembered, believed, could not be received corporaly;
then the Messiah Christ our Saluiour, could never be received in the blessed
virgins womb nor into the house or habitation of any other. Yet our belief
assures the contrary: and consequently the saying of Tertullian that our
fleash is fedd by the body of Christ, remains in his full vigor, although
those other words be true. Nay rather they are more thereby verifyed. For if
Christ be heard or believed, his saying the bread to be his body should not be
distrusted. Could you be content to hear the former testimonies avoided, by
every by, and impertinent word, that they were mystical; Sacraments,
Eucharistical, and therefore not true: and can you not accept like manner of
aunswering in this place? I refer you to Luthers opinion of like their wonted
answering mentioned in the 47. number. Although the former words of Tertullian
are insupportable to M. Riders claim, and that he strugleth in vain against
them, yet I will second them, with this conclusion out of the said Tertullian.
Acceptum panem and distributum discipulis, Corpus suum illum secit, Hoc est
Corpus meum dicendo; Tertull orat. de Antichristo.
The bread taken and distributed to his disciples, he made it his body, saying,
This is my body. I would feign behold M. Riders skill, in wreasting these
words from our purpose; with any show of probability. His wonted manner of
wreasting without probability, (which posterity will I suppose by his
remembrance name ryding) is as I think loathsome to his most loving friends to
find in him, and lewed to be followed by him.

Catholic Priests
God has left us his flesh to eat, and his blood to drink, that we might be
nourished by that, Cyprian de Duplici Mart: floruit: 249.
by which we have been redeemed Rider.
106. A Blind man may see that you never read this in Cyprian your self, or
else that you understand them not. For Cyprian says not God has left us his
flesh: but Reliquit nobis edendam carnem suam, reliquit bibendum sanguinem,
etc. he has left us his flesh to eat, and his blood to drink. I pray you
pardon me to ask you which is the nominative case to the verb, is Deus? no,
but if you had begun seven lines sooner, as you ought in deed to have done,
at Nemo maiorem charitatem habet, etc. you should have found the right
nominative case, that there might have been not only a gramaticall concord,
but also a Theological harmony, and then the sense had been plain. For it
was he that died for his enemies, that left us his flesh, etc. And that was
Christ, not God the father. But you begun (after your accustomed manner) in
the midst of a sentence, mistaking the nominative case to the verb; and so
lay down heresy for divinity: for God the Father has neither flesh nor
blould. But if I should help you with a charitable construction, by
attributing that to Christ's Deity, which is proper to his humanity, yet you
still have wrested the father and abused the Reader.

But thus Cyprian is to be read: Christ has left us his flesh to eat and his
blood to drink: so we confess it, we believe it, and we teach it: but to be
eaten and drunk spirituallie by faith, not corporally, not gutturallie, as
you imagine. For this is the inward invisible Grace of the Sacrament that you
propound.

Now how this flesh and blood of Christ is to be eaten, or how Christ's flesh
and blood are naturally, substantiallie, and reallie under the forms of bread
and wine, which is our question, you cannot prove by Cyprian: and so still you
propound the matter to us, when you should prove the manner to us: and here is
your error in the third kind, (if not in more) before specified.

And here you bring a testimony out of Cyprian, Cypria^ de Caena Domini nu. 9.
where he speaks not properly of the sacrament, but of the threefold
Martyrdom, which he gathered out of the death of Christ: and therefore you
show a great weakness in running to that Tractate, whereas you might have
spedde better (if you had list) nearer home. For if you had read or would
read that Father upon his Treatise of the Lords Supper, he would have either
changed your mind, or hardened your heart, but howsoever, discouerd your errors.

And that the eating of Christ's flesh and drinking of Christ's blood, is not a
gross corporal swallowing of his blessed flesh and precious blood, as you
deem: but that Esus carnis Christi, est quaedam auiditas, and quoddam
desiderium manendi in ipso, etc. What it is to eat Christ's flesh and drink
Christ's blood.
The eating of Christ's flesh is a certain egernesse, and a certain desire to
abide in Christ, etc. And three lines before this he says, Our abiding in him
is our eating of him: and the drink is a certain incorporation into him.

And in the latter end of the Treatise, you shall find that Father touch the
point in question betwixt us: haec quotiens agimus, non dentes ad mordendum
ac^^mus, How Christ must be eaten.
sed fide syncera panem sanctum frangimus and partimus, etc. As often as we
receive these holy mysteries, we whet not our teeth to bite or chew, but
break and divide this holy bread by a sincere faith, etc. And four lines
before that (says he) Edulium carnis Christi defaecatis animis, etc. The food
of Christ's flesh must be eaten with purified minds, says not with washed
mouths. And a little before that, he says, Impij nec se iudicant nec
sacramenta diiudicant. Ibid. nu. 13.
the wicked lambunt petram, etc. lick the rock, but neither suck honic nor
oil, etc. that is to say, they eat the Sacrament, but not the inward grace of
the Sacrament. Thus I hope the indifferent Reader is satisfied that your proof
is not pertinent to the matter in question, and therefore shows the weakness
of your cause, and the wilfulness of your minds, that will seek so stiflie
to maintain fables with wresting Fathers: Transubstantiation is but in deed a
fable.
for Cyprians place that you bring, handles the visible grace of the
Sacrament. And in this place which I bring, he touches the manner how that
grace is to be received, that is, with faith as we say, not teeth as you teach,
etc. And so Cyprian agrees with himself, and we with Cyprian join against
your carnal opinion. And thus having answered Cyprian with Cyprian, and
showed you your oversight and mistaking of Cyprian, I will come to the
examination of your next proof.

The fowerth part of the second proof. of S. Cyprian.
106. FIrst I am blamed, that when I should have said Christ, Fitzsimon.
I said God. Whereby every one may conceive, that I am not of their opinion who
deny the godhead of Christ, related in our examination of the Creed. I thank
Christ my God and Lord, that I am reprehended but for sucht faults as consist
with truth, and piety. Christ then, has left us his fleash to eat, and his
blood to drink, says S. Cyprian: which M. Rider says, he confesses, he
believes, he teaches. Then to the next clause: that are should be nourished
by that, by which we have been redeemed. To which M. Rider is mute, or dumb,
and consequently offending in one, he is made guilty of all. So that to
believe part, and not the whole, is unprofitable. In the mean time S.
Cyprians testimony can not be avoided. For if by Christ's body we were
redeemed: then by Christ's body says S. Cyprian we must be nourished. A figure,
a representatio^, an appellatio^, redeemed us not: therefore a figure,
appellatio^, representation in this sacrament nourished us not. Not only
through faith, and the stomach of the soul were our souls redeemed, but our
bodies also to resurrection and glory, by the true suffering of Christ's real
and corporal body: therefore, not only in faith, or only according to the
stomach of the soul, are we nourished, but by the true participation of
Christ's real and natural body, into our bodies to nourish them, and to
sanctify together the soul. Yet (says he) Cyprian tells, that the eating
of Christ, is a greedy desire to remain with him; and that with our teethe we
tear him not, but with a sincere faith we kreake and diuyde him which we ever
before and now, profess, and auerr. For who thinks Christ's true and real
receiving to exclude his spiritual and incorruptible receiving? Let our 34. 40.
42. 46. 54. numbers bear record, that we teach not otherwise then as S.
Cyprian here does, to wit, the corporal receiving, not to be a Capharnaical
tearing renting, or biting of Christ, but a true real participation of his body
into ours, under the forms of bread, and wine, to the sanctification thereby of
our souls. If any require, what is a Capharnaical tearing, by the Capharnaits
conceived, and by Sectarists imagined; S. Cyril l. 4. c. 22. in Joan.
certifieth saying; Ad immanes serarum mores, vocari se a Christo,
arbitrabantur, incitarique vt vellent crudas hominum carnes manducare and
sanguinem bibere. They supposed Christ to induce them to the savage manners of
wild beasts, and to have incited them to eat the raw fleash of men, and to
drink their blood. If you would kill sectarists, you can not weane, nor win
them, from like gross, and carnal constructions of Christ's words.

But to the former purpose that I may not play a protestants parts, saying, you
see this taught, and that taught; this here, and that there; when it is nether
so, nor so: I will allege S. Cyprians words, brief but plain, S. Cypr. de
cana Domi^i.
faithfully, to justify my speech, in the most sparing interpretation which
any adversary might affoorde. Panis iste que^ Dominus discipulis porrigebat,
non effigy, sed natura mutatus, omnipotentia Verbi factus est caro; The bread
(says S. Cyprian) which our Lord gave to his disciples, not in appearance, but
in nature or substance changed, by the omnipotency of the word, was made
fleash. You M. Rider say, there is noe proof in Cyprian, that the natural,
substantial, and real body of Christ, is under the form of bread. The 105.
untruth.
That now by S. Cyprian is assured the 105. untruth, he in express terms
saying, the bread, remaining only in appearance bread, and by Christ's omnipotent
word, in nature changed, was made his fleashe. The 106. The 106. untruth.
untruth is also by S. Cyprian almost in every syllable of the foresaid
allegation certifyed, when you affirm that he with you, and you with him,
agree in this point. For there could not be greater opposition against you, The
107. untruth.
contained in fewer words. The 107. is by S. Cyprian certifyed, when you
inform that according his opinion, the wicked eat not the body of Christ: he
manifestly saying, that; S. Cypr. ser. 5. de lapsis.
exhalantibus etiam scelus suum ^aucibus Domini Corpus inuadu^t; with gaping
jaws and breathing their wickedness, they invade the body of Christ. And this
to have happened, because; ante exomologesin factam criminis, ante purgatam
conscientiam sacrificio, and manu sa^erdotis; etc. before fullfilling penance
for their fault, before purgeing their consciences by the sacrifice, and hands
of the Preests, etc. they adventured to approache. This times papistrie, and it
of those times are found, will ye, nil ye, comfortable. This made Causeus to
term Cyprian blockish, Causeus dial. 8. and 11.
and reprobate. He is in deed a block in their way, and a reprouer of their
impiety, thereby so grauelling their cause, that their greauing, and groaning
minds must have vamped out such reproaches.

There is no doubt left of the verity of the flesh and blood of Christ,
Catholic Priests.
for now by the assurance of our Lord, and certainty of our faith, Hyllarius
de Trinitate lib. 4. and 8. floruit, 370.
it is his true flesh and his true blood. 107. GEntlemen: now we must needs
commend you, Rider.
for you give testimony with the truth and us, against the late church of Rome
and your selves, now you come near the quick in deed, and therefore speak
both the truth, and truly. This is the manner how Christ must be eaten, by
faith, but you should have added the next line following, Et haec accepta atque
exhausta id efficient, etc. and these, (that is, sanctified bread and wine)
being thus by faith taken and thus drunk, bring this to pass, that Christ is
in us, and we in Christ: so now you say with Hyllarie, that Christ dwells in
all them that receive him by faith. Your own proof is one our side.
And so by this your own warrant you witness to the world, that there is no
place for the corporal receiving of Christ by the wicked, (as Rome teaches
it) because Christ dwells not in them, nor they in him. And so because this
your proof proves one part of the matter in question against your selves,
that Christ is to be eaten or received by our faith, not by our mouth or
teeth, I will address my self to the examination of your next proof.

The fifth part of the second proof: of S. Hilarie.
Fitzsimon.
107. WHen I perceived some saying of mine to have contented M. Rider, Laert. l.
6.
I mistrusted as Antisthenes, that I had uttered some foolishnes; considering
that, obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit; flattrie and falsehood does
content, and gratify the multitude, and truth breeds rather their dislyke.
But all is well; For it is but a feigned pretext of contentment. Let us in the
name of God join issue, upon S. Hilaries suffrage. All that M. Rider has
therein to applaude unto him self, is, that there is mention of faith therein.
That such faith, assures, the verity of Christ's true fleash, and his true
blood, to be in the sacrament, was no impediment for M. Rider to have said all
to be for his purpose, and so to gallopp gallantly away from examining the
matter any longer. But, as the proverb is, the baker (you may know him to have
imitated Melancton, by leaving his preaching, and applying his baking, and
publicly selling bread, to the exceeding detriment of the free bakers a whole
year together in Dublin) must not so part from the pillorie. For S. Hilarie
nayleth his ears fast, in saying; Vere Verbum carnem, cibo Dominico sumimus;
Verily, we receive the Word made fleash, in our Lords food; quomodo non
naturaliter in nobis manner existiman^^ est? how is he not to be thought
naturaly, to remain in us? si vere homo ille qui ex Maria natus est Christus:
S. Hilarious lib. 8. de Trinitate.
nosq vere sub mysterio carnem corporis sui sumin^^, if he who was borne of
Marie be truly Christ: then we under this mystery (...) truly receive the
fleash of his body. If M. Rider can pull out these nails, without tearing his
ears, (that we truly) (and therefore not only figuratively) receive the fleash
of his body, if he be Christ; and that ^e naturaly remains in us, and
therefore not only by conceit; (especialy S. Hilarie saying; Ibidem.
Non per concordiam voluntatis, non vnitatem voluntatis intelligi voluit;
Christ would not it should be understood by concord of our affectione, or
unity of our wills, but, naturaliter, naturaly; which he repeateth fouer,
(...) five times; and, per naturalem proprietatem, by natural propriety.) If I
say, M. Rider can declyne, or remove from these tormenting nails: then (to
incountre him in one of his own Lilian sentences, for others he knew none)
magnus mihi erit Apollo; he shall be our wysest Deane, whose every word shall be a
Delphian oracle. I had rather S. Hilarie confute him thus alone, then by other
amplificatio^s to confound him. The 108. untruth appears, saying; The 108.
untruth.
that we witness to the world that there is noe place for the corporal receiving
of Christ by the wicked. As if forsooth, none can be wicked that have faith,
nor any able to receive Christ, but by faith. Whereby first all protestants are
made free from wickedness; and it is next given for a Riderian sound sequel, S.
Hilarie says, that by our Lords testimony and assurance of our faith, Christ's
true fleash and blood are received: therefore who soever is not faithful does
not receive Christ's true fleash and blood. Which sequel if it be current, why
also not this: by faith and hospitality Marie Magdalen, and Martha, received
Christ into their house: therefore Anna, Cayphas, Pilat, could not receive him
otherwise then by faith and hospitality? The 109. The 109. untruth.
that this proof of S. Hilarie proves, we should not receive Christ by our
mouth.

Nothing remains in the world of the body and blood of Christ, Catholic
Priests.
but that which daily is made by the Priest on the Altar. 108. GEntlemen: I
perceive you are soon weary of well doing: Athan. lib. de Passione Imaginis
Christi cap. 7. floruit 375.
in your last proof you confessed a truth with us, 109.
even against your selves: But now you leave Fathers and bring fables, 110.
Rider.
and so produce one fable to prove another fable: that is, you produce one
fable of the crucifying of the image of Christ, Like opinion like proof.
and the miraculous abundant gushing of water and blood out of the image his
side, that cured all diseases in all parts and places of the world to prove
your carnal presence of the Sacrament, by your fained transubstantiation.

For answer to which, first I say, When fathers help not, you bring fables.
that you should fitter have placed this proof in the rank of your fained
miracles following, or in your question of images hereafter. But to cover the
foolerie and forgerie thereof, you couch it amongst the ancient Doctors and
Fathers of the Church, thereby hoping to have him pass with more credit. But I
will show first, that you have not dealt well nor truly with the Author of
this fable, nor with the Catholics of this kingdom, because you have left
out such words as would wound both your credit in this case, and spoil your
cause: besides, your Translation is nothing found.

You leave out in two lines these four words, Quasi per manus, and
spiritualiter: you left out quasi because belike it was but an Aduerb of
likeness, and so because omne simile is not idem. you thought it were better
to leave it behind, then to bring it to your hurt. Secondly, you leave out
per manus, for your Author says, per manus sacerdotum, by the hands of the
Priests, and you leave them both out, and say, per sacerdotem, least the
people should think and say, if only the Priest made it, then it, can
neither have flesh nor blood, and so the miracle were marred.

And therefore it were better to leave out per manus, and to say per sacerdotem,
by the Priest, for then might be understood not only all the members of his
body, and intentions of his mind, but also the gestures and motions of both,
required to the conception of such a wodden Savior.

And lastly, you leave out spiritualiter, spirituallie, he says not
carnally, and therefore this proof is very vnschollerlike alleged: when
our question is of a presence carnal, you produce a presence spiritual: this
word makes for us, but that we scorn (and know it sinful) to bring in such
forgerie (for proof) in a question of divinity. For this you should have
brought in thus, which is daily made by the Priest spirituallie, Now how this
proof fitteth you, let others censure: shame makes me scilent.

This fable contains seven chapters of the crucifying of the images of CHRIST
done by the Jews for envy to CHRIST: who no sooner pierced the Image his
side, but Continuo exiuit sanguis and aqua, The word is Hydria, which you may
see John. 2. verse. 6. contains two or three measures or firk nes a piece,
which shows it to be a notable loudlie, and lewd legend.
forthwith gushed out both water and blood in such abundance, that they filled
many vesseles with the same, and this blood was carried into all the parts of
the world, through Asia, Affricke, and Europe, and cured all manner of
diseases. Upon sight of which miracle the cruel Jews repented, and were
baptized: and presently there was a holy Quinto Idus Nouemb.
day made in rememberance thereof, which was kept with no less solemnity then
the feast of Easter, and the Nativity of our Lord, as the Author says. Then
in the seventh and last chapter comes in your proof, which concludes a peace
amongst the Clergy, touching the truth of Christ's blood: for now says the
Author, there can no other flesh nor blood of Christ be found in the world,
then that which is daily made by the hands of the Priests spirituallie upon
the Altar. But this your proof is not truly translated according to the
Latten, but because it is a loudelie, I will neither reprove you for your
defective translation, nor correct it for any man's direction: Like Translation
like truth.
for I see no reason to bestow a true translation, upon a false miracle or
forged fable. Other circumstances, as, where this image was said to be kept
and brought soorth, etc. I refer the curious Reader, to the foolish (...)
forged Author. But that all the Catholics of this kingdom may see the reasons
that move me to think it to be a fable, be these: all of them gathered out of
the body of this fable, falselie fathered upon Athanasius.

So several places and persons falsely chaleng to them selus that every one
has a proper piece of Christ's cross. Athanasius printed at Paris, 1581. page
534, etc. So our Jesuits and Priests now, would persuade the Catho.
one sort of Priests said, that they had the right blood, and another sort of
Priests in other cities said, that they had Christ's very blood that issued
forth of his side: and so the contention among the Priests grew to be very
hot (as it is this day betwixt you Jesuits and Priests about other matters)
whereupon the whole Clergy met together at Caesaria in Cappe^^cia, for the
appeasing of this dangerous broile. The reverend Fathers were no sooner set,
but vpstart Don Petrus Bishop of Nicomedia, and said: Reverend Fathers, I have
a little book here of Athanasius, which I greatly desire to present to your
fatherhoode view and consideration: Sancta Synodus respondit: placet been, and
vt legatur opta^^^ The holy Synod answered; we are very well pleased, and
desire it may be read. Thus concerning the occasion: which was a solemn
Synod, to appease a foolish superstitious contention amongst the lying
covetous Priests of that age: when every hedge-priest would persuade the
simple people, that he had in his vial the very blood of Christ, which was of
force to pardon their sins.

Athanasius work contra Idola; a mean Grammarian may see it and discern it:
and therefore it cannot be his work.

Athanasius writ a most sharp tractate against Idolatry, when he was living,
and now they would father this fable upon him after his death: and therefore it
cannot be his work: for so we should wickedlie charge that godly father
either with recantation of truth: contradiction in and with himself, or open
maintenance of palpable Idolatry.

It was taken to be Athanasius work, only upon the credit of the Popes
Stipendarie Petrus Bishop of Nicomedia, as you may see in the title page, 554.
and therefore is not his work by open confession.

The time bewraies the forgerie; for this thing should be done by report of
your Sigebert in ann. 755
under Constantine the fifth, yet colored with Athanasius name, as written by
him, that was dead four hundred years before this matter happened, and
therefore plain and palpable forgerie.

It was imagined to be done some twenty years or thereabouts, before the
second Nicene, as a preparatiue for the planting of images in Churches, Action
quarta, synodi 2. Nicenae. tom. 3.
in which Council it was accordingly performed, and this fable registered in
the same, as a sure foundation for such a building, and a fit proof for such a
proposition.

Now let the indifferent Reader peruse at his leisure, but the seven chapters
of this Treatise, and he shall scarce read one line without a lie. Yet
superstition blushed not to in sert this fable into this fathers work. But if
we should tender such proofs, and preach such fabulous stuff for sound
divinity to the people, you would call us sots and souleslaiers. But for
Christ's sake and the peoples salvation, confess your errors and forsake
them, with these lying fables: it is no shame to forsake sin, but it is
dangerous when sin forsakes you. And so to your next proof.

The sixth part of the 2. proof. Of S. Athanasius.
108. Fitzsimon.
You have often perceived a fordwarnes in M. Rider to reprehend leauings out,
and puttings in; begyning and ending, at this place, and not at that. Here also
the same, and with like infortunat success, is observed. First he blames that
we leave out, [quasi, as yf] I should think, that noe wisdom or learning
would think that a fault; there being no manner of use of it, to any purpose;
or against it. Secondly that I omitted, per manus, by the hands. This omission
also should not offend him, both because it shows against him, that not only
by the faith, but also by the hands of the priest, Christ is upon the altar.
Secondly, because he omitteth it him self immediately, in these words: which
is daily made by the priest spiritualy. Thirdly, he blames the omission of,
spiritualiter, spiritualie: which being contained, had well consisted with our
doctrine; as well because we believe that spiritual, and corporal, may consist
together, which is manifouldly shown: as also, because we teach his being on
the altar, not to be a sensible, corruptible, and Capharnaical being, but a
true, substantial, real, yet invisible, being. Whereas contrarywyse, he is
bound to affirm, that in his sacrament Christ is nether corporaly, nor
spiritualy: and consequently, spiritual was omitted by me to my own
hinderance, and yet not to his advantage. For Foxes Martyrs (to whom M. Rider
has bound himself to consent) do thus instruct; The difference of Doctrine,
between the faithful and Papists, concerning the sacrament, is, that the
Papists say, that Christ is corporaly under, Fox Acts and Monum. page 1529.
or in the form of bread and wine; But the faithful say that Christ is not
there, nether corporaly, nor spiritualy. The same is the opinion of Musculus,
as appears in the 96. number, saying; The bread is the body of Christ,
Muscul. in loc. com. c. de cana n. 2. page 327.
nether naturaly, nor personaly, nor realy, nor corporaly, nor yet spiritualy,
nor figuratively, nor significatiuely: it remains after all these that we
say, the bread is the body of Christ sacramentaly. We must keep these men at a
baye, and at one resolution, and not suffer them to wander now to the word
spiritual, then to the word mystical, after to the word figurative: for this
is the most sovereign remedy to help, and hurt them; that you keep their
noses to the gryndestone of one settled profession. Otherwise you shall ever
find them; In nequitia and astutia circumuentionem erroris operantes; Ephesians. 4.
in wickedness and fraud woorking the circumuention of error, as the Apostle
says: that is running into all digressions, and variable doctrins, according to
the prophet; impij in circuitu ambulant; Psalm. 11.
the wicked walk in circuit. For the word, Sacramental, which was their last
refuge, I report to the 103. number, to manifest whether it has not also
abandoned them, and left them forlorn.

The 2. parcel of the 6. part.
109. M. Rider confessing the general belief of all Christians toward this
history out of which our last testimony is produced, in so much as there was
a solemn holy day made in remembrance thereof: leaving to confute or examine
the words, whereby in it is declared; that the body and blood of Christ, is
made on the altar, he betaketh him self to an impertinent disputation, whether
S. Athanasius was the autheure thereof. As if the matter approved by 350. Fathers
in the second council of Nice, had no other authority, but by being written or
not written by S. Athanasius.

The third parcel of the sixth part of the second proof.
110. FOr a man of M. Riders quality, it should seem strange, if he would
oppose him self against such venerable authority, without vrge^t and
undoubted proofs. His first motive not to believe it, is, that there was
errors sprung concerning the blood issueing from that image; for reforming
whereof, a Council was assembled. Is this a reason to deny a matter what mystery
of religion is there, but errors have sprung touching it? And why should
concils be collected, but to reform errors? How wise the first exception is,
let God and Man judge. The second reason of his, to distrust it, is; that the
style is not the same, which Athanasius observed else where. But this might
proceed from the interpreter. And the like argument might be made, that S. Paul
was not autheur of the epistle to the Hebrews; nor S. Ihon of the Apocalips;
because their style is altered. Yet few sobre protestants, but would blush to
misdoubt them to be the autheurs. The third reason: Athanasius wrote against
idolatry, therefore he wrote not this idolatrous history. To this I answer,
that worshipping of images was not counted idolatry during S. Athanasius his
life. Nicephorus lib. 6. c. 27.
Witness Nicephorus glorious testimony to that effect, saying: Zenaias iste
primus (an. 493.) o audacem animum, and os impudens! vocem illam euomuit)
Christi, and eorum qui illi placuere imagines, venerandas non esse. That
Zenaias first, anno 493. O desper at mind, and impudent mouth! vomited out
that voice: the images of Christ, and them that pleased him, not to be
reverenced. Wherefore the writing against idolatry before Zenaias, your opinions
patriarck, might proceed from a commender of worshipping images. For, by whom
was ever idolatry abolished, but by the defenders of such worshipp? Have ever
protestants converted any contries from idolatry? how are they named? What
histories recompt then? Tertullians saying of them is daily verified, de
prescrip. cap. 42. Hoc esse negotium illis, non Ethnicos conuertendi, sed
nostros euertendi, and hanc captare gloriam, si stantibus ruinam, non si
iacentibus eleuationem operentur. This to be their employment, not to convert
pagans, but to pervert beleuers: and to make it their glory, if they can cast
down them that stand, and not to lift up them that are fallen. The fouerth
reason is, the book was esteemed to be of Athanasius, by credit, and report
of Peter bishop of Nicomed. therefore it was not of Athanasius by open
confession. A fit [therfor] for such a scholar. The bishop of Nicomed. did
commend it as the book of Athanasius, therefore by open confession, he said, it
was not the book of Athanasius; How did he then commend it to be the book of
Athanasius? That it is said, this bishop to have been the popes stipe^diarie,
makes the 110. untruth. That it is confessed therefore, The 110. untruth. The
111. untruth.
not to be S. Athanasius his work because it was said to be his work, makes
the 111. untruth. The 112. untruth. The 113. untruth.
That it is reported by our own histories to have happened under Co^stantyne the
fifth, makeeh the 112. untruth. The 113. untruth is, that there is scarcely a
line in the 7. Chapters of such book of S. Athanasius but contains a lie. I
remember one Mistress Kirie, an English woman, who dwelled in S. Thomas streat
in Dublin, anno 1580. to have been replied unto by a poor begging woman who
had craved her alms for the sake of god, and our Lady; when the said Mistress
Kirie said she would give nothing for out lady, because she was better then
she, her self. Mischefe said the beggar, take the worst of you both. The same
might well be said of the most lying lines in your book, or this here
specified. Notwithstanding this assured discovery of his reasons to be most
frivolous and ridiculous, or rather lamentable, yet I think of the matter
according to the annotations of Baronius upon the 9. of November: that it was
not S. Athanasius of Alexandria that was autheur thereof, but some other, (yet
very ancient) of that name. And all may think, that this M. Riders exception
against the autheur, is no more to the matter, then if one would say, nothing to
be true whose autheur is unknown.

Catholic Priests. Damascen. lib. 4. de fide orthod. ^ap. 14. floruit 391.
Let us approach in ardent faith, laying our hands in manner of a cross, and
let us receive the body of him that was crucified. Rider.
111. YOu leave out ei: for it is in the father, Accedamus ei, let us come and
approach to him, which is in heaven not on your Altar, or in your miraculous
accidents, and then shows the manner how; in ardent faith; not with mouth,
teeth, and stomach. Damascen flatly shows the impossibility of your carnal
presence.
So this father is against your self, for the manner of receiving of Christ,
which is spiritual, not corporal. And in the same chapter, the same father
says, Corpus Christi, etc. that Christ's body being united to the godhead,
descended not from heaven to the earth, and therefore cannot be in your
sacrament corporally and carnally. And as fire and heat be in a burning coal,
so, (and more) neerelie are Christ's humanity and divinity joined together, so
that he which shall touch the coal should taste of heat, and he that should
eat Christ's humanity, must also eat Christ's divinity: which is damnable to
think, for a man to eat and devour his God. But because this your
impertinent proof is your apparent disproofe, I will proceed to the next.

The seventh part of the second proof, of S. Damascen.
111. I Have seen many nimble Riders, gambole over stools and stocks, in
Dublin, on shrouetuesdaye: but such stools, and stocks, as Damascen obiecteth
against M. Rider in the place by me alleged, so lightly vaunted over, I never
could hitherto observe. I might seem to Catholics faulty, that of so much as
Damascen tendreth, I affoorded so little, and but one testimony only, whereas
every line of half the chapter, might testify the greatest opposition that
might be against M. Rider. But my affection to brevity, and the sufficiency
of what was brought to any man not wilfully obstinat, enforced me thereto. Now
at least, attend what Damascen delivers. First, discoursing by many arguments
and examples of the powerful words of Christ, he demands; S. Damascen. lib.
4. de fide Orthod. cap. 14.
Quid tandem offerri potest, quin ex pane Corpus suum, ex vino and aqua
fanguinem suum efficere queat? What possiblye may be objected, but that he may
make of bread his body, of wine and water, his blood? Secondly, discoursing how
some might require, to understand the manner of such conversion of bread and
wine into Christ's body and blood; he says; Tibi item respondeo, spiritus
sanctus superuenit, eaque efficit quae orationis facultatem, and mentis
intelligentiam excedunt; I answer thee also, that the holy Ghost intermedleth,
Ibidem.
and woorketh those things, which surpass the vttrance of speech, and conceit
of understanding. Thirdly, discoursing, whether Christ localy discendeth from
heaven to be in the Sacrament; he says; Non quod assumptum illud corpus e
caelo descenderit: Ibideus.
sed quia panis ipse ac vinum in corpus and sanguinem Dei immutantur; Not that
his body assumpted discendeth from heaven; but because the very bread and wine
(without such discension) is changed into the body and blood of God. Whereof he
adds, that; modus eiusmodi est, Ibidem.
vt nulla ratione indagari queat; the manner is such, as by noe reach of reason
it can be conceived. Fowerthly, discoursing whether good and badd do receive
such mystery: he answers, they do, thee good, Ibidem.
in peccatorum remissionem and in vitam aeternam; to the remission of their
Synns and everlasting life; the badd, in poenam and supplicium, to their pain
and punishment. Fifthly, discoursing (as if he were a prophet, to prevent
heretical opinions) whether the bread and wine be only a figure or sign of
Christ's body and blood; he answers; Ibidem.
Nec vero panis and vinum Corporis Christi figurae sunt (absit enim hoc) verum
ipsummet Domini Corpus diuinitate affectum; In no manner bread and wine ar a
figure of the body of Christ (fie upon that) but the very body of our Lord
conjoined with his divinity. Whereunto he adds that Christ said not; Corporis
and Sanguinis signum, sed Corpus and Sanguinem; the sign of his body and
blood, but his body and blood. Sixthly, discoursing of the manner to approach, he
prescribes the humble and devout manner, contained in the testimony or
allegation which I first propounded. These letts, nay these montayns interposed
in M. Riders way, by Damascen. yet his flying Pegasus, or horse (namely his
deceitfulnes) found no difficulty to transporte him beyond all, and to cause
him to affirm that the passage was plain and favorable. But many dream they
are far voyaged, when they are found far deceived.

In the mean time, as you a little before have observed his great simpathie,
and union with Puritans: so now I crave your attendance to perceive like
concourse with infidels, and such heretics, as make Christ's divinity to have
suffered. Luther tom. 7. sermon. de Eucharist. fol. 335.
Auerroes, that wicked Infidel (says Luther) laden with sin, accuses us
Christians, as the most wicked of the world, for eating, and devouring of our
Cod. What say you is not the same reproached to us, by M. Rider? Is not this a
perfect agreement with impious infidels? But I would feign have his resolution:
if (as he said before n. 96.) it is like treason to offend against the picture
of the Prince, as it is against his person: Why it is a greauouser imputation,
to eat Christ him self, then to eat him (according to the Protestant
imagination) in his representation figure, or picture? Let him escape the brunt
of this objection; without failing in what he said before, or what he says
here, and his wisdom shall be accounted greater then accustomed. For thus I make
it in form of argument. He that receaueth Christ's seals unworthily (says M.
Rider n. 96.) commits high treason against Christ: therefore it is as grievous
an offense to devour his seals unworthily as to devour his body. Because,
says he, it is like offense, to disgrace his garments, as his person. And
consequently in eating their supper as the seal of Christ, they offend
(according his discourse) no less then in eating Christ. Also if they may eat
the seals without offense, so, as lawfully may they eat his fleash, he
assuring them, that unless they would eat not his seal but his fleash, they
should have no life in them. Secondly, if as he says, what is done to Christ's
humanity, the same must be done to his divinity: How can he avoid, whereas
that Christ according to his humanity was whipped, Vide number. 37.
pierced, and put to death, but the same must be thought fullfilled against his
divinity? O glorious, and godly friend of Christ's divinity! How we and our
doctrine determine that Christ both according humanity, and divinity, is
eaten, and received without detriment and corruption, already is so often
related, as it needs not to be here repeated. The residue of such blasphemies
against the death of Christ's Divinity, as is here inferred against the words
of Christ, and his institution that we should eat him, (that is religiously
receive him into our stomachs) may be found plentifully in the examination of
Protestantcie, The 114. untruth.
toward the Articles of our creed. The 114. untruth can not be denied, in
saying; Damascen is against us.

This bread is bread before the consecration: but when it is consecrated,
Catholic Priests Ambr. de sacrame^ti^ lib. 4. cap. 4. floruit. 400.
of bread it is made the flesh of Christ. 112. ALL this we grant to be true,
but you come not to the point, Rider.
whether Christ's flesh be made of bread by way of transubstantiation, that is,
by the changing of one nature or substance into another, by hoc est corpus
meum; this is our question, but you dare not touch it because you cannot prove
it, But seeing you recite fathers by pieces and patches, taking that you think
will fit your purpose, and leaving that which would cross your course or
weaken your cause; I will for the truth sake, and the Catholics good add
that out of Ambrose, which I am sure some of you would wish out of Ambrose. If
you had read a few lines more, you should have heard him tell you another tale,
and have expounded himself in this place: In the same chapter.
his words be these; Si ergo tanta vis est in sermon Domini Jesus, vt
inciperent esse qua non erant quanto magis operatorius est vt sint quae erant,
and in aliud commutentur? If there be such a force in the word of the Lord
Jesus that the things which were not, began to be, how much more can it work
this, that they shall be the same they were, and yet be changed into another
thing? And then brings in an example, how a thing may be that that it was,
and yet be changed. Tu ipse eras, sed eras vetus creatura, etc. Thou thy self
waste: but thou wast an old creature: after, when thou wast baptized, thou
begannest to be a new creature: will thou know how, a new creature? every one
says the Apostle, that is in Christ, is a new creature. Learn then how the
word of God is accustomed to change every creature: and when he will he
alters the course of nature. If you had read or known this, you would never
have alleged the other, for his example is this: as he that is baptized
suffers no material substancial or corporal change, rhough he be borne a
new spirituallie, and put on Christ. Vide did. 2. de co^secr. cap. quia corpus
page 432.
But he his changed not loosing or altring the body or soul which he had:
but in attaining the grace which he had not. And so the change is accidental,
not substantial, as from vice to virtue. So in substance the bread and wine
are the same they were before, but in accident or quality, they are turned
into another thing, of common bread, made a Sacrament.

So Chrysostom amplifying the change of bread in the Euchariste, Chrisost. in
Matthew. hom. 83.
he adds immediately withal: Sic etiam in baptismo: even so there is the
like change of water in baptism, as of bread in the Lords Supper: but that is
not of substance, but in quality, respect, or use, and so in this.

And this change is not in casting away the substance of bread or wine, Dialog.
1. cap. 6.
but in casting grace unto them: As Theodoret says, Non naturam ipsam
transmutans, sed naturae adijciens gratiam not changing nature, but adding
grace to nature. Ambrose de ijs qui initiantur cap. 9.
But who can better expound Ambrose his meaning then Ambrose himself? who
says, Ante benedictionem etc. before the blessing of the heavenly words, it
is called another kind: after the words of consecration the body of Christ is
signified: does not say, is the body of Christ, but signifies the body of
Christ. And else where. Ambr. 1. Cor. 11.
In comedendo and potando, etc. In eating and drinking we signify the body
and blood that were offered for us. And again he says, Quod est figura, Ambr.
de Sacrame^tis lib. 4. cap. 4.
etc. which is a figure of the body and blood of the Lord. But of this we have
sufficiently spoken before.

And thus now the Reader may be sufficiently satisfied that the change is not
natural, but mystical, not of substance, but of accidents and qualities. And
so bread remains in substance, but is changed in mystery. And so is bread
made the flesh of Christ, not by your miraculous transubstantiation, but by
mistical and Apostolical benediction or sanctification, not in changing the
nature of it, but adding grace to it, as beforesaid. And thus Ambrose has
answered Ambrose. And if you would read him without partial affection, he
would withdraw you from this your imagined opinion. But now to that which
follows.

The 8. part of the second proof of S. Ambrose.
112. FIrst he affirms, that all we produce out of S. Ambrose is true: yet
that we want in words our purpose of Transubstantiation. He might be ashamed,
to disable the right honorable Deputy and Concile, to whom he dedicated his
book, in exhibiting before their eyes the most manifest, the most palpable,
and the most forcible allegation that could be imagined for transubstantiation;
and such one as possibly can not be true, but transubstantiation must be
acknowleged; yet to dazel their eyes, and delude their judgments, as if he
would persuade them, they did noe wise see in those words what all judgments
must needs conceive, unless they were bewitched. For what is
transubstantiation, but a conversion of one substance into another, noe thing
of the former substance remaining? And in these words of S. Ambrose, is not it
said, that bread was before consecration: and not remaining after it; but
contrarywyse that it is made the fleash of Christ and consequently
transubstantiated? Are not the words following, selected out of S. Ambrose to
testify by example, a conversion of one substance into another, thereby to
persuade our belief of such conversion of bread, into Christ's body? This is to
use the L. Deputy, and Council, as the Jews used Christ in buffeting their
profession, with main strokes, in the mean time as if they had been buffmen
blind, demanding them that they should tell, what had smitten them or been
against them: Or rather inforceing them to believe by such strokes they had
not been harmed, but rather greatly pleasured, and much aduantaged For, S.
Ambrose the easier to prove such conversion of bread and wine, he exemplifyeth
by many other conuersions of Moises rod into a Serpent; the rivers of Egypt
into blood; of the read sees into that firm soliditie, that they stood of them
selves divided; of Jordan returning against nature backward; etc. after which
he brings the creation of heaven, and earth made of nothing by the puissant
words of God. Whereupon he infers; If Gods word could make things to be,
which were not; how much more can he make of things that were, things to be?
And by consequent; how unchristian is it to think, but his words this is my
body, this is my blood, do not convert bread and wine into his body, and into
his blood? And then he concludes; Ergo tibi vt respondeam, non erat corpus
Christi ante consecrationem, S. Ambros. l. 4. de sacram. c. 4 and 5. and lib.
6. c. 1.
sed post consecrationem dico tibi, quod iam Corpus est Christi; Therefore that I
may resolve the, it was not the body of Christ before consecration, but after
consecration, I say unto thee, that now it is the body of Christ. 2. Cor. 6.15.
What society is there betwixt light and darkness? what agreement betwixt
Christ and Belial? what participation betwixt the faithful and the Infidel?
that is betwixt S. Ambrose, and M. Rider? S. Ambros, telling by so many
proofs, and examples, a true conversion (in so significant words) of bread
into Christ's body, by consecration: M. Rider denying such conversion, and such
consecration. Nay believe him, and Ambrose has not a word against him: but if
he were redd says he without partial affection, he would withdraw us from our
opinion, and make us think no otherwise then as good Protestants. With what
affection then did Causeus, and the Centuriasts, Causeus dial. 8. and 11.
centur. 3. c. 4. page 54. and 81. Calu. in libello de caena, and de vera
reformat. Zuingl. to 1. Epichir. de Canone missae fol. 183. Cartwr. l. 2. page
513. and lib. 1. page 94. S. Hilar. l. 1. de Trinit.
read him, when they said, he was be witched by the devil? With what affection
did Calvin, and Zuinglius read him, when they professed he stood for Papists,
in establishing this incruental Sacrifice? With what affection did Cartwright
read him; when he said, the bringing in of his authority was a moving and
sommouing of Hell: and that he held diverse things corruptly? But because all
may know who is a good reader without partial affection, I will defyne him, in
the words of S. Hilarie. Optimus ille lector est qui non cogit illud dictis
contineri, quod ante lectionem praesumserit ad intelligendum, sed qui doctorum
intelligentiam expectat; He is the best reader, who does not wreast that to be
contained in evidences, which he before presumed, to be understood, but he who
expects the exposition of Doctors.

Now S. Ambrose by Catholic and Protestant Doctors, is allotted and assigned
to me against Protestantcie: whether then of us, have read him without partial
affection? This saying therefore, against such authority, makes the 115.
untruth. The 116. The 115. untruth. The 116. untruth. The 117. untruth. S.
Ambros. lib 4. c 4. and 5. and lib 6. de Sacram. c. 1. The 118. untruth. The
119. untruth.
that we have not showed whether Christ's fleash be made of bread. The 117. that
the instances of such conuersions mentioned by S. Ambrose, should be dislyked
by us. The 118. that he brings our spiritual change, from an old creature to
a new, to impugn the corporal change of bread into Christ. The 119. that S.
Ambros proves the change in this matter, to be only in quality. For in the
same place he says, that wine, Sanguis efficitur qui plebem redemit; The 120.
untruth.
is made the blood which delivered the people. The 120. that after consecration
Christ's body being signified present, (...) 12^. untruth.
should therefore not be present. The 121. that because there is a figure
mentioned therefore there is not a substance: as appears in 31. 39. 42. 46.
numbers. ^he 122. untruth.
The 122. that it may be collected, that bread still remains: it being
expressly said by S. Ambros; Vbi accesserit consecratio, Loco citato.
de pane fit caro Christi; When consecration is pronounced, of bread is made
the fleash of Christ. And in having by such assignation obtained S. Ambrose,
give ear to know how great a treasure I have purchased, and that by an old
and great reformer, even Pelagius him self. S. Aug. li 4. de Nupt. and concup.
c. 3.
Pelagius sic laudat Ambrosium vt dicat: B. Ambrosius episcopus, in cuius
praecipue libris Romana fulget fides, qui scriptorum inter latinos flos quidam
specios^^ enituit, cuius fidem and purissimum in scripturis sensum, nec inuidus
quidem aus^^ est reprehendere. Pelagius so prayseth Ambrose as he says: B.
Ambros Bishop, in whose books principally the Roman faith reshyneth, who among
the Latins as a bewtifull flower flourished, whose fidelity, and pure sense in
the scripturs, the very malignant durst not reprehend.

Catholic Priests. Chrisost hom. 51. in cap. 4. Math. floruit 410.
Not only the Sacrament, but the body of Christ is propounded unto us, not
that we should touch it only, but that we should eat it. Rider.
113. GEntlemen; it is in the 51. Hom, of the 14. chapter of Matthew, not in the
fourth: though it cost me great labor to find the place, yet I blame not you,
it might be the writer, not the Author: and if it were the Author, it is but
the slip of his pen, and therefore in discretion pardonable.

Still you run from the manner to the matter.
But you allege it very impertinentlie and improperlie: still proving the
matter never denied: and skipping the manner which I urged, and you should
answer. But if you had read a few lines more, Chrysostom would have told you
the manner how Christ is to be received, not by your mouth, teeth, throat or
stomach; but Magna cum fide, mundo cum cord, with great faith and a clean
heart. You stopped before your full period, This father is wholly with us, and
therefore unadvisedly brought in by you.
which is in you still a great fault: and will keep still the Catholics by
this your means in great blindness and doubts: who beleues when they hear you
allege one sentence of a Father, that all his works are suitable to that,
judging him to speak on your side by the sound of the ear, not by the touch
of knowledge: whereas if you would read a Father your selves from the beginning
of a controversy to the end, though it were painful unto you, yet it were
profitable unto you and the Catholics, then you should see the thing plainly
by the father expounded, which is by you often and too much wrested.

Read this father upon the seuenteeth Homily upon the tenth of the Hebrews,
and 1. Cor. 11. Hom. 27. and you shall find him there condemning your carnal
presence, mass, with your sacrifice, whereby you may perceive in this point
your opinion new and doubtful: and our religion old and certain.

But though this place be impertinent to prove the maine, which is our
question, yet it proves with us against you, that Christ must be eaten by
faith spirituallie, not by the mouth carnally, and that overthrows one of
your chief pillars. And so to your next proof.

The 9. part of the second proof of S. Chrysostom.
113. COnsider I request you Christian Readers, Fitzsimon.
a desperate dealing in my gentle friend M. Rider. You may well remember, how Fox
and Musculus, nu. 108. n. 96. Vide fusen. 96. 108.
rejected all other manner of Christ's being in the Sacrament, beside a
Sacramental manner: which Calvin nu. 96. says, is the brazen wall against all
incounters of adversaries to his opinion. You also may well remember, how M.
Rider relyeth to the phrase sacramental, thinking (n. 103. etc.) as often as it
is mentioned, so often to stand for his purpose. S. Chrisost. Hom. 51. in cap 14.
Math.
now here in this testimony S. Chrysostom (as he seems) wreasteth from them
this word sacramental: denying Christ to be only as a Sacrament, and affirming
that besyd the sacrament, we both eat and touch the very body of Christ.
What then was M Riders, as I said, desperate dealing? to leave the matter and
bidd us read else where, here and there, and we should find wonders. There was
a certain preacher in Paris, A preacher in Paris.
woe for pointing his audience to autheurs by him named, him self not producing
any allegation out of them, but saying seek here in such a one, and there in
such another, and you shall find stoare. Whereby he was named by all generaly,
the poster over to seek, where nothing could be found. Judge you, whether my
Caualiero, was not his scholar. Could such a main assault, and by that goulden
mouthed Chrysostom as M. Rider worthily terms him, have noe better
resolution? Now in deed (that I may always deal uprightly) S. Chrysostom,
toward any other then such mates, does not in the place cited, say, not only
the Sacrament, but not only the garment. Whereas therefore with them, the
sacrament is made no better then a garment, or bare representatio^ of Christ,
and that S. Chrysostom instructs; S. Chrysostom. loco cit.
that not only any such outward garment is in the Sacrament exhibited unto us,
but corpus ipsius; non vt tangamus solummodo, sed vt comedamus and saturemur;
his own body, not only that we might touch it, but also eat it, and be
satiated: it seemed all one sense against such (as I said) compagnions, to have
translated sacrament, or garment. For they compare the sacrament to Helias
cloak, and inform that it is not more conjoined with Christ's body, Witaker
against M. Martin. page 11.
then such cloak with Elias, he being translated, and the cloak remaining
with Elizeus. Whereby, as I imagine, M. Rider knowing what I could replye, if he
had made any difference betwixt Sacrament and garment, left such translation
vncontrowled. But think you, that M. Rider to the passage of Chrisostom
alleged, has said nothing? you are deceived. For he answers, that we run
from the manner, to the matter. Marye he tells you not how: but, because those
two words, had some consonance in sound; having only cuppled them together, as
hunters do hounds of like color and proportion, he takes his leave, and is
galloped away. I have some time noted the same refuge, and evasion to the same
words, in Latimere, of whom Fox page 1325. col. 1. number. 27. delivers his
answer, saying; It is true as touching the matter; but not as tuching the manner
of the thing. The same is repeated in the 70. number following, in a plain
contradiction of it self in this former place. So that it serves as a common
place, or answer, to all objections, and as a harborow against all foul
weather, as well for friends, as foes. For be it to the purpose, or against it,
yet they that know not what matter, and what manner is, may surmise some answer
given. But I pray you (gentle Readers) to conceive (the matter of the B.
Sacrament being Christ's body; and the manner, to be substantialy, realy, truly,
present therein, and therewith) whether have I declined, either the one, or the
other, alleging S. Chrisostom as before.

Secondly he answers, that the receiving should be (according to S.
Chrysostom) with a great faith, and a pure heart. To which I replye, port of
those words there in deed to be mentioned; to wit, with a great faith: the
residue to be a patche in that place, of M. Riders making and foisting to the
rest. Next I replye, the words immediately following, S. Chrysostom hom. 5. in
cap. 14. Math.
to expound S. Chrysostom, and all other Fathers commending a faithful
receiving; to be clean opposite to Protestantrie. The words are; Cum fide
autem accedere, non est vt tantummodo propositum corpus recipias, verum etiam
multo magis vt mundo cord tangas, and sic adeas quemadmodum ipsum Christum;
for to approache by says is not, that th^^ should only receive the body
propounded, but also much more that th^^ should ^uch with a clean heart, and
so repair as to Christ him self. Protestants, imagining that no body of
Christ is propounded to be received, and that repayring should not be as to
Christ him self, but as to his bare appellation, figure, resemblance: what
right have they any more, to talk of receiving by faith, expounded thus by the
Fathers? Do they not know S. Chrysostoms mind, (and consequently of the rest)
that the faithful receiving, Ch ysostom. hom. 60. ad pop.
is to include Christ substantialy, and not to exclude him? Witness these
words; Semetipsum nobis commiscet, non side tantum, sed and ipsa re; not by
faith alone, but in very substance. What have Protestants to claim in S.
Chrysostom? he saying: that Christ allows his fleashe, Idem hom. 45. in cap.
6 Joan. Ide^ lib. 3. de sacerdot.
tangi, and dentibus infigi; to be touched, and chewed with teethe. He saying:
that, Christ sitting with his Father, (whereat he exclameth, o miraculum! o Dei
benignitatem! o miracle! o bounty of God) and in the ipso temporis articulo
omnium manibus pertractatur, in the very same instant of time, is handled by
all men's hands. What could the Pope him self; or greatest papist, say more
repugnant to the heart, and fundation, of protestantcie, in this controversy?

Therefore the 123. untruth can not be denied, The 123. untruth.
in saying in the margent, that Chrysostom is wholly with protestants. Alas, M.
Rider, are you ignorant how contrary such saying is to Cartwright, Cart. lib 2.
page 524. 525. 526. Item page 107. lib. 3. page 89. 90.
affirming, it is dangerous to allow Chrisostomes proceedings? Alas, are you
ignorant or a despiser of the prophets words; quid apponatur ad linguam
dolosam? sagittae potentis acutae. What shall be reserved for a deceitful tongue?
sharp arrows of the powerful; cum carbonibus desolatorijs; with coals of
desolation. Truly as the wyseman says, or rather the holy Ghost; Proverb. ^.
Deus non indiget vestro mendacio, vt pro illo loquamini dolos. God needs not
your untruth, that for him you should utter deceits, or, which is all one, to
affirm to have them favorers, who as instantly, and ernestly as they may,
disprove, and condemn your persuasions, as the chief of your own fraternity
acknowledge toward S. Chrysostom. The 124. untruth is, The 124. untruth.
that it cost you great pains to find our allegation as we had quoted it.
For, althowgh the fowerth number being put for the fowerteenth, might have
driven you to payns; yet the 51. homily being specified upon S. Matthew, it had
been sufficient to ease you of other pain, then what the fynding thereof
ingenered in your guilty mind. The 125. untruth is, The 125. untruth.
that the allegation is impertinent; and that we run from the manner to the
matter. This is often propounded but never expounded. In all your book, to my
remembrance you tell but once, and that by glancing, that the matter of the
sacrament is Christ and all his merits. n. 121. such matter S. Chrysostom in our
allegations certyfieth to be in our Sacrament, denying his being only
sacramentaly, or by faith only, and affirming to be Christ himself, he that
sits, at the right hand of God; and that in manner aforesaid. It is time now
for variety sake, to invent two other words of one consonancie: or to tell in
particular, where we omit, either matter, or manner, deceitfully. For your bare
affirmations have cracked their credit. The 126. The 126. untruth. The 127.
untruth.
that Chrysostom after a few lines would have told us not to receive Christ by
mouth, or teethe of stomach. The 127. that I stopped before my full period; For
the suffrage alleged ended at a full point: and what M. Rider adioyneth, is
not in any one point, in all that homily. The 128. The 128. untruth.
that this Father else where condemns our doctrine. Marvel not to find
untruths more plentiful in this his distorting the Fathers from us. For as it
was a loud untruth, dislyked (as appears) by all learned protestants in the
world, to claim the Fathers as friends or approuers of protestantcie, and
adversaries to the Catholic Romain truth: so can it not be supported, but by
infinite untruths in discussing the particulars. How often this is verifyed in
all this treatise, toward S. Chrysostom in particular, appears manifouldly.

Catho. Priests. Cirill in Ioh. lib. 4. cap. 13 floruit. Anno 423.
We ought rather to believe in Christ, and humbly to learn of him; then like
drunke^ sots to cry out, how can he give us his flesh? Rider.
114 GEntlemen: I wonder you bring in this for your proof: alas: this is
nothing pertinent to our matter in hand, we cry not how can he give us his
flesh? For we know that he gave his flesh for us substantiallie on the cross:
misticallie in the Sacrament: and spirituallie in his word. And therefore this
might have been rather well spared, then ill applied: nay by your leave, there
is no such sentence in that place, as you preciselie allege: some such sound
of words he has, but no such carnal sense. But read the chapter through, and
these marginall quotations, Cirill lib. 4. cap. 14. 21. 22. 24. lib. 11. cap.
26.
and you shall planly see how you are deceived. For what soever he speaks in
all those places, is nothing else but to confirm and explain our spiritual
union with Christ our head: and for that purpose brings in for example, the
near and natural union and conjunction of the vine and the branches, head and
members, and so of Christ and all believers. So this being less pertinent then
the rest, shall have a more short (yet a sufficient) answer then the rest.

The 10. part of the second proof, concerning S. Cyrill Alexandrinus.
Fitzsimon.
114. ANy other adversary, haueing M. Rider as I have him now over the hipp,
how would he canuase him? First by the 129. untruth, The 129. untruth.
he denies such words to be found in S. Cyrill in that place. Let his friends
thereat blush for him, S. Cyrill. in Joan. l. 4. c. 13.
because him self can not. In the name of God, how could these words of S.
Cyrill be otherwise interpreted? Quart credidisse Christo potius vos oportuit,
and si quid arduum videbatur, ab eo humiliter petere, quam veluti temulentos
clamare, quomodo potest hic nobis suam carnem dare. All the dictionary Doctors
in his parish, can not more faithfully translate these words, then as our
allegation bears. Let all excusations of man's reach, be conjoined, and it
will not salve this denial, but either it must be from profound ignorance, or
bottomless impudency. I a little before advertised n. 113. that M. Rider
resembled the preacher in Paris, called seek here, seek there, where nothing
mentioned could be found, whether now also it be not notoriously belonging to
his dealings I resign to every ones examination. If before I had incountred
any short chapters as now I do one not very long; I would have translated them
or part of them, some one time or other, to testify his frivolous
assignations, and vain florishes in his extremities. Once for all, acknowledge
by the foresaid alleged chapter of S. Cyrill faithfully translated, whether
the fear of God, and regard of all examiners of his fidelity, has not
abandoned him.

The 13. Chapt. of the 4. book of S. Cyrill upon S. Ihon, faithfully
translated, to testify the fidelity of Protestant citations.
THe Jews therefore did contend among them selves, saying; how can this man
give us his fleash to eat? Christ therefore said unto them. All things are
plain and right to them, who (as it is written) have fownd knowledge, but to
fools the most easy things seem obscure. But the honest, Prou. 8.
hearer and wise, what he has understood, he commends to the treasure of his
mind, not being let by any conceit: and if any thing they be hard; by much,
and often seeking, and demanding, at leinthe he obtayneth: imitating hunting
hownds, which here, and there seek their game. Esa. 12.
The prophetical words note the wise man to be inquisitiue, saying: searching
seek, and dwell with me. For we are always so to inquyre, that we may dwell
with him, and not be borne to strange opinions. But thus the malignant mind
does not. For what soever it understands not, straight throwgh arrogance it
rejects as frivolous and false, yealding to nothing, nor thinking any thing
above it self: such as we shall find the Jews to have been. For it behooved
them who had perceived the divine virtue and power of our saluiour, by
miraculous signs, willingly to embrace his speech, and if in any thing there
seemed difficulties, to seek their solution. They did altogether the
contrary. And how can this man give us his fleashe? Of God not withowt great
impiety they cry together, and it came not into their mynds that there was
nothing imposible to God. 1. Cor. 2.
For whereas they were carnal (as Paul says) they could not understand
spiritual things. But folly to it self seems so great a mystery. But I pray
you, let us make great proffit by other men's synns, and yielding strong faith
to mysteries, never in so high things, let us once think, or utter, that How?
for this is a Jewish word, and cause of extreme punishment. Therefore Nicodemus
also when he said, How can these things be? he heard worthily: art thou a
master in Israel, and art ignorant of these? Therefore by other men's offense we
being instructed, when God woorketh, let us not demand, How! but leave the
knowledge, and way of his work, to him alone. For as no man knows what God
is according to nature, yet is justified by faith by believing that he will
reward him that seeks him: so being ignorant of the reason of his woorks
whereas by faith he doubts not that he can do all things, he shall obtain no
dispiseable rewards for this good disposition. And truly, so God exhorts us
to be disposed by his prophet Isaie, my cownseils are not as your cownseils,
nor as your ways, Isa. 53.
are my ways, says our lord: but as heaven surpasses the earth, so are my
ways above your ways, and my thoughts above your thoughts. So he who in
knowledge and virtue from God is so excellent, how may he not work so
miraculously, that the reason of his woorks surpass the conceit of our mynds.
Do not thou behold what is done by men of handy craft? they seem to tell us
some times incredible things: but because we experience them to have fullfilled
like things, we lightly believe they may do them. How then are they not worthy
of greatest torments, that contemn God maker of all things, as to say [How] in
his woorks? whom they know to be the giver of wisdom: whom the scripture has
tawght us to be almighty. Math. 19.
If therefore thou o Jew, will yet cry, how: such thy ignorance I imitating,
willingly will crave, how wenst thou out of Egypt? how was Moises rodd
converted into a serpent? how was the leaprie hand suddenly restoared to former
state? how were waters changed into the nature of blood? how went the Fathers
dry throwgh the sease? how by woodd did the bitterness of waters change to
sweetness? how did waters issue out of the rock? How did Jordan stand? How did
invincible Hierico fall by a cry only? Innumerable are the things, in which if
you require How, you must necessarily overthrow the whole Scripture, contemning
the doctrine of the prophets, and the writings of Moises himself. VVherfor you
ought rather to believe in Christ, and if any thing was hard, humbly to learn
of him, then like dronken sotts, to cry out how can this man give us his
fleash. Do not thou see, when you say these things, that together with that
voice, great arrogance is discovered?

Behowld Christians: this is the chapter, which (says he) being, read through,
would testify that we are deceived. This is the chapter, which as he says,
containing nothing but our spiritual union with Christ, brings in for example
the conjunction of vine and branches, head and members etc. This is the
chapter, which he wondreth that we would allege for our proof. This is the
chapter, which is nothing pertinent to the matter in hand. You perceive your
selves, The 130. 131. 132. 133. untruth.
the 130. 131. 132. 133, untruths, most malapertly avouched, to abuse your
patiences, and to deceive your souls, you perceive his confident appeal to
autheurs, posting to seek here and there, where he and his cause are utterly
destitute. I would to God I could set before the eyes of all men, the goulden
chapters and instructions of primative Fathers in manner as this of S. Cyrill:
that all might perceive how by reformers they are betrayed by false pretenses
of reformations, forsoothe according the doctrine of the primative Fathers, when
and whilst they are a seducing, to deformations, of all primative godliness, and
religion, which by the primative Fathers were most commended.

The bread which descended from heaven is the body of our Lord, Catho.
Priests. Hiero^. ad Hedib. Q. 2. floruit Anno 4^4.
and the wine he gave his disciples is his blood. 115. THis place in deed is in
his third Tom. page 142. Rider.
There was a learned and godly woman proposed twelve questions of divinity to
Hierome: wherein, and of which she desired resolution: For in those days, it
was lawful for women and all men to ask doubts touching religion; and for
their further instruction and consolation might read Gods word, and freely
confer touching matters that concerned their salvation. And this greatly
blemisheth your Roman doctrine, that will have neither men nor women to read
divinity, and the reason is this, least they should see your errors, and
forsake your profession. For this is your strongest tenure, Mark this ye
Catholics.
to keep them in blindness with idle ceremonies, dumb shows, and Latten
service. But I trust in Christ shortly to see most of their eyes opened, that
will discover your privy plots, and discourage your haughty stomachs, and
generally forsake your new religion, being in deed but man's invention.

This is the second question of the twelfth, but you omit some words, and cut
off some, which obscures the matter. But if a little charitable chiding would
make you more painful in your books, and less careful to please men's
humors, I could find in my heart to bestow it upon you, but praemoniti,
praemuniti: you are now forewarned, I hope you will be here after better
armed, or better, minded: which I wish with all my soul as to my self. But
your proof is thus in Latten. Si ergo panis qui de caelo descendit, corpus est
Domini, and vinum quod discipulis dedit, sanguis illius est noui Testamenti,
qui pro multis effusus est in remissionem peccatorum, Iudaicas fabulas
repellamus, etc. If therefore the bread that descended from heaven be the
body of the Lord, and the wine which he gave his disciples, be his blood of
the new testament which is shed for many for the remission of sins, then let
us cast away all Jewish fables.

Here you omit Si ergo, and noui Testamenti qui pro multis effusus est in
remissionem peccatorum. If therefore: and of the new Testament which is shed
for many for the remission of sins: All this you have left out, which was
ill done.

What now can you gather out of this, to prove that Christ's body is made of
bread, and his blood of wine, no substance of either creature remaining, but
only Christ's carnal presence as he was on the cross? Surely here is not
one word, silable, or letter to prove it, but the contrary. You wronged the
father so to mangle him: yet as you deliver him, it proves nothing of the
manner of Christ's presence that is in question, but the matter never in
controversy: for says she to this learned ^^ther, if therefore the bread
which came down from heaven be the body of Christ so she speaks of Christ's
divinity, that came down from heaven: (for his humanity did not) and our
question is of his humanity by transubstansiation in the Sacrament: so that
this proof nothing sorteth your purpose. And the blood here spoken of, is his
blood of the new Testament shed on the cross, not in the Sacrament: once for
all, not for any that pleased the Priest. And therefore as she said, Iudaicas
fabulas repellamus, let us cast away Jewish fables: So in Gods name for the
love of Gods truth, and of the peoples salvation, cast ye from you all
Munkish fables, and forged legends, that have misled the people into this
blind superstition, and join with us to teach Christ's precious flock, the
old Apostolical and Catholic religion, commanded in Gods word, and
practiced in the primitive Church: that you with us, and we wi^h you, and all
in the Lord, may now in this plentiful vintage so labor in the Lords vinyard
(his Church) according to our talents received, that every one of us may
deliver his talent with advantage of many souls: and then we shall be
patakers of that sweet saying: Well done, thou good and faithful servant, enter
into thy masters joy. Which God grant to us both. And so to the next, as
follows.

The 11. part of the Second proof concerning S. Hierome. Wherein is
discussed, whom, and how, we allow and disalowe, to read Scriptures, and
heretical books; and whether Protestants, or we, do most Symbolize with
Iewishnes.
Fitzsimon.
Cart. lib. 1 page 103. lib. 2. page 303. 502. lib. 3. page 89. 90. Cause. ^ial
8. and 11. Fulk. against. D. Bristow. page 15. 54.
115. CArtwright says; there is not such synceritie to be looked for at Hieroms
hand, as from others that went before him: That he is a cownterfeit: that he
often strayneth the text, and for milk some time draws blood, Causeus says,
that he is no less damned then Lucifer. Fulke; that he was but a rayler.
Saint Hierome in this allegation, teaches; the wine given to the Disciples to
have been Christ's blood. In the self same resolution to Hedibia, he says; the
bread, quem fregit Dominus, deditque discipulis, esse corpus Domini Saluatoris,
which our Lord broke, and gave to his disciples, to be the body of our
Saluiour. Else where he says; ipse Saluator est, S. Hieron. ad Damas. de Filio
prodigo.
cuius quotidie carne vescimur, cruore potamur; it is our very Saluiour, whose
fleash we are fedd withal, and whose blood we drink. Come forth M. Rider,
and play your wonted part; Come tell us what you oppose against this? First,
you run half way in your tale, before you stumble at this block, in one only
word. At leinthe, hemm, and speak out your mind; suerly (say you) here is
not one word, syllable, or leter, to prove that Christ's body is made of bread,
and his blood of wine. Not one word, leter, or syllable, man? Let other men's
wits, and eyes, be judge, how courageously the 134. untruth, The 134. untruth.
is delivered. But suerly, the baker, and the pillorie, once again must not be
suffered to part so slightly, but that we may examine his cause by parcels,
and yet not in prolixe, or tedious manner. That women might ask doubts touching
religion, is as lawful now, as in those days. That they might vulgarly read
Gods word, or the Scripture, seems an untruth: at least it is not proved,
but only affirmed by M. Riders word; the value whereof is known. That is was
not thought convenient, S. Hieron. 103.
I guess by these words of S. Hierome, of whom now we treat. Only the art of
Scripture, says he, is that which every one challenges. This the chatting
old wife, this the doting old man, this the babbling Sophister, this on every
hand men presume to teach before they learn it. Nay, more anciently said
Tertullian: Tertul. de praescripe,
Omnes tument, omnes scientiam pollicentur. Ipsae mulieres haereticae, quam
procaces, quae audeant docere, contendere, etc. All are puffd up, all do
profess knowledge. The very heretical women, how malapert, how audacious, to
teach, to dispute, etc. of which in our 99. number. How like you M. Rider this
dislyke toward your women's scripturing? But plead well for them, and make much
of them, for in my own knowledge you have need to seek credit among them,
considering that few or none of them, how base soever, but disdain the marriage
with the ministers of the word, and accept of them only for want of others.
They might (you say) freely confer touching matters of salvation. If you mean
in the Church, S. Paul crosses your saying; forbidding women to speak in the
Church, it not being (says he) allowed unto them.

The 135. untruth is, that our Romain religion would have no men, nor women,
read Divinity. God bless us: The 135. untruth.
How wisely this man discourses, if this be affirmed in good ernestnes. But,
because godly divinity of woomen or sound doctrine tending to Salvation, may be
known allowed by us; let these following assurances, to this present purpose
in controversy, (for all lawful circuiting, should have a referencie always
to the center) testify. Saint Agnes, even by testimony of S. Ambrose, told
her audience, this document of divinity, that, corpus Christi, corpori ipsius
consociatum esset; S. Ambros. Ser. ^0. Paulus Neapoludiaconus de S. Maria
Aegiptiaca.
the body of Christ was consociated to her body. Maria Egiptiaca, requested
before her departure; diuini corporis, and viuifici sanguinis portionem, in vase
sacro; part of the divine body, and life giving blood, in a sacred vessel.
Other you may find of the femal sex in Garetio, Garetius in 3. class.
attayning such divinity toward this mystery, that great protestant Doctors
never could reach unto. The keeping away of certain books, you say, to be
our strongest tenure. First I answer, the phrase of tenure, in that sense
wherein at seems intended, is new, and impropre. How soever, it brings me in
the memory, how you reprehending minister Hicoxe, for keeping a Trull, and he
you, for you know what: you called him base, and he called you counter.
Whereunto, if you conioyne your word, tenure; it may be forgotten, how close
the counter in London, and you married together: and diverse will or may think
by such conjunction thereof with tenure, that his meaning was only, that you
song a counter in London, and in Dublin reached to a tenure; and your meaning
only, that he song a base, and never could reach higher: withowt any other
mystery, contained in your words. For my part I leave you in your sweet
consort, and will answer further to such strongest tenure, The 136. untruth.
that it makes the 136. untruth. Nether shall you escape in this place from
receiving a foil at venerable Beda his hands, saying: (in cap. 7. Proverb.
refert Iuo, p. 4. cap. 84.) Soli ei conceditur haereticorum libros legere, qui
adeo solidatus est in fide Catholica, vt verborum dulcedine vel astutia nequeat
ab ea segregari: He is only permitted to read heretics books, who is so
founded in the catholic faith, that he can not by craft, or delight of their
words be perverted. Also as I observe among your selves, you debarr diverse
books of ours from reading, as is known to every mean conceit, ryfeling men's
houses for them, and forfetting all them you find, as Lords over all men's
goods. And the Lutherans do as carefully debarr your books, in all their
dominions. Schlusselburg. l. 3. art. 4. de Th. Calvin. shows that Caluinians
debarr Lutheran books; and Lutherans, their books, and bodies. And the same to
be done by other reformers against reformers appears in Gretser Praefat. de
iure, and modo, prohib. lib. haeret. Whereby is testified, that, we might (as
well as you, or Lutherans) debarr such books as are by us known, to be
hurtful, if not against the wise, yet against the simple. You know that I
abstain from discovering inconueniencies succeding in our contryes by vulgars
intermedling in Scripture. Whether chief protestants find it very
commendable, Calu. in praesat. nou. test. Gallici an. 1567.
or convenient, I appeal to these words first of Calvin, that he confessed;
Satan has gained more by these new interpretours, then he did before by
keeping the word from the people. Secondly by Luther, (whose later experience,
is more to be accounted, then first unseasoned persuasions) saying; Luther. l.
1. co^. Zuing. and Oecolamp. ^
If the world continue any longer, it will be again necessary, for the diverse
interpretations of Scriptures now used, that for the conservation of the unity
of faith, we receive the decrees of Concils and fly unto them. By this
^ppeareth all tenure, and cawtion, used by us concerning the use, ^r refusing,
of books among vulgar, to have been deserved. For the ^ther point, that we
would have no men to read Divinity: you mistake us, for Richard Hunn, Puritan
(of whom in the 124. num^er.) who damned, says Fox, universities with all
degrees and faculties. You ^aue bound your self to the same verdict, by making
such the foremenn of your quest. We, create doctors of Divinity. We, found
^choles, and lessons, to attain it. All the universities of the world, ^re
fruicts of our faith. How then are we said to dislyke that men should read
Divinity? where is Divinity, but among Catholics? Erasmus ep. ad Fratres inf.
Germ, testifies Luther and Melancton, to ^aue condemned all sciences as
sinful, and erroneus. Smidelin in ^rat. qua candidatis, licentiam concessit,
affirms the same hatred against degrees of Divinity, among the Zuinglians.
Wicleph had a distinct ^rticle, that universities, studies, colleges, degrees,
are Ethnical, superstitions, and diabolical. Luther sermon. Sympos. tit. de
studijs, says, that, ^^udere, has stultum, in the supin. Whether these
reformers, or we, ^e hindrers of men to read Divinity, by these evidences may
be assuredly gathered, ignorance M. Rider was affected not by us, but ^y such
repyners against schools, and learning.

That you would feign bestow a little charitable chiding upon us, to make us
more diligent; should by us be accounted a favor. For hitherto it has had
little show of charity, which you have used against us; saying our religion is
sandy superstition, wicked and damnable he^esie and irreligion; our
consecration full of uncertainty, absurdity, blasphemy; our whole doctrine
hellishe and damnable, and fitter for to be taught in hell by fends, then in
earth by Priests; our selves but liars, deceauers, heretics, idolatrers;
charmers, and magitians etc. Therefore we might be gladd to have charitable
mitigations of these grievous reproaches. Yet, I repeal my word: rather
choosing for this cause, your hate then your honors, your co^tumelies then
your compassion. Your often, and vain frequentation of another cupple of
words, Praemoniti, praemuniti, only for their consonancie, without all
occasion; does argue, there is little stoare, where such estimation is had of
such frivolous repetition. How often in speech, in letters, in printed books,
have I heard praemoniti, praemuniti; forwarned, forfortified. I will allow
your reflecting the mention of Jewish fables against our profession, if you can
find any ^ust cause to apply it to us, as I have to you. I intend to make you
seem a viper; by making your own brood, and conceits, not to have issued, but
by tearing your bowels. Remember, how I have proved in the 36. number, and
often beside, not only your profession, but your person, to endeavor to equal
the Sacraments of Christ with Jewish ceremonies: making Christ to have been as
effectualy received in Abraham's time, as since his institution of the B.
Sacrament. How can this be but a Jewish affection? Remember, how by chief
protestants mentioned in the 18. number of my examination, and after in the 78.
number, I have declared their hate against the new testament, and their inuitation
to depend only upon the old? How can this be but a Jewish affection? Remember
how in the said 18. number of my examination, I have showed other Protestants
to convict the Puritans Patriarck Calvin, to Iudaize, and thereupon diverse books
are lately extant, Printed at Iene in Saxony an. 1586.
with these and like titles: Caluinus Iudaizans, Calvin tending to Iewishnes:
Admonitio ex verbo Dei quod Caluinistae non sunt Christian^, sed tantum Iudaei;
An Admonition out of the word of God, that Caluinists are not Christians, but
only Jews, etc. How can this be but a Jewish affection^ Now, (for varities
sake) learn in another phrase touching the same, how most principal Caluinists
have renounced Christianity, and are fallen to Jewish circumcision; Vide
Conrad. Schlusselburg Theol. Call. and in Catal. Heretic.
As Alemannus, Ochinus, Alciatus, V^la^^^, Seruetus, Gentilis, Gribaldus, Adam
Newser, Gregorius Paulus, etc. Many more, (who would not undertake the pains
to be circumcised) were by relation of Protestants as much enemies of the
Deity of Christ our Saluiour, as any Jews. How can this be but a Iewishe
affection?

Vide Papirium Massonum de episcop. vrbis. lib. 4. in Nicol. 2.
Secondly learn, how Protestantrie had original from a Jew, named Josephus
Albo, familiar with Berengarius, first public founder of your opinions against
the B. Sacrament: Whereof, their arguments altogether agreeable against our
doctrine, may be a sufficient evidence, Cornel. Bertram. de politia Iudaica.
Geneuae anno. 1580. The Turkishe Alcoran printed in Germany, by the direction
of Protestants. Call. harm. in Math. c. 26. v. 26. Beza in 22. Luc. 20.
Bibliand. l. 1. de paschate Israel page 25. 26. 30. Vrba^. in 2. part operum.
resp. ad 2. lib. Ecle^^. c 7. Tremel. apud Bezam. and Biblian. loc. ^it.
that they were altogether consenting in framing them. Thirdly learn, that a
great part, of the holy Puritan Consistorial discipline, was borrowed from a
Jew, named Cornelius Bertram, who dedicated his book of the Jewish policy to
Beza, and printed it in Geneua: as appears by the said book. Fowerthly
learn, that the careful printing of the Turkish Alcoran by Melancton, and
Bibliander, could lykely have noe other intention, then to induce Christian
people to embrace Jewish circumcision, required in that book. Fifthly learn,
that Calvin, Beza, Bibliander, Vrbanus Regius, and Emanuel Tremelius a Jew, do
affirm that Christ's institution of the B. Sacrament, differs nothing from an
old Iewishe ceremony practiced from before the time of Esdras; which ceremony
the foresaid Tremelius translateth out of the Iewishe Talmud. Unto which
altogether, in form and fashion, by sitting at a table, by omitting Christ's
words ^f institution, by other concourse mentioned in the 68. number, our
^rotestants by all means possible, strive to conform them selves. Lastly
learn, that Puritants peculiarly demonstrat a Jewish affection, ^y naming
their children according to a Jewish practice: in so much ^s a certain late
Protestant notes these Puritan nice names: Survey of the pretended holy etc.
cap. 11. page 156.
The lord is near: More trial: Reformations: Discipline: Joy again:
Sufficient: from above: Free gift: More fruict: Dust. To which if I would join
the ^ames of Cherubals, and Hollibals in my own parish; you would ^ndoubtedly
smyle. But I can not trace these men's phrenesies, without hindrance in other
more proffitable employments. Also by their translations, so ernestly
concurring with the Jews, that diverse ^rotestants have been occasioned, to
reprehend them in that behalf: ^s Laurence Humfrey, Castalio, etc.

Without further Apostrophes M. Rider, upon great and urgent, Humfred. lib. 1.
de rat. interpret. page 178. lib. 2. page 219. Castal. defens. sua translat.
page 227.
and evidently approved occasions, by means of such inclination of Protestancye
toward the Jews, I will use your own words: ^udaicas fabulas repellamus; let
us cast away Jewish fables, and join with us to ^eache Christ's flock, the old
Apostolical and Catholic religion, commanded in Gods word, and practiced in
the primative Church. What agreement can you require in me more, then to iumpe,
and concur with you in one form of speaking? Yet perhapps you had rather then
the price of ^he prebendarie (wherewith you would have corrupted me) to concur
in one form of speech with you, that I did not in this manner concur, by
making your own word, like young vipers, tear, ad rippe your own intrailes.
Yet have I no desire to greaue you, but only to grauel the errors that
captiuat your understanding. I deserve thanks, if you could conceive good
offices. I can not hate the person of one sometime deluded considering my own
misfortune to have been miscarried. I was defiled, I confess, with the same, or
like, errors, which now I discover, and prosecute: but ignorance of childhood,
and blind education, deceived me. M. Huetson termed me therefore an Apostata;
and discommended me for leaving the gospel, to be subject to Antichrist, the
whore of Babylon, the Pope. His answer is in the end of the 61. number. Yet I
say again to him, in S. Augustins words: Quid magnum facis? S. August. Psalm.
36. Conc. 3.
Seuerior sum ego in malo meo, quam tu. Quod tu vituperasti, ego damnaui.
Vtinam velles imitari, vt error tuus fieret aliquando praeteritus. What great
stir keep thou? I am more severe against my harm then thou. What thou
do discommend, I condemn. I would thou would imitat, that at leinth thy
error might be ouerpassed. Why do I spend think you that read this calming
confort against a cauilling caveat, so precious time, so much payns? Only, to
confound my errors, and to do some satisfaction to truth, and religion, which
I impugned.

Catho. Priests. August. contra Aduersar. legis and prophetarum: cap. 9.
floru^t 430.
The mediator betwixt God and man Jesus Christ, with faithful heart and mouth
we receive, giving us his flesh to eat and his blood to drink. Although it
seem more horrible to eat the flesh of men then to kill; and to drink the
blood of men then to sheed it. Rider. Paris print. page 264.
116. AVgustine writing against that pestilent adversary of the law and
Prophets, who objected, that because Abraham by adultery with Agar brake the
Law, therefore either the Law was not good, or else the universal promise made
to God by Abraham was of none effect: confuting him by scriptures and reasons,
tells him that the promise was made in Isaac, not in Ismaell, and
disprooueth him for disliking such figures, similitudes, and comparisons, as it
has pleased the holy Ghost to use for the plain expressing of the near
union and conjunction that is betwixt Christ and his Church. And says, what
will this pestilent adversary say, when he hears Paul speak? they shall be
two in one flesh, he will scorn and deride it. Ephesians. 5.
But it is a great mystery spoken of Christ and his Church. For says
Augustine, we understand by the two sons of Abraham, and the two mothers, two
Testaments, though in respect of times and ceremonies, diverse, but in respect
of the substance all one and the same. And also by the near union and
conjunction betwixt man and wife, we understand our natural union with Christ,
and that without any obscenitie or absurdity, maugre the beards of the
adversary. Then follows you proof, even in the midst of a sentence very
vntowardlie, I will not say negligentlie: And yet you omit one word (Sicut)
which though it be small in show, yet it is in this place of great consequence.

For as you allege Augustine it is nothing material to confute the adversary
of Gods grace. Thus Augustine speaks, and so you should have said, Sicut
mediatorem Dei and hominum: as the mediator betwixt God and man, etc. And thus
after your wonted manner, you leave out the point material, and begin in the
middle of a sentence, leaving out beginning and ending, neither respecting what
went before, whereof, and wherefore he spoke the thing: nor what follows
after to prove and disprooue the thing so spoken of. And this your neglecting
the coherence, makes you fail in the sense and inference. For this word
(Sicut) which you leave out, shows plainly that it is a similitude, and I
hope you know that similitudes be no Sillogismes. And as there was no
obscenitie or absurdity in the similitude of marriage (they truly shall be
one flesh): so in like case, here is no absurdity or inhumaine Caniballisme,
in this similitude of the Sacrament, used to express our union with Christ:
for though it seem more horrible to eat the flesh of man, then to kill man,
and to drink his blood then to shed it: yet we without horror or absurdity,
eat the flesh and drink the blood of the Mediator betwixt God and man Jesus
Christ. And if the adversary in Augustines time, or you Romanists now, would
know how this may be so done without slaughter of Christ, sin to our souls,
or offense to the world, Augustine tells you in that place, fideli cord and
ore, with a faithful heart and mouth.

So that now you see Augustines scope, and your drift, clean contrary the one
to the other: for Augustine brings it as a similitude to express our
spiritual union with Christ by faith: you wrest it as spoken of the corporal
and gutturall eating and drinking of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament,
under the forms of bread and wine with our mouths and stomachs. Many places
you have unfitly, and in deed untruly alleged: yet showed in none of them
less learning and true meaning, then in this. For this is your great fault,
that wheresoever you see or hear in Scripture, Father, Council, or history:
Corpus and sanguinem Domini, or such like words or phrases, presently you
infer (and so persuade the Catholics) that there is Christ's carnal presence
in the Sacrament, never examining the circumstance of the place, or the end
wherefore they be alleged.

And thus you err not knowing (or wilfully contemning) the state of the
question, the sense of the holy writ, and judgment of the ancient Fathers.

I am sure you never read this place of Augustine your self, but snatched it
out of some late ignorant and foolish idle Munkish or Franciscan Enchiridion.

And my reason why I think so of you, is drawn out of Augustine himself. For
a few lines before this your proof, he calls the Sacraments Sacra signa,
holy signs (not the things themselves as you do) and so distinguishes that
which you confound. And within three lines after your proof, if you would
have read him, you should have heard him record to your great discredit in this
case, that this your proof is (as other former examples are) figurate dictum
secundum sacra fidei regulam: that it is spoken figuratiuelie, according to the
rule of sound faith and religion.

Now let the Reader judge betwixt you and me, whether of us is in the right.
August. in this place as in the places formerly alleged, is against you still.
Augustine says, the Sacraments be sacra signa, holy signs, and so say we:
But you Iesuiets and Priests say no, they be the things themselves. Augustine
says it is spoken figuratiuelie, and so say we: you say no, but properly.
Augustine says, that this opinion is squared out for pattern to Christ's
Church, by the straight rule of sound faith, and so say we: and as you allege
your proof, you say no: and make a flat opposition betwixt Augustines faith
and your faith. And yet you will brag of Fathers, and that they all speak on
your side, and you all follow their sayings: when they neither speak, for you,
nor you imitate them. And so though we follow scripture, fathers, and primitive
Church, yet you call us heretics. And you that wrest scriptures, falsify
fathers, that have neither with you, consent, antiquity, nor verity, yet will
be Catholics.

And thus if a man should have hired you to have brought a place out of
Augustine against your selves, you could no better have fitted your self, or
your setter on, then in this: who very plainly delivers the manner how
Christ's body and blood is to be eaten and drunk: that is, with a faithful
heart and mouth, not with our material mouth, teeth, and stomach, as you
untruly teach. And thus hoping the Catholics will less trust you in the
rest, that have so groslie deceived them in this, I will proceed by Christ's
asistance to the examination of your next proof.

The 12. part of the second proof concerning S. Augustine.
116. FIrst it is allowed by Calvin, that S. Augustine, is; Fitzsimon. Calu.
lib. 3. Instit. c. 3. n. 10. l. 4. Instat. c. 14. n. 25. 26. and in psalm, 58 v.
2. Beza in c. 3. Romans v. 12.
Fidelissimus testis antiquitatis; the most faithful witness of antiquity.
Omnium veterum theologorum tum Graecorum, tum Latinorum Princeps; the Prince
(says Beza) of all ancient Divines no less of Greeks, then Latins. So that it
is an importan point, to know, whose, part S. Augustine takes. ^artw. lib. 1
page 98. lib. 2. page 513. Psalm. 78. v. 13.
Secondly, the Arch pillar of Puritan Cartwright, says, that; Augustins
sentence, is approved unadvisedly: for the^^ a window is open to bring in all
Popery. This is one great stepp, to attain S. Augustine to our side. ^. Augst.
ser. 2. de verbis Apost. and tr. 26. 27. in Joan. Idem de co^sen. Eua^g. l. 3.
c. 1. tem 4. Idem in psalm. 33. Idem in cap. Vtrum sub. de consecr. did. 2. S.
Aug. in ps. 98. Idem ser. de verb. euang. citatur a Beda 1. Cor. 10. Idem l. 3.
de Trin. c. 4. Idem cap. Nes autem de Consecr. did. 2. Idem ibidem cap. Hoc
est.
What need any longer delay in this matter, when never any child of the
Catholic Romain Church cried more loudly then S. Augustine, to Pope, and
popery, in the words of the prophet; We thy people, and the flock of thy
pasture-grounds, will confess our selves thine everlastingly? In the First 14.
number, he is found teaching, to receive the true body of Christ, not only
spiritualy, (...) in a visible Sacrament; in veritate ipsa, in truth it self.
In the 38. numb. he is found teaching; that Christ in the 6. chap. of S. Ihon
amply treated of the B. Sacrament: contrary to M. Riders denial thereof. In the
32. (...) he is found teaching; that Christ according to the letter, was in
diverse places at once. In the 46. number, he is found teaching, that the body
of Christ is not only a figure, but also the verity: and that the same body
which was borne of the B. Virgin Marie, is given to be eaten. In the 54. number
he is found teaching, that we eat our Lord, yet in such manner, as we harm him
(...) our eating, but rather arm, and help our souls by such divine
participation. In the 63. number he is found teaching; that to preach Christ,
and to eat him are very different: contrary to M. Rider, affirming both to be
all one. In the 64. number, he is found teaching, that we should confess
faithfully, what was before consecration but bread and wine, after consecration
is the fle^^ and blood of Christ. In the 70. number he is found teaching; that
it (...) Christ's fleash, and blood, which is received under the form, or
lyknes of bread and wine. What more might be said, or more effectualy, and more
oppositely to Protestantcy, by any Pope, or Papist, in the world?

Now let us give ear to M. Rider. First he fetches a long carrier, of half
his chapter, before he ever stoupeth at this allegation out of S. Augustine.
Next, leaving what I have said; he tells what I should have said. When I play
the puritan, as I said before, his direction would be more convenient, to leave
the matter, and to dallye rownd about, up and down, off and on. Thirdly, that
it is a similitud, and therefore no sillogisme: I told you before in the 43.
number, what logitian he is. A^^ust. 1. Topic. 14.
Read Aristotle, good sir, and he will tell you, that similituds may well be
arguments. Nay read the new testament, and find Christ's arguments to have been
vsualy but similituds. At last, he affirms plainly, that Augustine tells, we
should eat Christ, with faithful heart, and mouth. Why I ask no more, but
that it be granted, not only by heart, but also by mouth, Christ may be eaten.
But like a badd cow he stryketh down with his heel, all this milk even in
the very next word (which makes the 135. untruth) that S. Augustine is
contrary to us. The 135. untruth.
But I pray you, what is the reason? Forsooth says he; because he vttred these
words as a similitude, to another intention. Yet again; let it be granted
him to have vttred the words: and for the intention, whatsoever it was, it is
known that he would not, and could not lawfully for any purpose, ratify or
insert false doctrine. So that if the words be found, his mind is notoriously
expressed.

When no footing could be founded on these seely (if ever hitherto any reasons
have been seely) shifts, and no answer framed, or forged, to this forcible
allegation; then bursteth out the 136. untruth, The 136. untruth.
that we had alleged many places unfitly, and untruly: yet showed in none of
them less learning, and true meaning, then in this. But I ^ay, as often
before, that I take no greater assurance of your being ^rampled by these
allegations, then by your pretending that I showed small learning, and not good
meaning in them. For what ^edlam beldame but might, in impudent resolution,
say as much, ^f she had no other evasion? And who behouldeth not, but in this
^aying, and in such manner, is the very depth of infamy detected? The 137.
untruth follows close by, The 137. untruth.
that we had never read the ^lace in S. Augustine, but snatched it out of some
ignorant Monkish Enchiridion. What may be said to this facer of a bold
cownte^ance, in a cold cauterized conscience? Nothing fitter, and shorter ^hen
out of the Poet: Non tibi plus cordis, sed minus oris adest.
No couradge new, but less thy shame is fownd.
Yea the very derision of the name of Moncks, is not only a demon^tration of
his being abandoned by S. Augustine, but a testimony of ^is combination with
old heretics: S. Aug. tom. 8. in psalm. 132.
against whom S. Augustine manifouldly defends the profession of Moncks; yea
and such their very name. whereof let these few proofs be witnesses. Merito
Elis displicet nomen Monachorum, quia illi nolunt habitare in vnum cum
fratribus; VVorthely does the name of Moncks displease them, because they will
not dwell in ^onsent, with their brethren. Deinde perrexit (Petilianus) ore
maledico in vi^uperationem monasteriorum, and monachorum, arguens etiam me quod
hoc genus ^itae fuerit a me institutum. Then (Petilianus) proceeded with a
malicious mouth, ^o disprayse monasteries and moncks, reproving me also, that I
had instituted that ^ynde of life. All his whole woorks are replenished with
mention, Idem tom. 6. Cont. lit. petil. lib. 3. c. 40.
commendation, direction, and defense of such profession. All was one for my
Caualiero he had a resolution to trample all truth vn^^^ foot. Vide Remi^d.
Rufum. in duplicatione con. Patronum Molinai fol. 76.
Such was a like protestant not long since, who being ad^^nished of his
unmeasurable lies; he answered; Quam diu potero (...) adferam: Latebunt quam
diupoterunt. Valebunt apud vulgus ista mendacia. (...) long as I can, I will
indomadge: let it remain hidd, as long as it may. These lies will avail among
the people. O woeful, yet general; o true, yea shameful Protestant intention!
What other could be his intention that says by the 138. The 138. untruth.
untruth S. Augustine to affirm, it which was said of our Sacrament, to be
figuratively spoken; he only so saying of S. Paul's words of marriage; they
shall be two in one fleash? or, where S. Augustine calls, in the words of the
Apostle, marriage; mag^^^ Sacramentum in Christo and Ecclesia; Ephesians. 5. The
139. untruth.
a great sacrament in Christ and his Church^ to interpret it is but a great
mystery? Or, by the 139. untruth, to referr the words, sacra signa, holy
signs, to this our Sacrament, which S. Augustine refers to the former
Sacrament of Marriage? Or, by the 140. The 149. untruth.
untruth, to avouch, that notwithstanding all these palpable evidences, for our
side, and against our adversaries; yet that S. Augustine is opposite to us, and
we could never, if we had been hired, have brought a more repugnant testimony?
I can not conceive but every one, Catholic, and protestant, does perceive such
a^ aforsayd to have been his intention, videlicet to indomage, to remain hidd,
as long as might be, (and to that end to have debarre^ me three whole years
all use of printing, although he had warra^^ to the contrary) and in this
mercenarie manner of popularitie, (...) seek to content for the present time.
It being more brightly clear, then the son at myddaye, I proceed, full of
have, and loathsomnes to write against men of such intentions. Quorum lingua
tam prodi^^ infrenisque est, Gellius lib. 1.
vt fluat semper verborum colluuione taeterrima; whose (...) lauishe and
unbridled, that it flows only with a most odious pudle or stream (...)
words. Wherein none should contend with them, the conquest being against the
conqueror, and the victory his that is overcome. I find it by experience most
assured that Nazianzen related of old Reformers, to be as real among new
Reformers. Inter se certant, peri^^^ atque non id metuant, Nazianz. erat. 2. de
pace.
ne impijs erroribus sese constringant, sed ne in hac re (...) tolerabiliusque
caeteri peccent. Among them the strife is, not as if they (...) err impiously,
but that they contend to surpass on another in this (...) This approved
saying, if I should as often replye as occasion does require, at every leaf of
this book, it might be repeated.

^n what darkness of ignorance, in what sluggish carelessness, have they been?
Catho. Priests.

Leo epist. 22. ad Clerum and plebem Constantino politanae vrbis floruit Anno.
366.

Rider.

This Leo was the 13 Archb. of Rome: and twenty more succeeded him b fore any
usurped the name of Pope. Nomb. 23.8.


as not to have heard by hearesay, nor by reading to have found, which in the
Church of God is so plain, as that the mouths of children do tell, the body
and blood of Christ to be truly in the blessed Sacrament. 117. GEntlemen, you
mistake the Epistle: it is in the 23. Epistle, page 74. beginning in the 12
line, printed at Louaine, 1575. and seeing it is both your ^wne proof, and
your own print, if upon due examination it make against you, you must think
God deals with you, as he did with Balaam, who when he made acco^nt for gain
to have cursed Gods people, then God put into his heart, and uttered by ^is
mouth a blessing to his people. You made account to have here overthrown the
truth, establ^shed error, and strengthened your credit: and God has put into
your heart, and you have subscribed with your hand to confirm the truth,
confute your own error, and discredit your selves: and more to the worlds
wonder, and the foil of your Roman faith, even by a bishop of Rome: against
whom you can take no ^xceptions. So that now the Catholics shall see that your
carnal presence was not known to the first bishops of Rome, for the first five
hundred years, and therefore it ^s not Catholic. And you shall see how
untruly you not only quote him but alle^dge him, nay wrest and enforce him
to speak that after his death, which he never meant ^uring his life. So that
from the first to the last, you deal neither truly with the book of God: nor
the works of men. And as Christ said to the Scribes and Phareses; Matthew. 15.6.
You ^aue made the commandment of God of no Authority by your Tradition, So
you ^esuits and Priests have made neither Scripture, Ancient father, Council,
nor Pope of ^nie Authority, by your new and false constructions, addicions,
and subtractions, etc. But now to the examination of your proof.

But I will first show to the Catholics the occasion, why Leo writ this: and
there ^hey shall see how greatly you are deceived in mistaking Leo: and much
abuse their simplicity and the credit they repose in you.

The occasion why Leo writ this Epistle was this: That whereas the error of
the Manichees had greatly infected the Church of God throughout all
Christendom: They denied Christ's manhood and taught that his body was not a
true body but a fantastical body.
he ^n a charitable manner sent Epiphanius and Dionisius, two public Notaries
of the Church of Rome, to the Clergy and people of Constantinople: requesting
them, that ^uch as professed these damnable heresies, might not only be
excommunicated from ^ermons and sacraments, but also be banished from their
Cities for fear of further in^ection. For (says he) such as believe not
that Christ has taken our nature and flesh upon him, believe neither the
verity, nor virtue of Christ's passion and resurrection, And then comes in
your proof, which properly must be applied to such heretics, (...) deny
Christ his manhood to be borne of the blessed virgin: and hold that his body
is not a true body, but a fantastical body, and not to us that believe
both. Again, you have not truly translated this place for thus it stands in
the Author. In quibus isti ignorantiae tenebris in quo hactenus desidiae
torpore tacuere, vt nec auditu discerent and after wards, Vt nec ab infantium
linguis veritas corporis and sanguinis Christi inter communis sacramenta fidei
teneatur? In what darkness of ignorance, in what slugg^sh carelessnes, have they
remained, as not to have learned by hearesay (not heard by hearesay as you
translate) that the truth of the body and blood of Christ among the
sacraments of our common faith, is not kept back even of the tongues of
infants?

It seems you had this out of some man's notebooke by hearesay not by your
proper and diligent reading of the Author hmiselfe: and my reasons why I
think so be these: because you mistake so much, and translate so untrue. Yet
will not I take exceptions to every particular fault.

1 First, you say it is in the twentieth Epistle: it is not so, but in the
th^^^ and twentieth, and therefore I think you never read the Author.

2 Secondly, you say, heard by hearesay, the Author says, Learned by hearesay.

3 Thirdly, you translate linguis for mouths: it should be tongues, Yet if the
re^^ had been true, I would not have excepted against this.

4 Fourthlie, you change a Nowne into an Aduerb, vere for veritas, truly for
truth: and transpose it also out of that proper place to alter the sense of
Leo the Bishop of Rome, which is great wrong to the dead Author, and living
Reader.

5 Fif^he, you change the singular number for the plural, sacrament for
sacraments.

6 Sixtlie, you quite leave out two words of great consequence, communis and
(...).

7 Seuenthlie, you add this word (Blessed) which is not in the Author.

8 Eighthlie, you point it not right, considering the Author spoke it only
by way of interrogation.

Which premises are faults great and gross, which shows plainly that you
ne^^^ read the Author himself, but borrowed them forth of some other man's
papers, and therefore you sin grievously in persuading men's consciences to take
there things at your hands for truth, and faith, when indeed you tender them
nothing, but things ^^^sled from all faith and truth,

Now Gentlemen, do you deal plainly with the world in bringing this pla^^
against us? did ever any of us deny that Christ was borne of the virgin
Marie, and conceived by the holy Ghost: you cannot charge us with it. Did ever
any of (...) teach that Christ's body was fantastical, neither did you ever
hear it. Then in this as in the rest you wrong us, deceive the Catholics,
and abuse Leo sometime Pope.

But I will show you plainly, that this Bishop of Rome and this your proof.
confutes and confounds your own opinion, and confirms ours.

Read page, 7. 8. in the same Epist. where he bringes in the Sacraments of
Redemption and of Regeneration.
First Leo says, the truth of Christ's body and blood is in both the two
sacrament, as well in Baptism as in the Lords Supper; and as he is reallie in
the other: and what presence of Christ is in the one sacrament, there is the
like presence in the other, as has been proved before. But least this would
ma^^ the fashion of your transubstantiasion. and carnal presence, therefore
you trans^^^ it sacramentum, in the singular number, not sacramenta in the
plural.

Secondly, you have left out two words, communis fidei of common faith:
bec^^^^ no man should see it was then as Catholic opinion, to believe that the
truth of Christ body and blood, was as reallie in Baptism, as in the Lord
Supper, yet in both spirituallie, in neither corporally.

But you will say I abuse the Reader, because Leo never spoke of this word
spiritual, or spirituallie, and therefore I wrong both the Author and Reader, I
answer as (...) the prophet answered Achab the king, when he told Eliah that
he troubled Israel (...) (says the Prophet) it is thou and thy Fathers house
that have troubled Israel, in that you have forsaken the commandment of the
Lord, 1. K^nge, 18.17.18.
and followed Balaam. So Gentlemen, it is not I that wrong the Author that is
dead, or the people that yet live: but it is you and your confederates that
follow Balaam of Rome (God keep you free from following Balack of Spain) and
that the Reader shall see I will prove that Leo joins with us, and we with
him, and both of us with Christ's truth against your trash, I will make him
speak in his own defense, and utter that which you concealed. It follows
immediately after your proof, in the next immediate words after this manner: In
the same page.
quia in illa mystica distributione spiritualis alimoniae hoc impartitur, vt
accipientes caelestis tibi, in carnem ipsius, qui caro nostra factus est,
transcamus. Because that in the mystical distribution of that spiritual food,
this is given and received, that we which receive the virtue of the heavenly
meat, we pass into his flesh, which was made our flesh.

Gentlemen, this you should have added to your former, for the Author joined
them together, the one to accompany the other in Gods service, and in deed the
latter to express the former. But now let us out of this, but compare the old
doctrine of the old Bishops of Rome, and the doctrine of the modern Popes
and his Chaplens.

1 The old Bishops of Rome said, the food in the sacrament was spiritual and
heavenly: the late Popes, Jesuits, and Priests say, that it is carnal and
material.

2. The old Popes said, the distribution of that spiritual food was mystical:
you say presbiteriall.

4 They said in old times, that the worthy receivers of this spiritual meat
were transformed into Christ his flesh. The late Popes and you his Echoes say
no: But the sacramental bread and wine are transsubstantiated and transnatured
into Christ's flesh and blood.

The Bishop of Rome brought in this, to prove Christ's humanity conceived by
the holy Ghost, and borne of the virgin Marie, against heretics, who taught
the Christ's body wa fantastical. And you allege the same place to prove
Christ's humanity, to be made by a sinful ignorant Priest, and that of bread:
and so contrary to Scripture and Creed, will recreate Christ of a new matter,
which is as blasphemous and heretical.

The old Bishops and Church of Rome held, So Tertull. contr^ Marcion lib. 4.
that the Sacraments could not be true signs of Christ's body, unless he had
a true body, and because thy were true signs, therefore Christ had a true
body. And the late Popes and Popelings teach, that Christ's body is made a new
of the signs, and so confounds the signs with Christ's body, and in deed
maintains heresy as gross, as the Manicheans. For they held that either he
had no body, or a fantastical body. And you hold that there be no signs in
the Sacraments, but that they are transubstantiated into Christ's body and
blood. And so Christ's body is daily made of a piece of bread, John. 6.
which must needs be a body fantastical: not a true body as our Creed
witnesses. And as in the manner of eating Christ's body, you disagree not much
from the Capernaits: so in the case you differ not much from the Manicheis.

Now will I say as the painful owner of the vineyard said: Isaie 5. 3^
Now therefore oh you inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge I pray
you, between me and my vineyard. So, oh you Inhabitants of this worshipful
City of Dublin, and you loyal subjects of Ireland, and all the learned and
well minded of both England and Ireland, judge I pray you charitablie (yet
truly) betwixt me, and these my adversaries. And if you refuse to censure us,
and this our conference according to the truth, then I say as David said to
Saul: The Lord be judge between thee and me: 1. Sam. 24.13.
so the Lord be judge betwixt us, whether of us have more truly, and with
greater sincerity of truth, and conscience, behaved our selves (in this
matter) for his glory, discharge of our own consciences, instruction and
salvation of the Catholics,

The last part of the Second proof Concerning S. Leo.
Fi^zsimon.
117. Master Rider (as the hare is wont, before he seat him self in his
form) had a great desire to strain him self to greater leaps, and girds,
toward the end. Yet all will not serve. As far as my remembrance serves me,
Sidneis Arcadia.
I read in Sr. Phillip Sidneis Arcadia, a pleasant fiction of one Dameta who
had ernestly provoked one Clinias to combat thinking that he would not accept
the challenge. But Clinias being with much wooking animated to answer him;
Dameta excepted against the promised performance of Clinias that it was not in
such time, place, and manner, as it deserved by him now to be allowed. Let my
Dameta. prove me a Clinias if, and when he can: For I am suer I can now
discover him a Dametas in relenting in the main provocation and excepting at
trifles, most timorously; and impertinently. Plutarchus in moralibus.
As Plutarck declares, that; Malus orator nihil ad argumenta respondens, vocem
aut codicillas indiligenter scriptos, calumniatur; A badd orator answering
nothing to the argument, carpeth at the voice, or papers negligently written.
So in most perfect resemblance, M. Rider omitting the answering to my
arguments, carpeth, and wrangleth at some impertinent points about the writing
of them; as before, now, and after appears: Cic. lib. 2. ad Heren.
such dealing is propre to Calumniers, says Cicero; Calumniatorum proprium est
verba consectari, to leave the matter and strive about wandering words.
Concerning Leo, how favorable the learneder Protestants do account him to
their profession, let this testimony of Beza intimate. Beza in Confess. Geneu.
cap. 7. cap. 12.
It is manifest (says he) that Leo in (...) Epistles, does clearly breath
forth arrogancy of the Antichristian Romain Sea. etc. Far, of another
opinion was Amos Patriarch of Jerusalem, when he said; Nam inueni scriptum,
quia beatissimus and equalis angelis Papa Leo, qui Romanae Ecclesiae praefuit.
etc. Joan Moscus in prato c. 149. For I have found it written that the most
blessed, and equal to angels, Pope Leo, that governed the Church of Rome, etc,
The Protestants account him comparable to devils, and we to Angels: which is
difference sufficient to know who accounted him a friend, and who a foe. Therefore
approach we to learn how friendly M. Rider has found him, whom so learned, and
principal of his sort accounted (...) adversary.

First he says, we had put the 22. For the 23. I account not my wrytings so
absolute beyond all other men's, but the such a small slip might escape my
examination, when I ouer-redd the book after the engrossing thereof by one,
from whom a far greater fault in discretion had been supportable. But suer in
my own extract, the quotation; was vnfaultie. You shall perceive, besyd all
former gross corruptions in my reprehender, sufficiently in this very parcel,
to counterpoise far greater defectiuenes, then a misfiguring of 22. for 23.
After which reprehension he runs headlong during fiftye lines of his
discourse, into his wonted wondering digressions, of our shame if our own
allegation be found against us; of the occasions of such words of S. Leo; of
our falsehood toward God and man; etc. Next, he tells, how and against whom
our allegation should have been applied; and how by great lykely-hood we had
never read it, but purchased it by hearsay. Whereof he yealdeth eight reasons to
any indifferent judgment, not unworthy to have him capped with a hoode of
eight colors. For who besyd him, would except against a translation, wherein
the pithe, and substance, is faithfully observed, whether the rynde, or
circumstance, be more or less? where are either sacred, or profane translations
but take unto them selves that liberty? And is it not most detestable to
chaunt on such fanatical exceptions; and at the same time, in the same
correction, to fail most filthelye? It is often, and at every such
reprehension, before declared: here also it is conspicious. For out of the
Latin, he omitteth this whole line [which in the Church of God is so consonant,
in the mouths of all] when that he took upon him to translate the sentence
most exactly according as S. Leo delivered it. Their hatred against the name of
Church (whereby in the Bible of the year 1562. it was intierly excluded) and
their want of universal consent, blinded him not to behold this line; or
enforced him, to dissemble it. Truly I resign from the bottom of my heart, my
first answer wholly to Gods sacred providence, being his gratiouse gift that it
had that perfection as not to be subject to any other cauills: and that in
their seeking to carp, and calumniat, when they could not, did ever redound to
their infamy, and utter confusion: as amply appears in the 51. 76. 97.
numbers, Now if we had misfigured 22. for 23. what inference is it, that
therefore we never read the author? After he demands; did ever any of them,
deny, that Christ was borne of the Virgin Marie? I answer; that to appear, in
the examination of that article of belief. Then, a second Question is
propounded: whether ever any of them did teach Christ to have a fantastical
body? To which ly^^wyse I answer, that diverse of them have so taught, by making
his body deuoyde of all blood: by affirming his body as much in Abraham's time,
as after, to have been received in communion: by granting his body to be
conjoined with us realy, yet not corporaly, etc, which are infallible
assertions that he had a fantastical body. And consequently, by granting such
allegation auaylable to disprove the teachers of a fantastical body; M. Rider
as often before, so now, by teaching the same, gives sentence against him
self. By attainting his inevitable untruths; the residue concerning S. Leo
shall be understood.

The 141. untruth.
The 141. untruth is, that after Leo, twenty Archbishopps of Rome succeeded,
before either he, or they, usurped the name of Pope. Witness this to be a clear
untruth. First M. Rider against him self, saying, about the midst of this
chapter, that we abuse Leo some time a Pope. Here Leo is a Pope, and here, the
same Leo, and twenty his successors were no Popes. Secondly witness the whole
Council of Chalcedon, Council. Chalcedon. Act. 3.4.6.
in these words; Paschasius episcopus vice Domini mei Beatissima atque
Apostolici, vniuersalis Ecclesiae, Papae vrbis Romae, Leonis, synodo
praesidens, statui, consensi, subscripsi. Paschasius Bishopp, in place of my
Lord most blessed, and Apostolical Leo, of the Universal Church, Pope of the
city of Rome, I being President in this synod, have appointed, consented, and
subscribed. Is not every word of this testimony think you, a terror and a
torment to M. Riders opinion? First, to view and understand his former untruth
of pope, by the subscription of 630. Fathers (who were in that Council) by whom
that Leo was pope, is mantayned against him. Secondly by perceauing the Pope of
the City of Rome, entitled Apostolical Lord of the universal Church. Thirdly,
by observing such Romain Popes Legate, although but a Bishopp, to have been
President of the whole general Council etc. This testimony was long before the
time by M. Rider determined of Phocas Emperor, First bestower of supremacy
upon Romain Popes, if Reformers do not lie.

The 142. 143. 144. 145. 146 untruth.
The 142. untruth is, that he will show this allegation of Leo, to be against
us. The 143. untruth, that we deal falsely with Gods word, and woorks of men.
The 144. that we have deminished the authority of Popes, and Fathers. The 145.
that the error of Manichees had infected all Christendom: For never was any
heresy so universal; much less it of the Manichees. The 146. untruth, that S.
Leo says, the truth of Christ's body and blood to be as well in Baptism, as in
the Eucharist; For, first this man, that often blames me, if I allege not
words next before or after, my purpose, although they had not been pertinent;
he himself ouerskipped above a hundred lines, to find out some seely shroude,
remaining never the less as naked, as the wood cock, whose only beak is
covered, The words are; Ecclesia quae de sponsi carne prodijt, S. Leo loc.
citat.
quando ex latere crucifixi manante sanguine and aqua, Sacramentum redemptionis
and regenerationis accepit; The Church which issued out of the fleash of her
spouse, when out of the side of him crucified, flowing out blood and water, she
received the Sacrament of redemption, and regeneration. In which words, there
is nether Baptism nor Eucharist signified; but only declared, that the passion
of Christ, by similitude of effect called a Sacrament, has been a redemption,
and regeneration to the Church. What affinity has such words, with them by
M. Rider, lately related? What a decretal, and obstinat proceeding is this,
against perspicuous truth, and in desperate deprauations? to falsify Fathers
so wittingly? to deprave evidences so contrariously? It is; Faedum mansisse
diu, vacuumque redijsse; Filthye to have sought so far, and departed so
destitute. The usual artifice of such Doctors, is, when they are pressed, and
suppressed with any authority, to search most carefully some word in the
place alleged, whereby they may in some show euacuat the brunt of such
authority; being So infatuated with loathsomnes, and hatred against Christ's
institution, that thereby being (as Luther himself says) become madd, and
gyddye, Luth. tom. 7. fol. 397.
what soever they take hold of, although it be but a straw, yet they imagine
it to be a spear, and that at every stroke they kill thowsandes. Never could a
Father express better the qualites of his children.

The 147. untruth is, The 147. untruth.
that S. Leo by mentioning the word Spiritual, does exclude all our doctrine.
This untruth is at least a dozen times detected, and therefore needs no further
refutation. It is clear that S. Leo here says; the Verity of the body and
blood of Christ, (and consequently not a figure only) to be one of the
Sacraments of our faith not unknown to children: Which also S, Augustine
confirms. And S. Leo to putt it out of doubt, that he had rather endure any
martyrdom, then think otherwise; he advises Christians generaly; sic sacrae
mensae communicare debere vt nihil prorsus de veritate corporis and sanguinis
ambigant; So to communicate at the sacred table, S. Leo Sermon. 6. de i^iunio 71.
mensis.
as by no means to doubt of the Verity of the body and blood. If you require
the cause of his knowledge; he answers; Hoc enim ore sumitur quod fide
creditur; For that is received by mouth, which is believed by heart. These
words M. Rider, are peremptory. No glossing, no racking, no quircks, can
avoid them: but that they leave you a spectacle, to God, Angels, and men, full
of shame, and confusion, for your unadvised claim, and canterized conscience.
The 148. untruth.
The 148. blasphemous untruth is, that the body of Christ made of bread, is a
fantastical body: for in the 46. number, M. Rider is made to convict himself
of such untruth; by fynding, according S. Augustine, to be no other body, then
was borne of the Virgin Marie. Tertul. l. de resur. carnis.
Such beastly accusations do well inform what you are because, Spurciloquium
decet haereticos ac Ethnicos, as Tertullian says.

For your Apostrophe to the City of Dublin, and imprecation to God, to judge
betwixt you and me: For the first; Dublin knows you too well, and few of your
sort better: not only for your former hindrance of the bakers therein; but also
for your transferring their trade of Merchandise into your house, and
liberties, among your sonns in law, they being forreners, and very fleash worms
in Dublin. Such as nether bear sesse, nor press, watch, nor auarde, towle nor
custom, and in the mean time suck the juice of the City into their private
purses under the warmth of your wyngs, (to use your phrase) and in the
protection of your liberties. So then Dublin should be very seaseles not to
know you familiarly, and particularly. For the next, be not headlong in such
importunat prouocations against your soul. God often permits sentence of
hipocritical imprecations to take effect. Let your brother in the Lord,
Schlusselburg. lib. 2. fol. 68.
Schlusselburg, against your own brother in the Lord John Amand, even in our
purpose, and matter, inform you, saying; The said John Amand to have cried in
public sermon, pray brethren and hearers, that God instantly cause me to dye
an ill death, that I further seduce none, if I be faulty teaching this error.
And thereupon he was stricken with a cruel cholick, and breathed out his
miserable soul. Polid. Virg. l. 8. hist. Anglic.
I referr you for breuities sake, to the ruthful example of Earl Godwyne,
related by Polidore virgil: whereby you may be reclaymed from such execrations
against your self. To our purpose one of Dublin regarding your strange dealing
and disputing pertinently, declared it in a borrowed verse out of F. Cottons
treatise of the Sacrifice.

Prisca tonas? ridet. noua das? spernit. ardua? nescit.
Imperplexa? fugit. testificata? furit.
Do you bring old? he scorns. or new? he fretts.
Or hard? you find him dull.
Or plain? he shrinks. or past all doubt?
He storms, and stands wilful.
Thus much for the fathers, as a skantling or taste, Catho. Priests.
leaving the surplus to the curious Reader. I might have recited Martial
Epist. ad Burdegalenses, cap. 3. Anaclet. Epist. general: Dionisius Areop.
cap. 3. page. 3. who lived within the compass of the first hundred years: but
I observe I pray you observe verity.

I think your meaning was 500. years, otherwise it cannot be true.


brevity, as by the next proof shall appear.
118. 119. GEntlemen: Martiiall neither in this place, nor in the ten
chapters following, says any thing against us, but for us, Rider.
and as I think altogether against you. For Martial reproves those that
honored such Priests, as ^acrificed mutuis and surdis statuis, to dumb and
deaffe images (which neerlie touches your freeholde) and diswaded them from
it, saying; Martial.
Nunc autem multo magis sacerdotes Dei omnipotentis qui vita^ vobis tribuunt in
calice and pane honorare debetis: For now you ought much rather to honor the
Priests of Almighty God, which give you life ^n the cup and bread. This is
that which you think knocks us in the head. But first ^et it be examined, and
then censured.

1 First, you must prove that you are Priests of Almighty God: which you shall
never do; as has been plainly proved.

2 Secondly, you must prove that you give life to the communicants, in the
cup and bread, which is impossible. And unless you prove the premises, the
allegation ^s impertinent.

3 Thirdly and lastly, if the Priest could give life in the cup, wine or
bread, then it were clear that the substance of bread and wine remained. And
that would knock but the brains of your miraculous transubstans^ation. Now
masters, in alleging Martial you are brought into a labyrinth, get out as
you can. For if you ever had read Martial, you would never have alleged him
in this case: for in the end of the same chapter, he shows to Sigebert, and
to other newly converted from ydolatrie, ad synceram fidem, to true religion,
that Christ is sacrificed three manner of ways.

First, by himself on the cross once for all.

Secondly, by the cruel Jews, who cried, Crucify him, Crucify him.

Thirdly, per nos in sui commemorationem; by us in rememberance of him. Thus
Martial tells you, that in rememberance of Christ, is not Christ. Now if you
will needs sacrifice Christ after Martials opinion, you must choose one of these
three: after the first if you would you cannot: after the second, I am sure ye
will not: and after the third you ought, but do not. Thus your proofs mend, as
sower Ale does in summer, worse and worse, even like a conie in a net: or a
bird amongst limetwigs, the more they stir, the faster they stick. But you
cannot help it; seeing the cause is bad, how can your proofs be good? But in
Gods name leave wresting of Fathers, deceiving of Catholics, and come to the
confession of your faults, and recantation of your errors: and you shall
glorify God, edify his people, and save your souls, which God grant for
Christ's sake.

For Anaclete, I have not seen him, and therefore cannot censure him: Anaclete.
but if he be ancient, he will speak with us: if he be a late writer, he is
a weak witness: and at first excepted against: and unless he lived within
the first five hundred years after Christ, he must neither help you, nor hurt
us.

And for Dionysius Areop. because he speaks not one word for you, Dionisius
Areop^.
therefore I have no reason to speak one word against him. And whereas you say,
these fathers you have brought as a scantling or taste: I tell you plainly,
scant a taste of any trick. And the fathers you have not brought with you, but
left them behind you, because ye know they would witness what they should,
not what you would. Then you say, you will leave the Surplus to the curious
Reader: by your leave, it is better to be curious then careless. For if the
Reader had not been more careful then you were, Ovid. Metam. lib. 1. page 1.
it had been inform Chaos, and as Ovid once said, Rudis indigestaque moles,
(...) quicquam nisi pondus iners. But now to the rest.

A confirmation of all our former doctrine, by disciples of the Apostles:
particularly by Martial, Anaclet, Dionise etc.
Fitzsimon.
118. FIrst M. Rider requesteth us, as we observe brevity, so to observe
verity. I promise in the mercy of God, that I will not fail therein, nor for
a thousand worlds would falsify, or deprave any point of truth, wittingly.
God is my witness, and my conscience, that I seek not, nor aim at worldly
applauds, or preferments. My cause needs noe sinister defense. The gats of
hell could not, can not, and may not hereafter prevail against it. When I
abjure Christ and religion, then will I (Puritan-like) diligere vanitatem and
querere mendacium; Psalm. 4.3. Esa. 28.15. 1. Tim. 4.2.
in mendacio ponere spem mea^; and loqui mendacium in hypocrisi; Love vanity,
and seek for a lie, plant my hope in a lie; and speak falsehood in
hypocrhysie. This request from him (who as if he hated verity, eschueth it;
and yet here requires it, as if he affected it, and had wanted it in our
dealings) is a duble offense: because as S. Augustine says; S. Aug. super psalm.
63.
Simulata aequitas non est aequitas, sed duplex iniquitas, quia iniquitas est
and simulatio; Dissembled equity is not equity, but doble iniquity: The 149.
untruth.
for it is both iniquity and dissimulation. Secondly, in the 149. untruth he
says, that unless we understand by the first hundred years, five hundred
years, it is untrue. But contrary; I say again, by testimony of S.
Ignatius, S. Ignatius epist. 5.
that Dionysius was disciple to S. Paul, Anaclet to S. Peter, who both suffered
in the year 69. Martial by most writers accounted one of the 72. disciples of
Christ. And consequently, they all three were within the first hundred years
after Christ; and so our saying true. So that M. Rider can meddle with no kind
of doctrine, but in correcting, he is found lamentably unskillful.

The 150. untruth.
Thirdly, in the 150. untruth is said, that Martial speaks nothing against,
but for protestantrie. I infer thereupon, that then you have recanted
protestantrie: For in the 99. number, as being then a protestant, you denied
preisthood in the new testament. Now, as no protestant, you consent with
Martial, that there is a preisthood, and priests by whom life is given in the
chalice and bread. As a protestant before you have ever denied, Christ to be
the same in the Eu^harist who was crucified: now as noe protestant (for you
have pro^essed to consent with Martial) you profess; S. Martial epist. ad
Burdegal. c. 3.
Quod Iudaei per inuidiam ^mmolauerunt putantes se nomen eius a terra abolere,
nos causa salutis nostrae in ^ra sanctificata proponimus; what the Jews by
envy did sacrifice, thinking to can^ell his name from upon earth, that same we
do propound upon a sanctified Altar. Therefore having wisely recanted, beware of
being a relapse to your former vomit, and never to deny any part of all this
hereafter. Fowerthly, he that has here professed him self conformable to S.
Martial, he that has before told that the old, and new testament, Vide nu.
56. 62. 9^.
gives the names of one thing to another for resemblance sake; behold how
here he knocks out (as his swagring phrase is) the brains of our
transubstantiation, because forsooth the body and blood of Christ is called
bread, and wine. Why are you so forgetful? ^id not your own mouth, in your
pretended exposition of the 6. ^hap. of S. Ihon, say: This bread of life
Christ, is the true bread: Christ and his fleash are all one and the same
bread: etc. And why might not S. Martial call Christ bread, as well as you? I
never found one being so forgetful and contrarious to him self, better
described, then in F. Cottons Epigramme, before his treatise of the Sacrifice.
Colligis? haud meminit. stringis? crepat? inijcis? odit.
Iamne negata? probat. iamne probata? negat.
Sum you his words? he forgetts. pinche you? he fumes* cite you? he hates.
Were they now denied? he affirms. if but now affirmed? he rebateth.
For the point of commemoration or remembrance; it is in the 81. and 86.
numbers abundantly discussed. For discomending our proofs, and affirming that
we are taken as in a nett: it displeases me not. For never think I any proof
so strong, as what by your like is pretended weak; nor my doctrine and
profession more at liberty, and out of danger, then when by such it is
disabled. In not knowing Anaclet, you testify what your skill is in the
primative Popes: S. Anaclet. epist. 2. ad Episcopos Ital.
among whom, he was of the first, in time, and dignity. By him you might
learn that priests are; Corporis Christi tractatores; handlers of Christ's
body. You have noe reason, you say, to speak against Dionisius, because he
speaks not one word for us. Yes M. Rider: it is for us greatly, that the
priest must, S. Dion. Hierarchy Ecclesiast. cap. 2. and 3.
first make his confession, after having placed the signs upon a holy altar;
by which signs Christ him self, signatur and sumitur, is not only signified,
but received. Then that the venerable prelat comes to the altar, and
sacrifices. Then that after elevation of the sacred host, he communicates
him self, and distributeth part to the assembly. Which is in one word to say
Mass. If by your own confession, you have not reason to speak against all
this: then you will also be destitute of reason, in impugning us any longer,
for our confessions, for our sanctified altars, for our priests, for our
masses, for our eleuations, and in one word, for all our papistrie. As I
answered a little before, so now I answer, again: that I have never better
opinion of my answer, that it is nether careless nor defective, but exact,
and insuportable, then I have, by your reprehension of it. For that is your
last refuge, to make vanting your victory, reproaching your reproving, which
is as Cicero said; Exhibere fugam pompae similem; to retire, and fly,
dissembling a triumph: and when you are confounded, to pretend you had
confuted: imitating certain being wounded in their bowels, whom Aristotle
relates, Aristoteles lib. 3. de partibus Animal.
in and by lawghing, to perish. So you, notwithstanding owtward applaudings,
God knows, and every reasonable man, have as fowly failed, and as forciblie
been foiled, as ever needed any enemy of God, and godliness.

Nether wanted I in the next words of Ovid, a more pertinent replye, then
wherewith I am in the last lines attaynted: But I will aspyre to greater
victory over him, then by Ouids help. For I forgive his accusation, without
any feeling thereof. S. Chrysostom has long since armed me against such
reprehensions. S. Chrysostom. hom. 2. ad Antiochen.
Aliquis iniuriam intulit? non sensisti, nec doluisti, non es iniuriam passus?
magis percussisti quam percussus es. Has any one says S. Chrysostom iniuried
thee? and thou not feel it, nor lament it, nor endure any hurt thereby? thou
did rather strike, then wast struken. Yet if he had any sparck of modesty or
wisdom, he would have said to him self, out of Horace; Horat. 1. epist. 18.
Ter. in Adelph.
Nec tua laudabis studia, nec aliena contemnes: thy own skill commend not, nor
it of others condemn. But Terence said true: homine imperito nihil quicquam
iniustius, qui, nisi quod ipse fecit, nihil rectum putat.

A conclusion of these two principal proofs, out of Scriptures, and Fathers.
119. Do not marvel, Christian Readers, Fitzsimon.
that M. Rider so confidently claymed the Fathers as his favorers, who is so
found to have no interest or title in them. Remember the dishonest woman's most
impudent and peremptory claim, of another woman's child, before Solomon.
Remember this our purytans predecessors like claim, to the primative Fathers,
so perfectly delivered by Dioscorus as you may say, not one spirit only, but
also one mouth, to have vttred the words related by him, and repeated by M.
Rider, they are of such agreeable sownde, and suitable sense. Ego cum patribus
eijcior: Council. Chalcedon. Action prima, immediate ante actionem secundam
Concilij Constantinop.
Ego defendo patrum dogmata: non transgredior in aliquo: Et horum testimonia
non simpliciter neque transitory, sed in libris habeo: I am abandoned together
with the Fathers: I defend the doctrine of the Fathers: I depart not a jot:
and I have their testimonies, not simplye nor slightly, but in their own
books. Yet this protestation of Dioscorus was perfidious, and most impiously
dissembled. For, as a principal heretic, he had departed from both Fathers,
and Christian faith, and was condemned a reprobat Eutychian heretic; Theod.
lib. 4. Fab. Conc. Chalced. S. Vigil. l. 4. Con. Eutych. S. Basil. in orat: que
habetur in 7. Synodo.
such as affirmed Christ's divinity, to have been crucified and buried; and
traditions to be of no estimation: Wherein also our sectarists (as appears in
the examination of the creed) voluntarily conform their imaginations. Now,
what part of M. Riders Caveat, is there but the former words of Dioscorus, are
therein verbatim in a manner engrossed? The whole consent of all sort of
protestants, Lauatherus in epistola de sua visitatione.

Genebrard. chr. l. 4. initio page 526. dicit excremiss^, supra 200. sectos.
Spongia pro Societate page 100. dicit and 250. Eodinus in methodo, dicit esse
innumerabiles.

Statius. lib. 11.


which amownt to above two hundred sects (for the very Lutherans, even by the
report of La^atherus their Visitor, did in his time, alone, attain to a
hundred and four score) disclayming the Fathers; The Fathers them selves
disclayming all parts of protestant doctrine; The knowledge of the grave and
learned protestants to the contrary; The testimony of his own conscience,
could not retain him, but as Statius said: it preceps sonipes stricte
contemptor habenae: on ronneth the head long horse, neglecting restrayning
raynes; and renews both Dioscorus claim and impudency, in affirming, yea
and (that I may use to him a Lancashyre phrase) in threaping and bearing, in
hand that it was blyndnes, and ignorance, to contradict him, that the primative
Fathers stood not assuredly for him. Neither contented therewith, but to be
known every way to concur with ancient heretics, he manifouldly repeateth
these words following of theirs, mentioned a thousand years past, by Vincent
Lyrinensis: Whose goulden book, he also commended to us to read, as whereby to
know him to be in the right; whereas no other book, so much discovers him to
be in the wrong. And Iustus Caluinus, olim a famous and principal Protestant,
imputes his Conversion to be a Catholic, to no other book so much, as to the
same. Thus then says the said Vincentius; Audies etenim quosdam ipsorum
dicere: Vincent. Lyrin. de prophan. her. nou. Cap. 26.
Venite o insipientes and miseri, qui vulgo Catholici vocitamini, and discite
fidem veram, quam praeter nos nullus intelligit, quae multis ante seculis
latuit, nuper vero reuelata and ostensa est. You shall perceive some of them to
say: Come o ye fools, and miserable people, who commonly are called
Catholics, and learn the true faith, which none understand but we, which
has been long hidd, but is now of late revealed and showed. What could any
Catholic, or right believer, speak more confidently toward his true belief?
Will you give ear to M. Riders words of like mowlde, and honesty? You and
your late Rhomish Catholics, do quite dissent from Christ's truth, and owld
Romish religion. And therefore remember whence you are fallen and return to
the ancient truth. By which words he nether goes beyond, nor astray, from
these former heretics, as truly pronouncing them as they. It is impossible at
this discovery of his dealing, but his mind says, out of Plautus; Plautus in
Cap.
Nec mendacijs subdolis mihi vsquam mantellum est meis; To my guilfull frawds
there is no shroud remaining. What then was his intention in publishing his
Caveat, whereby was to ensue, such infamy and confusion as he could not be
ignorant might have succeeded? I answer, the same, which is related in the 116.
number of one of his brethren, in the Lord. Who being challenged of his
exorbitant lying, answered: Quam diu potero clades adferam: Remund. Rufus in
duplicatione Con. Patrona Molinei. Fol. 76.
latebunt quam diu poterunt: Valebunt apud vulgus ista mendacia. As long as I
can I will indomadge: it shall remain secreat as long as it may: among the
people these lies will be current. Such was Stratocles the Athenian, who in all
post have returning home from the battle, wherein the Athenians were
overthrown, certifyed the contrary, that they had vanquished their enemies,
whereupon triumphs of joy were appointed, and great feastings, and
gratulations used: within two days after the truth being revealed, and every
one offended with Stratocles for his lying, he answered: I had more care to
content you two whole days, then respect to have towld one lie. So is it with
my Cauailero: he esteemed more the joy for a moment by being thowght a learned
Doctor, and great confuter, or gladsoome relator of false victories, by
untruths how great soever, then the disgrace, which might ensue; which he
thought he would avoid, as long as he might, and when he cowld no longer, to
defend his dissimulation by example of Beza, and Cartwright, allowing in such
cases to be lawful to neglect all truth, and fidelity: as appears in the
99. number.

The third proof. That the chief Protestants did believe the real presence,
Catho. Priests.
and alleged all the Fathers for the maintenance thereof.
120. 121. 122. 123. THis truly is worthy admiration, that none of the
fathers, Luther Tom. 7. Defens. verb. coenae fol. 391.
whereof there is an infinite number, but did speak clean contrary to
Sacramentaries. And though the fathers all with one mouth affirm: yet the
Sacramentaries harden themselves to deny them.

And they would never utter this (that Christ his body is not in the blessed
Sacrament) if they had any regard of the Scripture: and were not their hearts
full of infidelity. Idem fol. 390.


I truly would give the frantic Srcramentaries this advise, Idem Ibid. fol.
411.
that seeing they will needs be mad, they should play their parts rather
wholly then in part: therefore let them make short work, and raze out of the
scripture these words, This is my body which is given for you. For touching
their faith it is all one, if thus they keep it. Christ took bread and gave
thanks, brake it, and gave it to his Disciples sayng, take, eat, do this in
rememberance of me. For this proves sufficiently, that bread is to be eaten
in rememberance of Christ. This is the whole and entire Supper of the
Sacramentaries.

In vain do the Sacramentaries believe in God the Father, God the Son,
Luther Tom. 2. fol. 263.
and God the holy Ghost: seeing they deny this one article as false, of the
real presence, whereas Christ does say. This is my body.

The whole opinion of the sacrament, the Sacramentaries began with lies, Luther
in Ep. ad Ioh. Haruagiu^ Typograh. Argent.

Rider. De Cons. did. 2 canon. prim. in glossa, tertia tenet page 429.


and with lies they defend the same.

GEntlemen: you know Luther was a Munke, and though he recanted Popery, and
utterly condemned your Transubstantiation as a fable, having neither Scripture
nor Father to warrant it: yet he stuck fast in another error, fitly named
Luthers heresy was in Rome before Luther was borne.
Consubstantiation, which error he also sucked from the Popes own btest, as
you may see in his distinctions. For you in your Transubstantiation teach, that
of the substance of bread and wine is made by the Priest the very natural
body and blood of Christ: no substance of either remaining, but only the
outward forms.

Luther by his Consubstansiation says, that Christ's body and blood be
received together in the bread, under or with the bread; both substance and
accidents of bread and wine remaining.

Now I pray you, how fitteth this your purpose? you will say in this, that
Luther held a real presence. True, but Luther denied your real presence as a
fable. And yet his opinion was far wide from the truth. We regard not
Luthers censure against us, for Christ his spiritual presence, no more then
you do for his comdemning of your Transubstansiation. And Luther is more to be
commended, then all the Popes, Cardinals, Priests, and Jesuits in Christendom:
who with Augustine, though he did err yet would not persevere in errors, as you
and they do, Ad Lectorem Tom. 1. page 1.
least he should be an heretic, and therefore in his Epistle to the Christian
Reader, says in this manner: Ante omnia oro pium lectorem, and oro propter
Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum, vt ista legate cum iudicio, imo and cum multa
miseratione, and sciat me fuisse aliquando Monach^^. Before all things, Quid
aequius peti potuit?
or first of all, I beseech the godly Reader, and I beseech him for our Lord
Jesus Christ his sake, that he will read these my works iudiciallie, and with
great compassion and pity; and let him know and understand that I was
sometimes a Monk. As if he should say: if I have erred, or do err, impute
that to my Monkerie and Popery, which in deed is but a forge of bles, and a
legend of lies.

The Priests think every real presence to be their Transubsta^tiated real
presence.
But because you say Luther held a real presence: therefore you conclude
against us with his testimony, because you call him a chief Protestant,
persuading the Catholics, that either some chief Protestants be of your
opinion touching your real presence: or else that there is a jar amongst our
selves touching the same. And because few of you have read Luther (as appears
by your omissions, transpositions, and your imperfect translation) and
therefore in this point, know not exactlie the difference betwixt your selves,
Luther, and us; I will plainly and truly set down the three several
opinions touching this question; that the Reader may see wherein the difference
one from another, or agreement one with another consists. The manner (Christ
willing) shall be by question and answer, as follows.

1. Questi.
1. Question.

What is given in the Lords Supper besides bread and wine?

1. Aunsw.
1. Answer.

First, you say, the body and blood of Christ.

Secondly, Luther says, the body and blood of Christ.

Thirdly, we say, the body and blood given in the sacrament?

2. Quest.
2 Quest. How is Christ's body and blood given in the sacrament?

2. Aunsw.
2 Auns. You say corporally.

Luther says, corporally.

We say with scriptures and fathers, spirituallie.

3. Questi.
3 Quest, In what thing is Christ's body and blood given?

3. Aunsw.
3 Aunsw. You say, under the forms or accidents of bread, the substance being
quite changed, the accidents only remainning.

Luther says, in, with or under the bread, neither substance nor accidents
changed, but both remaining.

We with scriptures and fathers say, Christ's body and blood are given in his
merciful promise, which tendereth whole Christ with all his benefits unto the
soul of man, sealed and assured unto us in the worthy receiving of the
sacraments.

4. Questi.
4 Quest. How must Christ's body and Blood be received?

4. Aunsw.
4 Auns. You say, with the mouth.

Luther says, with the mouth and faith.

We say according to the holy scriptures, that Christ must be received by
faith: and there lodge and dwell in our hearts: for whatsoever Christ gives by
promise m^st of man be received by faith.

5. Questi.
5. Quest. To what part of man is Christ's body and blood given?

5. Aunsw.
5. Auns. You say, to your bodies, which is absurd.

Luther says, both to body and soul, which is impossible.

We say, to our souls: for the promise is spiritual; the things promised,
spiritual; the names to receive them, spiritual: so the place into which it
must be received, must needs be spiritual, not corporal: not that the
substance of Christ's body is vained to our spirits: but that those precious
benefits purchased for us in the crucified body of Christ, must be united to
our spirits by faith. This doctrine is Apostolical, sound, and Catholic,
upon which we boldly may venture our souls and saluations.

^ Quest. To whom is Christ's body and blood given? 6. Questi.


^ Auns. You say, to the godly or godless, believers and infidels, as has been above said. 6. Aunsw.


Luther says, both to the godly and godless.

We say, only to the godly believers, as heretofore has been proved.

^ Quest. What do the wicked eat in the Lords supper?

^ Auns. You say, accidents of bread, and Christ's body. 7. Questi.


Luther, says, the wicked eat bread, both substance and accidents, 7. Aunsw.
and the body of Christ also.

We say, the wicked eat nothing in the Lords supper, but bare bread, and
drink nothing but mere wine, being the outward elements of the sacrament. As
for the inward grace of the Sacrament, which is Christ crucified with all his
merits, they eat not, they receive not: because they have neither a lively
faith to receive him, nor a purified heart by faith to intertaine, him. And
therefore they only eat as Judas did: and as Augustine said: Illi
manducaba^t panem Dominum, Tract. 59. super John page. 205.
illi panem Domini co^tra Dominum. The godly eat bread the Lord: the wicked
only the Lord against bread of the the Lord.

8 Quest. What is it to eat Christ's body? 8. Questi.


8. Auns. You say, carnally to eat Christ's flesh with your bodily mouth,
etc. 8. Aunsw.


Luther says, carnally to eat Christ's flesh, and spirituallie to believe in
him.

We say, with the Scriptures, that to believe that all Christ's merits are
ours, and purchased for us in his passion. This is to eat Christ's body, as
has been already proved.

9 Quest. What is it to drink Christ's blood? 9. Questi.


9 Auns. You say, carnally to drink his blood. 9. Aunsw.


Luther says, carnally and spirituallie.

We say with the scriptures: it is to believe that Christ's blood was shed on
the cross for our sins.

10 Quest. How is bread made Christ's body? 10. Questi.


10 Auns. You say, by Transubstantiation. 10. Aunsw.


Luther says, by Consubstansiation.

We say, by appellation: signification: or representation, as aforesaid.

11 Quest. Where is Christ's body? 11. Questi.


11 Auns. You say every where. Both of you err, 11. Aunsw.
for then Christ should not have a true body.

Luther says, every where. Both of you err, for then Christ should not have a
true body.

We say, according to Scripture and Creed, only in heaven.

12 Quest. How is Christ every where? 12. Questi.


12 Auns. You say, according to both natures, 12. Aunsw.
But both of you speak Monkerie and Popery.

Luther says, according to both natures. But both of you speak Monkerie and
Popery.

We say with Scriptures and Fathers, as has been proved, only according to
his Godhead.

Now gentle Reader, you see the agreement and difference that is betwixt the
Papists, Lutherans, and Protestants. And how impertinentlie (I will not say
vnschollerlike) this is brought against us, which neither helps their carnal
presence, nor hurts our faith touching Christ's spiritual presence. And now
to the rest that follows.

The third Proof; That the chief protestants did believe, the real presence;
and alleged all the Fathers for the maintenance thereof.
Fitzsimon.
120. THIS proof being so important, by how much it is greueous, and
extraordinary, to be overthrown by his own brotherhood, it lay M. Rider
upon, to strain all his senses and employ all his power, to frustrat so many
assaults: and especialy, when his own domesticals, or rather his patriarcks,
had conspired against him. First therefore, he says, that Luther was a Monck:
and therefore by Luthers request, all errors, (and among the rest this of the
real presence) ought to be imputed to his being a Monck. And so all is thought
well defended. To which, for answer, I revoke first into memory, what is
delivered out of Luther, in the 117. number, of the manner of answering, of
these people: how every thing, to them, seems a full, and bastant,
resolution, to all objections. Luth. Defens. verb. cenae fol. 381. 382. 394.
405. 406.
Besyd which, else where he says. They will say any thing, boast of any thing,
confidently affirm any thing, but prove nothing: unless it be by frivolous
bragging of the most clear truth; in which; Finem, and modum nullum, faciunt;
they observe no mean, or end. Nemo eorum obtestationibus, and iactationibus,
quicquam credat; Nam eos mentiri, and dupliciter mentiri, certissimum est. Let
noe man (says he) believe their protestations, and braggs: for it is certain
that they lie, and lie again.

Secondly for answer, I say; the being of Luther a monck, long Martyn. Taburnus
contra profuges Vitembergicos Caluinistes.

Luth tom. 7. VVittemb. fol. 502. and tom. 8. Ien^ Germanico fol. 174.

Confess Tygur. trac. 3. fol. 108.


It therefore, that by noe study (conioyning thereto ardent invocation of God (as
him to have done, Martin Taburnus s;ayth) nor by any other means, although he
carefully inquyred all occasions to harm the Pope thereby) could otherwise
seem to him, but an heresy; even then, when he had (as he says him self)
one foot in his grave: how can the dislyking of this opinion, be imputed to
his some time being a Monck? I, says he, will carye this testimony, and this
glory, to the tribunal seat of Christ, my saluioure, that I have with all
ernestnes condemned these fanatical men, and enemies of the Sacrament, in what
place soever they be under the sun etc. And again. Luth. in epist. ad Jacob,
ecclesiae Bremen. Doctorem. an. 1546.
Mihi omnium infelicissimo satis est vna ista beatitudo; Beatus vir qui non
abijt in confilio Sacramentariorum. To me the most unhappy, that the
blessedness is sufficient; Blessed is he that has not gone in the Consil of the
Sacramentarians. And again: Idem. libel. con. Sacramentarios.
Hereticos serio censemus, and alienos ab Ecclesia Dei esse Zuinglianos, and
Sacramentarios omnes, qui negant Christi corpus and sanguinem ore carnali sumi,
in venerando Eucharistiae Sacramento: we account in great earnestnes, heretics
and strangers to the Church of God, all Zuinglians, and Sacramentarians, who
deny Christ's body and blood, in the venerable Sacrament of the Eucharist, to
be received with a corporal mowthe.

This he affirms, whom all the learned Protestants that ever were, so much
extolled; yea his very adversaries. To Calvin, Calu. de libro arbitr. con.
Pigh^um l. 1. page 192.

Beza in Iconibus. Illyricus in c. 14. Apoc.

Amsdorf. in 1. Tom. Luth. in prefat. Alber. con. Carolostad. l. 7. B. D. 8.
Cyriacus con. Steph. Agric. fol. 6. A Iuel. def. Apol. par. 4. c. 4. n. 2. Fox
in calendario.

Whitaker. con. Campian. page 191.

The 151. untruth.


he is an Elias, out of whose mowth God thundered his truth: which Alberus in
like words confirms. To Beza; He is the principal instrument of
Christianity in Germany. To Illyricus, he is the Angel fleeing through the
midst of heaven, and having the eternal gospel: of whom is mention in Apoc.
the 14. To Mathesius, he is the supreme father of the Church. To Amisdorfe, he
who never had his like in the Christian world. To Alberus, a very Paul. To him,
and Illyricus again. A second Elias, and one sufficient alone to appease Gods
wrath. To Iuel, Melancthon, Jonas Pomeran, Whytaker, and Fox, he is the light
of the world, a Saint, the Father of truth. Quicquid agit mundus, Luther vult
esse secundus. What ever shift be fownd, Luther will be secounde: and much more,
reported in our first 20. number. What is M. Rider compared with all these; nay
with the meanest of these?

The next answer to Luther, is, that he entered into another error of
companation: which by the 151. untruth, he says Luther had sucked out of the
Popes own breast. For first, there is noe such Chapter as he cites for proof
in all the decretals. Secondly, had there been any error mentioned in the
decretals, to have been by the Popes condemned, and not by any Pope or Papist
defended: is it not a Riderian, and ridiculous sequel, that such had been, the
Popes Doctrine, and sucked out of the Pops own breast, because the Pope
mentions it by way of abominable doctrine by him condemned? As for Luthers
other errors, let his disciples make apologies for them against M. Rider. And
for his being against us, we howld it a great honor. But what is that to you,
whose ringleader he was? If he did not persevere in error, as you say: how can
it be, but his last, and lowdest condemnation, of your doctrine, does not make
such doctrine, to be confessed an error, and not erroneusly condemned by
Luther? Luther by your confession, remaining in no error, and condemning, and
detesting it, as both erreneous, and heretical?

How our opinion; the Sacramentarian opinion; and Luthers opinion, are reported.
Fitzsimon. The 152. untruth.
121. IN the very first relation of our doctrine, issues out the 152. untruth.
Do we say, besyd bread, and wine, Christ to be in the B. Sacrament? Or rather,
without bread, and wine? you bear us witness your self, before your replye to
the 6. of S. Ihon, that we teach all bread, and wine to be transubstantiated:
and thereby you register now against your self this said untruth. In the same
first answer, The 153. untruth.
you adioyne the 153. untruth, that you teach, the body, and blood, of
Christ, to be in the supper. Witness your own words, at the 103. number, the
Sacrament and Christ's body to differr as much as the lamb and the passover,
etc. which had no more union, then the wine that is sold, and the iuye garland
that is a sign of the sale thereof. Join also these two I pray you together:
that, Christ is not given but in his outward sign; and yet, that the body and
blood in the supper is given not only by sign, but as you say, realy, and
truly. Given, and not given; only in sign; and not only in sign; but also in
substance. Is not this fast, and loose; pass, and repasse; off, and on; pro,
and contra, with, and against; Is not this a pretty ridle? In your third answer
to the second question, bursteth forth the 153. untruth. For you do not say,
nor can say Spiritualy, unless you depart from your first martyrs, (to whom
you have obliged your self to consent) and from Musculus: As appears in the
108. number. Also, our answer is not intierly delivered: For, we affirm not,
only corporaly, but also, spiritualy.

In your third question, and third answer, is contained, first, the The 154.
155. and 156. untruth.
that Scripturs and Fathers, say with you. Secondly, the 155. untruth, that
Christ in this institution, made any promise. Thirdly, the 156. untruth: that
Christ by any promise assures all his benifits to the worthy receauer: for
there is noe such matter. In the 4. question, The 157. 158. untruth.
and first answer, is the 157. untruth, that we say, Christ to be received
alone with the mowth, as manifowldly is testified. In the 4. answer, is the
158. untruth: that whatsoever Christ gives by promise, must be received by
faith. For he gives damnation to the wicked infidels, which he had often
promised: yet they have no faith. He gives resurrection to our bodies, in his
promises: yet bodies have no faith. He gives health, food, attire, by many
promises to his servants: which can not be received, or used, but only by their
bodies. He gives baptism and grace to children: yet they have no actual
faith: he gives by promise food to the fowls of the air, to the fish of the
sea, and to the beasts of the earth: can these be said to have faith? yet, I
confess, they may have as much as puritans, and have none at all. O rich
Deanery of S. Patricks, how would thou groan, if thou could feel the heft
of the divinity of thy deane, wherein such falsehood stands for infallible
principles, and such impiety is termed the word of the Lord? How many
untruths therefore are employed in these words, none of meanest capacity, but
must perceive.

In the fifth question and first answer, is the 159. untruth: The 159. untruth.
that it is absurd, by our bodies to receive Christ: as also, that we exclude
the receiving by our sowles. In the third answer to the 5. question, is the
160. untruth, The 160. untruth.
that either such institution as I said was a promise, or a thing spiritual
alone, and not also corporal. The residue is disproued in the premises. And
consequently, The 161. untruth.
that it is the 161. untruth, that any may venture their sowles upon such
doctrine. Toward the next question, let it be understood what we say, to be
said, according the salvation of the godly, and damnation of the ungodly; or
else it will be a further untruth. That it has been proved by you, that the only
godly believers receive Christ, is the 162. untruth. The 162. and 163. untruth.
To the 7. question, and third answer, it is the 163. untruth; that Christ
crucified is the inward grace of the Sacrament: both because, Christ truly
gave his disciples his body vncrucifyed: as also because Christ being a
substance, can not be grace; which is an accident. Although he is, and well may
be called, the giver of grace. And feign would I know, two things, mentioned in
this answer of yours to the 7. question; First, why you say Christ crucified,
with all his merits, to be the matter, or inward grace of the Sacrament;
considering Christ ordained it before his being crucified. Secondly, why you
allow any other his merits besyd his passion, considering, that in the 83.
number and 14. examen, you affirm only his passion, or rather the wownd of his
side, to have been fruictfull for your redemption?

To the 8. question, and first answer: it is the 164. untruth. The 164.
untruth.
For we say no such matter of carnal eating, but of corporal, true, real, and
substantial eating: and that, not only by mowth, but also by charity, and
faith. The 165. untruth is, The 165. untruth.
that you say with scriptures in so saying: both because, there is no such
scripture in owld or new testament: as also because, it is false that all
Christ's merits are yours; or that all were purchased only by his Passion: For
many, yea infinite, The 166. 167. 168. 169. and 170. untruth.
were purchased before his passion. In the 9. question, is the 166. untruth,
that we say, carnally: and the 167. untruth that you say with scriptures: In
the 11. question, is the 168. untruth, that we say Christ's body is every
where: and the 169. that Scriptures, or Creed, say he is only in heaven. In the
12. question, is the 170. untruth: that we say Christ according to both
natures, to be every where. The sum of this answer to Luthers authority is,
that Luther has failed like a monck, and that the Father of protestant truth,
as them selves term him, is but a Father of error. A good verdict. For the
name of Protestants here taken from the Lutherans, we will examine how rightly
it is done.

Who are in deed Protestants? and wherefore so called?
Fitzsimon. Luc. 8.
122. ARe you got in, from puritans among protestants? you have not observed
the conseile of our Saluioure, when you are invited to a mariadge, to keep the
lower place. I must therefore dismount you, into your rank. First, the name of
Protestant, sprung upon this following occasion. When the Reforming profession
had purchased many followers, (as it is no more marvel to behold numbers to
follow a doctrine of liberty, then waters to fall from a height, when a gappe
is opened) and the Emperor Charles the fifth would feign understand the
grownds of their persuasions: Sleidan. lib. 6. fol. 101. 102. 109. Lauather. in
sua historia page 19.
they joined their heads together, and made a collection of opinions, to which
they protested to stand to. Which book being delivered to the Emperor at
Augusta, otherwise called Auspurg, anno 1530. some thirteen years after
Luther had apostated; and the greater part by manifowld protestants (whereby
the name begone) promising to auow the said book: the book to this day, is
called the Confession of Augusta; and the only defenders thereof, are called
protestants. Nether do the Zuinglians in Heluetia, claim this name, but are
known by the title of Sacramentarians; nether the Geneuians, or French
reformers, but are known by the title of Hugenots; nor the Flemish rebels,
but are known by the title of Ghewes. Secondly, concerning this name of
protestants, they to whom it does belong, have duble cause to applawd greatly
to them selves: Such only, (as I forshewed) are the Lutherans, and they only
that are consenting to the foresaid confession of Augusta. The first cause is,
that the Zuinglians, the English, the French, etc. have sought, Brentius in
appendice.
and that (as by their own report is testified) with tears to be admitted
into their concord: yet that they never would admit, or tolerat them: as
appears upon the Article of the creed, in the communion of Saints. And when,
they blazed abroad, that they had the good lyking of them; the protestants
took it most injuriously, and (as a great slaundre) sharply refuted it. Exam.
nu. 19.

The second cause is, that their very name of Protestants, is so much affected,
even by them, who are opposite unto their profession (as appears in England)
as that they covet it, and strive for it In deed the cause why that name had
first access into England, was, because the first reformers who resorted
thereto, Tindal, Frith, Barns, Cranmer, etc. were of the Lutheran stamp, with a
peculiar small diversity. Now, M. Rider are you a Protestant? If you consent
with the Augustan confession, and so be a protestant (for otherwise you can
not) then you must recant all your opinion against the real presence, and
consent with Luther. But you perhapps will distinguish English Protestants,
with Thomas Digges your brother Puritan, Thomas Digges in his humble motives
anno 1601.
from all others, by calling them state Protestants: and so intrude, and
incroache, among them. But you can not; For you have impugned the blessing of
the Cross, as a magical charminge, which they allow. Numb. 53. Nu^b. 62.
You have impugned Baptism to be a true lauer of regeneration, making it only
an external sign or seal, and that only to the faithful; which they
disprove, as they may, the scripture instructing the^ thereto, and saying; Mat.
3.11. Mar. 1.8.16.16. Luc. 3.16. Joan. 1.32. Acts 2.37.38. etc. 22.17. Tit.
3.5. 1. Pet. 3.21.
to be contained therein the holy Ghost, remission of sins, eternal life, it
being the holy Ghosts lauer, or font of regeneration, and renouation, whereby,
and by the word of life, we are cleansed from sin, and saved, etc. To which,
the doctrine of the communion book, accords, in these words: This infant,
The communion book printed at London by Tho. Vawtroller, anno 1574. in the
tra. of private baptism. Com. book in ^he form of public baptism.
who being borne in original sin, and in the wrath of God, now by the lauer
of regeneration in baptism, is ascribed into the number of Gods children, and
made heir of eternal life. Again: that by that sacrament, Children be
regenerated, and graffed into the body of Christ's congregation, and made
partakers of the death of our Saluiour. So then baptism is more then an
external sign (and not only of the elect) among true state Protestants; from
whom M. Rider having sequestered him self; in no manner or way, the name of
Protestant is belonging to him.

Also he has impugned out of ministering the Communion, Number 68.
the words of Christ's institution; which by state Protestants, are allowed,
and used, in all their communion books. Fowerthly, he impugneth inequality
among the clergy; Fifthly, the name of priest; Sixthly, that in the new
testament, by imposition of hands, or otherwise, there is any function more
belonging to some, then others whether they be men, Numb. 98.99.
or women: which is altogether rank puritancie, and the very quintessence of
the holy reforming consistorial discipline. And yet this man, so plain a
puritan, will take to him self the name of a protestant: imitating the nature
of Polypus, a fish: which borrows, the color of whatsoever it sticks
unto; whereby not being mistrusted, it deceaueth and receaueth all preye passing
by. So my Puritan being, omnium horarum homo, a man for all times, and
professions, will loose nothing within his reach, although he should change
his shape and name from Puritan into a state Protestant, Vide Paulo ante number.
100.
and back again. Whereunto he has his warrant and dispensation, as I said,
from Beza, and Cartwright. Now, as I believe, M. Rider is fallen into deep
confusion (of him who haueing mounted at the mariadge; afterward cum rubore,
Luc. 14.
nouissimum locum tenuit, with shame was contented with the lowest place) for
separating him self from Catholics, and intruding among Protestants, from
whom he is (as the new phrase of soldiers bears) reformed among puritans;
by whom I think in my conscience (but that they care more for number, then
participation in their compagnie) he showld be cast off.

123. Is not think you this a great alchimie, to change, and convert every
thing, Fitzsimon.
to his purpose? Let us bring Scriptures, Fathers, and all testimonies to
warrant our doctrine: they are said, not to be for our purpose, but against it.
Let us bring, Scriptures, Fathers, and his own brethren, disprouing his
imaginations: they are said not to be against them, but for him. But that it
may be known, The 171. untruth.
this to be the 171. untruth; First here is declared, that by factions of
opinions, the real presence is denied: a thing (says M. Rider in the 28.
number) never denied by us, nor ever in question betwixt Protestant, and
Papist. Now at least, these protestants here alleged, writing to the late
Queen of England, in this allegation, show two untruths contained in M.
Riders denial: One, that it was never denied; the other, that it was never in
question. Yea in the same place, they request her majesty, to beware of the
Pharisaical leaven of them so denying it, as by them the words of Christ most
plain, most evident, most puissant, be overthrown. If I were at leisure, I
would worthily persecute such denials according to their desert. But in truth,
I am not at leisure, being often employed from morning to twelve of the clock,
in hearing confessions, in exhorting and catechizing, in performing, offices of
charity, in not omitting the domestical employments incident to one in his
third year of probation. In so much, as when I afford any pains to resolve
M. Riders articles, it is only at vacant, and vnperceaued time, by others.

This proof, that protestants approve the real presence, shall be duly
fortifyed, by all chief Protestants, and most approved, of all contryes in the
world. First, Berengarius the master author of the contrary opinion, says: Ego
Berengarius cord credo, and ore confiteor, Floruit an. 1579. De consecrat.
did. 2. cap. Ego Beren. Fox Acts. page 146.
panem and vinum, que ponuntur in altari, per mysterium sacrae orationis, and
verba nostri Redemptoris, substantialiter conuerti in veram propriam and
viuisicatricem carnem and sanguinem Domini nostri Jesus Christi: non tantum per
signum, and virtutem Sacramenti, sed etiam in proprietate naturae. I
Berengarius in heart do believe, and confess by mouth, the bread and wine
which are placed upon the altar, Theuet. vies des hommes illustres lib. 3. fol.
128. Gal Malmsbur. lib. 3. de gestis Anglorum.

Papyrius Masson. in Anal. Francorum. lib. 3. in Philip. ^ege. Gerson. con.
Romant. Vixit an. 1369.

VVicklephus epist. ad Joan. episcopum Lincoln.

Huss apud Joan Pezibranium lib. de non remane^tia panis con. VVicklephistas.


by the mystery of sacred prayer, and words of our Redemptor, to be
substantialy converted into the true, propre, and lively fleash and blood of
our Lord Jesus Christ Not only by sign and virtue of a Sacrament, but also in
the propriety of nature. And in this belief he dyed, as diverse relate. So
that here is the head of M. Riders opinion fallen from him. Secondly, Wickleph
thus says, against them who slandred him to be of a contrary opinion: At ego
credo, and vsque ad mortem meam volo desendere, quod postquam legitimus
Sacerdos rite protulit sacra verba super panem, quod sub forma panis sit verum
corpus Christi: but I believe, and will desend to my death, that after the
lawful priest has vsualy pronounced the sacred words over the bread, that
under the form of bread is the true body of Christ. Thirdly, Ihon Hufs
professes, that; Christus verbi sui ineffabili virtute, panem and vinum
transubstantiat in propriam carnem, and sanguinem; Christ by the unspeakable
virtue of his word, does transubstantiat bread and wine into his fleash and
blood. What a learned Reader, and Dictionarie maker, we have of M. Rider, that
(in this pillar of Reformation) omitted to find the word of
transubstantiation; is to be observed. Fowerthly Hierome Prage, says; Ante
consecrationem, panem; in consecratione, and postea, Prag. apud Pognium epist.
ad Leon. Aretinum.
verum Christi Corpus; Before Consecration, bread; in consecration, and after,
the true body of Christ. Of these three, the first, Wickleph, is by Fox
acknowledged; a chosen man raised by God to lighten the world. The other two,
Fox Acts and Mon. page 390. and seq. Oecolampadius in conscione de presentia
Corporis Christ's in eucharistia.
are Capital, and Calendarie Saints, with Fox. Fifthly Oecolampad says,
Simpliciter, and absque hesitatione, credamus, adesse, and contineri, sub hoc
pane, verum corpus, sub vino autem, sanguinem. Non dicofiguram tantum absit id
blasphemiae etc. Simply and without stamering let us believe to be present, and
to be contained under this bread, the true body; and under the wine, the
blood. I do not say a figure only, fie upon that blasphemy. Again; Vtinam
princeps illustrissime abscissa mihi fuisset haec dextera cum primum inciperem
de negotio Cenae Dominicae Idem epist. ad Lantgrau. Hess. an. 1529.
quicquam scribere; I would most renowned Prince this right hand of mine had
been chopped of, when I began to write of the affayre of the supper. Sixthly
Bucer says; Ex actis Council. Luther Wittenberg in adibus Lutheri.
Cum pane, and vino, vere, and substantialiter, adest, exhibetur, and sumitur
Corpus Ch^^^, and Sanguis; With bread and wine, is the body and blood of
Christ prefer, and is received truly, and substantialy. He also writing upon
Saint Ihon; Bucer in cap 6. Joan and cap. 26. Math. Calu. in haerm. eva^g. and
l. 4. Instit. c. 17. n. 11. and de cena Domini inter opuscula.
craves pardon of God, that ever he bewitched any, with the contrary opinion
of the Sacramentarians. Seuently Calvin says; In vain would God command his
to eat bread, and affirming it to be his body, unless the effect did
acco^pagnie the figure. Therefore not only in sign is he showed, but in
substance. etc.

This was Caluins opinion during Luthers life; to be by him favored. And when
after his death he had changed it, as now it is by Caluinians professed; yet
was he so doubtful, and distrustful of his propre opinion, as to have it
depending upon on man's good or badd lyking. Calu. Defens. 2. con. VVes^phal.
Si Philippus verbulo declaret me a sua mente deslectere, protinus desistam: If
Philipp (Melancthon) declare in the least word, that I swerve from his
judgment, I will suddenly surcease. Is not this a pitiful counterpoint to M.
Riders opinion? yet will he shake all off as lightly, as a breath of wind.
Nothing of all this will be against him: nothing of all this will be for our
purpose: all will be said to be impertinent fictions, and wreasted, mangled,
dismembered, and corrupted allegations. Other answer, nether will he, nether can
he give: for there is no life, nor doubt, remaining in the matter. I confort my
self with the saying of Cicero; Cicero.
Latere nullus nugator potest diu; No iugler (especialy in this industrius age)
cany remain long unknown. And against his slanders, and reproaches, (which
are the sacred ancre, and greatest confidence of his cause) I have this defense
out of Saint Bernard; S. Bernard. super Cantica.
Sufficit aduersum os loquentium iniqua, opinio bonorum, cum testimonio
Conscientiae; The opinion, or knowledge, the good have of me, together with the
testimony of my conscience, is sufficient against the mouth of them that
speak wickedness.

The second part of the third proof. How English Protestant Martyrs confessed
the real presence.
Fitzsimon. Tacitus. li. 19.
123. COnsidering how M. Rider is employed in this answer; I must with Tacitus
account him; Acerrimum militem, and in extrema obstinatum; A most eager
sowldiour, and obstinat against all extremities. First he trotteth to his old
wandering declaration, of the occasion of such allegations: as if any occasion
could make any affirm false doctrine; or if true doctrine delivered by indirect
occasions, should therefore be accounted untrue. But that the good man mistaketh
the occasion, and altogether mis-informeth his reader in this matter; may be
gathered by these short demonstrations following. The first is: that if as he
says, they had intended not to meddle with the matter of the presence, why would
they condemn the opinion of them, who did not believe such real presence? An
sint facienda mala vt inde eueniant bona? could ill be done, that good (as that
life, or livings might be preserved thereby) might come thereof? The Apostle
flatly teaches the contrary: Nether is the authority of Beza, or Cartwright,
who granted (as is declared) such allowance, (to cownterfet for helping the
word) Christian or religious. Now the principal Protestants renounced the
figurative imaginary presence, as heretical, and professed to believe the real
and substantial presence. For as much (said Sr. Ihon Old Castle) as I am
falsely accused of a misbeleefe in the Sacrament of the altar; I signify here
to all men, that this is my faith concerning that. I believe in that Sacrament,
to be contained very Christ's body and blood, under the similituds of wine and
bread; yea the same body that was conceived of the holy Ghost, borne of the
Virgin Marie. Over this confession, is by Fox written: the Christian belief of
the Lord Cobham. If it was Christian: Fox Acts and Mon. page 512.
how is not the contrary thereto, unchristian? If it was unlawful: how was it
professed at time of death? Can all the wit of man excogitat any quircke, or
chincke, to declyne this contradiction; but that in a termed Christian
confession, of a Protestant principal Martyr, the puritan profession against
the B. Sacrament was condemned?

Such, and in like terms, even by Foxes own relation, was the Protestation
of the L. Cromwell; That he dyed in the Catholic faith of the whole Church,
not doubting of any Sacrament thereof. Whereunto also Fox gives the like title;
of a true confession of the L. Cromwell. And for Rob. Barnes, he was a most
resolute Lutheran: and therefore must have been as opposite, as his master, to
the sacramental supposition. Yet I come nearer, and omitting Ridley, Hooper,
Rogers, Latimer, the Duke of Northumberland, and others, great Saints, with
Fox: I crave in courtesy of M. Rider to give satisfaction, if Crammer was not
against his opinion, how did he pronounce sentence against Ihon Lambert, and
Anne Askew, principally for being of his opinion? Fox confesses the chief
condemners of them to have been Crammer, and Cromwell. Perhaps he will think
to escape with a turn of a Fox, saying: that, to have been compassed by the
pestiferous, and crafty counsel, and stratagems, of Bishop Gardener: that by
the gospellers them selves, the gospellers should be condemned. Good
ghospellers they must have been in the mean time. But I am now so upon the
chase, as I can not so lightly loose my game. Why then in King Edwards days,
(the forsaid Bishop as he says, being cast into the tower) did the said
Cranmer, condemn Joan of Kent? What Fox, or woolfe, can avoid that, but that
Cranmer, was thereby known no friend, even then to any of the foresaid Anne
Askews disciples? I will not in vain have been some time of your profession,
and having touched it, and been defiled with the pitch thereof, (for which
offense I daily, and most humbly crave pardon, of my dear and sovereign Lord,
and Saluioure) but that of the same pitch, I will light a toarche, to them that
are in darkness, and in the shaddowe of death, to direct their feet into the
way of peace. Let us therefore pursue more of this kind, to have the true
portraicture of M. Rider, placed before all men's eyes.

Catho. Priest. Magdeburg, in Epi. ad Eliz. Angliae Reg.
Amongst factions of opinions, some lately take away the body and blood of
Christ, touching his real presence, contrary to the most plain, most
evident, and puissant words of Christ. Rider.
124. GEntlemen, this concerns not us: it may fitter be inuerted upon your
selves, for we deny not Christ's spiritual presence taught in the Scriptures,
and received in Christ's Primitive Church; but we deny your imagined carnal
presence, never recorded in Gods book, nor believed of ancient father, nor
ever known to Christ's spouse the Primitive Church: as you have heard truly
proved. But this is your great fault usually practiced, that whether in
Scriptures or Fathers you hear of Christ's body and blood, and his presence,
or real presence: you imagine presently without further examination, that it
is your carnal presence, which thing is grown up with you from a private
error to a public heresy.

Catho. Priest. Fox in Martirol. Kemnitius in Exa^. Conc. Trid. cenira tan, de
Eucharistia.
Tyndall, Frith. Banes, Cranmer, left it as a thing indifferent to believe the
real presence. So that the adoration (says Frith) be taken away, because
there then remains no poison, whereof any ought to be afraid of. Yet
Kemnitius upon the assurance of the real presence, approoueth the custom of
the Church, in adoring Christ in the Sacrament by the authority of Saint
Augustine, and S. Ambrose, in Psalm. 98. Eusebius Emissenus, etc. Saint Gregory
Nazianzen: and says it is impiety to do the contrary. So that the brood
being of such agreement we have the less occasion to embusie our brains to
confute them. GEntlemen: by pieces you repeat some of their words, not knowing
(at it seems) the occasion; and so you utterly mistake the sense, which was
this. These godly Martirs perceiving the flame of persecution to burn so
fast, and mount, so high, as it was neither bounded in measure nor mercy: and
only for a new vpstart opinion having no warrant from Gods word. They in a
Christian and brotherly discretion, exhorted the learned brethren, only to
preach that necessary Article of our free justification by faith in the
personal merits of Christ. And touching the Lords Supper, to teach to the
people the right use of the same; yet not to meddle with the manner of the
presence, for fear of danger, if not death: but leave it as a thing
indifferent, till the matter in a time of peace might be reasoned at large on
both parties by the learned. Provided ever, that poisonfull adoration be taken
away. The premises considered, what can ye now gather, that proves with
you, or disprooueth us. Nay, here is nothing but against you altogether. For if
you had dealt truly with the dead Martirs, or the living Catholics, these
collections (and not yours) you should from hence have gathered.

1 First, these Martirs taught with their breath, and sealed with their blood,
that your carnal presence and transubstantiated Christ, was neither
commandment given by God, nor Article of our faith ever taught in the
primitive Church, but a late invented opinion devised by man.

2 Secondly, they wished the brethren (considering it was but man's invention,
and never recorded in gods book) that therefore they should not hazard the
loss of their lives, which would tend so much to the prejudice of Christ's
Church.

3 Thirdly, they wished it to be taken for a season as a thing indifferent,
yet not absolutely, but with these cautions.

1 First, that adoration or worshipping of the creatures were quite taken away,
which never was done by you: and therefore they held it not absolutely
indifferent.

2 Secondly, till the Church of Christ had peace and rest from your bloody
and butcherly slaughters, wherein the matter might be decided, not with
faggots, but scriptures, which was not granted in their days: and therefore
you greatly wrong the dead, when you make them speak that thing absolutely,
which was limited by them with conditions.

Now I appeall to the indifferent Reader, whether you desserue not a sharp
reproof thus to dazell the eyes and amaze the minds of the simple Catholics,
by violent wresting the writings of the martirs, persuading the ignorant, they
should either dissent in this opinion amongst themselves, consent with you, or
vary from us. Whereas both they and we, now and then consent with Scriptures,
Fathers, and Primitive Church, in unity and verity of doctrine, against your
dissentions, pestiferous errors, and open blasphemies.

Of M. Riders bynding him self to Consent with the first protestant Martyrs;
And of how many, and monstrous beleefes, he makes him self thereby.
124. THey and he, then and now, (says he) consent, with Scripturs, Fitzsimon.
Fathers and Primative Church, in unity, and verity of Doctrine, against our
dissentions, pestiferous errors, and open blasphemies. Perhaps before I part,
I will make him beshrew the fingers of him that printed this protestation,
although I know, Stow in Chron. anno 1549.
it was not the printers fault. Omitting words, let us repair to woorks. The
last named Joan Knell of Kent, shall be first confronted with M. Rider, Fox Acts.
page 398. 571.
to see if he will stand to this word. This Joan (as also did Peter the
Germain an other his martyr) denied Christ to have taken fleash of the B.
Virgin. M. Riders words are; that he consents with protestant Martyrs, in
unity, and verity, of all doctrine. It must then follow, that he denies the
same. Since that I deal against a puritan, I will allege one of the same
sort, William Cowbridge, Fox page 570.
because he affirmed (as Fox confesses) no bishops to have any more authority
then preests, as also because, as other puritans can not tolerat any honor to
the name of Jesus, so could not he to the name of Christ; but said, that it
was a filthye name; Alan. Copus dial. 6. c. 17.
and all that did believe in the name of Christ, were damned Also that Christ
was not redeemer of the world but deceauer thereof. Which with many other like
articles, he professed at his death, as is not only affirmed, but also proved,
by Alanus Copus, alias Nicholas Harpsfeld, against Fox. All which M. Rider has
bound himself to believe, Fox loc. proxime cit. Fox page 1151. Tom. 1. Luth.
in disp. de baptism. Art. 3. Gagninus l 6. hist. Fran. Item Gerson. tr. 3. in
Mat. Paul. Aemil. l. 6. hist. Gal. Genebr. in Chron. an. 1280.
by his former words. Thirdly Ihon Wesell, denied the holy Ghost to proceed
from the Father and the Son. Yet he a Foxian Martyr Fowerthely, Haux denied,
baptism of Children to be necessary to salvation yet he a Foxian Martyr. Yet
Melancthon (and he a Foxian Confessor) pronounces: Furor est affirmare, quod
paruuli sine Sacramentis sal^ fiant; it is fury to affirm that children may
be saved without Baptism. Fifthly, Almaricus, (as Gagnin relates) denied
resurrection, heaven, hell, Christ in the Sacrament more then in a stone, and
that God spoke more in S. Augustine, then in Ovid: Yet he was a Foxian Martyr,
and by him made a great bishop; which others could never have known. So he
made Sr. Ihon Old castle, L. Cobham, by his own absolute authority; as well
allowed to make Lords and Knights, as Martyrs and Confessors. Fox. page 942.
943. 944,
Sixthly, Frith the learned, and excellent Martyr of Fox, affirmed the real
presence no article of belief, affirmative or negative; although the express
scripture record it; and offered, says Fox, to Sr. Thomas More, to believe the
real presence, without the adoration. Ihon Clerk, Fox in his Caleddar, 12. 13
14. Nouemb. July 3. Item Acts page 111. col. 2. number. 26.
and Alice Potkins, defended; there was no other Sacrament then Christ hanging
on the cross. Antonie Person, Testwod, and other assured, the words of
Christ, this is my body which is broken for you, only to mean the breaking of
Gods word among the people. All this by his former words, my Caualiero is
bound to believe: for these are Foxian Martyrs, with whom he says, he is
consenting in unity and verity of Doctrine. So is again William Cowbridge;
Alan Cop. dial. page 6. 633. Fox. page 738.
saying; that nether the Apostles nor Evangelists nor sower Doctors of the
Church, have hitherto revealed, how sinners might be truly saved. So Also is
Richard Hunne, saying; that poor men and idiots have the truth of the
Scripturs more then a thousand Prelates, and clercks of the schools. What say
you M. Rider, will you affirm the same, according to your word, and bond?
There is no remedy, your obligation is to do it. But I would know, whether you
now hold with the idiots, rather then the Scholars? Truly in any consequence
you can not, both for such promise, and for being, non proficiens, accompagnie
Scholars. Yet, if you disdain to be an idiot; which your bond has made you;
and perforce (inuita Minerua) will intrude your self among clercks; listen,
how your Martyr, in unity and verity of doctrine, Fox page 738.
comes over you: he damned (said Fox) the university of Oxford, with all
degrees and faculties, in it. So that unless you take to be an idiot, your
Martyr condemns you. To be brief, in this ruthful obligation printed against
your self, to stand to such confederats, besyd your making you self idiot
etc. you must auerr, with Ihon Teuxburie; Ibid. page 935.
that it is impossible to consent to Gods law, that all things are equaly
belonging to all: that the Jews of good zeal putt Christ to death etc. Of all
othets mentioned in the examinatio of the Creed, being all for the most parts
saints of the same stamp add Calendarie, you have bound your self fast, to
ratify their damnable blasphemies, and to consent with them in unity and of
doctrine. You are to justify all that they have affirmed, or else your printed
protestation will bewray your puritanical faythlesnes in performance of your
promises.

125. And next, you bring in another learned Protestant Cheminitius, Rider.
who (you say) alleges Augustine, Ambrose, and Gregory Naziazen, to
approve your adoration in your sacrament: Intimating to the world, that we
should either allow that in you which publicly we preach against; or else,
that we should be at a discord amongst our selves touching this your opinion.
But the matter being exactlie examined out of these Fathers themselves, and not
by your Enchiridions or heresay, the Catholics shall see you wrong us, and
abuse them. And first, it seems very plain, you never saw or at least never
read Chemnitius, and my reasons be these.

First, you know not so much as his right name, much less his precise opinion,
Chem pars. 2. Canon. 6. page 434.
for you misspel his name, Kemnitius for Chemnitius, which had been a small
fault if you had rightly alleged him touching the matter. For your
Tridentine Canon commands an external or outward worship of Christ in the
Sacrament under the forms of bread and wine. And Chemnitius he condemns
your outward worship for ydolatrous, and teaches only an inward spiritual
worship. And to prove what I say, I will truly allege your Cannon: then
Chemnitius his examination of it, and then let the Catholics but judge
indifferently whether of us deal more truly and syncerelie in this case. This
is your Canon: Si quis dixerit in sancto Eucharistiae sacramento Christum
vnigenitum Dei Filium, non esse cultu latriae etiam externo adorandum and
solemniter circumgestandum, etc. Anathema sit: That is, if any man shall say
that in the blessed sacrament of thanksgiving, that Christ the only begotten
Son of God, is not to be worshipped with that outward and divine worship
which is proper and due only to God, as well when the Sacrament is carried
about in procession, as in the lawful use of the same, Page 435. 436. 437.
let him be accursed. Martyn Chemnitius examining this your Canon, first
condemns your fained Transubstansiation, and shows the reason: for says
he, unless the Church of Rome had devised this Transubstansiation, you should
have been palpable ydolaters, worshipping the creatures for Christ. And
therefore she imagined that the substance of bread and wine were quite changed
into Christ's body and blood, no substance of them remaining, lest the simplest
should spy their ydolatrie.

Secondly, he expreslie condemns your outward worship as ydolatrous, and
shows there that Christ must be received by faith, and worshipped in spirit
and truth. Page 444. lines 2. 3. 4.
And afterward he says, comprehenditur autem vera interior, and spirituali
veneratio and adoratio Christi in illis verbis institutionis, hoc facite, etc.
for the true inward and spiritual worship of Christ, is comprehended in the
words of Christ's institution, Do this in rememberance of me. Now let the best
minded Catholics see your unjust dealing with both quick and dead, pretending
that either Chemnitius (as you say) allowed your outward worship in your
Sacrament, or that we jar amongst our selves touching the same: which both
be untrue. For you hold the worship to be outward, he and we inward: you
carnal, he and we spiritual: and briefly, if you will yet read him
diligently, you shall find he utterly condemned your carnal presence, and
your external worship, approving the one to be a fable, the other blasphemy.
And thus much for your ignorance touching Martyn Chemnitius, whom it seems you
never saw, but only took him by the ears, as Water-beares do their Tankerds.
Again, you say that Chemnitius upon the assurance of the real presence,
approves the custom of the church in adoring Christ in the Sacrament, by the
authority of Saint Augustine. Ambrose in Psalm. 98. by Eusebius Emissenus, and
Saint Gregory Naziazen charging as many as do the contrary with impiety:
to every of which thus I answer.

This Psalm. according to the Hebrew is the 99. Psalm and upon this place S.
Augustine writ, Aug. in psalm. 98.
as I will allege him of your Paris print: his words be these. Quid de carne
Mariae, carnem accepit: and quia in ipsa carne hic ambulauit. etc. ipsam carnem
nobis manducandam ad salutem dedit: Nemo autem illam carnem manducat nisi prius
adorauerit: which took flesh of the flesh of Marie, and because in that flesh
he walked here upon the earth, he gave to us that flesh to eat to our
salvation, for no man eats that flesh unless first he worship it. Now let us
examine this place, and see how that fitteth your purpose. First, the flesh of
Christ that Augustine will have worshipped, must be thus conditioned.

1 First, it must be borne of the virgin Marie: but yours was made of bread,
and therefore not that true flesh of Christ which Augustine speaks of, and so
not to be worshipped without ydolatrie.

2 Secondly, that flesh of Christ which Augustine will have us worship, walked
visiblie with his Church here upon earth before Christ's ascension. And until
you can approve unto us by canonical warrant, such a Christ in your
Sacraments as walked upon the earth, and died on the cross, Augustine will not
have him worshipped: which you shall never be able to do during the world.

3 Thirdly, that flesh of Christ which Augustine will have us to worship, was
given to us for our salvation, which I hope you will say (if you say truly)
was actuallie, reallie, and in deed upon the cross. And in the Sacrament
misticallie, or by representation, as has been proved out of your own books.

Thus you wrest that which Augustine spoke of the blessed flesh of Christ, to
your fabulous supposed flesh made by a priest: whereby you wickedlie abuse the
learned father, and deceive the simple Reader. For this flesh of Christ which
was conceived by the holy Ghost, and borne of the blessed virgin, must be
eaten with the spirit, and adored with the spirit, as Augustine there speaks:
and neither adored with your external apish worship, nor eaten with your
corporal mouth. But to speak according to Scriptures and Fathers, the very
eating of Christ, is the true adoring or worshipping of Christ: because as he
is eaten, so he is adored, but he is eaten spirituallie by faith. For faith is
the chiefest branch of Gods honor. Your next Author is Ambrose upon the 98.
Psalm. which you imagiue proves your external worship of Christ in the
Sacrament.

125. I am glad that Kemnitius is auowed to be a protestant, Fitzsimon.
to M. Riders lyking: for thereby we may perhaps have some desired sport. The
reprehension of our Spelling Kemnitius, for Chemnitius, for Crantzius (as a
little after appears) might have been spared: If M. Rider by Gods good
providence, had not been reprobated to confusion in all matters, and sciences,
whereof he has made any mention. Of his ignorance in Scripture, in Fathers, in
Histories, in Orthographie, in Greek, in French, in Latin, in English, and
now in Spelling, against my will, he would needs convict him self ignorant.
First then I answer, that K. in greek, is all one and C. in Latin: and therefore
might indifferently be taken. Secondly, that German names, such as are
Kemnitius, and Crantzius, are written indifferently by either C. or K. and that
these two foresaid names, even by the authors them selves, are more written in
our manner, then according to M. Riders conceit; which also is observed in
Bellarmine, Stapleton, and all other famous Controuertists. Let him repair but
to the College, and inquyre for the Metropole of Crantzius; and finding it as
I had written, after in all his life, let him abstain from such fanatical
exceptions. For if they were auayleable, that who misspelled, were ignorant in
the matter: how cowld M. Rider know, how, and when, to be silent, not knowing to
write silence, but scilence? how could he profess him self a scholar, writing
the name amiss, scholar? How could he tell what circumcision was, he writing
it circumscision? which never scholar would have done, that after would object
less misspelling, to another. In what wisdom, or learning, or latin did he
learn to write lattin, for latin, intolerable for intolerable, subtly, for
subtilie? etc. But of his palpable ignorance in latin after.

Well, now to accompagnie him forward. Of Kemnitius he says, it is untrue,
that he iarreth with M. Rider; or contrary wise. Which if it be not revoked
speedely; M. Rider must recant and affirm with Kemnitius, that the opinion
against the real presence, is; Blasphema, impia, damnata; Kemnitius in sua
epistola. ad Joan. Georgium Marchion. Brandeburg. 24. Ioa^. 1584. Extat in
Incendio Caluinistico. Kemnit. 2. par. exam. Conc. Trid. sess. 13. c. 5.
blasphemous, impious, condemned. Secondly Kemnitius says; Nullam esse qui
dubitet an Christi corpus in coena sit adorandum, nisi qui cum Sacramentarijs
aut neget aut dubitet in Cena vere Christum esse presentem; There is none that
doubts the body of Christ to be adored in the supper, but he who with the
Sacramentarians (to whom Kemnitius is diametricaly opposite) denies, or
distrusteth that Christ is in the Sacrament. Whereunto, what think you may M.
Rider replye? Forsooth, that Kemnitius allows only the internal adoration.
Which is an untrue and a seely excuse. For is not the adultery of the mind as
unlawful, as it of the work? Yes truly, if Christ be true, or the common
doctrine of Diuins, and Philosophers, that the external act adds nothing to
the malice of the internal act; although by other circumstances, it may be
conjoined with more offenses, in being external, then if it were only internal.
Wherefore, it had been madness in Kemnitius, to have allowed internal adoration,
and not external. It being also, as shortly after appears, forged untruly,
The 172. untruth.
makes up the 172. untruth, But says he, Kemnitius is against us. I answer:
that is our glory. Non estenim speciosa la^ in ore peccatoris; It were noe
commendation for us, such wicked sectarists should commend us, but a great
benefit that they impugn us. Now will you behold the promised sport, by M.
Riders accompting Kemnitius his good friend? It appears, by his impugning with
tooth and nail the allegations, which by Kemnitius are produced in proof of
adoration. Will you M. Rider be so discourteous toward your friend? will you make
us behold a iarr, where you said there was none? will you be a continual
registrer against your self, of untruths? He acknowledges (if you observe
him well;) that Kemnitius charge them with impiety that deny the real
presence, or adoration of Christ therein. Whereunto he promises distinctly to
answer. First, that point of the real presence, and of such impiety, he
gamboleth over nimbly, without stumbling thereat. This then is the 173. The 173.
untruth.
untruth: that he fulfilleth not that part of his promise. Secondly he
translateth, and denounces, out of S. Augustine, what so often before he denied
was ever said, or thought, by S. Augustine, or other, in six hundred years
after S. Augustine; that Christ gave that very fleash to us to eat, which was
borne of Marie, and wherein he walked here in earth: Adding thereto, that none
eats that fleash, but he that first adoreth it. The 174. untruth.
Yet by the 174. untruth says M. Rider, that wickedly we abuse S. Augustine.
How could we abuse him, whom not we, but Kemnitius, alleged, to prove Christ
in the B. Sacrament, should be adored? How do we abuse him, whom not we, but M.
Rider, translateth so as Kemnitius had informed, and as we had ever confirmed?
What after he wishes us to prove, that in the B. Sacrament is Christ, who was
borne of the Virgin Marie, and visibly walked, and was given to our salvation;
he may find it (besyd this evident proof by him self translated) proved in
the numbers 37. 40. 43. 46. 71. The 175. untruth is, The 175. untruth.
that Faith is the cheifest branche of Gods honor. First Saint Paul expressly
says; That Charity is greater. Secondly, if it were not untrue, the cheifest
branche of Gods honor, would be, not in God him self, nor in Christ his
Son, nor in all heaven: for faith is not in them, or in heaven: but that
which fol^oweth faith, to wit, not to see God any longer in enigmate, sed
sacie ad faciem: in a dark resemblance, but face to face. Thirdly, consider
how ^mpertinent such unfaithful infidelity, toward S. Paul, toward Gods
honor, and toward truth and reason, is intermedled in this place. Our
Saluioure to be called, a breaden God, fabulous fleashe, and our adoration of
him, but external apishe worshipp; were points fitly conjoined with such
disdain toward Gods sacred words, and honor, whereby contrary to all
belief, God is said not to have in him self, but out of him self, his chief
honor; yet philosophy teaches, honor non est in honorante sed in honorato;
honor is not in him that honors, but in him who is honored. If any would
understand more of S. Augustins mind toward the adoration of Christ in the B.
Sacrament; let him peruse the Augustinian confession collected by Hierome
Torrens, Confess. August. c. 6. l. 3.. 5.
to have it manifested abundantly. Let it now suffice that he teaches;
Saluberrimum Corporis Christi Sacramentum certatim honorandum; De consecra.
did. 2. c. nos autem.
the most healthsom Sacrament of the body of Christ, to be honored
importunatly.

126. But Ge^tlemen, why deal you so untruly with Gods heritage, in a matter
of this importance? did Ambrose ever write upon this place, I tell you no,
Rider.
Ambrose in deed writ upon the Psalms, till the end of the seventy one Psalm.
and there brake off, and recontinued at the 118. Psalm. but never writ of the
98. or 99. Psalm. as you untruly deliver. For Chemnitius says thus. Ita
Ambrosius, in eundem Psalmi versum inquit. Thus speaks Ambrose upon the same
fifth verse of the Psalm, adorate scabellum, Tomo. 2. lib. de spiritusancto
cap. 12. page. 157.
worship ye his footestole: but he says not that Ambrose writ upon that
Psalm, but upon a verse of the Pfalme, and not in that Tome, but in another,
and yet not of a worship external, as you teach, but of a spiritual worship,
such as Christ teaches in the fourth of John. For if you had read Ambrose you
should have heard him speak thus; Hoc in loco de spirituali Christi adoratione,
etc. In this place we will speak only of the spiritual worship of Christ. So
Ambrose utterly (if you had understood him rightly) condemns your external
worship of Christ. But because August. writing upon this Psalm. expounds
Ambrose his opinion upon that one verse, adorate scabellum, worship ye his
footstool, etc. and both against your external worship, I will only desire
you to read your own Augustine or your own print, both thoroughlie and
deliberatelie, and then I doubt not but you will see your error, and reform
your judgment.

Of Kemnitius his citation out of S. Ambrose, and Eusebius Emissenus.
Fitzsimon.
126. HERE is good stuff; Saint Ambrose did not write upon the 98. Psalm,
because he did write but upon a part thereof. If therefore one buffeted M. Rider
upon the ear, he could not be said to have stricken M. Rider, because he
struck but part of him. The 176. 177. 178. untruth.
The 176. 177. and 178. untruths are: First that we deal untruly with
Ambrose, we only telling him that Kemnitius so alleged him. Secondly that
Ambrose is ill alleged to prove Christ should be externaly adored; for he
says expressly; Caro Christi quam hodie quoque in mysterijs adoramus; the
fleashe of Christ which this day we adore in the mysteryes; and that was the
same, quam Apostoli in Domino Jesus adoranerunt, which the Apostles in our Lord
Jesus adored. Again. Qui digne hoc mysterium accipit, iudicare debet, quod ipse
est Dominus, cuius sanguinem mysterio bibit: he who receaueth worthily this
mystery (which I have added out of S. Ambrose, to deprive M. Rider of all
cauillation about the word Mystery) ought to judge, that he is our very Lord,
whose blood in the mystery he drinks. Also he falsely informs, that S.
Ambrose in that place professes to speak only of the spiritual worshipp of
Christ. And if he had so spoken, it had been for our purpose, that the
adoration of Christ in such mystery which is eaten and dronken, is not only
external, but also spiritual. For toward such mystery (as appears) he
allows such external adoration. And for avoiding of other small untruths,
M. Rider might have better informed (since he would needs digress to that
purpose) if he had said Saint Ambrose to have written his Commentaries not
consequently to the 71. Psalm, but upon the first, and then upon the 35. 36.
37. 39. 40. 43. 45. 47. 48. 61. and 118. Let others judge what his skill was in
S. Ambrose, by having so, as he shows to the world, conceived of his writings.

Rider. Hieron. de scripto. Eccles. (...) in Eusebio Emeseno Tom. 1. page. 296.
127. But now let us see how fitly you allege Eusebius to prove your
external worship of Christ in the sacrament.

Saint Hierome makes mention of Eusebius Emesenus Bishop of Emesa in Syria,
who writ in Greek very learnedlie, and lived about the time of Constantius,
about the year of our Lord 342. and was buried in Antioche: yet some very
craftily have stitched certain Latten Homilies upon this Greek fathers
sleeue, and work upon him a strange wonder, in making him speak Latten, at
least five hundred years after his death, that was ignorant of the language
during his life, But here I will not take upon me to discuss whether this was
Eusebius Emesenus the Syrian, or Eusebius Emissenus that Canisius says was a
Frenchman, and hoc forte tempore claruit, Canisij cron. in Anno 500. Did. 2.
de consecr. canon quia corpus page 432. in fine. Your first decrees printed at
a r^s and your last at Louaine something differ in words and periods.
and peradventure (and peradventure not) flourished at that time: or whether it
were Gratians Eusebius. But this is most sure, that Gratian does grace his
Canon with his name, but which of them, any, or noone of them, it shall
neither help nor hurt, because we w^l examine the matter, not the man. The
canon is this: and cum reuerendum Altar cibis spiritualibus ascendis
satiandus, sacrum Dei tui corpus and sanguinem fide rispice, honora maxim,
totum haustu interioris hominis assume. That is: and when thou come to the
reverend Altar to be fed with spiritual meats: look upon and consider with
thy faith, the body and blood of thy God, honor it with great reverence, and
receive the whole body with the swallow of the inward man.

127. Like dealing is used toward Eusebius Emissenus, Fitzsimon.
both in omitting parcel of his words, recorded in the decretal alleged; and
putting maxim, for mirare, but especialy, for inferring by a Riderian sequel,
that because Eusebius persuadeth to use faith, admiration, and internal
receiving of Christ, he should therefore overthrow our doctrine that there can be
any real, corporal, or substantial receiving of him; and that the real presence
is by him disproued. Yet Eusebius him self in the same place amply teaches,
that Christ inuisibly conuerteth the visible signs into the substance (and not
only into the figure) of his body and blood, by the secreat power of his word.
Which words to any heart not veyled, to any understanding not depraved, to any
behoulder not reprobated, might suffice: but not to reforming illuminated
Doctors. Another pranck was, to omit these words containing the adoration
toward such mystery (vt coleretur iugiter per mysterium, quod semel
offerebatur in praetium; that the body should be ever honored in the mystery,
which was once offered for redemption) and to propound the very end of the
Chapter, to a cleene contray intention; that no such body should be honored in
the mystery, which had been offered for redemption. Was this sincerity? was
this promised fidelity, to bring a clause in the end of a chapter, to
overthrow the conclusion, and whole scope of the chapter?

128. Now examine Chemnitius his doctrine and your opinion: Rider.
he brings in this Canon to approve the spiritual eating or worship of Christ
in the Sacrament. And you allege it to make good your external Tridentine
adoration of your breaden God. Behold, every word of this your own Canon is a
witness against you, for the meat is spiritual, the man is spiritual, the
manner is spiritual, the sight is spiritual, and the worship or honor is
spiritual. Here is nothing corporal or outward, as you say, but all inward
and spiritual, as we teach.

Whether Kemnitius allowed external adoration. When Pixes began. Of the
triumph of Corpus Christi feast.
Fitzsimon.
128. TO amend former dealings, he advises to examine Kemnitius his dealing and
our opinion: and that we shall find him to commend only spiritual adoration.
This facing out of the 179. The 179. untruth.
untruth, shall be discovered, to the detestation of all such writers. The very
words of Kemnitius are; Kemnitius in exam. Conc. Trid. par. 2. etc.
Ad veram confessionem pertinet, vt fidem, deuotionem, celebrationem public
quoque testemur, and voce, and alijs externis significationibus, quibus
ostendamus quid de huius Caenae substantia and fructu sentiamus: qua animi
reuerentia and deuotione accedamus, qualem ibi cibum nos credamus accipere.
Tali externa confessione seiungimus nos a Sacramentarijs, and Epicureis, horum
mysteriorum contemptoribus: excitamus alios ad Reuerentiam, ne qua detur
occasio, vel simplicibus ad profanas cogitationes, vel porcis ad conculcenda
haec mysteria. Externa enim irreuerentia signum est prophanae mentis and non
diiudicantis Corpus domini. It pertayneth to true confession, that we should
publicly profess our faith, devotion, and hallowing, both by voice, and other
external significations, whereby we declare what we conceive of the fruict, and
substance, of the Supper: with what reverence of mind, and devotion, we
approache, what food we believe there to receive. By such external confession,
we sequestre our selves from the Sacramentarians; and Epicures, the contemners
of these mysteries. We do excite some to reverence, that no occasion be given,
either to the simple of profane cogitations, or to Hoggs of treading these
mysteries. The external irreuerence is a sign of a profane mind, and not
discerning the body of our Lord. Vide number. 59.
Now appears the conscience, and fidelity, of my Anaxagoras, affirming every
thing contrariously. Kemnitius professes, they are Epicures, hoggs: and
profane contemners, and not discerners of the body of Christ, who are
adversaries to the external adoration of the B. Sacrament. M. Rider in saying
he consents with him, and that it is untrue there is any iarring betwixt
them, must in like manner by such titles, call all the impugners of such
external adoration. Let the whole state of England, Irland, and Scotland, take
notice of this his secreat reproaching them. If also he will say, that
Kemnitius disproued the external adoration, Vide number. 59.
because he approves the internal: I report my self (whether that be not to
Ride, or Anaxagorize) to the last profession of Kemnitius. In the mean time,
smyle not, and I will show you a pleasant inference of M. Rider: that the
adoration can not be but spiritual, because the man coming to receive the
communion is spiritual. One would think that the man to receive, is not only
spiritual, but also corporal, and therefore that the adoration might be, not
only spiritual, but also corporal. Also if such sequel were forcible, no
protestants hereafter should bow their corporal knees to the supper, or to God
him self, nor putt off their corporal hatts, nor hold up their corporal
hands, because the adoration can (by his saying) not be corporal, to any
spiritual things adored. O Riderian reasons, how pleasant you are.

129. And so to the next witness, which is Gregory Naziazen: his words be
these, Rider. In Epitaphio Gorgoniae sororis suae.
Inuocabat Christum, etc. she called upon Christ, that is worshipped on the
Altar where the mysteries are celebrated. I pray you what can you gather out of
this to prove your external worship of Christ in the Sacrament, with cap,
thumpe, and knee. Gregory says, she worshipped Christ, therefore you will
conclude, it was your breaden Christ: too hasty a conclusion to be true. Or
do you think she worshipped Christ as enclosed in those mysteries? Surely
no, For Gregory says, it was in the dark night since approached to the
Altar. The Pixe was invented by Innoce^tius 3. 1214 and Gregory Naz. writ
Anno 567. Ioh. 4.20. Exodus 3.12.
At which time there was neither priest standinge by the Altar, mysteries upon
the Altar, nor the pixe hanging over the Altar, and therefore she worshipped
Christ that was called upon at the Altar, in the celebration of the mysteries:
not that he was enclosed under the forms of those mysteries, no more then the
mountain wherein the fathers worshipped, was either God substantiallie, or
that God was enclosed in that mountain under the forms and shapes of the
mountain. But the mountain was the place where God was worshipped. And so the
Altar was the place where Christ was called upon and worshipped, not that
Christ was there locallie by a corporal descention, but that he was worshipped
there being called upon and served with a spiritual ascension.

And if you had read Gregory Nazianzen a little after, you should have read
that Gorgonia his sister carried about her still some pieces of the figure of
the sacred body and blood of Christ, as it was the custom of that age: and
with her repentant tears she bedewed the same, not that she externallie
honored the same.

Here Gregory calls the Sacrament but a figure of the sacred body and blood
of Christ, therefore it had been ydolatrie to have worshipped it. Esaie 42.8.
Yet notwithstanding your missaleadging and misunderstanding of the premises,
as also your dissenting from Scripture, Fathers, and ancient Popes, and
irreligious dangerous iarres among your selves, you easily disburden your
brains from further answer, thinking you have confuted the protestants, and
satisfied the Catholics, and so strike up your victorious plaudite in this
manner: So that the brood being of such agreement, we have the less occasion
to embusie our brains to confute them.

Here Gentlemen you call us a brood: we will take it in the best sense, for we
confess we are Christ his brood hatched under the warmth of his merciful
wings, coming unto him like hungry chickens at the heavenly clock and all
of his preaching ministry, to receive that promised meat which indureth unto
everlasting life. Math. 23.37. Ioh. 6.27.
And as for your pleasant Rhetorical conceit expressed under this word
agreement, it shows that in a merry mood you have not forgot all your
verbal tropes and figures. Antiphrasis.
But when you can show plainly wherein the Protestants jar amongst
themselves, or dissent from the Scriptures and primitive Church in matter of
faith; then bestow upon them these biting figures. In the mean time, (your
iarres amongst your selves: nay your revolt from scriptures and all primitive
practice being made now so manifest to the Catholics) it stands you upon for
the discharge of a good conscience, to confess and recant them, for cure them
you cannot. And thus much concerning your unfortunate success in alleging
some of our chief Protestants, as you term them; And now to that which
follows.

Fitzsimon.
129. He proves that Gorgonia adored Christ upon the altar, because it was
dark night. As very a Riderian reason is this to every ones understanding as
the former. For why might not any adore as well by night as by day? otherwise
if in darkness God could not be adored, how did Tobias, or any blind men, ever
adore God? And might not the lamps there present, have supplied all want of day
time? S. August. ser. 215. de tempore, and 155.
Saint Augustine exhorted; that oil, and wax should be offered by the people
to the use of the Church: and signified the use of burning thereof to importe,
that Christ might voutchsafe to lighten and nourish the fire of charity in us.
S. Isidorus lib. 7. etimologiarum. c. de clericus.
Saint Isidor tells, that the lights and lamps burning in the day time in
the Churches, are, to testify our gladness, that Christ vouchsafed to be, our
lux vera quae illuminat omnem hominem, true light which illuminateth every man.
Joan. 1.
Eusebius, and Nicephorus recompt, when in the Church (not the Temple, Eusebius.
l. 6. c. 7. and Niceph. lib. 5 c. 9.
which long before was destroyed) of Jerusalem, there wanted oil to the lamps,
Narcissus Bishopp thereof demawnding water, blessed it, (consider this old
Papistrie) and suddenly, natura aquae in olei pinguedinem versa, splendorem
luminum etiam solito reddit clariorem; the nature of water (says Eusebius,
about the 340. year after Christ) was turned into the fatnes of oil, yealding
a greater cleernes of the lights, then accustomed. What other proofs to this
effect I could bring (if I knew noe more then are in Durantus of the
ceremonies of the Church) may be coniectured. Durant. de ritibus Eccl lib. 1.
c. 8.
Yet for all this, M. Rider shortly after will tell you, that Eusebius denied
all miracles, after Christ's accension. So then, although it had been night,
adoration might have hapened. If not otherwise, at least when light was present.

The 180. untruth.
But let us go forward to the 180. untruth: that the Pix was invented S.
Cyprian lib. de lap^^ c. 5.
Cum quedam arcam suam, in qua Domini Sanctu^ fuit, manibus indignis tentasset
aperire, igne inde surgente deterrita est ne auderet attingere; When a
certain woman attempted to open her coffin (or pix) in which the holy of our
Lord was, by fire bursting out thereat, she was terrifyed not to touch it. Calu.
l. 4. Instit. c. 17. n. 35. Durant. l^c. cit. c. 16.
Calvin confesses, and Durantus demonstrateth, the use of such pixes, from the
time of the Apostles. The 181. untruth is that Gorgonia found noe mysteries
upon the altar. The 181. untruth.
Witness to the contrary S. Gregory in the same narration: yea, and M. Rider
against him self, that with her repentant tears she bedewed, not what he
says she adored in heaven, but what she had purloyned from the altar. Which
was not a figure only, but (...), which succeeded all types, and figures, Vide
Suarez. disp 46. sec. 4. in 3. p. q. 75. a. 1.
of the old law: or if you would have it to be a figure, let it be also the
thing figured, according as is so often forshewed, that both may consist
together. For by noe circumstances or words of figures, would S. Gregory have
the body of Christ to be excluded; admonishing us, without doubt, and shame to
eat the body, and drink the blood, S. Greg. Nazian. orat. 2. de Paschas. quae
est 42.
if we have any desire of Salvation; and for noe words of fleash, to refrain
our belief, and not to be offended by them which are of Christ's passion.As if
he had said: let not them hinder thee, who tell it is a foul fact to eat the
fleash of Christ; nor be not moved if thou be said to tear, or torment Christ,
as in his passion; or if thou do not think that Christ is eaten by thee, in
any corruptible, or passive manner, be not troubled for the residue.

Thus far have we been conducted by occcasion of Kemnitius, whom I only said
to have been adversary to such as deny Christ to be adored in the B.
Sacrament, and for his persuasion therein, to have alleged these foresaid
Fathers. If he had mis-alleaged them, the fault had been his. But to thwart,
and impugn, the contrary opinion, they them selves can find sufficiently out
of the Fathers, without mis-allegation: whereas to contradict our opinion, they
can not find a word. O immortal, and omnipotent Lord, the Saluioure Jesus
Christ, thy name, and bounty, be evermore extolled, that of thy infinite
clemency toward my sinful soul, it pleased thee, to deliver me from all
heresy in general, and particularly against my adoring thee in the B.
Sacrament! Glorious adoration, so apparent, and reasonable, as even to
Sectarists them selves (being otherwise wilfully blind) so shyneth, as
victoriously to overcome their malice, and lead of them, Kemnitius Bucer,
Brentius Oecolampadius, Peter Martyr, Kemnitius in 2. part exam. s ss. 13. c.
5. Bucer in Actis colloq. Ratispon. Brent. in Apol. pro conf. Wittenberg.
pericope 2. Oecolamp. in lib. de verbis Domini. Martyn in disp. Oxenij dictata
page 173.
and many more Captive; that when they would, as Satan's Balaamitical hyrelings
curse thee, God and truth, wresteth them (by acknowledging such adoration
necessary) to bless thee, and curse them that impugn thee! Glorious
solemnity of Corpus Christi, by which Christ's dear, chaste, and unspotted
Spowse, the Catholic Church, triumphs over all their heresies, who deny the
real presence, or who believe it, yet not otherwise then during the present use
thereof: or who mis-beleue the plenarie perfection thereof, in one only kind: or
who exclaim, and bark, at the religious cost, and devout honor toward Christ
in that sacred mystery: or who deny transubstantiation: or who affirm any
bread to remain together with the B. body of Christ: or by any other impiety
do hold any error against the Catholic doctrine concerning Christ's realitie,
and reverence, appertaining to this mystery! All which, heresies by that
solemnity, adoration, and conservation of the heaueniy host (without the use
of the chalice) are discomfited trampled, and overthrown. Glorious, and thrice
glorious mystery, so clear, so true, so generaly acknowledged, and so
powerful, as can not be darkened but by sleight clouds presently vanishing, by
the perspicuous, and manifest attestations of Gods word; as can not be
falsified by any deceits, deprauations, or corruptions of giddy brayns; as can
not be but acknowledged by all sorts of heretics how much soever given up to a
reprobate sense; as that hell gates can not prevail against thee, but that
thou do amaze every horse, and stryke every his Rider (as the prophet
fortould) into follye! Zachar. 12.


Fox page. 586. Acts and monuments.
The six Articles established by act of Parliament. Anno 1540. at the planting
of the Protestants faith.
Catho. Priest. Rider.
1. That there is the real presence of Christ's natural body and blood in the
Sacrament, under the forms of bread and wine. 2. That the communion under both
kinds is not necessary. 3. That Priests by the law of God may not marry. 4.
That vows of chastity ought to be observed. 5. That Masses are agreeable to
Gods law, and most fruitful. 6. That confession is necessary.
The foresaid Parliament, and every one saying, publishing, preaching,
teaching, disputing, or holding opinion against the first of these Articles, is
adjudged a manifest was burnt and lost his Lands and goods as in case of high
Treason.
heretic: and missbleeuers in the They but lost life and goods as in case of
Felony, which was then a favor.
rest rigorously punished.
130. GEntlemen, I expected that your proofs should have ascended to the first
five hundred years after Christ's ascension, and now they descend so low, that
there is small hope either of your recall or recovery. I might justly take
exceptions against this your Parliament proof, because it is many hundred
years too young to prove our matter in question: yet in respect it is an Act
done by all the Nobles and learned of the land, and least the Catholics
should think it unanswerable, I am content to admit it, yet still keeping my
ordinary course, in examination of the proofs by Scriptures, Fathers, and the
ancient Bishops, and Church of Rome.

1. Article.
1. The first Article is sufficiently confuted in the premises already
handled.

2. Article.
2. The second Article crosses Christ's blessed institution, and therefore is
abominable. And your Parliament says, it is not necessary to salvation to
minister or receive in both kinds, as Christ and his Apostles did. Revel.
22.19. Did. 2. de cosec. cano^. Co^perimus fol. 430.
But you know there is a woeful curse pronounced by Gods spirit, against such
as add or detract to or from Christ's Testament. And your own Pope Gelasius
laith flat sacrilege to their and your charge, for this your half communion,
contrary to Christ's institution, saying: Aut integra sacramenta percipeant aut
ab integris arceantur, quia diuisio vnius eiusdemque mysterij fine grandi
sacrilegio non potest peruenire. Either let them receive the whole sacraments,
or else let them be kept back from the whole, because the parting of one and
the same mystery, cannot be done without great sacrilege. The beginning of
your Canon calls this half communion superstition, and the later part
calls it sacrilege. Yet says your parliament proof, the receiving in both
kinds is not necessary to salvation. Then I say, if it be not necessary, why
did Christ use it? if we should not practice it, why did he commanded it?

Now if either Christ's commandment, Hoc facite, Do this, or the Popes law can
prevail with you, follow Christ his institution: If you care for neither
Christ nor Pope, then the Catholics may see that you are Antichrists and
Antipopes, and deny Christ written truth, and the primitive practice of the
Church of Rome, and the best that you can make of your selves, is not ancient
Roman Catholics, but new vpstart Romish heretics. And so to your third
Article.

How M. Rider behaueth him self toward Acts of parliament. And of his impugning
Communion under one Kind. Acts of parliament, since protestantrie, command to
believe the real presence.
130. YET more Puritantrye? Fitzsimon.
to wit to confess these Acts proceeding from all the nobles, and learned of
the land; and yet not to let them pass without his examination; nay, without
his condemnation of them all, to be heretical. The first article, that in the
B. Sacrament is the real presence of Christ's natural body, is (says he)
sufficiently confuted. This to be the 182. untruth, he him self against him
self shall contestat, The 182. untruth.
saying: (numb. 28) that Christ is realy in the blessed Sacrament, a thing
never denied by us, nor ever in question betwixt, Protestant, and Papist. If it
was never denied, or in question; how could it be sufficiently confuted? All
the glue in Christendom, will never make these two, to stick together. Atleast
then, the one of them must be untrue. I take upon my reputation, if this last
be true, or untrue; the first, that he has confuted it, sufficiently, or
insufficiently, is in the eyes of all men, and of all professions, most untrue.
To the second, although it be as is said, an act of parliament, of all the
nobles and learned in the Land, yet in the examination of our Puritan, it is
abominable. He proves it, first by our own Pope, and one of the decrees,
that the forms should be received both wholly, or refrayned both wholly. I
answer, the decree to be fulfilled by priests, (as only to them the speech was
intended) in receiving both forms wholly. For more instruction in this matter,
why heretics do communicate, not in one, but in both kynds; Luth. tom. 3. Germ.
Ien. fol. 274. de formula Missa.
attend Reader their impulsion thereto. If, says Luther, the Council of Trent
had allowed communion under both kinds, he would in spyte of the Council of
Trent, maintain the contrary. If the Catholic Church had permitted the
clergy to marrye; he would mantaine such to be more in Gods favor who would
retain two or three whoores, then who would conform them selves to the
Church. Yea he would command under pain of damnation, that none by permission
of the Council should marrye. Tom. 2. Germ. fol. 225.

Idem in art. 500. ser. 4. post inuocauit.


Also, that he would approve transubstantiation, but because he would not
consent with the Church: yet that he would rather accept thereof, then consent
with the Sacramentaries. If the Pope command thee, not to eat fleash on
friday, and in the Lent, keep thy liberty, in no case obey him, but say: in
spyte of thee I will eat thereof. Follow this in all things according to my
example. etc. Breefly this contradiction of the Popes profession, and
opposition against him, Zuingl. tom. 2. sol. 296.
is by Zuinglius said, to be, fundamentum, and bona pars religionis; the
foundation, and chief party of reforming religion. The same motive to have
given the first entrance, of their gospel into England, Fox Acts. page 977.
the very Apostle thereof, as they esteem him, Tindal, witneseth in these
words of a leter to his scholar Ihon Frith; He smelled a certain counsel
taken against Papists. But that Frith must understand, that it was not for God,
but for revenge, and to inioye the spoil of the Church. Thus much out of the
very root of Protestantrie, may acquaint us, by what instinct they impugned
our doctrine, as well in general, as in the foresaid articles in particular: Now
listen, why single Communion is used.

Whereas it ever has been believed in Gods holy Catholick-Church, Vide Suarez.
tom. 3. in 3. par. quest. 80. disp. 71. sec. 1. 2. and 3.
nether his blood is separated from his body, nor the body deuoyed of blood,
but where the one is, there is the other) the practice of primative Christians
was, indifferently to communicate, either under one form, or under both,
according to the diverse commodities presented; knowing, they had as much
benefit by the one, as by the other. For all is one, and the self same Christ.
S. Aug l. 5. con. Faustum c. 6.

S. Leo ^. sermon. 4. de quadrages.


Not long after first Christianity, sprung up the heresy of the Manicheans,
who condemned the use of wine saying, it never came from God, by means of the
manifould abuses insueing thereby: which was the old heresy of Seuerus,
according S. August. her. 24. and S. Epiphan. her. 45. and is now a turkish
error, as appears in the Alcoran Azoara. 3. For disprouing and thwarting of
which error, the Church frequented communion under both forms, generaly to
auow the form of wine to be good. In succession of time, that heresy being
vanished, there budded another error, that Christ was not intierly in either
form, but in both together: as if his body were now separated from his blood.
Against which error the Church, Council. Constantien sess. 13. Council. Trid.
sess. 21. c. 1. Council. Basil. sess. 30.
to testify that either of both was perfect Christ, and as fruictfull in one
form, as both, swayed to the contrary side, by first practicing, then
determining, that only the priests should receive under both forms, and the
lay people, but under one of bread. For the form of wine, it seemed not so
convenient, both for the danger of shedding in the giving thereof, as also for
the danger of sowring, if it should be kept long in any vessel, for the use of
the people, especialy of the sick. Let a man so esteem us, as the servants of
Christ, 1. Cor. 4.
and dispensers of the mysteries of God. Being then such dispensers, and having
such impulsions, the Prelates of the Church fulfilled and followed such decrees,
and practices. For the confirmation of all that I have said, first is
presented, that Christ some time ministered under one form, and some time under
both: this at his supper; that to his disciples, at Emaus; who in the breaking
of bread (which was the B. Sacrament by most principal Fathers and Doctors
persuasion) being known of them, suddenly vanished away. Secondly, the
Apostles continued in prayer and breaking of bread; that is, Act. 2.
in communicating the B. Sacrament: yet without any mention of the use of wine.
The same appears to have been the general practice of all Christians; so to
be contented with the B. Sacrament under the form of bread, as not to have
coueted the use of it under the form of wine. This appears by Serapion, who
being near his departure, Eusebius. l. 6. hist. c. 36.
and craving the B. Communion, the Priest, as Eusebius says, sent him only a
part of the Eucharist, without any consecrated blood.

In Suarez loc. cit.
Thirdly, by the use of Pixes, as I lately said, proved and confessed from the
Apostles times, made for the conservation of the B. Sacrament under the form
of bread, Vide Durant. lib. 1. c. 16.
there being no such for the form of wine. Yet, (as I forwarned) the use of the
chalice was indifferently allowed to lay people (as partly appears by the
request of Maria Aegiptiaca, numb. 115.) according to the several commodities
of places; until by reason of danger, as I fortould, of sowring, and shedding,
and of errors increasing, the Church restrained it from the lay people. Also,
because the Priest does offer a sacrifice in remembrance of the death and
Passion of our Saluioure Jesus Christ (whose blood at that time of his passion
was shedd, and separated, from his body) he ought to consecrat and receive
under both forms; for the better explication of such effusion of Christ's
blood, which is not needful by the people, rcceauing it rather as a Sacrament
then Sacrifice. This doctrine so godly, and religious, is impugned by heretics,
as appears, Brent. in co^fess. Wittenberg. art. de euchar. Kemnitius in fine
disputationis de vtraque specie.
only to thwart the Pope. Brentius, and Kemnitius, accord to that part thereof,
that Christ is wholly under either of both forms. Whereby I take no confirmation,
but to show they have no conformation in their being against us. Also in K.
Edwards times, when Protestantrie was most free from the dreggs of Puritantrie,
the communion under both kynds, or forms, was not thought so absolutely
requisite, Statut. An. 1. Edward. 6. cap. 1.

Luth. ser. de Eucharistia.

Vide conc. Constant. sess. 13.

Rodolph. Ab. de S. Communione.


but if necessity did otherwise require, it might (says K. Edwards statute)
be allowed in one kind. Also Luther, in his sobre mood, could teach; Satis
esse populo alteram desiderare and sumere speciem; quantum ordinat and dat
Catholica Ecclesia; To be sufficient to the people to desire and receive one
kind, as much as the Catholic Church ordains and gives. To be brief, such
to have been the received custom of Gods church, these verses of Rodolph Abbot
of S. Trudon, 450. years past, do confirm.

Hic, and ibi cautela fuit, ne presbyter egris,
aut sanis tribuat laicis de sanguine Christi.
Nam fundi posset leuiter, simplexque putaret
Quod non sub specie sit Jesus totus vtraque.
Be it a Caveat, that Priests, to sick, or sownd.
Of lay folk, give not Christ's most sacred blood:
For it might shed: and seely thoughts would simply grownd,
In either form a like, Christ not to have stood.
3. Article.
3 The third, That priests by the law of God may not marry.

Rider.
131. 132. I May not here make any stay, only touch a point or two and so
away. This Article is contrary to holy Scriptures, ancient Fathers, the
practice of the primitive Church, and the Canons of the Popes. In the old
Testament the marriage of the Priests is recorded and commended.

Ierem. 1.1. Exodus 18.
The holy Prophet Jeremy was the son of a priest. Zippora was the priest of
Midians daughter, and married to Moises the Lords Maiestrate.

Luke. 1.8.9.
Again, in the new Testament John Baptist was the son of Zachary a priest.
And the Scriptures touching marriage, give rules without exception or
limitation. To avoid fornication, let every man have his wife, and every
woman her husband. 1. Cor. 7.2.
And to the Hebrews he says, Marriage is honorable amongst all men, and the
bed undefiled, but whoremongers and adulterers God will judge.

Whether Continency of the Clergy was anciently commanded.
131. THe too the that M. Rider, Fitzsimon.
as a Puritan has against acts of Parliament, transporteth him from all
patience, and purpose, which should be betwixt us. For I only alleged the
foresaid acts, to testify, that the real presence was even since Protestantrie,
commanded to be believed: which being the first article of the six, and the
residue being suitable, and conformable thereto, against such late Protestants
as are degenerated from first planters of Protestantrie; I recorded them
together, only by their conformity to ratify the article in question, without
any intent, or expectation, that I should be occasioned to defend acts of
Protestant Parlaments, by me objected against Protestants: But as I was before
by him enforced to defend Kemnitius my adversary, so now I am to defend
opposite parlaments. Well then in the name of Christ let us not forsake him in
all his vagaries, he being now not far from home. First, he confesses the
said articles, an act inacted by all the nobles, and learned of the Land: Yet
that, the first is refuted; the second is abominable; the third is contrary to
holy Scriptures, ancient Fathers, the practice of the primative Church, and the
canons of the Popes: and the other three as repugnant to Christ's truth, as the
rest. Secondly he tells, he will make no stay, but touch a point or two, and
so away: whereof, and of the next; that in the old testament, the mariadge of
preests is commended, there being no such matter therein, amounts the 183. The
183. untruth.
untruth. In deed in the old testament as being not so perfect a state, as
the new, preests wrere married. Yet, although they were employed only about
figurs and shadows of the substance and truth delivered in the new
testament, they were nevertheless bownd to continency during such their
employment, and not only they, but also the people when they would partake of
such figurative mysteries. As for example, Achimelech refused to give David the
proposition bread, unless he had understood that they were, 1. Reg. 21.
mundi pueri maxim a mulieribus; undefiled people especialy from women. And
when the preests of the old testament were occupied about their function, 1.
Paralip. 24. Luc. 1. Calvin. l. 4. Instit. c. 12. n. 25.
they were remote from habitation, and wives. At which consideration Calvin
could confess the preests of the old law, iussos fuisse vltra humanum morem
se purificare; to have been commanded to purify them selves beyond the custom
of men. Yet can he not find it allowable in the preests of the new law.
Notwithstanding any would think S. Paul's words more belonging thereto, saying;
nemo militans Deo, implicet se negotijs secularibus; no man serving God,
imployeth him self in secular affairs: but of S. Paul's mind, afterward.
Although S. Ihon Baptist was the son of a priest; yet is it not true, that if
so happened in the new testament; or that he was son of a priest of the new
testament: for the new testament, was made only at the last supper before
Christ's passion: before which, both Zachary, and S. Ihon Baptist, both dyed.
Now let us attend to his objections out of Scripture, against the continency
of the Clergy, and not exact at his hands any exact knowledge in matters of new
or old testament.

Fitzsimon.
132. To avoid fornication I grant every man may hate his wife; if he entered
no other bonds contrary to having a wife: or if being free from such bonds, he
can not otherwise avoid fornication. For otherwise the very next line before,
does assure, it is good for a man not to touch a woman. 1. Cor. 7.1.
Secondly, not long after, he advises, even the married them selves, when they
would be vacant to prayer to observe continency. Thirdly, followed, for such
as are not married and widows, it is good they would so remain, as S. Paul
did him self. Fowerthly, that we being deerly bought, should not make our
selves subjects of men, but he without worldly cares: whereas if any be married,
he is careful of the world, and how he may please his wife, and is divided; as
also the woman toward her husband. This, and much more, has S. Paul in the
very chapter whence the foresaid objection was borrowed. Whereby the continency
of the Clergy is ratifyed, and testified to be necessary, if we covet to have
the Clergy be vacant to prayer, to follow that which is good, to be without
worldly cares, to think of things which are of our Lord, how they may please
God. To the other objection, I grant likewise that marriage is honorable among
all men: for none ought to dishonor it, but to account it a great Sacrament,
in Christ and his Church. Hebr. 13.4.
Also, it is honorably contracted by all, who have not otherwise devoted them
selves to a higher state of perfection, or by laws of God, and his Church, are
prohibited to marrye within certain degrees. As for example, although the
Scripture speaks without exception, or limitation; yet you are not so far
gone M. Rider, as to allow marriage to be honorable betwixt mother and son,
sister and brother, the grandfather and grand-dowghter. And if you be forward
in such Puritantrie, as to allow such marriages, to be honorable; Calu. l. 4.
Instit. c. 19. n. 37.
you forsake Calvin the founder of your holy consistorial discipline,
accompting them very dishonorable. Hitherto nothing appears against the not
marrying of Preests, if they have devoted them selves to a higher state then it
of marriage; and especialy if they have Mat. 19. S. August. l. de Sa^cta
Virginitate. c. 23.
qui se castrauerunt propter regnum caelorum; and had gelded them selves, (that
is says S. Augustine; qui pro proposito ab vxore ducenda se continuerunt; such
as by a godly purpose abstayned from taking a Spowse) for the kingdom of
heaven, and had entered obligation of vow, if after they would marrye, S. Paul
says; 1. Tim. 5.
damnationem habent, quia primam fidem irritam fecerunt; they have damnation,
because they have infringed their first faith. If therefore it could not be
honorable to forsake attentive prayers to God, and being careful of pleasing
him, and fulfilling the first faith plighted; it could not be honorable also
for such to marrye, who had betaken them selves to such state of life, and
undertaken such obligations. For what honor can there be in purchasing
damnation? Hereby appears, that the Scripture, either has not, or to M.
Riders skill affoorded not, any advise, or commendation of such men's marriage.

133. And the same Apostle points out to all posterities, Rider.
that the Authors and vpholders of this Article be liers and hippocrits, Heb.
13.4. 1. Tim. 4.1.2.3.
and the forbidding of meats and marriage, to be the doctrine of Devils. And
this is only proper to the Church and Chaplens of Rome, as now they stand in
the view of God, Angles, and men.

Whether we forbidd Marriage, or Meats.
133. BY a testimony of S. Paul, he indeuoureth to prove, Fitzsimon. 1. Tim.
4.1.2.3.
that the vphoulders of this Article against Preests marriage, are liars, and
hypocrites. Let such, as he confesses to have been all the nobles and learned
in the land, give him thancks for this courtesy. We grant, the forbidding of
marriage, and meats, to be a doctrine of devils, if they be forbidden absolutely,
or as things abominable;i but not if they be forbidden for greater proffit of
spirit, and glory to God. That we do not forbidd them absolutely, is known,
when we account none fit for Gods service, as Churchmen, but such as are
begotten in lawful marriage; and when we eat such meats out of fasting
days, as we eschued in fasting days. This argument a secundu^ quid ad
simpliciter, that who forbidd marriage and meat in certain persons, and times,
they absolutely forbidd them; you shall behold how ridiculous it is, by these
few weak inferences. Leuit. 18.7. etc.
Gods word, and his Churches laws, and also Princes decrees, do forbidd, as
is to every one known, marriage betwixt father and dowghter, mother and son,
etc. By your rules taken without limitation, that marriage is honorable among
all, and forbidding marriage is a doctrine of devils; do not you blaspheme
against God, and his Church, and injury your Prince, for their forbidding such
marriages? Next, the Apostles forbidd the eating of blood, Acts 15.20.29. c.
21.25.
and strangled meat, (for which in presence of the Constable, and a Puritan
Sadler, whose name I can not remember, and others, your devout Doctor Ihon
Laney, Cutler, maintained in May last 164. that it was unlawful to eat
puddings, or henns, whose necks were cracked) the laws of Princes forbidd to
eat fleash in lent, and certain days of the week; and Physicians forbidd
diverse meats. By your general rule, that the forbidding of meats' is a doctrine
of devils, do not you make the Apostles, Princes, and Physicians, diuilish
doctors? Because I intend God willing in my replye upon these points, to dwell
some what longer, let Gods word, the Churches laws, Decrees of Princes, the
Apostles, The 184. untruth.
and Physicians, testify, that it is the 184. untruth, to be only propre to
the Church of Rome, to forbidd marriage, and meats, as aforesaid.

Rider.
134. Did not Tertullian write two books to his wife, in the first he gave
direction unto her touching his goods and possessions, if he should die. In
the second book, directs her in her Widdowhood, either to live solelie
serving the Lord, or else to marry in the Lord. But in no case to marry (as
some did, for honor or ambition) with the Gentiles. Who I pray you ever checked
or controlled him for so doing?

Whether Tertullian did write to his wife. And whether he was, for, or against
Priests marriages.
Fitzsimon.
134. YEs truly, Tertullian wrote to his wife; and by writing, testified, that
to justify marriage of the Clergy, M. Rider unfortunately as often before,
has fished for a Serpent to his cause, in steed of an eale. First because,
Tertullian, Tertullia^. ad vxorem lib. 1.
having separated him self from his wife by mutual consent, to become a
Priest, persuades her, that by no persecution after his death, she should
marry again; he erroneously thinking, second marriages betwixt Christians to be
unlawful. Secondly, by informing her, that to be Gods servants, it is
necessary to be free from marriage; alleging examples of Christians, and
Ethnicks, admitting only Chaste, and Virgins, to their principal services of
Devotion. Thirdly, by being to vehement in dehorting from second marriage as
appears in several books. Could then in wisdom this man, Tertull. lib. de
exhort. ad Castitatem. De pudicitia de Monogamia.
who not only by doctrine, but by example, eschued, and abandoned his wife, to
be a Priest, and affirming it to be necessary for serving God more perfectly;
be witnesed to ratify, that he that is a Priest, may marry? Whether I admonish
or not, this wisdom will be considered. Also good M. Rider, reuiew the first
book again, and find other contents therein then you here specify: for what
you produce, is either not at all there found; or no part of the occasion or
purport of writing that book. Tertull. de prescript.
I do not peruayle that Tertullian of these men says; Hoc illis esse negotium
non Ethnicos conuertendi sed nostros euertendi. Hanc magis gloriam captant
sistantibus ruinam, non si iacentibus eleuationem operentur: This is to be
their employment, not to convert Ethnicks, but to pervert ours. They seek
greater glory if they procure them that stand to fall, then them that are
fallen to rise. For who do not behold, how by most contrarious deprauations,
or ruin, and fall, is by them followed?

135. Ignatius the Martyr commends the Apostles and other ministers, Rider.

Ad philodelphenses Epist. 5. page. 34.


Qui operam dederunt nuptijs, who ever blamed him for it? Nay, your own Popes
and Canons condemns you and your parliament proof. For thus they record to
your disgrace: Cum ergo and sacerdotibus nati in summos pontifices supra
legantur esse premoti, Did. 56. Canon. Canomanensem fol. 67. Col. 4. and 68.
col. 1.
non sunt intelligendi de fornicatione, sed de legitimis coniugijs nati, etc.
When therefore we read that priests sons be promoted to the Popedom, you
must not think that they be bastards, borne in fornication, but sons borne
in lawful marriage: which marriage was lawful for priests, before the late
prohibition, and this day is lawefull still in the East Church,

Here your own Popes record that priests were married, and that their
marriage was lawful, and that Popes have been priests sons borne in
lawful marriage. And that there was a prohibition to the contrary, made by
man. But no scripture or warrant from God.

Whether S. Ignatius did favor Priests marriages; And whether the Apostles
were married.
Fitzsimon.
135. FIRST you mistake the number: for it is the sixth epistle. Secondly, you
mistake the word, non Vituperans, not dispraising, by interpreting clean
contrarilye to commend. For S. S. Ignatius epist. 6.
Ignatius advises Virgins, so to follow the best, as therefore not to condemn
marriage as being execrable; and affects so to him self the Sanctity of
Helias, Jesus Naue, Melchisedech, Heliseus, Hieremie, Ihon Baptist, and of his
beloved disciples, of Timothy, Tite, Euod, Clement, who dyed in chastity; as
not dispraysing them who, nuptijs dederunt operam, had been married. Thirdly
you mistake the time of the Apostles marriage employments; Mat. 19.
For when Christ had called them, they forsook all, says S. Peter in the name
of the rest; and Christ auerring they had among the things forsaken, quitt
their marriage conversation, replied thereto, pertinently, saying: eueryone that
forsakes house, or parents, or brethren; or wife, S. Clemens Alex. l. 3.
Strom. S. Hierom l. 1. in Iouin. etc.
etc. shall receive a hundred sold, and possess life everlasting. Besyd which
insinuation of our Saluiour him self, that the Apostles who had wives had
forsaken them for his service sake, it is also generaly testified by the
Fathers, that after their vocation; they never conuersed matrimonialy with
their wives. If then their having of wives, by their vocation to Apostleshipp,
was turned into a diuorcement; any might think that none after such vocation,
could hereby be allowed to marry: but rather otherwise, and consequently, that
by his own allegations, his cause continualy is overthrown.

Next in interpreting our canon, much disordre is followed; For M. Rider to
interpret to be Popes) but not that it should be conceived of their sonns
gotten in fornication, but only in lawful marriage, he tells and translateth
[ you must not think Priests sonns be bastards, borne in fornication, (God be
praised that he makes Priests to have no bastards) but in lawful marriage.
Yet this gloss is not only contrary to this text, but also contrary to the
gloss extant in the book, Did. 56. gloss. in. Osius.
saying: all these examples, to be understood of such as their parents in lay
state, or in the mineur ordres had begotten, when it was lawful for them to
accompagnie their wives. The further part of the text, that lawful marriages
were allowable in every place before the prohibitio^ (to which word M. Rider
by good sincerity, conjoined, Late) and in the oriental Church to this day are
proved to them to be lawful, shall be shortly after, God willing, discussed.

136. Again, there be two other Canons of the Popes, Rider.

Did. 28. siquis fol. 32.


that will batter down your papered rampires of humane constitution: the first
begins thus, Si quis docuerit sacerdotem sub obtentis religionis propriam
vxorem contemnere, Anathema sit: If any man teach that a Priest may contemn
his wife under color of religion, let him be accursed. And the second canon
immediately follows, which does second this. Si quis discernit presbyterum
coniugatum tanquam occasion nuptiarum, quod offerre non debet, and ab eius
oblatione ideo abstinet, Anathema sit. If any man judge that a married Priest
ought not to offer, (or to do his office) by reason of his marriage, and
therefore abstain from his oblation, let him be accursed.

Whether all that may not contemn their wives, may converse with them
carnaly; And, whether some time married men, may not be Priests?
136. FIrst, Fitzsimon.
if any learned man would but peruse this distinction, and the precedent, and
considre, how upward of twenty several texts forbidding Bishops, deacons,
Priests, Religious, Subdeacons, to marrye; and such men as are married not to
be assumpted to Preesthood, and Preests doing otherwise to be deposed: although
he were never so much an affectionat friend of M. Rider, yet will he, and can
not but censure him, not to seek to inform truth of matters, but to obscure
it as much as he may. Secondly, he knows not how to countenance his
allegation, but when it is a canon of the Apostles, he names it a Popes canon.
For so it which he now cites, is delivered, Melancthon in Confess. August.
art. 23, and in apol. eiusdem articuli.

Conc. Trullan. can. 48. 2. Conc. Turon. can. 8.

Vide did. 31. cap. omnino.


even by Philipp Melancthon, a great Protestant; and in the canon law, before
the title of the foresaid text, is contained, that it is taken from among the
canons of the Apostles. I grant, that a Priest should not contemn his wife,
but according his obligation expressed in several Concils, be careful of her,
prouid for her, and content her; but as is there signified; absque vlla
suspicione carnalis commercij: without any suspicion of carnal compagnie. Now
mark this Riderian sequel: a priest may not, by pretext of religion whereby he
is bound to be continent, despise his wife, from whom he is departed (for so,
by testimonies of the foresaid Concils, it is to be understood) therefore a Priest
may marry; or having been married may carnaly converse with his wife. Who would
not pity his fathers loss, if he had been at any charges (as he was not
able) for his sonns bringing up? For although a son can not despise his
mother, yet follows it not, that he may marry her. Thirdly, the next Canon
concurreth in the same exposition, that one being married before, is not thereby
disabled from being priest. There is nothing in every contry more usual. And
Dublin is well acquainted that M. Hall of good memory, and M. G. B. of rare
virtue, had been married, yet both exemplar priests. And at this instant of my
writing this, a Gentleman called Mr. Anselmus Crucius, of exceeding ability,
being married, and his wife living, and newly entered into a cloister of Nunns,
after having lived 30. years with his foresaid wife in inuioleble continency,
only for more exact devotion toward God, she as I said entering into religion,
he also is become priest, and Jesuit, with whom I am daily familiar, to my
great delight, and edification, he being as great a mirour of piety, as miracle
by his foresaid voluntary divorce, to all these contryes, in which he is known.

Rider.

Did. 31. Nicana synodus fol. 34.


137. Paphnutius, also being but one man, confounded a whole Synod of your
Bishops and learned men, as your Popes Records witness, and by Scriptures
enforced them to subscribe that Priests marriage was lawful. Here you see
magna est veritas and preualet, Truth is great (though in one against many)
and preuailleth.

Whether Paphnutius persuaded the Council of Nice, to allow preests to Marry.
Fitzsimon.

The 185. untruth.


137. THat truth, as you affirm, may be great, and prevail; let it be
presently confessed, that it is the 185. untruth, that Paphnutius is confessed
by records of Popes, to have confounded a whole synod of our Bishops. Where are
such records? how do they confess any such matter. Will fittons fill all
leaves, if not most lines, of your book? Secondly, let it be confessed, that
you have granted the first Council of Nice to have been a synod of our Bishops,
and learned men. Magna est veritas and preualet! 1. Esdr. 4.41. Conc. 1. Nic.
can. 3.
truth is great and preuayleth! Thirdly, let it be confessed, that the Council
of Nice in the third Canon, forbids preests, to have any woman in their
house, besyd their mother, sister, or aunt. How then was it confounded, or
governed by Paphnutius, to the contrary? Magna est veritas, and preualet!
Fowerthly, whereas none of the 20. Canons of the Council of Nice, nor Eusebius,
Socrat. lib. 1. c. 8. Sozomen. lib. 1. c. 22.
nor Ruffinus, (more ancient then Socrates, and Sozomen out of whom Gratian
borrowed his tale of Paphnutius) nor any others, report any such matter; S.
Epiphan. her. 59. and in epit.
and whereas S. Epiphan assures that the Church and ancient Canons has always
avoided from preisthod any begetter of Children, S. Hieron. ep. 50. con. Iouin.
and lib. co^. vigil. Luther lib. Conciliorum part 1.

S. Basil. epist. 17.1. Esdr. 4.41.


and S. Hierome testifyeth in the Oriental Church, and Aegipt, not to have been
lawful for priests, or deacons, to use their former wives; Nay whereas Luther
acknowledges, that the foresaid Council would not follow the advice of
Paphnutius; and lastly whereas S. Basil would not permit, by reason of the
former third Canon of this Council, a priest 70. years old to dwell with a
woman: how can it be denied, or avoided, to be the 186. untruth, The 186.
untruth.
that they had subscribed, that priests Marriage was lawful? Magna est veritas
and preualet! truth is great and preuayleth!

Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 21. Bellarm. l. 1. de Clericis cap. 20.

S. Greg. l. 6. epist. 31. Socrat. and Sozom. loc. cit.


and Sozomen, being found often times tripping, as in Socrates appears thryse
in one chapter, and first against this sacred Synod; (as incomparable Bellarmin
learnedly according to his wont demo^strateth) and of Sozomen is testified by
S. Gregory: yet not withstanding, that they are far from reporting any
confort to the protestant cause. For they both recompt, that Paphnutius
affirmed that it seemed to him convenient, it should be decreed, that the
clergy after their ordination, should not be permitted in any case to marry,
according the ancient Conons; and only craved, that others married before,
might use their wives. This allegation therefore seems to favor protestancie,
as the tendering of a piece of bread in one hand, with a cudgel reddy to stryke
in the other hand, is a favor to a dog. Magna est veritas and praeualet!
truth is great and preuayleth* 1. Esdr. 4.41.


138. And to come near home unto you with domestical presidents: Rider.

Esdras 1. cap. 4.41. Bern. in vita Malachiae fol. 2. col. 4. about the years
of our Lord 1130.


were not eight learned men, all of them immediate Archbishops of Armachan in
this land, and all of them married? who utterly refused this tyrannical and
dyabolicall Romish yoke of forced single life. Nay in those days the Nobility
and Gentilitie of that Province defended that true religion with their swords
against the Pope, and they refused to receive Orders, Bishoprics, or Decrees
from Rome. Where upon you may see that Bernard then in the Popes quarrel,
calls the Nobility and Gentility of that Province, generationem malam and
adulteram, a wicked and adulterous generation, and says it was, Diabolica
ambitio potentum, a devilish ambition of the Peers and mighty men. And
execranda successio, a cursed succession, 8 Immediate Lord Archbishops of
Armachan married. Mark this ye Noble men and Gentlemen of Ireland. Imitate your
Ancestors in true honor.
that eight Bishops successively all married (yet they all learned, and
preached the Gospel and ministered the sacraments) and yet neither they, the
Nobility, nor Gentilitie, cared two pence for the Popes blessing or curssing.
O quantum mutantur ab illis? O Lord, how far is the Nobility and Gentilitie
of Vlster, and that province, nay the most part of the kingdom changed from
that old Apostolical religion, and become slaves and idiots in superstitious
service to that late Italian priest the Pope, Gods enemy and the Queens
butcher. Then they drew their swords against the Pope to defend the truth: now
too many of late drew their swords for the Pope against the truth. The Lord
open their eyes to see the truth, and give them hearts to renounce this new
heresy, and cleave to the Apostolical Roman verity. Then will all of them be
as ready to fight the Lords battle against the Pope, as many of late fought
the Queens battle most honorably against the Spaniard.

Of M. Riders grant of the Council of Nice to be ours; And his claim of
predecessors in Vlster.
Fitzsimon.
138. IN saying Paphnutius had confounded a whole synod of our Bishops and
learned men; the Council of Nice, whereof speech is made; is thereby bestowed
upon us. None dowbted thereof before, Anno 1. Elizab.
that it was due unto us, until in the first parliament of our late Queen, it
was claymed to Protestantry. Also by M. Riders appeal to the Fathers of the
first five hundred years, (of whom the Council of Nice was ever yet accounted
the principal part) it might seem to any that would believe him, that we had
no interest therein. Now of his liberality, as appears, he bestows the said
Council upon us, and thereby upon him self a most infamous confutation of his
woeful claim of the primative Fathers. A small, matter with him to be contrary
to himself. But, is it so great a gift as to be so thankful for it? Whitaker.
Page 12. con. Campian.

Beza Epist. theol. 81.


Yes says Beza, (the Polyphemus among Divines, by M. Whitakers opinion) as,
quo nihil vnquam sanctius, nihil augustius ab Apostolorum excessu sol vnquam
aspexit; then which, the son never beheld any thing more holy, or more
excellent, since the Apostles departure. Now for recompense of this
incomperable threasor, contained in this Genes. 25. Hebr. 12.
will you see a prophan Esau exchange a rich inheritance, for a mess of
pottage? He will needs have ancestors in our Northen Vlster: such (as S.
Bernard says) by sathanical ambition reserved the Archbishopric of Armach
among their family. Which execrable succession (says S. Bernard) had
continued, S. Bernardus in vita S. Malachia.
in fifteen generations. And when they had not any of the clergy in their
linadge, the wicked and adulterous generation (they are the words of S.
Bernard) by iniquity worthy of all death, wanted not (to wit in name and
usurping Church reuennues) Bishops. Of which sort without orders, but not
without learning, eight married, had been before Celsus. VVherby (I observe the
order and words of S. Bernard, but breefly) insued the dissolution of
Ecclesiastical discipline, and overthrow of religion, and Christianity. For
reformation whereof, Saint Malachias, by a vision from heaven was chosen, and
accepted by the King, other Bishops, and the faithful of the people, to his
charge. But the Council of Malignant, and children of Belial repugned, and
purposed to kill both the King and him. At length the chief of them struken
by thunder, with three others, and the rest dispersed, Malachias entered his
Bishopric, and having by singular and powerful means, appeased his enemies,
he reformed abuses. The successors, and recompense sought by M. Rider, All this
confusion by Vlsters relation. B^le in his centuries persuaded M. Rider to
accept upon his credit: For all is taken out of him.
are the foresaid intruders into Church dignities. O quantum mutantur ab illis?
How far are these diverse, from them of the Council of Nice? Certainly I would
not scarcely have consociated my enemies to such. For if the being only
rebellious to ecclesiastical discipline, and usurpers of Church fruicts, and
intrusion into Church offices, and profaning sacred places, if the doers
thereof were married, can satisfye you for ancestors: you may enter into your
list, or catalogue, all sects and sorts of old Heretics, all Turcks, and
Jews, and armies of malefactors as being such. O quantum mutantur ab illis! o
how much are these, inferior to the three hundred and eighteen Fathers of the
Council of Nice? For my part I will not refuse your demand nor deprive yon of
such confederats. Yet if I could, I would exempt you from their ruthful lot.
Now, to answer the circumstances tendered by you, and to the formest, whether
the foresaid eight learned men were not all successively Archbishops. I say
first, chat the history does not contain they had been any such successively:
unless you would have them Puritanical Bishops. For in the text of S. Bernard
they are said to have been; absque ordinibus; without Ordres. Therefore, they
could be nether Catholic, nor Protestant Bishops: as appears n. 99. I could
the sooner think them to have been Puritan Bishops, the rather for being
without ordres; as well because they do not allow any distinct order of
clergy, as also because they are enemies, to all ordres, and the disordred
disturbers of all well ordered common wealths, and breaders of confusion. Qua
non immanior vlla pestis, and ira Deum stygio sese extulit Orco. Secondly, that
they were (named by S. Bernard) no Bishops, but in figure, representation, and
appellation, as you say Christ to be in the B. Sacrament. For if you may say
Christ not to be otherwise in the B. Sacrament, 1. Cor. 11.
notwithstanding his words of being truly present, the same who was delivered
in his passion: I may say, being bowlstered by the laws of Gods Church, and
such proofs as I have produced n. 99. of imposition of hands, that they could
not otherwise, then as aforsayd, be Archbishops. Next I let pass your sweet
reuyling, of the tyrannical, and diabolical Romain yoke. Thirdly the
nobilities repugning against the Pope is added to the text, by a 186. untruth.
For nether Pope, The 186. untruth.
nor Papist assaulted them: how could they then defend them selves with their
swoords against the Pope; especialy not hate of papistrie, but love of
sacrilege, being their impulsion to such uproar? The 187. untruth is, The
187. untruth.
that they refused to receive Orders, Bishoprics, or decrees from Rome. For
nether is any profre, nor any such refuse, recorded. If Bernard so sharply
reprehended them in the Popes quarrel, for not being subject to the Popes
orders, or decrees: in the name of Jesus, why did you in your Preface inform
your readers, that S. Bernard told the Pope to his face, that his supremacy
was unlawful? O quantum mutantur ab illis? O how far are these words
repugnant to those? That those eight preached the gospel, and ministered the
Sacraments; is an addition of your making: As also, that the nobility, and
gentilitie, cared not two pence for Papal blessings, or curssings. Whether they
came to such infidelity, or not, there is great want of fidelity in your
deprauation of the history as S. Bernard affoordeth it. That they changed
their old Apostolical religion; if you mean according as your author
informs them to have changed (as you should be tied to your autheurs
relation, and the sense thereof, unless you would be accounted a falsifier,
rather then interpreter) what you call owld Apostolical religion, according to
your conceit, is according to truth, and your author S. Bernard, deuilish
ambition, dissolution of ecclesiastical discipline, overthrow of religion, and
Christianity, etc. O quantum mutantur ab illis? O how far are these words of
the author, dissenting from these words of the interpreter? That they are
become slaves to the late Italian Priest the Pope, Gods enemy, and the Queens
butcher; I know not how wise a speech it may seem to any: this I am suer, if
they be slaves by being only Catholics (for other slavery I think the Pope
expects not at their hands) it should not repent them: for, seruire Deo
regnare est; to serve God is to reign. And I could wish, that as they affect
to be accounted such; so they would better effect the duty belonging to such.
If the Pope be no truer Gods enemy, then he is late, The 188. untruth.
or the Queens, butcher, the 188. untruth may to all men's seeming, be
calculated. That then they drew then swoords against the Pope to defend truth;
the informer of the matter, the punishment sent from heaven, the former
Protestant resolutions related in our answer to your Preface, that truth was
unbegotten, till Luthers time, The 189. untruth.
do conioyntly register for the 189. untruth Whereas you provoke the Noble men
and Gentlemen of Irland, to imitat such ancestors in their true honor; you
flatly perswad them to insurrection, and rebellion. For if they imitat them,
they will endeavor to kill their King, and such Bishop as he would establish:
they will enter into devilish ambition, etc. For so did they (by information of
S. Bernard) to whom you would induce these to conform them selves. From the
profoundest bottom of my heart, I beseech the omnipotent Saluiour of the world,
long to preserve his sacred Majesty now regnant, against such Puritanical
sequels, and other their disloial and desperate dissignes, long since not
unknown to his wisdom, nor unfelt to his person, nor parents.

139. And that golden mouthed father Chrisost. Upon this place of Paul. Rider.

Chrysostom. hom. 2. upon first of Titus.


That a Bishop must be the husband of one wife asked this question, what moved
Paul thus to write to Timothy? he answers himself saying, obstrure prorsus
intendit haereticorum ora qui nuptias damnant, ostendens. etc. The Apostle
intends to stop the mouths of all heretics that condemns marriage,
showing that the thing in it self is faultlesse, and a thing so precious, vt
cum ipsa etiam possit quispiam ad sanctum Episcopatus solium subuehi: that a
man being married, may be promoted to the holy function of a bishop. And
your Pope Gregory says plainly, writing ad Theotistam Patricium, that if
marriage must be dissolved because of religion: Sciendum est inquit, yet says
he, you must understand, quia etsi hoc lex humana concessit, lex tamen diuina
prohibuit, that if man's law grant that, yet Gods law forbideth that.

Whether S. Chrysostom and S Gregory allowed Priests Mariadges.
139. I grant, as before is said in the 133. number, Fitzsimon.
that to forbidd marriage, as damnable, is unlawful, and heretical, and
devilish: which is not done by us, as there appears, but in old time was
done by Tatian, Marcion, and Manichee; and lately by such, of whom afterward.
Secondly S. Chrysostom tells you, that the cause why the husband of one wife,
may be Bishop, and not of more then one, is; That he who had more then one cna
never be good instructor or master of the Church, who might not persevere in
love toward his wife she being dead. So that it is supposed the wife should be
dead, from affection toward whom, kept, or violated, the one might be elected
Bishop, and not the other; he to be Bishop, who conserved such affection, and
not he who had rejected it. Also in the 136. number, other answer is found,
that a married man living, absque vlla suspicione carnalis commercij; without
any suspicion of carnal compagnie, may not only be Bishop after his wyfes
death, but also during her life. Thirdly S. Chrysostom him self answers in
form, to your argument, saying: Dixit vnius vxoris virum, non ea ratione vt id
nunc in Ecclesia obseruetur: S. Chrysostom, hom. 2. de patientia Job.
oportet enim omni castitate Sacerdotem ornatum esse; He said the husband of
one wife, not so, as that now should be observed in the Church: for a priest
must be adorned with all chastity. Certainly, I do not believe, that a man
might be more often discomfited by his own conforts, then it hapeneth to my
Antisophist. For here the gowlden mouthed S. Chrysostom brought to avouch
marriage of Preests, is found most repugnant thereto: as ever before also the
like was done toward S. Chrysostom, and all others.

Let us inquyre whether he thriueth better in the confort out of S. Greg. l. 6.
c. 1. in lib. reg.
Errare eos qui propter verbum Pauli: vnusquisque vxorem suam habeat, putant
licere Ecclesiasticis vxores habere; Them to err who for the speech of S.
Paul: Let every on have his wife, think it lawful for Church men to have
wives. Secondly to my thinking, in saying S. Gregory to be ours, and that he
mantayneth marriages not to be dissolved according to Gods law; is to confess,
that he him self had not said truly before, in saying the old Fathers to be
his friends, or that our doctrine condemns marriage. For if one of ours
mantayne this point of controversy, how is every one of us, said to be against
it? For the honor of God, M. Rider, leave collusions, and imposturs, in abusing
your fraternity with such iuggling doctrine, being fast and loose, off and on,
up and down, without ryme, or reason. Thirdly, S. Gregory says not, that if
marriage must be dissolved, but, si enim dicunt religionis causa coniugia etc.
If any say that marriage for religions sake may be dissolved, although law of
men accord thereto, yet the law of God does forbidd it: to wit (as he there
expounds) that without mutual consent they should divorce them selves, for
any pretext to enter into religion. And nether is this against us, not allowing
the contrary; nor for him, Patricium, but the feminine according to good
congruitie, by calling her Patrician. All was one to M. Rider, who is loath to
have to great knowledge in that Papistical latin tongue, Luther. de abroga^da
missa priuata P^mer. lib. de coiugio episcoporum. Magdeburg. en vnaqui^que
ce^tur^a, cap. 7. and cent. 11. c. 7.
as shall after appear. Fifthly, if any covet to have a pattern of M. Riders
choosing of proofs, if he be learned and a Protestant, he may peruse Luther,
Pomeran, the Centurians, Beza, Martyr, Melancthon, Calvin, Brentius, Kemnitius,
Iuel, Fox, Du Plessis, etc. in treating of Preests marriage; If he be a
Catholic, Beza and Martyr. 1. Cor. 7. Mela^c. Conf. Augustana. art. 23.
Ca^uin, 4. Instit. c. 12. n. 23. Brent. in Conf. Wittenberg. c. de coniugio.

Kemnit. 3. par. exam. Iuel con. Harding. Fox acts. etc. Plessis l. con.
Eucham. page 307.

Michael Medina libris 5. de continentia hominum sacrorum Espenceus in lib,
eiusdem argumenti. Clictoueus de celibatis Sacerd. Hosius dial. de eod.

Didac. Payua lib. vlt. Cochleus con. Calu. de votis. Alphon. a Castro l. 13.
de her. ver. Sacerdotium. here is. 4.

Alb. Pighius controuersia, 15.

Vide Ce^tur. 6. c. 7. col. 388. and cap. 10. col. 686. vide Fox. Act. and Mon.
page 386.


and would find the objections of Protestants answered, I report him to
Bellarmins third part of the first tome, lib. 1. chap. 19. and seq. and chap.
22. and seq. of the book following to Hardings reioynder fol. 170. and to
other Catholics refutations mentioned in the margent against such heresies.



M. Rider over rydeth all substancial stuff, stopping and stouping to snatch
every bayte, whether it be to his behoof, or to his bane. If he had omitted it
because he had found it confuted in Bellarmine etc. it might be excused. But
the not finding of all the residue of is guggling stuff, confuted in Bellarmin,
etc. shows that he was to good a Rider, to be, so good a reader as to have
ever perused him. Now then to answer this forgerie so vehemently aggrauated by
his brethren; I say to it as to like untruths, that one part thereof
supplanteth another. For the forged autheur thereof, lived not a hundred years
near the time of him, to whom he is said to have written: as appears in
Bellarmine. Secondly no such law, or memorial, or mention is extant in S.
Gregory, Vide Staphilum resp. ad fictas dissensiones obiectas ab Illiryco.
Vide Alan. Cop. dial. 1. cap. 23.

S. Greg. l. 1. epist. 42.


or in any autheure treating of his life, as Iohanes Diaconus, Beda,
Sigebertus, Ado, Treculphus, etc. Thirdly S. Gregory confuteth it him self,
confirming the Catholic doctrine in this behalf, by commanding; Non ordinari
Subdiaconos, nisi prius vouerint continentiam; Subdeacons them selves not to be
received to holy ordres, unless they would vow continency. Fowerthly some time
those heads are said to be found in Sicile, some time in Rome. etc. Other
stuff, (besides railing at the parliament proofs, by him confessed, to be the
act of all the nobles and learned in the land, saying them, to be unlawful and
horrible doctrine of Devils, repugnant to Christ's truth, and the Pope to be a
bloody murdering Italian Priest, and Foxes Saints to be innocent lambs
crying for revenge against their murderers (whereby you perceive again, that
he accompteth them of a good belief) and the like, not worth the taking up by
any sincke-sweeper) I can not find, or perceive, whereunto I might replye,
therefore to discharge my promise, I will acquaint the truth of this point of
Coelibat, or vnmarrying of Preests, in the East and West Churches.

Rider.
140 Now ye see Scriptures, Fathers, Popes, practice of the primitive Church,
and presidents of godly Bishops and priests witness with us against you, that
the marriage of priests is lawful and honorable, and your parliament stuff
unlawful and horrible: the one has the warrant from Christ, the other is the
doctrine of Devils, from which recall your selves, your confederates and
nouices, least in abstaining from lawful matrimony, ye fall into damnable
adultery; which the Lord prevent for Christ's sake; And thus much for the first
three Articles.

Catholic doctrine of the not Marrying of Priests.
Fitzsimon.
140. FIrst it is to be understood, that the determination of the Church, is
authorized from God, as if it were his own act. He that hears you, hears
me. When you received the word of obedience of God, by us, you received it
not as the word of men, Luc. 10. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 1. Joan. 4.
but as it is truly, the word of God. He that knows God, hears us; He
that is not of God, he does not hear us. In this we know the spirit of truth,
and the spirit of error etc. Secondly it is to be known that the Church from
the Apostles times, has eschued Marriage in the Clergy, and followed
Coelibat, Ver. 35. 1. Cor. 1. Ver. 33. S August. lib. 5. cap. 26. co^tra
Donatistas.
or Continency, that according to S. Paul; Facultatem prabeat sine impedimento
Dominum obseruandi; It might enable them without impediment, to serve our Lord.
For he that is married is careful of the things which are of the world, how he
may please his wife: and he is divided. Thirdly says S. Augustine, and it is a
godly and goulden saying; De eo quod tota per orbem frequentat ecclesia,
disputare; an ita faciendum sit, insolentissimae insaniae est; To dispute of
that which the whole Church does observe, whether it should be observed or not,
Conc. 2. Carthag. can. 2. An. 396. fuit probatum 2 Leone 4. d. c. de libellis.
is most insolent madness. Fourthly, that it proceeded from the Apostles times;
of innumerable proofs, extant to that effect, I will only tendar these few. 1.
Out of the 2. Council of Carthage. Placet vt Episcopi, Presbyteri, Diaconi, vel
qui Sacramenta contrectant, pudicitiae custodes, etiam ab vxoribus se
abstineant. Vt quod Apostoli docuerunt, and ipsa seruauit antiquitas, nos
quoque custodiamus. It pleases that Bishops, Preests, and Deacons, or they who
administer the Sacraments, even from their wives should abstain, and keep
integrity. That what the Apostles taught, and antiquity observed, we also
should continue. In which words, all that we said, of the being of Coelibat
the Apostles doctrine, and practiced in the Church, and commanded to posterity,
is contained. Conc. Neocaesar. Anno 312. probatu^ a Leone 4. d. 20.
2. Conc, Neocaesar. Presbyter si vxorem duxerit, ordine suo moueatur; If a
Priest marry a wife, let him be deposed from his order. This Council was more
ancient then the former, and testifyeth how heinous a punishment it had been
that a Priest should marry. 3. Council. Council. Elibertinum Anno 325.
Elibertinum in Hispania; Placuit, in totum prohibere Episcopis, Presbyteris,
Diaconis, ac Subdiaconis abstinere se a coniugibus, and non generare filios; It
pleases, altogether to forbidd Bishops, Preests, Deacons and Subdeacons, to
abstain from wives, Conc. Aquisgran an. 816. cap. 6. Maguntin. an. 888. cap.
10. Wormatiense anno 868. cap. 9.

S. Clem. can. 27. Apostolorum.

S. Calixtus 1. apud Gratian. d. 27. c. Presbyteri.

Siricius ep. ad Himericum.

Vide Bellarm. Baron. Valentiam.

De caelibatu. S. August. de baptismo con. Donatistas lib. 2. c. 7. and 23. and
epist. 118.


and not to engender Children. This council was in the West, the other two in
the East, and Southe; yet concurrng in one doctrine. And for the North, the
Concils of Aquisgran, of Worms, and Mayence in Germany, not only followed the
same doctrine, but also the same words. And these concils being partly before
Siricius, and cettayne of them also before, the Council of Nice; in vain does
Flessis Willet, and such others, draw the original of Coelibat from Siricius
and the said Council. For S. Clement in the canons of the Apostles, Calixtus the
first, Siricius, etc. being near the time of the Apostles them selves, do
certify (if that might serve our veneral ministers distrust) the antiquity
thereof long before. Therefore by the rule of S. Augustine; Quae non inueniuntur in
literis Apostolorum, neque in Concilijs posteriorum, and per vniuersam
custodiuntur Ecclesiam, non nisi ab ipsis tradita and commendata creduntur;
What are not found in the epistles of Apostles, nor Concils of their
successors, yet are kept through the universal Church, are believed not to
have been delivered and commended but by them. By this rule, I say, Coelibat
finding still one more ancient then another, testifying the obligation thereof,
can be no other then an Apostolical tradition.

S. Epiphan. ad finem operiscontra haereses, Item her. 59.
Epiphanius; Sanctum Sacerdotium, ex virginibas vt plurimum, aut ex solitarijs,
aut si hi ad ministerium non suffecerint, de his qui se a proprijs vxoribus
continent, et si quis ab initio continens viduus fuerit, habere potest locum
Episcopi, Presbyteri, Diaconi, Hypodiaconi: Holy preesthood for the most part
is of Virgins, or solitary persons, or if these be not sufficient toward the
charge, of them who live continent from their propre wives, and if any from the
begyning had been a continent widow, he may have place of a Bishop, Priest,
Deacon, Subdeacon. Hieronimus; Quid facient Orientis Ecclesiae? quid Aegipti,
and sedis Apostolicae, quae aut virgins clericos accipiunt, aut continentes,
aut si vxores habuerint, mariti esse desistunt? What shall the Churches of the
East do? S. Hieron. circa initium libri contra Vigilantium. Idem in five
Apologiae contra Iouinianum.
what of Egypt, and the seat Apostolical? which either receive Virgins into the
Clergy, or Continent, or if they had wives, they leave to be husbands. Long
before said Origin hom. 23. in lib. Number. Illus solius offerre sacrificium
indesinens qui perpetuae se deuouet castitati; It is his part alone to offer
the continual Sacrifice, who has devoted him self to continual or perpetual
chastity. Nay the pagan and most lasciuous Poet could say, discedat ab aris;
Tibulus 2.1.
queis tulit histerna gaudia nate venus. Casta placent superis. By these
testimonies, dearly beloved Reader, unless thou be perverse, and insatiable,
thou have, that Celibat being commanded by the Church, is thereby also commanded
by God him self: that the Apostles taught it to be observed: that Concils of
East, West, South, and North, concurred in the observation thereof: that the
disciples of the Apostles testify the necessity thereof: that other vnspitious
assurance auerre the same. Thou perceauest also, that the objections against
it, are as light in them selves, as they and their lives are light from whom
they come: who being licentious and fleashly Libertins, do only seek for
cloaks to their shame. Women (as of Samson, David, Solomon, and the Children of
Israel, so peculiarly of the foresaid mates) were the stone of offense or
scandal, and of Apostasy, according to the saying of Gods word;
Ecclesiastici. 19.2.
Vinum and mulieres apostare faciunt sapientes; Wine and women do make wise
men (in their own Conceits) to fall from belief. Besyd all which thou have
lately out of Luther before, that he would have taught celibat, Vide number. 130.
but to be opposite to the Pope: and if the Pope had allowed it, he would
mantayne whoordome to be more lawful.

4. Article.
4 That vows of Chastity ought to be observed,

5. Article.
5 That Masses are agreeable to Gods law.

6. Article.
6 That Confession is fruitful.

Rider.
141. 142. THese three Articles are as repugnant to Christ's truth, as the rest.
The fifth Article (Christ willing) to my next Treatise shall be handled, the
fourth and sixth Article, as you hereafter give occasion. Now let the
Catholics consider how vnmercifullie and immeasurable, the bloody Bishop of
that Italian murdering Priest shed the innocent blood of so many Saints,
because they would not say and subscribe that these six Articles (being in
deed heretical) were Apostolical and Catholic. Was this the planting of the
Protestants faith? no, this parliament was established for no other end, but
to supplant them. And therefore these six Articles were fitly termed, VVhipe
with five strings.
the whip with six strings, where with your forefathers whipped to death these
innocent lambs (for neither conspiracy nor treason) but only for the word
of God, and for the testimony which they maintained. But they cease not to
cry still for vengeance against those murderers, saying: How long Lord holy
and true do not thou judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the
earth? Revel. 6.9.10.
But thanks be to God those channels of innocent blood shed then in England by
the Popes direction, have quite for ever banished out of England the Pope and
his superstition. And as the mother that would before Solomon have the child
divided, was not the true mother, for the Church of Rome that delights so
much in blood, 1. Kings. 3.17. etc.
cannot be the true Church. Time will not permit to write the damnable fruit
that this filthy Munkish chastity yields: but of that when opportunity is
offered: yet still nothing but what your own friends record.

Whether late Sectarists, or Catholics, be greater discommenders of
Matrimony.
141. IF Catholics be discommenders or condemners of matrimony, it appears
by the premises. Fitzsimon.
Whether Sectarists be or not, let it now be conceived. First they can not
abide that matrimony should be a Sacrament: for they allow but four
Sacraments in their first confession of Augusta, tendered to Charles the fifth
anno 1530. Namely Baptism the Supper, Augustana Confessio de numero
Sacrame^torum. anno. 1530. Idem habet Lossius in Cathecismo anni. 1557. Luth.
Sermon. de Matr. Melanct. in loc. Com. an. 1536. 1552. 1558. Sleidan. l. 20.
Absolution, and Order. In deed after, they foisted in Matrimony; and lastly
Confirmation, and Unction. Wherein they are gone before them in our Contryes;
who allowed first, but three, and soon after but two: and now they abrogat
these two (by making them no better then base and beggarly ordonances as is
often above declared) not esteeming them any thing necessary to salvation, nor
much behoofull, but as bare external signs. So that matrimony by being none
of their Sacraments, is according to their conceit, not so much as a base and
beggarly ordonance, or a bare fruictless, external sign; peruse but the
numbers quoted, and you shall find them to think no otherwise. For truly
Hall in Chron. an. regni Henrici 8.28. fol. 228.
to belie the devil him self. I may hitherto therefore conioyne, a pleasant
alteration of religion, saying; Now you see friends, that four Sacraments of
seven are taken from us, and shortly you shall leese the other three also,
except you look about you. For now they are all made no better, then taken
away. Secondly, for the marriages of Preests, never could the state of our
Contryes, by all vehement, and importunat suit that might be made, obtain the
children of Preests to be legitimated. The most that ever I was able to learn
they had obtained, was in K. Edwards days, only to be exempted from temporal
punishment incident to their sacrilege in marrying. And in the same act of
Parliament, Statut. anno. 2. Edou. 6. cap. 21. anno Domini 1548.
I find it affirmed, to be better, and most to be wished, that Preests would
abstain from marriage. Which truly, is a secreat condemnation of their
marriages to be unlawful; as also that their children could not be
legitimated, so many statuts, of former laws, and parlaments condemning them
for illegitimat. As great a condemnation was it in the later days of Q.
Elizabeth, to have been upon the point to have all Preests, yea and ministers
marriages utterly forbidden, as every one knows. Which, as I take insued for
the most part by promoting Puritants, telling of their fellows that, they do
lease out Church benefices lands, 2. Admonition to the Parliament. page 23.
and houses, for bravery and brybs to be bestowed upon their wives, or
children, or officers, or servants, etc, and thereby alien at Church livings
from Church uses, and their successors. How much could I, if I had not
compassion toward some, certify in this matter? What could I say of them, that
stoutly preached against marriage of the ministry, against plurality of
benifices. etc. Who now are environed abundantly with stock and store of the one
sort and the other? God be praised.

To our subject of discourse, belongs that marriage, thirdly, is greatly
disparaged, by late Sectaries, allowing so many breaches thereof, as if it
imported no great bond. For you may find in Luther, Luther. tom. 5. in 1.
Cor. 7. fol. 111. 112. 122. 123, Et in proposit. de digamia. Sermon. de
Matrimonio l. de vita coniugali.

Corpus Doctr. Christ. Germ. in repet. de co^iugio page 280. Vrba^. Reg. in
loc. com. de Matr.

Canones Ge^euen. anno 1560. Martyr. in 1. Cor. 7. Bucer. in c. 19. Math.

Luth. Sermon. de Matrimonio.

Ochin. dial. l. 2. dial. 21. Page 200. 204. 205.

Exodus 20. Deute. 5. Math. 14. Mar. 6. 1. Cor. 6. 1. Tim. 1. Ephesians. 5.

Galat. 2.4.


Bucer, and the Geneuian resolutions, (to which P. Martyr, Ochinus, and others
accord) these causes of Diuorcement, and of new marriage, during the lives of
both parties. First, to have mistaken one another to have been Virgins. 2. Any
unkind forsaking, betwixt both parts. 3. Any long absence of either. 4. Any
great forwardnes of either. 5. Dislyke of parents toward the marriage. 6. If
either refuse, or may not fulfill the act of marriage. 7. If the husband can
not begett children, that the wife may use another help; Misceatur alteri vel
fratri mariti, occulto tamen matrimonio, and proles imputetur putatiuo (vt
dicunt) Patri; Let her lie with another, or the brother of her husband, (says
Luther) and let the child be fathered upon the father (as he is called) in
conceit. 8. By allowing saecular people to have many wives. Paulus Episcopis
and Sacerdotibus plures vxores interdicit, ceteris tacit concedit; Paul, says
Ochin, (whom Bale says, England when it had him was happy, when it wanted him
was unhappy) forbidd Bishops and Preests, to have many wives, but permitted
them secretly to the residue. Go tell these men, that God forbids adultery
and fornication; that it is not lawful for these Herod's to have their
neighbors wives, they being living; that such as are divorced must remain
unmarried, during the life of their former spouses; and other such assurances
of Gods will and word; they will clappe this text in your teethe; False
brethren, that have stolen in, to spy our liberty, which we have in Christ
Jesus. And by this liberty (for which all this hurly burblie is followed) the
very ministers them selves, are not contented with one wife, as confesses
Silu. Czecanouius, saying; Deus bone! quam incredibilia vidi etc? Czecanouius
de corruptis moribus.
O good God what incredible things have I seen etc? And among many other
enormities of adulteries, and murders, he says; Vnus eorum (is toxico vxorem
suam interfecerat, vt alijs mulieribus vteretur) rogatus, cur tantum admisisset
scelus, respondit, coniugium in Lutheranis Sacerdotibus non restinguere vagas
libidines; One of them (he had killed his wife with poison to use other women)
being demanded, why he had committed so great a crime, he answered, marriage in
Lutheran Preests, not to extinguish wandering lusts. This made the Anabaptistan
minister George, David; to four wives whom he had first, Hortensius Mowntfort
de tumultibus Anabap.

Hamilton. in Calu. C^rfus l. 2. c. 35 fol. 236. Nichol. Burn. Scot. disp.
etc. c. 29. fol. 143.


to have added tenn more: and most of the people, to have had by his example,
five, six, seven, eight.

This made Knox the Puritan Apostle of Scotland (who had been some time a gally
slave) first to have abused his own mother in law. Secondly being thereupon
banished into England, to have wallowed in all leacherie; and hearing of
seditions in Scotland, to have returned (as to such carren such crows repair)
accompagnyed with three women sisters. Thirdly not as yet contented, to have
committed a rape upon a young gyrle, and after by a trick of witch craft
(familiar among the brethren) to have made her his holy fourth vessel of ease.
This liberty against the bond of marriage, made Luther confess; Luth. in
Colloq. mensal. fol. 400. 526. tom. 2.

Idem ibid. fol. 125.


Propter libidinis vehementiam and amorem mulierum se ad insaniam prope
redactum fuisse; By the vehemency of lust, and love of women (besyd his
Catharin) that he was almost become madd: and says he, who soever is
importunated by Sathanical thoughts, for to repel them; de aliqua puella
cogitet suadeo; I counseil him, to think upon some young maid. I will not
specify any disordre of the disciples, nor as much by the tenth part of the
doctors them selves, as I might culle out of Luthers banqueting conferences,
Colloq. in mensal. Bolsec in vita Call. Zuing. to. 1. fol. 115.
published by him self. I will leave Calvin to be known by Bolsec, Zuinglius
to intimat his own, and his fellows incontinencie. And for conclusion I will
only deliver at this time, the abominable declaration of Beza (whom Trauers
the Puritan terms the best interpreter of the new testament) of his
uncertainty, Trauers in his defense of Ecclesiastical discip. page 86.
whether more he should follow leacherie, or Sodomie; and his final resolution
in preferring Sodomie; as he has published him self. Let none excuse it, as
if it had been done during his Papistrie: for in his Creofagie, Beza in sua
Creof. page 58. In Pref. de sua confess. Schlusselb. theol. Call. fol. 93.
long time after his reading in Lausana, he auoweth, and confirms the same:
in his translation of the fifteth Psalm, he conformeth his style to the same:
and Schlusselburg assures, that; totam aetatem explendis suis libidinibus and
cupiditatibus, and describendis suis amoribus, and vlciscendis suis riualibus
exercuit; he spent all his time, in fullfilling his lusts, describing his
loves, reuengeing his corriuals, as applying nothing but the same.

The impious elegy of Theodore Beza his doubtful deliberation, whether he
should follow more, adultery with his Claud, wife to one in Paris, in the
streat de la Calend, ensign du Banc, or Zodomie with German Andebert, a boy of
Orleance. And how he preferred Zodomie. Elegia. 3. and 4.
ABest Candida, Beza quid moraris?
Andebertus abest, quid hic moraris?
Tenent Parisij tuos amores.
Habent Aurelij tuos lepores,
Et tu Vezelijs manner pergis,
Procul Candidulaque amoribusque
Et leporibus, Andebertuloque?
Immo Vezelij procul valete,
Et vale pater, and valete fratres.
Namque Vezelijs carere possum,
Et carere parente, and his and illis,
At non Candidula, Andebertuloque.
Sed vtrum rogo, preferam duorum?
Vtrum inuisere me docet priorem?
An quemqua^ tibi Candida anteponam?
An quemqua^ antefera^ tibi Andiberte?
Quid si me geminas secem ipse parts,
Harum vt altera Candidam reuisat,
Currat altera versus Andebertum?
At est Candida sic auara, noui,
Vt totum cupiat tenere Bezam:
Sic Beza est cupidus sui Andebertus,
Beza vt gestat integro potiri,
Amplector quoque sic and hunc and illam,
Vt totus cupiam videre vtrumque
Integrisque frui integer duobus.
Praeferre attamen alterum necesse est.
O duram nimium necessitatem!
Sed postquam tame^ alterum necesse est,
Priores tibi defero Andeberte.
Quod si Candida forte Conqueratar.
Quid tam? Basiolo tacebat vno.
Candida is absent, why do thou Beza s^aye?
Andebert is absent, why do thou here delay?
Paris does retain thy loves sweetest treasures.
Orleance does keep thy most deli^som pleasures.
How do thou then lingering in Vazelay town endure,
thy little sweet Ca^dida far from thy power,
and little Andebert thy pleasures sweetest flower?
No, adieu Vezelay, I list noe more in thee dwell.
Also father and brethren, I bidd you farewell.
For I can want Vezelay, and yet not be hindered,
My father and brethren and all my kyndred.
But not my dearest Candida, and Andebert.
But whether, I pray you, shall I soonest prefer?
Or to whether soonest my self transfer?
Shall any before Ca^dida obtain such grace?
Shall not rather Andebert have first favors place?
How then should I my self into two parts divide?
whereof, the one forthwith to Ca^dida might slide.
And the other to Andebert might spedely ride?
But I know so greedy to be my Ca^dida,
As feign she would wholly inioye her own Beza.
So willing of his own Beza, is Andebert,
That Beza, be his only own by good desert.
But I so in my mind embrace, both him and her,
As wholly of both, I wish to visit either
And wholly them both to inioye together.
But one I must prefer, by great necessity.
O over hard case, and great extremity!
But since there remains thereof noe remedy:
Andebert I grant chief favor first to thee.
And if Candida of such unkindness complain,
What then? One sweet imbracement will ease all her pain.
Of Priests Marriages in the Oriental Church, and of late Sectarists seeking
their favor.
142. I Request all Readers desirous of the truth, Fitzsimon.
to observe diligently this short declaration following. As it happened ever
before, when new Sects budded in any contryes: so for every one province
reuolting from Gods Church, for every contry infected, fot every diminution of
religious authority, God almighty in his admirable providence, multiplied
hundreds for one, and augmented the dignity and jurisdiction of his church at
the same time, with reparation of the loss, above all comparison. Satan might
obtain of God, to impouerish first a Job, but could not after hinder that God
should redouble all his substance. First, Constantins gifts, and decrees in
favor of religious authority, being by diverse of his successors revoked,
and infringed, especialy by Honorius, and Valentinianus; God called to faith
and religion, Anno. 495.
France with their King Clodoueus, submitting his dominions to Hormisdas Pope.
About the same time the Arians infected small parcells in the East: and about
the same time all our contryes came to Christian religion in the Anno. 732.
banished Pope Siluerius, and the Grecians began to apostat from religion, or
at least to fall to sundry erroneous persuasions. At or about the same time,
(when Leo Isaurus also, and others impugned Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction)
Charlemaigne, Pipin, and others were excited by God to most religious courses
and the Occidental Empire was separated from the former tyrants, the authority
of the Church more then ever before amplifyed, and all Germany, and the North
part of the world, was lightened with Christianity. Breefly after the last
Council of Florence, the Grecians falling to hateful heresies, and emulations,
and making up a schismatical Church or rather Synagog, repugnant to the Romain
Catholic Church; God sent them first the scourge of the Turcks who subdued
them, and to this day far beyond all belief most cruely oppresses them: So,
when Luther, Anno. 1500.
and his brotherhood conspired into like insurrection, and that betwixt the
Grecians and them, part of Greece, and Germany, Sleida^ in his history of
Charles the fifth, was as silent as a fish of the conversion of the Indies.
revolted from Gods Church; then God of his wonted goodness, in abundant
recompense bestowed upon these parts, where religion was professed most
exactly, namly upon Spain, the infinite regions rather then realms of the
world: whereof America only, never before known, surpasses not only in wealth,
but also in amplitude, the residue of the earth, which all our predecessors
had ever before known: And upon his Church, he bestowed all these contryes, in
subjection of religion, and loialtie: as by their late legation from the most
remote parts of the world, to every eye, and ear, was notorious, when three
Princes of Iaponia in the name of all the rest, rendered their homage to Sixtus
quintus Pope in Rome, having employed three years travailing to come thereto,
anno. 1585. Now (the premises forwarned) when Protestantrie considered the
obstinat Schism of the Grecians against the Romain Church on one side, and
their own nakedness, and the particularitie of their faction, on the other side;
they sought (as people in extremity respect not by whom, or how, they are
countenanced) to be graced with the approbation of the Greek Church. But they
were, as, spurij adespoti, unknown illegitimats, by them most disdainfully
rejected. Behold what succeeded upon this their endeavor. God almighty, Vide
Bredenbach. lib. 7, c. 18.
awaked as out of a drowsy sleep, two chief parts of the said Grecian
Church, to wit the whole Patriarchal portion of Alexandrie the Southeast, and
the Ruthenian the Northeast part of the Grecian Church, to prostrat them
selves before the last Pope Clement, in all devout submission. Which being
publicly, and with incredible solemnity performed in Rome, Tom. 6. and 7.
circa finem.
the theater of the world, as is amply specifyed by the worthy Baronius; and
known to all Christendom; I need not dwell longer in the relation thereof.
Only let all Catholics, magnify the mighty bounty of God toward their
profession, that when adversaries revolted from it, for every one subverted,
thousand infidels have been converted, and no fewer schismatics reconciled.
Vide Bredenbach. lib. 7. c. 18.

Iustus Calu. in Apologia page 12.


The censure of the greek Church given against Protestantrye how desyrously
the Protestants endeavor to conceal it, and how much they are greaued, and
graueled thereby, I leave to Bredenbachius, and Iustus Caluinus, to demonstrat.

For conclusion; a part of the Schism of the Greek Church against the Romain
Church, consisted in their admitting married men to receive holy ordres, Vide
Bellarm. to. 1, par. 3. l. 1. c. 19.
and after receiving them, to retain their wives: Provided always, that if
they came chaste to holy ordres, or that their wives dyed, they could never
after marry. This their lecherous impiety, being contrary to all primative
Christianity as appears they so desperately embraced, as through it, and for
it, notwithstanding all the calamities they sustain by Turks, all the
refutations of their errors by Catholics all the means that can be wrought
hitherto, they have not been nor might be reclaymed. Yet Gods heavy hand over
them, the continual sting of their consciences behoulding their offense, their
disdain toward late heresies as fearing to straye more, and other sundry
manifestations, are sufficient proofs, that their Schism is their own
infamy, and rather the glory of the Romain Church then otherwise: that when
other Churches like chafe are borne away against it by heresies; it as sownd
corn remains, to furnish the heavenly banquet: when other houses builded
upon sands, are by rain falling, wynds blowing, and seas surgeing,
overthrown; it in state and sowndnes, not only against the despyte and fury
of men, but even against hell gates (as Christ had promised) remains
inviolable. Nether, as now appears, Mat. 16.
do the Grecians even in the foresaid disordre, concur with Protestant
marriages of Priests: who, as Luther says, not only before ordres, but after,
and not only for one wife, but for two, three, four, five, and six, Luth. in
proposit. de digamia.
are allowed to enter into matrimony; contrary to the former belief, and
practice of Grecians, how leacherous soever. And not only for this point, but
also as great, or rather greater condemnation afforded they of their heresy
against the blessed Sacrament, saying; Ecclesia Orientalis in censura doctrinae
Lutheranae c. 10.
Ecclesiae Sanctae iudicium est, Panem and Vinum in Corpus and Sa^guinem
Christi virtute Sancti Spiritus transire ac immutari: non quod Christus
discendat de caelo, vt in Eucharistia presens adsit, sed quod per
transmutationem and transitionem panis in ipsum corpus fiat presens. It is the
judgment of the holy Church, bread and wine by virtue of the holy Ghost to
pass and be changed into the body and blood of Christ: not that Christ
discendeth from heaven, that he might be present in the eucharist, but that by
the passing and changeing of bread into his body, he is made present. A heavy
sentence, as bringing contempt where contentment was expected; in stidd of
consolation a condemnation; and a testimony of hatred against Protestantrie,
to be universally in all the world.

The fourth proof. Denyers of the Real presence condemned as heretics.
Catho. Priests,

143. Ignatius ad Smyrnenses, and Theodoret dialog. 3. circa medium, do make
mention of certain denyers of the Real presence: but so, as they had none to
accord unto them. Also Iconomachi (as may appear out of the 7 Council) did
affirm that the Sacrament was but an image of Christ: and they also had no
followers: only Berengarius in the time of Leo the ninth, about five hundred
years past, who thrice recanted such opinion as eronious, mantained the only
spiritual presence. And he in three Councels was condemned: in Conc. Turon.
sub Victor. 2. in Conc. Romans sub. Nich. 2. in Council. Romans sub Gregorio nono.
The Council of Trent remains for the rest that have insued.

Rider.
GEntlemen, you should have brought Theodoret before Ignatius* because Theodoret
only reports some such thing out of Ignatius (but Ignatius himself has
not one word of it) and it seems still you never read Theodoret, because you
say circa medium, not knowing in which of the three and thirty chapters it
was. To be brief, that which you think makes for you, is in the ninteenth
chapter, which is but a sacramental Metonymie, as the rest of the fathers use:
and you would wrest it to your litterall and proper sense; which is still your
error spoken of and confuted before. But read Theodoret dialog. 1. cap. 8. and
he will expound himself and confute you. And for Ignat. I have read his twelve
Epistles upon this occasion twice over, and from his first Epistle ad Martam
Cassoboliten to his last ad Romanos., there is no such thing in that reverend
Archbishop and Martyr, but the contrary: which makes me to wonder with what
conscience you can belie so godly a Martyr, and abuse the Catholics your
loving friends. And as for your Iconomachi, they are very impertinentlie
brought in this place, your title of Images were more proper for them. Yet that
you may see they fit not this purpose, I refer you for satisfaction to the
Popes own Synod and Decree, Ex Synod 2. Act. 5. page 549.
beginning at Cum diem extremum impiorum Arabum Tyrannus quem Soliman
nominabant, clausisset, etc. and after follows the Popes decree. Petrus
deuotisimus presbyter, etc. Read this Act and Decree, and they will give you
satisfaction of your impertinent allegations: and if the Pope cannot content
his Chaplens, then you are male content in deed.

Whether ancient denyers of the Real presence, were condemned as heretics.
Fitzsimon.
143. MY objection against M. Rider consists in two important accusations; The
one, that the denyers of the real presence, as soon as they took up such
opinion, were condemned as heretics. The Other, that when they took it up,
they had none to accord unto them. So that only Ignatius and Theodoret could
find but a glawnce of such opinion: which vanished for want of followers in
such manner, as Ireneus, Tertullian, Philaster, Epiphan, Augustine, Damascen,
etc. in their calculation of heresies, could find none so unfaithful as to
distrust the truth of Christ's real presence. To this urgent accusation, M.
Rider only answers, first that we should have brought Theodoret before
Ignatius. In deed, as I have said before, when I am a Puritan writer, I will
follow their preposterous proceeding, and place Ignatius that was three hundred
years before Theodoret, (yet both were within the first five hundred years)
behind him; and Theodoret that alleges another monuments, I will place
before the monument writer, as if he were a prophet to fortell what should be
written. Secondly he answers, that Ignatius him self has not one word
thereof. Whereunto I reply, that the greater our loss, by not having so much of
his wrytings as were found by Theodoret. Thirdly he answers, that it seems
we never read Theodoret, because we say about the midst of his third
dialogue; not knowing in which of the 33. chapters it was. I replye: that the
later chapters being more long then the former, I had not strayed, in
specifying the midst in the 19. chapter. Also it is but a Riderian sequel,
you know not the chapter: therefore you never read the matter. In our 135. number,
I demonstrat, that you mistake the number of S. Ignatius epistle: will you
therefore be confounded by your own sequel, that you never read the words?
Thirdly he answers, that the point of the objection, is but a Sacramental
Metonimie. To which I reply, that this answer is M. Riders ignominy; to use
obscure words vnexpownded, and nothing to the matter. What Sacramental is, I
have often before declared. For Metonymie, it is thus defyned by Festus:
Metonymia est tropus, quum quod continet significatur per id quod continetur.
etc. Metonymie is a figure, when it that contains is signified, for it that
is contained, etc; as if you would say, drink of this cup, meaning the
liquoure in the cupp. This denomination of the cupp for the liquoure, is a
Metonymie.

Now having unmasked M. Riders words, I may be licensed to examine how they
serve his defense against the accusation out of S. Ignatius. For he thought as
Agar abandoned her child under a bushe, Genesis 21.
remaining remot till it had dyed, to leave the objection without any other
consolation then that in placing it in an obscure shadow; and retired far
from it, lamenting his own extremity. But I will supplye to him the office
performed by the Angel to Agar, and say: Genesis 21.
take up the Child: meaning the foresaid objection by him forlorned, contained
in these words, of Ignatius. Eucharistias and oblationes non admittunt, quod
non confiteantur Eucharistiam esse carnem seruatoris nostri Jesus Christi; They
allow not Eucharists, and oblations, because they do not confess the eucharist
to be the fleash of our Keeper Jesus Christ. Compare M. Riders tropical answer
to this accusation; and tell after, that it is out of the compass of both the
tropicks limiting the Zodiac; So that the son of plain dealing can not reach
to be directly over it. Here is then Agars child Ismael reuyued to the Puritan
opinion against the real presence; Ferus homo, manus eius contra omnes; a
fierce fellow, his hands impugning them all: Genesis 16.
as the Scripture tells Ismael to have been. So that M. Riders expectation,
that it should have dyed by being placed in a dark thicket of remote words is
frustrated, and it now a fierce and cruel adversary to them that deny the
Eucharist, and Sacrifices; as proving them in their first originals to have
been apparent heretics. The foresaid denyers of the Eucharist to be the flesh
of Christ, being the first of that opinion (yet in deed, they were persuaded
rather that the Eucharist was not Christ's fleash, because they thought he had
not fleash, then if he had any, that his words so pregnant to testify such
truth, had not made the Eucharist to be his fleash: and by consequent, the
heresies of these times were condemned in them, not otherwise but by
anticipation; to wit, for denying the Eucharist to be Christ's fleash, and yet
confessing that Christ had fleashe) and for it disproued as heretics. To come
again to his affected obscurity; what use, or effect, do the words of M.
Rider importe, [that the speech was but a Srcramental Metonomye] to defend
them, and their imaginations thereby? Either the Metonomie is to be referred to
the persons, or to the persuasion, or to the condemnation of the persons, and
persuasion, or to the condemners, of their condemnation. In any way in the
world that it can The 191. untruth.
Nether could he confute us, but by first confuting him self. Also if he did
so expownd him self, and confute us; M. Rider having any regard of his credit,
should have brought such confutation, and omitted his void, and blind mist of
a Sacramental Metonomie in place thereof. Fifthly he answers, that we belie
Ignatius. To which I reply, that I attended (according my experience of many
greater discurtesies endured at his hands, Calu. de vera particip. Corporis
Christi in coena page 1171.
as before is showed) this abuse; considering in the same case I found it used
by Calvin, against Heshusius. But M. Rider for recompense and satisfaction,
will take this 192. untruth, The 192. untruth.
in his own mouth, confessing Theodoret to have in his 19. chapter, what we
had alleged. In whom then, is the lie? He dares not to say that it is in
Theodoret, being a most venerable Father within the first five hundred years.
And he can not say, it is in me, who have only certifyed (and that truly, as
he confesses) what Theodoret alleged out of S. Ignatius. There remains
therefore, that he can bestow it no where so well as in his own lips: where, it
is, rex in regno, res in fine, locoque locatum, in a propre free howld, and
habitation of inheritance. There it is, as in the most imprenable scons, out of
which verity is banished, and has lost all jurisdiction; of which sconce, the
teethe are the walls, the lips the rampars, and the beard the trenches; there
it is, as a cock crowing on his own dunghill, whom as the lion King of beasts
can not terrify, so is falsehood in that mouth, teethe, lips, beard, and
dunghill, not surmowntable by verity. Therefore we must let it, there, and in
that manner remain, without controwlment. For if you chase it out of such seat,
it will fall into the throat, and never be expelled.

Iconomachi, infamous heretics, (who in deed are the ancientest forefathers of
the Protestant persuasion; among such as confess our Saluioure Christ to have
had a true body) affirming, the Sacrament was but an image of Christ, had none
to credit them; he answers, first, that they are impertinently brought into
this place. To which I reply, that the proof bearing title, whether ancient
denyers of the real presence were condemned for heretics, and it being showed
that Ichonomachi were such denyers, and so condemned; it can not possibly be
avoided; But M. Rider knows not (as is ineuitably apparent in his whole
book) what, or when is any thing pertinent, or not. His second answer shall
make my imputation in the sight of the world, assured: by his aduising me to
read the Popes own synod and decree, to give me satisfaction of my
impertinent allegation. Mark Readers, I instantly request you, to what act,
and satisfaction, he sends me: namely to it, wherein nothing is contained but
such execrations of his doctrine as follow; Qui torquent sententias scripturae
de idolis in venerandas imagines, anathema. Qui venerandas imagines idola
vocant, anathema. Qui clamant, Ex Synodo 2. Act. 5.
Christianos imagines vt Deos adorare, anathema. etc. They that pervert
sentences of Scriptures belonging to idols, against images; execration; they
that term images, idols, execration; they that cry Christians woorshipp
images, or Gods, execration. Here is the Popes own Synod, and decree, that
tells me, by M. Riders opinion, that I had not alleged well my allegations
against the Iconoclasts, because forsooth, they were condemned for deprauing
the scriptures against venerable images, and because they said that Christians
do worshipp images as Gods, and that images and idols are all one. Do not these
canons and condemnations rather battre late reforming heresies, then any way in
the world, directly, or indirectly, concern any answer to my evidences? What!
are all impertinent awnswers, (although new condemnations of Reformers) due
satisfaction to all objections against Reformers? Are all frivolous objections
of Reformers, insupportable thunder claps against all lawful oppositions? Will
it be ever your condition (as Luther him self your father of truth declares
to have been of your brethren) to think every straw a spear, and that at
every stroke you ding down armies? But of such pay masters, unless you accept
such payment, there can no other be had. In the mean time antiquity is fownd
to have condemned such for heretics, who affirmed the Sacrament to be but an
image of Christ. etc. His making Lirinensis to be against Catholics, Bernard
against the Supremacy, the Fathers against the Real Presence, this Council
condemning the Iconoclasts or image breakers as hateful heretics to God, to
be as a satisfaction for him against us: what is it other, then gallantly, and
Ridericaly to ride, in manner fortould: affirming like Anaxagoras whiet snow to
be black incke, and every thing clean contrariously? If his meaning be that
the Iconoclasts because they were impious against images; could not also be
impious against Sacraments, or against any other mysteries; and thereby but
belonging to one allegation; he shows him self to be so simple, as not to
know that one impiety disposes to another: which every other how foolish
soever, is not ignorant of. Alas! pore Puritan profession, what Proctour have
thou chosen, who directs thy adversaries to find thee condemned, and makes
thy condemnation for impugning their doctrine, to be to them, a hurtful
satisfaction?

Rider. Berengarius.
144. Lastly, you bring in poor Berengarius upon the stage, to bear his
faggot and recant his error, of the spiritual presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, which we have sufficiently proved before to be (by scriptures,
fathers, and Popes,) the true presence. And now you bring in siliee Berengarius
his recantation, too be our confutation. I pray you let me ask you but one
question: can a reason drawn from a particular conclude generally. If it
should, I would reason thus with you: Bonner, Standish, wih others, preached
stoutly against the Popes supremacy in king Edward his days: therefore the
Popes Supremacy is nor lawful. Would you admit this kind of reasoning, These
Iurers be too young to g^ue evidence, and too partial to be trusted with the
trial of this Issue.
I think no: no more do we the other. For shall one man's weakness,
inconstancy, and fall from the truth, conclude generally against the truth;
God forbid. But you will object and say, it is not one man but three several
Synods. But I pray you remember that subornation of witnesses, and paching of
Iuries done in Westminister Hall, is most severely punished in that most
honorable Starrechamber: and shall not the Fope and his followers be called to
an account one day before the great Judge Jesus, for the suborning of witnesses
and packing of corrupt Iuries to deface Christ's truth, and to maintain their
own forgeries? The Catholics demand a proof out of Scriptures and fathers
for the proouing of your Roman opinion touching Christ's real and corporal
presence in the Sacrament, and you bring in the Popes Stipendarie Chaplens
gathered by the Popes su^mons to uphold the Popes rotten declining kingdom,
and every one of them at least 1100. years after Christ^ ascension, and one of
them within this sixty years to prove a thing done a thousand years before.
Now I give Irelands Catholics this friendly caveat, not to cleave to the
Popes Romish religion, but to Paul's Roman religion: and not to rest
concontented wi^h the name of Catholics, until they have the doctrine that is
Apostolical and Catholic. And now to your fifth proof, being your last
refuge and least help.

Berengarius his recantations, and condemnations.
144. FOr his first answer, Fitzsimon.
to this recantation of the first late head of his opinion (who could never
fashion any monstrous body thereto of adherents) he says; a particular does
not conclud a general. Which being true, what miserable conclusions has he
made in his whole book? When if a figure was to be granted in one word,
thereby was concluded that all the sentence was but figurative. If there were
like form of speech and sownd of leters in the old and new testament; thereby
was concluded, there was noe more liberality, or substance, in the new, then
in the old; if spiritual sense was affirmed, in any one sentence, of
Scriptures, or Fathers; thereby was concluded nothing was literal. If any one
Prelat, and any one book, yea the very Antiphonarie, was worthy to be
reformed; the lives of all Catholics, was thereby concluded to be lewed, and
all their doctrine deuilishe. If any sentence, yea impertinently, were alleged
out of any Father; the town, the province, the Kingdom, that region of the
world, Europe, Africa, Asia, were inferred to hold the same; although, nether
person, nor place, nor province, of such Region, (as appears in our 60.
number, when Asie is made to hold an opinion, without any of all Asie
specifyed for being author thereof) is numbered. What say you M. Rider? can
reasons drawn from a particular, conclud generaly? you insinuating that
according to learning they can not. Spitt out man, and let truth have once a
clean seat in your mouth, and confess in plain deed that they can not: and
consequently confess, that your inferences hitherto have been at least
frivolous, and unlearned. Secondly I reply, that this recantation, and
condemnation of Berengarius was not particular: the condemnation being by three
whole Concils; and the recantation being, Calu. in vltima. admonit. ad Ioachim.
VVestphalum.
as Calvin confesses, by the parent of the Sacramentarian opinion, in his own
behalf, and of his children: in so much, as thereupon, to the times of the
Albigenses, and Ihon Wickliff, few or none could be found taynted with that
error. Secondly, he accuses Bonner, and Standish, to have dissembled in their
belief. I think in my conscience the accusation is untrue; and the rather,
because there is nether witness, nor author, besyd his own cracked credit to
auerr it. But let us suppose it to be true: all that follows thereby is, that
they borrowed Puritanical dispe^sations to them selves mentioned in the 99.
number, to do contrary to their consciences. Deal plainly in Gods cause, and
tell the world whether the late thousand subscribing Puritans, have not all of
them drawn in their horns, and swayed with the time. How many times did
Latymer and Crammer, recant, up, and down? So then, such did Puritanize.
Thirdly he answers, that subornation of witneses, and packing of Iuries done
in Westminister Hall, is punished in the starr chamber: thereby implying that
the Pops subornation of his stipendarie (this is Quicquid ex eorum codicibus
aduersus eos sonuerit, S. Aug. 22. contra Faustum.
immissum esse a falsatoribus ore impudenti, and sacrilego, non dubitant
dicere; What soever against them selves, out of their own books (or of their
doctors deeds, and recantations) is alleged, that they doubt not to affirm
out of an impudent and sacrilegious mouth, that it is foisted in by deprauers.
I do not thereby intimat that M. Rider is such, unless he be guilty. Secondly
I would be instructed willingly in the cause of his knowledge, how all the
Bishops of the three concils whereby Berengarius was condemned, are found to
have been the Popes stipendarie chaplins. Peter of Nicomedie is made the Popes
pensioner, as also S. Bernard, and all that can be alleged against
Protestants. But why? (...), ipse dixit M. Rider says so. Therefore it can not
be otherwise. If you distrust him, or his sayings, you are inferred to be
traiterous, superstitious, etc. Thirdly, how fyndeth he among his Spiritual
revelations, that the Popes rotten kingdom declineth? For as I showed not long
before, it has to our seeming never in three ages formerly, been so far
extended, as in this last, and more, and more follows on the same tenor.
Fourthly, in what Chronology finds he, that every one of the said
stipendarie chaplins, lived at least 1100. years after Christ's ascension? The
council sub Victore 2. was in the year 1055. The Council sub Nicolao 2. was anno
1059. and the Council under Gregory the 7. was anno 1073. not after Christ's
ascension, but after his birthe. If therefore the 34. years of Christ's life
before his ascension, be deducted from the first of these Concils, which was in
the year after his ascension 1021. and after his Nativity 1055: it must
follow, that every one of the foresaid stipendarie Chaplins, had lived four
score years after giving sentence against Berengarius: because every one of
them is by him affirmed to have lived at least 1100. after Christ's ascension;
and consequently they not being Prelates in Concils before their age of 20.
years, at least; all of them are made to surmownt a 100. years. Which suerly
in so great a number of Prelates, had been a rare grace, and miracle, and a
great lykelyhood that God the giver thereof, would recompense to the sight of
the world, their zealous employment, and approve it as most laudable. But in
deed hondreds in M. Riders accounts, are some time easier found a stray, then
in a pinners shopp, at hand. Notwithstanding all this shall stand but for the
193. untruth. The 193. untruth.


Now I come nearer, to find all small untruths tending to one Capital
untruth over whelming his whole discourse, and converting all his allegations
into a main sea of one falsehood. You have (as I that under the warmth (they
are his words) of Innocentius the third his wyngs, our transubstantiation in
the Synod of Lateran was hatched, at least 1200. years after Christ's
ascension: that the Pixe was invented by Innocentius the third anno 1214. that
breefly all our opinion was forged by Innocentius the third. Vide n. 67.
Here is his fundation for clayming antiquity. Here is his corner stone of the
whole frame of his trauayles, that Innocent the third (forsoothe) was first
broacher of our doctrine. All which Babilonian tower by this division in his
own tongue, not understanding him self is undermined, and utterly subverted.
Some time he says peremptorily, that Innocentius the third had invented it;
and yet that other Popes had packed iuries, and suborned witneses, to condemn
Berengarius for being opposite thereto, above a hundred and forty years before
Innocent the third lived: the first condemnation thereof being anno 1055. and
Innocentius, and the Lateran Council, but anno 1215. Some time that our opinion
was never known nor dreamed of before Innocent the third; and yet the
authority of them that professed it, was so great, as to see all prelates in
the world to be stipendarie Chaplins, against them that denied it. These are as
coherent discourses, as advised resolutions, as constant informations, that
were they alone, they should not only persuade others, but M. Rider him self
to be worthy of as great reprehension, and confusion and punishment, as Aristo
sustained by the Athenians, for unworthily, and foolishly, writing her
commendations. But being conjoined to so innumerable of the same sort, how may
he escape not to fall into disperation of being otherwise accounted then a
Rider? You get not any rethorical apostrophes at my hands, to aggrauat this
his confusion, nor yet any help to get him up again after this his
disgraceful stumbling against the head of his own opinion, during his leaping
short at the fownder of our doctrine. But if you of his profession will assist
him to rise. I doubt not by Gods grace to accompagnie him to this iournyes
end, and so often to occasion you to support him in his slipprines, as
affection could require; and yet to renownce him in the end, as past remedy,
and recovery.

The fifte proof. Of many miraculous testimonies of the real presence.
Catho. Priests.

Rider.
145. GEntlemen, you know in Schools, an sit, is ever before quid sit: In
architecture the foundation is before the building. In Christ's divinity, man's
philosophy, and common sense, the cause is ever before the effect. But you,
contrary to divinity, reason, and philosophy, will have a thing to work
wonders supra naturam, above nature, which is not in rerum natura, neither has
any being at all: for you would make the simple people believe, that your
transubstantiated Christ works miracles, and yet you have not, nay you
cannnot prove any such a Christ, and if there were such a Christ, he is none
of ours: for he was never borne of the blessed virgin, nor shed one drop of
blood for our sins, and therefore we renounce him as none of our Savior.

Of many miraculous testimonies of the Real presence.
Fitzsimon.
145. HE tells, in the very entrance to this disputation of miracles, that the
Real presence is not in reru^ natura, not to be found, or of no being. Next
that he renownceth Christ transubstantiated. A woeful denial, and woeful
abiuration. For the first, he that could face out that Christ's real being was
never in question; that both they and we hold, Christ's real presence in the
Sacrament: how comes he now to affirm, that it is contrary to divinity,
reason, and Philosophy, to suppose that the real presence has any being at
all? and to distrust the very first question of the real presence (for the very
title of this disputation does bind him to treat of no other controversy)
whether it be in rerum natura, among things of being, or not? The 194. untruth.
Let this contradiction be the 194. untruth, to increase the late mentioned
Ocean. His other blasphemous abiuration of Christ transubstantiated, I leave to
his replye, to whom it belongs. If I would admire any point of infidelity,
or any desperate courses of Reformers, (which continual use, has made me long
since not to wonder at) I would exceedingly remain astonished at their impious
resolutions against the point of miracles. Some time they affirm them to be so
necessary, as they who without them would incroached into the offices of
Doctors, and preachers, to be, audaces, temerarios, haereticos etc.
presumptuous, rash, heretical, imitatours of Chore and Dathan, worthy for
their intolerable and deuilish arrogancy to descend into hell, taking more
upon them then Ihon Baptist, Zuingl. to. 2. Ecclesiastes fol. 52.53.54.
more then Peter, Paul, and Christ Jesus him self. To which saying of
Zuinglius, thus consents Brentius: Donum edendorum miraculorum hunc vsum
praecipue habet, quod sit testimonium and confirmatio doctrinae caelitus
reuelatae; Brent. in cap. 13. Luc. hom. 6. and hom. 76. de resurr. Christi ibid.

Luth. to. 4. in c. 35. Isa. Muscul. in loc. com 41. de nom. Dei page 394.

Act. 19. v. 14 15.16. Luth. to, 4. in c. 34. Isa.


The gift of woorking miracles has this use especialy, that it is a testimony
and confirmation of a doctrine revealed from heaven. To which also Luther, and
Musculus, expressly subscribe. Some time they are heauielie, and ernestly
impugning all them that require such proof of miracles at their hands
professing a new doctrine, unknown by their manifould confessions, since the
time of the Apostles. And wherefore should they not, they being known the Sonns
of Scena mentioned in the Acts, not able as Luther confesses to heal a lame
horse, or to woork other miracle then to draw after them to their licentious
doctrine great multitudes? Aptly to such miracle woorker, says S. Hierom: Ne
glorieris quod multos habeas discipulos. Quod mali acquiescunt sententiae tuae,
S. Hieron. con. Iouin. l. 2.
indicium voluptatis est. Non enim tam te loquentem probant, quam suis vicijs
fauent. Do not bragg that you have many disciples. That badd people delight in
your persuasion; it is a show of licentiousnes. For they do not so much approve
your speech, as they yield to their own vices. Aelian. l. 13. variar. hist.
And conformably thereto Socrates answered the harlot Castilla (obiecting
against him that with all his eloquence he could not divert any of her lovers
from her) saying; It was no marvel that they being perverse, were more aptly
drawn downward to vice, then upward to virtue.

At our miracles reported unto them, 1. Cent. 6. c. 13. p. 815. 2. page 16. 3.
page 814. 4. page 816. 5. page 810.
what exclamations have they! nay rather what blasphemies have they not? O
credulos and stupidos homines! O praestigias contra verbum Dei! O tenebras
ingentes! O (say the centuriasts) credulous and blockish people! O iuggling
contrary to the word of God! O owgly darkness! Vide Bezam volum. 3. p. 146. l.
61. Danaeum to. 1. resp. 785. to. 2. 1421. Call. in pref. Instit. Math. 12. S.
Aug. l. 10. de ciu. c. 18. S. Ambros. in Ser. de SS. Geruas. and Prothas S.
Hier. con. vivigila. S. Victor. l. 2 de persec. VVandal. Joan. 14. Mat. 10.
Mar. 6. Mar. 16. Psalm. vlt. Psalm. 14. v. 5. and v. 1.
etc. So again they and Calvin say, that our miracles are, either feigned, or
fantastical, or by witchcraft. As much said the pharisees of Christ's miracles,
the pagans, of them of the Christians, the Arians, Eunomians, Vigilantians
against the Catholics; as S. Ambrose, S. Hierom, S. Victor, etc. recompt.
These two assurances we have in defense of miracles to cownterpoise all that
Satan, and his sucklings, can object: First Christ's promises; that his
disciples should do the things he had done; and greater then he had; and that
they should cure the sick, raise the dead, cleanse the leopers, and cast out
devils. Secondly, that all chief Fathers are recompters of miracles, and
writers of admirable lives of Saints, in every age from Christ's times;
mitating S. Lukes admirable and miraculous relation of the acts of the
Apostles. Which David advises, saying; Laudate Dominum in Sanctis eius; praise
God in his Saints. As also animating them to follow such devotion, because;
Qui timentes Dominum glorificat, habitabit in tabernaculo and requiescet in
monte sancto Domini; He that glorifyeth them that fear our Lord, he shall
dwell in his tabernacle, and rest upon his holy hill. It is harder to name any
of the Fathers who omitteth to treat of miracles, then to specify them who are
reporters of them; Not only the ears, but the eyes of all Catholics M. Riders
objections in particular, without dwelling in confirming light to be in the
sun, or water in the sea. Only let the inconstancy of heresy not be
unknown also in this point. For Calvin some time says, that the Apostles;
Miracula doctrinae sigilla recte vocant; Do term rightly miracles, the seals
of Doctrine. in Hebr. 2.4. and 2. Cor. 11.12. and others; Fidem and scripturam
stabiliri fatentur; do confess that they establish Faith, and Scriptures.
Martyr in locis 38.41.489. Kimedon de verbo Dei. 225. If it be so, verily
protestants have great cause to distrust their doctrine, as being unsealed, and
vnestablished: For miracles they vterly are known to want: besyd the former,
whereof they should little glorify.

Rider. Part. 2. decreti aurei auns. 1. Q 1 page 119. Teneamus fratres.
146. It is strange to see the difference of the old Church of Rome, and this
last giddiepated Church of Rome. The last Church of Rome, thinks that Church
to be no true Church, unless she work miracles: but I pray you hear old
Romes censure of new Romes opinion, Praeter vnitatem and qui facit miracula
Glossa ibid: nihil ad vitam aeternam.
nihil est: in vnitate fuit populus Israel, and non faciebat miracula: praeter
vnitatem erant magi Pharaonis and faciebant similia Moysi: He that works
miracles without the unity of the Church does nothing: the Israelits were in
the unity of the Church, and did no miracles: the Magicians of Pharao were out
of the Church, and yet did like things to Moses. Therefore true miracles such
as Moises wrought, may be done by such as are not members of the true Church,
and so consequently miracles by old Romes confession, prove neither any
such wherein they are workt, to be the true Church, nor the workers true
members of the same. And then it follows: Petrus Apostolus etc. Peter the
apostle wrought miracles, and so did Simon Magus many things: yet there were
many Christians that could not work miracles, as Peter did, or as Simon did,
and not withstanding rejoiced that their names were written in heaven.

Now for the Catholics good, let us examine the faith of old Rome. The old
Church of Room taught us to be assured of our salvation in this life, The new
Church of Room to doubt of our salvation in this life.
The children of Israel wrought no miracles yet the true Church: Pharao his
Inchaunters workt miracles, yet were the false church. And that many of
Christ's flock that neither workt miracles as Peter did: yet they rejoice for
that they were assured that their names are written in the book of life. And
thus much for your own Pope against your own miracles.

And does not your own Doctor Lyra tell you plainly, that, and similiter fit
aliquando in ecclesia maxima deceptio populi in miraculis fictis,
factis a sacerdotibus vel eis ad haerentibus propter lucrum temporale, etc.
and so in like manner it comes to pass, Upon Dan. cap. 14. page. 222. but
Lira printed at Venice has.
that sometimes in the Church the people are often most shamefullie cosoned
with fained and false miracles devised by the priests or their followers, even
for a temporal gain: which shameful shifts of cosoning and covetous priests,
Lira wishes to be severely punished by the chief Prelates, and to expel it
and them out of the Church.

And your own Alex, de Hales part. 4. quaest. 53. member 4.
Irrefragabilis Doctor (for that is one of his titles) records more special
iugling then this, saying, In sacramento apparet caro, interdum humana
procuratione, interdum operatione diabolica. In your very Sacrament of the
Altar, there appears flesh, sometimes workt by the nimble conueiance of man,
sometimes by the working of the devil: so that if there be any flesh in the
Sacrament of the Altar, whether visible or invisible, it is either wrought
through the priests legerdemaine, or the devils cunning and craft. Now
Gentlemen, you have brought your miracles to a fair market, I trust after a
while the discreeet Catholics will nor give you a halfepennie for a hundred of
them.

Tharasius the President of that ydolatrous Council demanded of all the
learned in that Synod, why their images then did not work miracles. Nycen.
syn. 1. Act. 4.
Answer was made out of Gods book, that miracula non credentibus data sunt:
Miracles are only given to the unbelievers. If you be too busy with your
fained miracles, we will make a whole superstitious Synod yet to brand your
Church and her children in the forehead for unbelief.

And that reverend Chrysostom says, per signa cognoscebatur qui essent very
Christiani, Chrisost. Hom. 45. in Mat.
qui falsi: Nunc autem signorum operatio omnino leuata est: magis autem
inuenitur apud eos qui falsi sunt christiani

In old time it was known by miracles, who were the true Christians, and who
were the false. But now the working of miracles is taken away altogether, and
is rather found amongst those that be false disguised Christians. Note but two
things out of Chrysostom: First, miracles are now quite taken away: Next,
only they remain with false Christians in the false Church: so if your Church
will have miracles, by Chrisostomes censure she is a false Church, and all in
that Church be false Christians, But if your miracles were true, as all Gods
and Christ's miracles are, then the change must be as well of the forms as of
the substances. When Moses rod was turned into a serpent, it was a serpent in
deed, and no likeness of a rod remaining. Exodus 4.3. Iho. 2.9.10. These prove
your miracles to be false.
And so when Christ turned water into wine, there was neither color nor taste
of water remaining, and so in all true miracles. But you would have in your
Sacrament, a change of the substance of bread, yet the accidents, as
whiteness, roundnesse, thinness, taste, August. de ciuitate Dei lib. 22. cap.
8. line. 3. 4.

August. de Trinitate lib. 3. cap. 10.


and relish, notwithstanding remaining, which is impossible, and not only
contrary to the word of God, but also to the faith of those primitive fathers^
And Augustine urges this matter very Euangelicallie, saying: Quisquis adhuc
prodigia, vt credat inquirit, magnum est ipsum prodigium, qui mundo credente
non credit. Whosoever he be that yet requires wonders and miracles, to bring
him to believe the truth, is himself a wonderful miracle, that the world
believing, yet he remains still in vnbeelefe. And Augustine else where
tells you flatly, that in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper there is no
miracle: read him and follow him. And this is not to pass untouched, that as
your miracles are false in themselves, so they are invented and done to a most
wicked end, which is to confirm your false doctrine of real presence,
Purgatory, praying to Images, and the like trash, which are clean contrary
to Christ's miracles: for their end was twofold: the first, to confirm our
faith in Christ's divinity: and the other, Ioh. 10.30.31,
to assure our souls of salvation through his name. These things are written,
that ye might believe that Jesus is that Christ the Son of God, and that in
believing ye might have life through his name.

What miracles are reproved by Catholic writers.
Fitzsimon.
146. IF you have duly considered the style of M. Rider (as perhapp you might
hardly find any, more worthy for sowndnes, and method, to be considered) you
may find among other points, that when our decretals, seem to favor him,
then they are old, and every parcel of them is a Popes Canon; and when any
late Doctors are by him alleged against us, of our own profession, then they
are ancient; and contrariwyse when any who lived long before such, are produced
by us they are termed late. One only brief example is to be at this present
specifyed. When Lyra, who lived anno 1320. is thought to deny the 6. Chapter of
S. Ihon; then is it said, Old Lira says, that the 6. of Ihon etc. treats
not of the Sacrament. Contrariwyse, when we had brought three whole Concils
condemning Berengarius, they are excepted against, as being late; although
according his own computation they had been three hundred years elder then
Lira. He has the best gift in that, to make old young, affirmations negations,
disproofs approbations, truethes falsifications, decrees denials, and to
affirm all to be for his purpose how assuredly soever he is oppressed thereby,
(like Tarleton who affirmed, that his mistres casting a chopping knyfe at his
head for some proffred sawcines, had done it for a favor) that lightly may be
found, among any writers of this time. Now then for his first allegation, and
all his inferences thereupon, (although it is not to be granted, that
Magitians, or Sectarists, can work true miracles) if in a liberal disposition
I accord unto them; what is he the better? Let the faith of old Rome (the
phrase is so pleasant as it is reiterated) condemn miracles done out of the
unity of the Church: does not the faith of late Rome, as ernestly condemn
them also? Does not S. Paul condemn the miracles of transferring mountayns,
etc. if one be not in the unity of Charity? 1. Cor. 13,
What needed then so frivolous a labor, to so small a benefit in seeking out
impertinent sentences in defect of direct resolutions; of which no syllable
belongs to mend the bringers cause, or to mar it of their impugners. Thus
much at least we gratefully receive from our own S. Augustine (who was noe Pope
but of M. Riders making) not against our miracles, but against them that are
not in the unity of the Church; Such as Puritans are, not only in respect of
the universal Church, but also in respect of their own first protestant
synagogue: So far is it, that S. Augustins words are against us, that they
always styng, and destroy them principaly, that distort them against us. And
when you affirm, these words: thus much from your own Pope, and from the
old Church of Rome; how advised are you, to deny that the Pope of the old
Church of Rome, is not our own Pope? I pray you to soder these two together:
your own Pope; not your own Pope. Concerning the allegation out of Lira, I am
persuaded as of the altar: Vide number. ^07.
Yet you blamed me for adding the word blessed before Sacrament, because it is
not in the authoure. You infer next like your self, upon this proposition:
some time by abuse there are apparitions: ergo, if there be any fleash in the
Sacrament of the altar, whether visible or invisible, it is wrought through the
priests legerdemain, or the devils cunning, and craft. First, without doubt the
sequel is Riderial: that is, far beyond being ridiculous, and preposterous.
For if it were allowable, would follow as reasonably: some time M. Rider has
been known in London to use legerdemain and all to have abused diverse by the
deceitful suggestions of the devil: therefore in all other places, whether he be
visible, or invisible, he is to be accounted not seen, but by legerdemain, and
deceit of the devil. If your cursing were no better then your discoursing, you
would as badly deserve the name of the one, as you are far (and for all I
could understand, ever was) from obtaining the other. Secondly, do not you
start from your word in the 35. number, and in your Rescript, that as we
believe to receive Christ realy, so you do also? yet now, you profess that you
do not believe him to be received visibly, or inuisibly in the Sacrament, and
that if he be therein visibly or inuisibly, it is by legerdemayne? Can he be
realy, and yet nether visibly, nor invisibly?

Not to be unsuitable in your proceeding, you make the next stuff of one liuerie
with the precedent, by diverse dishonest dealings. First you say, that Tharasius
was President in that Council: which makes the 195. untruth. The 195. untruth.
For he was nether first, second, nor third therein: as appears in the
begyning of the first act. Secondly by the 196. untruth, The 196. untruth.
you affirm, that it was an idolatrous Council. It is a puritaninical
propriety to be saucy, and malapert toward Concils, and Parlaments: The 197.
untruth
as is before testified. Thirdly, it is the 197. untruth, that Tharasius
demanded any such matter, he only propounding it as an objection by these
words; Sed quispiam dixerit, etc. Some one would say, The 198. untruth.
By the 198. untruth you add, the word, only. Whereby might follow, if what
was granted to the not believers, the same was granted only to them: then M.
Rider unless he be an unbeliever has no eyes, head, arms; no wit, or moral
honesty: because all these are granted to the unbelievers; which by his
addition, is all one, and to be granted only unto them. And consequently, he
having all the same, must by his own words be an unbeliever, he partaking
such things, as by his deduction, only unbelievers have. But M. Rider, if it
may please you, let Christ him self expound the saying of miracles, or signs,
to be granted for the unbelievers, not to exclude them from the believers,
(for says he; Signa antem eos qui crediderint haec sequentur etc. Mar: 16.17.
But such as believe, these signs shall follow) and consequently only to
import, that they are granted to unbelievers to convict them of falsehood; Yet
remaining with believers not to such intent, but to confirm, and confort them
in their religion. To which end the words of S. Augustine are appliable, which
shortly after you allege, and misalleadge. He that yet requires prodigious
wonders to believe thereby, M. Rider makes false latin in S. Augustins
allegation. Ipse, not ipsum.
is him self a great prodigious wonder, who believes not, the whole world
believing. We require not wonders to believe thereby, but inioye them by Christ's
promise; to assure the weak, and confort the feeble in faith. Good Lord! What
benifit can your belief receive, by this sentence of S. Augustine; not only no
world, but no contry, nor no city, nor no house, being now, or ever before,
intierly of your belief? Easily might I answer S. Chrysostom, if any such
matter were in that place. But it makes the 199. untruth, The 199. untruth.
that he so says.

Likewise it is a Riderian sequel: signs are found among those that are false
Christians: Ergo she is a false Church, and has all false Christians, which
will have miracles. First, it is against Christ's former words, that believers
should not want signs. Secondly, if the sequel be allowable, that what Church
soever will have miracles, both it, and all therein are false; the Lutheran,
Staphil. in respon. Con. Scihmidelin page 414. Lindan. dial. 3. c. 1.
Dubitantij. Bolsec in vita Caluini cap. 13.
and Caluinian Churches are false, and all therein, because Luther coueted to
work a miracle upon one possessed, and Calvin by raising his man Brule from
dissembled death; Luther to his own extremity, and Calvin to the true death
of his man. Then also Foxes Church, and all thereof, are false by forgerie of
some of his martyrs speaking without tongs, burning without pain, and being
martyred and yet alive long after. As Vide Alan Cop. Dial, 6. Page 697.
Fox had no other excuse, but to confess him self deceived; and to rail
against them that warned him thereof, calling them Carpers, Fox Acts and Mon.
page 1114.
wranglers, exclaimers, deprauers, whisperers, raylers, quarrell-pyckers,
Corner-creepers, fault-finders, Spider-catchers. etc. Now as I said, by M.
Riders being of Foxes Church, according to unity and verity of doctrine, as he
says him self; and Fox seeking false miracles, and martyrdoms, as hereby
appears, to his Church: it must follow, by M. Riders own sequel, that such
Church and all thereof, are false. Why should such unfortunate disputers, every
moment made to confownd them selves, intermedle at all with matters of learning?

He proceeds in the same vain, and vanity of reasoning, saying: All God and
Christ's miracles (as if they were not all one, in the point of miracles) do
change as well the (accidental) forms, as the substances; as it happened in
Moises rodd, and the water turned into wine. If any would bidd him prove that
Moises rodd did not retain the leinthe it had before, after it was made a
Serpent; or the water in Cana Galileae, the quantity and moistnes of water
when it was turned to wine; to what plundge would he be driven? You might hear
him say, it were impossible, and contrary to the word of God, and faith of the
primative Fathers: but for other proof, you should as soon wrest it out of a
block. And if it could be proved, that in them God had changed both substances
and forms, as it can never, why should a general conclusion (contrary to his
late confession, in the 144. number, that learning did not allow such
reasoning) be drawn out of particulars? When Christ resuscitated three dead,
he changed their substances making them of carcases to be living creatures:
Mat. 9. Mar. 5. Luc. 8.
yet he changed not their forms. So when he made bread to become his body; he
changed the substance of bread, but not the external form. Contrarywyse when
he was borne, when he walked on the Sea, when he became invisible both at their
seeking to throw him down a rock, and to make him king, when he issued the
sepulcher, when he entered among his shutt up disciples, when he ascended, he
altered the natural forms or qualities of his body, but not the substance
thereof. Whereby appears, that according to his pleasure, and omnipotency, he
may alter the one without the other, and as much, and as little, as it pleases
him. As also that it is the 200. and it a blasphemous untruth, The 200.
untruth.
that such change was, or is impossible, to his divine majesty. Whereof peruse
what is said in the examination of the Creed, upon the word Almighty.

Whereas he says S. Augustine urges this matter very euangelicaly, M. Rider is
very prodigious among Christians, in not believing according to the belief of
the whole world; or which is all one, in the Catholic belief. So that he
might fill his papers, he cared not how little important, or how much
impertinent, how little to his benifit, or how much to his discredit, and
confusion, would be his sayings. According to which his vain of vain writing,
he adds, that S. Augustine tells flatly, that in the Sacrament of the Lords
supper, there is no miracle. The 201. untruth. S. August. in Psalm. 33.
O, what a flatt lie for the 201. untruth, is used toward S. Augustine? He that
amplye, and professedly testifyeth, Christ to have borne him self in his own
hands, not metaphoricaly, but according the leter; and delivers all other
documents recorded in the 116. number; how is he made to doubt of a miracle, in
the miracle of miracles? Yet of S. Augustins opinion concerning miracles, I
would wish Bellarmine to be read, c. 14. de notis Ecclesiae.

And if S. Augustine had ever otherwise surmised; yet the same had been an
opinion repugnant to Protestantry. Calvin lib. de coena. Anno 1552. Idem l. de
optima. ineund. concor. rat. fol. 97. Call. l. 4. Instit. cap. 17. n. 32. Ibid.
number. 24. and n. 10. 11. Vide Eezam Creoph. fol. 66. 67.
For Calvin him self acknowledges; hoc mysterium tam esse sublime, vt nequeat
ingenio, aut cogitatione comprehendi; this mystery to be so supernal or
sublime, that it can not by wit, or conceit, be comprehended. Again: I am not
(says he) ashamed to confess this mystery to be higher, then that I can
either comprehend it with my wit, or declare it with my tongue. A little before he
says, it is a slandre of the adversary, that he did measure this mystery,
with the squyre of humain reason; concluding to his difciple M. Rider in these
word: Christ truly, with the substance of his fleash, and blood, does give
life to our sowls. In these few words, who so perceaueth not many miracles to
be contained, plus quam stupidus est; is more then a dolt. I would be loath to
have been such Godfather to M. Rider, as his own father in God makes him
self, by giving him such an discourteous name, for his denying miracles in this
mystery. The Zuinglians profess no less; Hoc mysterium tam esse sublime, In
sua Co^fessione Gal licana page 35.
vt nostros sensus omnes, and totum naturae ordinem superet; This mystery to
be so high, that it surmownteth all our senses, and all the course of nature.
What needs greater confusion, or disproofe, then when his own ghostly
fathers, pillars of his profefsion, namely Calvin, and Zuinglius, contradict
his assertions? To the residue there needs no answer. If any other had M.
Rider at such advantages; how much might he exaggerat his ouerweening him
self, in thinking his reach naturaly to have attained that comprehension of
this Sacrament, wherein others find such sublimitie, as to acknowledge it most
miraculous.

Eusebius recounted, that in the persecution under Severe, Catho. Priests. lib.
5. cap. 1.
that it was a great accusasion against Christians that they did eat man's
flesh, because they believed that they did receive the body of Christ.
147. GEntlemen, in that book are five and twenty chapters, Rider.
and not one word of this matter in any of those: and again, you mistake the
time, for Seuerus then governed not. If it were under Seuerus, it should then
be in the sixth book where you shall find forty five chapters, yet there also
is not one word of this. Yet, if you mark this that you bring against us, if
it were to be found in Eusebius, it makes nothing against us: for though the
Pagans were as gross in the matter of the Sacrament, as Nicodemus was in the
matter of regeneration, it is neither miracle nor wonder, but a thing too
common now and then. And for true Christians to eat Christ's flesh
spirituallie by faith, is or ought to be no miracle in the Church, but the
practice of the Church.

Whether M. Rider understands any hard Latin.
Fitzsimon.
147. OF M. Riders skill in Greek, whereby he affirmed Christ to have spoken
greek (who never spoke other language during his abode in this mortal life
then Hebrew, as not conuersing with Ethnicks, or Gentiles, such as then the
Grecians were) as if greek and hebrew had been all one, as his knowledge in
them both is all one, we have already treated. His skill also in Scripturs,
Cowncils, ancient Fathers, Scholasticks, Histories, grammar, ortographie; is
not obscurly notifyed. At least, he that glorifyeth of his grammarian
travails, he that made the latin dictionarie (whereunto he added nothing
formerly vnuulgar, but ridiculous words) is he ignorant of the latin tongue? Let
it appear by his saying, that Eusebius. has not one word in the place by us
alleged how Christians were accused for eating man's fleash. In the same place
by us cited, thus relates Eusebius. the foresaid accusation used by Infidels
against Christians; Thiesteas coenas, and incaestus Oedipodis falso commenti
sunt; they forged falslye (against Christians) to have Thiestes refectio^s, or
suppers, etc. By which metaphor, is insinuated their eating of childrens
fleash: because Atreas had compelled Thiestes, for a heinous offense, to eat
this own children. Which figurative locution, being beyond M. Riders
capacity, he denied Eusebius. to have any such matter. Before you betake your self
to new grammarian labors, or dictionarie inventions, learn to understand a
plain metaphorical relation of a matter, that your denials thereof, because it
is not in plain dunstable terms, be not reputed, if not profowndly impudent,
yet profowndly ignorant, or contrarywyse. When you in your first sermon in
Dublin, five times produced or made long Sculptile, which showld have been
short; and not long after brufed, and broke Priscians head, in saying templum
Ianum, for templum Iani; whereof the L. Chancellor rebuking your audacious
temeritie in intermedling with that papistical language, unacquainted to such
capacities, was it not your part to forbear from intermedling therwithall?
Why would you wade further in so unfortunate a foorde, wherein you had been so
publicly ouerplunged? Since friendly cownseil would not avail, but that being
by your name a Caualiero, you would also be aduenterous; I will instruct your
self, and others, (who perhapps will be therefore more thankful) of some few as
great slipps, and tripps, of ignorance in latin testified in this discourse, as
might wreast shame out of impudence it self.

Omitting in your very dedicatorie epistle, the saying of Poscolo, to contain
false latin, not by his ignorant composition, but by your bad application, by
saying of Princes and men of state, deferant aures eius; whereas, eius, being
the singular number, can never be in concord, with Princes or men of state
being the plural number (which first sentence is answerable to your first
sermon). First, where you treat of active and passive doctrine; you affirm,
that eis signifies, to you. yet it is against all skill in latin, for it
signifies, to them; and not eis, but vobis, in all owld grammarian labors, is
answerable, to you. Secondly, in your margent upon Lira his supposed saying,
the sixth Chap. of S. Ihon not to concern the B. Sacrament, you say: quod
nondum est non datur priuilegium; where as you should say, non dat priuilegium.
A gross absurdity in a professor of skill in latin; especialy in him who
delivered a discourse of Christ's doctrine rebownding from active to passive, and
back again, as a tenise ball from wall to wall. But it was Gods judgment, that
he should be found stumbling into a passive for an active, that had made
Christ's discourse impertinently wandering from active to passive. In the 67.
number, he interprets, neque est credibile; to be it is credible: which is to
make a negation an affirmation, it being expressly, it is not credible: In the
69. number is showed, how he cowld never understand the latin of
transubstantiation: considering that it being so ryfe in writers, he confesses
he could never find it. An other instance is in your Rescript, in these
words: all which I pray you wish him to mend them, and multis alijs. To mend
multis alijs, is latin woorthly to be much mended, as being against all
grammarian concord, that emendare should govern other then ane accusative
case. Wherefore it should be, multa alia.

Several other incongruities in speaking, and interpreting, are formerly
specifyed; and these so far beyond al excusation of not only vnskillfulnes,
but also blindness in the latin tongue, that I may seem to deal favorably in not
ryding M. Rider more vehemently in this point. Accept therefore kyndly, that
omitting other exclamations, I register up the 203. untruth, The 203. untruth.
whereby Eusebius. was denied to report what we had alleged. So also, whereas it is
of a greater antiquity which Eusebius. repeateth in the fifth book of his
history, then in the sixth: what frivolous exception was it, to say the time
was mistaken, if not only in Seuerus time, but also before, the accusation of
Pagans (that we did eat a child's fleashe because of our eating the B.
Sacrament) was usual? I say, usual; as before both Eusebius. time, and Seuerus,
appears in S. Justin, and Tertullian. To which effect, thus flowted in
Minutius Felix, Justin. in Apol. 2. ad Antonin. in fine. Tertull. in Apol. c.
7. Vide Prateol. verbo Machuetes number. 7. Minut. Felix, in Octau.
a Pagan, and in his derision a perfect Puritan, saying: An infant, shrouded in
a cake of flower, is given to them that are made Christians. O, how well does
this Infidels words, concur with M. Riders blasphemies, against our breaden
God, our Wafre God, etc! what sweet predecessors these men have of their
doctrine, and dealing! But of this we have treated in the 111. number.

Rider.
148. But if you had read Eusebius your self diligently, you should have found
that in the fifth book and seventh chapter, he would have told you that then
miracles ceast, Ex l^b. 2. Iraenei. cap. 58.
and were not in Gods Church: and he produces old Father Iraeneus for
confirmation of the same. You bring in Eusebius to maintain miracles, and
Eusebius himself deni^th them. This is your old fash^on, to enforce the
fathers to speak not what they would, but what you please: but read that place
well, and remember that Eusebius records that Church wherein miracles are
wrought, not to be Gods church: and so by his opinion your Church of Rome must
be planted in the suburbs of Babylon, not (in Ciuitate Dei) within the gates
of Sion.

Whether Eusebius affirms true Miracles to have ceased.
Fitzsimon.
148. WHo would not think this report of Eusebius. impertinent in this place,
seeing our allegation concerned not miracles? The 204. untruth.
First then it is the 204. palpable, and pregnant untruth, that Eusebius. denies
Miracles, in that Chapter, or any where else. Therefore, let these words of the
said Chapter be witness, whether M. Rider has not defied all truth. Daemonaes
enim alijs solid ac vere expellunt, ita vt illi ipsi a malis spiritibus
repurgati ad fidem peruenerint, and in ecclesiam recepti sint: alij vero
futurorum praescientiam, visiones, ac prophetica vaticinia habent, alij morbis
laborantes per manuum impositionem curant, and sanitati restitunt. Some do
cast forth devils assuredly and truly, so that them selves purged from bad
spirits have come to belief, and been received into the Church: others have
foreknowledge of future things, visions, and Prophetical predictions: others by
imposition of hands do heal the sick. Who do mistearme good evil, and evil
good, light darkness and darkness light, why should they not make affirmations to
be negations, and disproofs to be approbations? Is it because Eusebius. affirms,
in S. Ireneus times there were miracles, therefore he denies them after? Speak
clearly, and honestly, M. Rider, did not you fear your conscience, when you
wrote this autheur to affirm the Church wherein Miracles are wrought, not to be
Gods Church? But since you have appealed to Eusebius; to him you shall go. I will
once again exalt the baker to the Pillorie, and make no other then the witness
by him self alleged, to nail his own ears.

First, M. Rider says, Eusebius. to deny miracles in Gods Church. Eusebius. him
self says the contrary, in these words; Eusebius. l. 5. c. 3.
Aliae multe miraculosae diuinae Chrismatis operationes quae per varias adhuc
Ecclesias perficiebantur, etc. Many other miraculous operations of divine
grace, which in diverse Churches as yet were done. etc. Lib. 6. c. 29.
Secondly he tells how a pigeon descended from heaven upon Flauian, to have
him chosen Pope. Thirdly he relates, how Constantin the great and all his
army, did behold a bright cross above the sun, with this inscription; Lib.
1. de vita Constantini.
By this sign thou shall overcome. And how Christ him self commanded him to
have such a sign borne against his enemies for a salfegard. I report me to all
mynds, and understandings, whether this was not a miracle, and such a one as to
the breakers of Crosses should be dreadful. Wherein, what portion M. Rider
deserves, is before signified. For breuities sake I omit to show how Eusebius.
puts many other nails in his ears, being assured that he can not be
lightly delivered from these few, and others before rehearsed.

A Jew present at mass, which Saint Basil did celebrate, Catho Priests.
Amphil. and Guitmu^dus in vita Basilij.
was converted by seeing a child divided in the blessed Sacrament.
149. I Find in Basil page 171. that he writ thirty chapters ad sanctum
Amphilochium Iconij Episcopum, but your Munkish Amphilocius I never saw, Rider.
neither do I care, because he is a forger of false miracles, and thus I
prove it. The fabler says, the Jew saw a child divided in the sacrament:
that could not be Christ, for he was a perfect man before his passion. And if
it were any besides Christ, or if it had been any in Christ his likeness, it
must be done, as your own Author said a little before, either by man's
slight, or the devils illusion. But to be brief and yet plain, A lier has
need of a good memory.
this must needs be a very shameful lie:

Whether Christ being a Man, may notwithstanding appear in the lykenes of a
Child.
149. IN this discourse, Fitzsimon. Metaphrast de Arsenio. Paulus Diac. de S.
Gregorio. Paschas. Abb. de Prasbytero Plegijs. Villanaeus de S. Ludouico.
Vincent. lib. 30. spec. c. 24. Guitmundus lib. 3.
because there is great sport tendered by M. Rider, I will first breefly
satisfy the reader which is desirous to learn the truth, that not only these
former, but many others recompt, how Christ visibly appeared in the B.
Sacrament, and commonly in lykenes of a Child. As Metaphrast in the life of
Arsenius; Paulus Diaconus in the life of S. Gregory; Paschasius abbott
treating of the Priest Plegijs; Villaneus in the life of S. Jews, etc. I
ouerronne S. Vincent, and Granado, to avoid tediousnes. Now let us attend first
how M. Rider proves Amphilocius a forger. Because, says he, Christ was a man,
and therefore could not appear divided like a child. As good an argument might
be made against the Acts of the Apostles, that Christ could not appear to S.
Stephen standing, we believing him to be sitting at the right hand of his
Father, until he make his enemies his footstool. Likewise also against S.
Paul, that he did not see Christ in the way to Damasco, for the same reason.
Alas M. Rider, if Angels who have no bodies can appear young: why should
Christ's body deminish his power, that he can not do the same?

His second proof that this apparition is a shameful lie, is because the
Mass was a patching and hatching (says he) four or five hundred years after
S. Basils death; and therefore that S. Basil could not say Mass: which had it
been true, whereas S. Basil dyed before the year 400. after Christ, it must
follow that the Mass was perfectly hatched and patched before the year 900.
after Christ: which was 300. years before Innocent the third, so often by M.
Rider protested to be the hatcher thereof. So that him self almost in every
point is a witness that, him self is untrue. But that he had great reason to
grant this to be the 205. untruth; The 205. untruth.
I will demonstrat from the Apostles times, true and perfect Mass, in
substance, ceremonies, and name, to have been frequented in Gods Church, as
far as before my coming to the particular treating thereof, which insueth, any
might lawfully expect at my hands.

Rider.
150. For how could Basil that lived about the year of our Lord 367. say your
mass, that was in hatching up and patching together at least four hundred or
five hundred years after his death? Tom. 6. Biblioth. patru^ in lib.
Guitmunmundi Archip. de veritate Euch. li. 2. page 405.
as shall (God willing) be proved unto you out of your own books, in my
next Treatise of the mass: and so you feed the Catholics with these lying
legends, in stead of holy scriptures.

(a) As for Guitmundus, he has neither one word of Saint Basils life, nor of
your miracle, yet he has some other thing as folish and as untrue, or else he
had not been made Archbishop for his pains, wherein he greatly seruiced the
Pope.

How ancient the Mass is.
Fitzsimon.
150. IT is known often, and sufficiently, that M. Rider has bound him self
to recant, if I make good by Scripturs, or Fathers of the first five hundred
years, the doctrine we profess in the Controversies by him objected; Hesich.
in Leuit. l. 4. c. 9. lib. 10. c. 13.
among which, the Mass is one of the principal. Hesichius first, of the
Apostles in general, teaches, Idem habet Epiphan. here is. 79.
that on VVhitsonday they accomplished what was written in Leuitic. and
Deutronomie of the new and voluntary oblation, when they celebrated the sacred
mysteries: which the Acts of the Apostles do auerre in these words, (...),
Acts. 13.
they were offering Sacrifice to our Lord. Which also Erasmus confesses to have
been Mass. And it is proved by the whole Grecian Church, and Fathers, upon
this text, not otherwise tearming the Mass then a Liturgy. This Hesichius,
lived within the first four hundred years. But particulars shall convict and
certify the same. S. Isidor. in effic. Eccles. l. 1. c. 15. A^dias in vita S.
Petri.
S. Isidor (and he also a Father within the limitation) says: Ordo Romanus
Missae, primum a S. Petro institutus est; The (Romain) order of the Mass, was
first ordained by S. Peter. And Abdias confirms, that he said Mass in
Naples, and Antioche. These two witneses, are also within the limitation. Vide
authore^ de Duplici Martyrio. Vide Garetium.
S. Andrew in a certain epistle to the Church of Achia, (which epistle before
100. years was mentioned by S. Wolphelmus abbot, S. Bernard, and Algerus) thus
testifyeth him self to have said Mass; S. Andreas in ep. Ecclesiae Achaiae.
Omnipotenti Deo (qui vinus and verus est) ego omni die sacrificio non thuris
fumum, nec taurorum mugientium carnes, sed agnum immaculatum quotidie in altari
Crucis sacrifico, cuius carnes postquam omnis populus Credentium manducauerit
and eius sanguinem biberit, agnus qui sacrificatus est integer perseuerat and
viuus: I every day do sacrifice to omnipotent God, (who is living and true)
not the smooke of frankensense, nor the fleashe of looing bulls, but the
immaculat lamb in the altar of the cross: whose fleash after the whole
multitude of believers have eaten, the lamb which is sacrificed remains
intier and living. This testimony is to clear to need larger interpretation.
Thirdly, S. James, by testimony of S. Chrysostom, and the Council of
Constantinople, was the first that left in writing the mystical sacrifice.
Illyricus lib. Missa Lat. page 73.
Which his only liturgy the Sirians do use upon solemnities. Nether does this
want the very approbation of Flaccus Illyricus, so great a Protestant,
confessing both such lyturgie mentioned, and the Syrians having thereof. Abdias
in vita S. Mathaei.
S. Mathiew was killed at the altar saying Mass, says Abdias, whom Julius
Affricanus interpreted.

What say you M. Rider, are these lawful proofs or not? You will perhaps
except against them, that the express name of the Mass, is not contained in
them. Wherein you would show your self willing to wrangle. For as S. Augustine
says: What is a more perverse part, S. August. epist. 174.
then to strive about the name, where the thing it self is certainly known?
And you would think him to cavil in the close of S. Patricks, who when any
thing is well affirmed of M. Deane, would deny it to be understood of you,
because forsooth your name Ihon Rider, is not expressed. But because I am
willing to grant all your honest motions, I will condescend, that you shall
have as ancient evidences for the name of Mass. Yet breefly; because in the
peculiar treatise of the Mass, you know, S. Ignat. epist. ad Smirnens.
I particularly treat thereof. S. Ignatius that glorious Martyr, says; Non
licet sine Episcopo neque offerre, neque sacrificium immolare, neque Missas
celebrare; It is not lawful without the Bishop to offer, nor to Sacrifice, nor
to celebrat Masses. S. Clemens epist. 8. S. Iuo. lib. 2.
The same is ordained by S. Clement. S. Higinus Martyr, says; Omnes basilicae
cum Missa debent semper consecrari; All Churches ought to be consecrated with a
Mass. S. Fabianus Martyr, (whom as I showed you before, Eusebius. by your self
alleged, testifyeth to have been chosen Pope, Vide Garetium.
by a dove discending upon him) says; Sacrificium non est accipiendum de manu
sacerdotis, qui orationes vel actiones, and reliquas obseruationes in Missa
secundum ritum obseruare non potest; The sacrifice is not to be received at
that Preests hands, who can not accomplish the prayers, actions, and other
observations in the Mass. Because I affect, and follow, the most succinct
discourse possible, I remitt the residue belonging to this point, which
already is made more then evident, to the article of the Mass shortly
insueing. Now let M. Rider be demanded, whether the Mass was hatched and
patched four or five hundred years after S. Basil, In his rescript toward the
midst.
or no? Yes says he, in his Rescript. Durandus, Durantus, Guido, were the
Mass fownders. O Muses! what stepp-mothers have you been to M. Rider? He that
consented that it was hatched and patched within five hundred years after S.
Basil, does thereby affirm, and say, that it was five hundred years before the
founders thereof (for Durandus, and Durantus (if they were diverse) and Guido,
were no less then a thousand years after S. Basil) or else that him self
failed in the antiquity thereof no less then 500. years! Homo homini lupus, a
man is a wolf to a man. That is, M. Rider is continualy made as his own
wolf, to devour him self. In the Rescripts 44. number, the like disproofe is
affoorded by Kemnitius.

Catho Priests. Amb. oration. 1. de obit. Satyri.
Ambrose speaks of a happy preservation of one from drowning, for devotion
toward the same.
151. IN deed Ambrose Tom. 5. page 720. writes a treatise of the death of his
brother Satyrus, Rider.
wherein he shows the great mercy of God always toward his Church and
children in preserving them from danger: and amongst the rest, he brings in
an example of a great number of passengers that in a storm suffered
shipwreck, amongst whom there was one seeing the danger, desired of some
fellow passenger, to give him some part of the mystical bread (for in those
days it was a superstitious custom wickedlie tolerated, to carry some part
of the sacramental bread about them) which piece of bread when he had
enclosed fast in his garment, he leapt over board and did swim safe a shore.
This now is your wonderful miracle, out of which let us see what may be
gathered. The best note (says a learned writer) is, that he was a good
swimmer. But to overthrow your miracle, I will allege Ambrose his own words
in that place: First, he calls it but only fidei auxilium, a help of his
faith. And if he had thought it had been Christ, as you untruly teach, he
would have called it the Author and finisher of his faith, and therefore he
took your Host not to his maker, as you teach, nor his present preserver, but
a strengthening of his faith. And that you may see it is true which I say,
afterward he calls it Diuinum fidelium sacramentum, the divine Sacrament of
the faithful; And therefore he thought not as you do, that Christ was localie
in the sacrament.

And again, there was no miracle in this, because other passengers that had
not such mystical bread, escaped safe to shore as well as he: for if the
having of that Host preserved him, the lack of the Host should have drowned
the rest. If your host cannot do the lesser much less the greater.
And it is very strange that the Catholics being so wise men in all other
matters, should be so sotted in this, as to think that a Wafercake consecrated
by a Priest or Pope, should preserve a man from drowning in water, when it
cannot preserve any good follow from being drunk with wine. But to the rest
as they follow.

Whether S. Ambrose esteemed it a miracle by the B. Sacrament, that his
brother was not drowned.
151. I Inform you Readers, Fitzsimon.
that M. Rider has formed in this parcel of his discourse, certain arguments.
Which being known, I admire, if you prepare not your attentions as carefully,
as to hear a new play; you having had so good demonstrations of his talent in
arguing. But first according to his custom, he begins at a manifest
untruth, which amownteth to the 206. that he that was by S. Ambrose his
testimony preserved, The 206. untruth.
desired but of some fellow passenger to give him some part of the mystical
bread, whereas S. Ambrose says, that it was a demand made to them, quos
initiatos esse cognouerat, whom he had known in holy ordres, to give him,
diuinum illud fidelium Sacramentum, that divine Sacrament of the faithful,
(note M. Riders fidelity, which translated these words, to signify only,
some part of the mystical bread) not that he might curiously behowld or view
(in which words S. Ambrose alludeth to the presumption of the Bethsamits, of
whom God distroyed 5070. for looking into his arck, which is an assurance that
he would not have his mysteries vulgarly known to the people) the hidden
secrecies, 1. Reg. 6.19.
but that he might obtain the help of his belief. For he caused it to be tied
up, and bownd it about his neck, and so did cast him self into the sea, not
seeking a planke of the dissolved shipp by which he might be helped, because he
coueted the sauegard of only faith. Nether did his confidence fail him, nor
his opinion deceive him. To conclude, preserved from the waves, and brought to
land, etc.

In this discourse, so distinctly, and religiously penned by S. Ambrose, M.
Rider says there is no miracle contained. If you covet to know the cause of
such his knowledge; he will tell you, because it was only a note of a good
swimmer. O subtle conceit! But his text controwleth his gloss, by insinuating
that he was, in portum euectus, borne into the haven, and that first, not
mentioning that he did, or could swim. His second proof is, that S. Ambrose
or his brother did not conceive, diuinum illud fidelium Sacramentum, that
divine Sacrament of the faithful, to be Christ. What is his reason? Because
forsooth, it is called fidei auxilium, a help of faith, and not the author and
finisher. of faith. O gentle and wise exception! S. Ambrose says, that his
brother coueted the divine Sacrament of the faithful; Vt fidei suae
consequeretur auxilium; That he might obtain a help to his faith; and M. Rider
assures, (when he had undertaken to allege S. Ambrose his own words) that
he calls it but a help of his faith: leaving out S. Ambrose his own words,
diuinum illud fidelium Sacramentum, that divine Sacrament of the faithful.
Mark it well, good Sir; First that S. Ambrose calls his brothers deliverer,
the divine Sacrament of the faithful, truly and realy tied about his brothers
neck, and not only in his M. Rider wresteth: what sequel could be more
Riderian, or ridiculous, then that Christ might not be the autheur of our
faith, because he is the help of our faith? Next he says: Ambrose calls it,
after, (according to truth, it should be said, before,) the divine Sacrament of
the faithful: therefore he thought not as we do that Christ was localy in the
Sacrament. Was there ever such a therefore? But none may gather fyggs of
brambles, nor other arguments from Puritan capacities. The answer thereto,
shall be only to direct the reader to the 112. number, where we have showed S.
Ambrose perspicuously testifying his opinion, that Christ is localy in the B.
Sacrament, and that therefore it is the divine Sacrament of the faithful,
because it contains his divine body. A third argument is, that in the former
narration there was no miracle, because others were saved as well as S. Ambrose
his brother. Good still. I answer first, it was more miraculous in Satyrus the
brother of S. Ambrose, because it is recorded that he had saved him self and
others, and not others him. Secondly, that others might be more skillfull then
he in swimming; and therefore that his delivery might have been more miraculous
then theirs. Minut. Foelix, in Octau.
A fourth blasphemous argument is, that the B. Sacrament (he calls it, as the
Pagan in Minutius Foelix n. 147. toward the end; a wafre cake, consecrated by
a Priest) could not save any from drowning, because it can not save any from
being drunk; For answer I only revoke to memory the blasphemous saying of the
Jews, against Christ: he could save others, but him self he can not save. So
M. Rider faith Iewishly, Mat. 27.42.
that because he does not save some from being drunk, therefore he could not
save others from being drowned. Were it not as lawful to say, Christ saved not
him self: therefore he could not save others. Fie on these Pagan phrases, and
Jewish blasphemies.

152. So simple people foolishlie carry about them hollie Bread. Crosses,
Crucifixses, Rider.
agnus Deis, and such trash.

Whether Crosses, holy Bread, or agnus Deis be allowable.
152. IF M. Rider does not continualy tender occasions to confound his cause,
Fitzsimon.
let this point among the rest bear witness. In his margent, this he writes:
So simple people foolishly carry about them holy bread, Crosses, Crucifixes,
agnus Deis, and such trashe. If his own argument were good, that mispelling
does demonstrat ignorance of the thing it self: it is clear, that he
mispelling holy bread, and agnus Deis, knows not what he is writing against.
First concerning Crosses, notwithstanding that England in all standards,
flaggs, and targetts honors them; that Elizabeth late Queen retained them
in her Chapels; that M. Rider him self amply assured them to be traitors no
less who abuse the picture, robe, stamp, or standard (such as the Cross is of
Christ) then they who assault the very person of the Prince: yet here he says,
it is simple that golden mowthed Father, and else where, that Reverend
Chrysostom.

Omitting all ample treatise in defense of the cross, (which is affoorded by
the worthy Gretser, in his volume de Sancta Cruce) I will breefly allege
this gowlden mowthed Father, this Reverend Chrysostoms words. Ipsum lignum in
quo positum Sanctum Corpus Domini, and Crucifixum, S. Chrysostom. orat. quod
Christus sit Deus.
quare nam habere totus mundus ita contendit, vt qui paruum quid ex illo
habent, hoc auro includant tam viri quam mulires, and ceruicibus suis aptent:
hinc valde honestati and magnifici, muniti and protecti. The wodd on which the
holy body of Christ was placed and Crucified, why do all the world so strive to
have it, as they that can purchase any parcel thereof, they enclose it in
gould, men and women, and hang it on their necks, being thereby thought honored
and rich, defended and protected. What say you: was that gowlden mouthed
Father, and Reverend Chrysostom, a Papist or a Protestant? was our devotion, in
his opinion, but simple foolishnes, trash, etc? I could long swymme in this
plentiful matter of the reverence and devotion toward Crosses, from the
Apostles time upward, having all godly Fathers and doctors to bear up my chynn
if this one testimony of S. Chrysostom, by M. Rider commended, did not seem
bastant, and powerful, to disprove his bare wise accusation; and had I not to
treat again thereof in the article of Images: but because he is in Irla^d, and
that it may be known of what religion owld Irish men were, I will give one
testimony beyond my word out of Coelius Sedulius, by his own inscription
known to be Scotus Ibernensis, a Scot of Irland, saying: in Carm. Paschal.
Neue quis ignoret speciem Crucis esse colendam. That none mistrust the form of
the Cross to be adored.

As for Agnus Deis, it is to be considered, that the Gentiles or Infidels Varro
de lingua latina lib. 6.
it seemed good to Gods Church, since that such as were converted would not
easily, quyte this foresaid folly; to change superstition into religion: as by
like occasion was done for candles on candlemass day, Vide Baron. tom. 1. page
606.
and certain feasts, converted to Gods honor, that they might not be retained
against his honor. Therefore in remembrance that we were redeemed by the lamb of
God that takes away the synns of the world, who lived a virginal and innocent
life for our example, and by his death sanctified our sowles by the spiritual
unction of the holy Ghost, Vide Petrum Maffeu^ in 7. decretalium.
was by Christ's sacred Spowse framed in resemblance of all these, an image of a
lamb in whyt virgin wax, tempered with holy oil. Such image, is called an
Agnus Dei. Of which sort, when to Charles the great was presented one by Leo
the third, he received it (as was his duty) no otherwise then a precious
treasure. With no less piety, and devotion also did the Emperor of
Constantinople receive one from Vrbanus the fifth, proceeding against it in a
Solemn Procession of the Clergy and Laity, and carrying it in a triumphant
godly honor into the City.



S. Paulinus in epist. 8. Hieron. in v. S. Hilar. Osbernus in v. S. Elphegi.
Conrad. in in v S. VVolphelmi. Theodoric. in v. S. Hildegard. lib. 3. c. 9.
Metaphrast. in Decembri. in v. S. Marcelli. Vide tom. 3. Conc. l. page 569.
and of later times S. Elphegus Archbishop of Canterbury, S. Marcellus Abbot,
S. Hildegardis, and many others, have affoorded so ample testimony of the
virtue and estimation of it, that a thousand Riders can not impair, the
dignity thereof. Nether can there be any thing more authentical, then the form
of benediction thereof, used in Concilio Nannetensi Can. 9. in these words. O
Lord our holy Father omnipotent eternal God, vouchsafe to bless this bread,
with thy sacred benediction, that it may be to all, health of body and soul,
and a defense or protection against all diseases of soul and body. I would
willingly have all Catholic to hold it for a principal rule, that were there
no other authority to justify these holy and hallowed things, yet that they
should esteem them very grateful to God by being impugned by such as M. Rider
is. For if they did not displease and often displace Satan, he would not be so
importunat in his followers, to deride and disgrace them. This rule have I
followed my self to my exceeding benifit, to be more devout toward such
devotions, at which they are most discontented withal.

Catho. Priests. Lib. 8. cap. 5.
Sozomen recounteth how a woman not believing that Christ had transformed bread
into his body, was in danger by transformation of bread into a stone.
Rider.
153. SOme such thing there is, but you miss Sozomons words, sentences, and
purpose, and apply it still to your Host. The priest told Sozomen, that in
giving the Sacramental bread to a woman, she took it in her hand, and
privily gave it her maid behind her: which the maid no sooner touched with
her tooth, but it turned into a stone, Believe it that list.
and the print of the tooth is this day to be seen in Constantinople. I pray
you Gentlemen, is this your Oste Christ's body? if it be as you teach, (but
fie, it is a false lie) then were Christ's body turned into a stone, and to be
seen at Constantinople under the forms of a stone, as well as at Rome under
the forms of bread.

Whether M. Rider, or I, Do misreport the relation of Sozomen.
Fitzsimon.
153. YOu have gotten M. Rider the habit, or facility, and perfection of
falsifying; that now it is ingrafted in you as a second natural inclination. It
shall appear now both toward Sozomen, and the very sacred Scripture it self;
being both most shamefully corrupted. The history of Sozomen is thus related.
Vide S. Hieron. in Chr^^^^. S. Aug. h^^. 52. Epiph. her. 73. So^rat. l. 2. c.
35. The^. l. 4 her. fab.
A certane man of the Macedonian heresy (such as denied the holy Ghost to be
consubstantial to the Father and Son) had a wife of the same sect. The man
after he had heard John Chrysostom teaching what should be believed of God,
praised his doctrine, and requested his wife to believe as him self did. But
whereas she rather conformed her self to the words of noble women, then to his
usual entreaty, and that he labored (as commonly women are in vain: unless,
says he, thou accommodat thy self to me, thou shall never hereafter enjoy
(Mark this you married folk of meddled and different belief, among whom such
threats are known to have had more force then any faith, or religion) my
conversation. The woman hearing, this (so contrarywyse, from true belief to a
false, our women are drawn more by their husband like threats, then let by
the displeasure of God and his Church) promised her consent, and communicated
the matter to her esteemed trusty maid, and used her help to deceive her
husband. VVherfor about the time of the mysteries, Sozomen. lib. 8. cap. 5.
(the faithful know what I mean) she reserved what she had received, and as
being to pray, inclined her self. Her maid behynd her secretly gave her the
bread which she had brought (as by eating whereof she should seem to eat the
holy mysteries) in her hand. This bread when it was putt to her teethe, hardened
into a stone. The woman terrifyed, fearing least she should have more hurt by
that which by Gods judgment had happened, ran to the Bishop, and accusing her
self, showed the stone, having the impression of being bytten, and appearing
to be of an unknown kind, and having an admirable color: and together with
tears craving pardon, she promised to consent to her husband. And if this
seem incredible to any, the stone it self is witness, which yet remains
among the relics of the Church of Constantinople. Thus far Sozomen
recompteth.

The 206. untruth.
that we miss Sozomens words, sentences, and purpose? Is it not the 207.
untruth, The 207. untruth.
that she gave her maid the Sacramental bread (which is a false translation of
the word, mysteries) behind her; and that it was the maid under whose teeth
the bread did become a stone? If there can be any escape, but that either
infidelity in dealing, or ignorance in understanding is here pregnantly
exhibited; I desyer nether credit, nor reputation during my life. Was it the
wife, or maid, which with tears promised to be agreeable to her husband? or was
the husband, a husband, to both his wife, and his maid. Now follows a
Riderian sequel, worthy of consideration. The bread which the maid secretly
gave her mistres (says the autheur) was turned into a stone: therefore says M.
Rider Christ's body is turned into a stone, and to be seen in form of a stone
in Constantinople.

154 O hellish divinity: but I say unto you Priests and Jesuits, Rider.
as Paul said to the false Arch-Iesuit Bariesus: O full of all subtilitie and
michiefe, children of the devil, Acts. 13.10.
and enemies of all righteousness, will ye not cease yet to pervert the
straight ways of the Lord, but still like Elimas seek to turn Christ's flock
from Christ's faith?

Of his evident depraueing Gods wooord.
154. NO readers: do not blushe at this last dishonestie, Fitzsimon.
but faint at the next. He will not likely often be found true toward man's
relations, who is often found a deprauer of Gods own sacred words. You have
considered his exclamatio^ against the hellish divinity of Sozomen, which in
deed was not Sozomens, but M. Riders his own. Yet if it had been hellishe, or not, he that bound him self to be tried by such witneses, and suitable to their
resolutions; could not after repeal, or start from them. That now which I
blame is, that he having quoted the residue of his chapter as a text of
Scripture, and imprinted it for such in a distinct leter, he has added and
altered, perverted and diuerted the words, and meaning, above all
reprehension. Take your Bibles, and peruse your selves his quotation, and his
application, and look how handsomely these fellows can make Scriptures of
their own brains, Vide Frischlinum in comedia de varijs heresibus impressa in
lazibus Metanastis an. 1592.
and (as many Protestants of a calmer condition confess) deliver you their
fanatical dreams, for the written oracles of God: as appears, M. Riders
Rescript. page 65. 66. 67. 68. Deerly beloved, and that unfeignedly, think in
this case with Seneca, non est leuitas a cognito, and damnato errore discedere,
Seneca l. 4. de bon. c. 38.
that it is no lightness to depart from a known, and damned error. I may be
deceived: but I think your capacities sufficiently informed, how erroneous and
damnable this man's dealings are to be accounted: by whose proceedings you may
discover the residue of his sorts, and therefore you may justly be justified
from all leuitie in departing from them.

Catho. Priests. Crantzius lib. 5. c. 9.
And a certain Duke of Saxony upon alike occasion did become a Christian.
Rider.
155. ALbertus Krantzius Hamburg: (you misspell his name) writes chronica
Regnorum, Daniae, Suetiae, and Noruagiae, I have read diligently the ninth
chapter of every fifth book of these the histories, and there is no such
thing in any of them: therefore you are to blame, still to abuse learned men to
be the Authors of these fables: and the Catholics most of all, to believe
these fables.

Whether Crantzius be belyed by M. Rider, or me.
Fitzsimon.
155. Here also is an ordinary Riderian argument: he has redd what Crantzius
has in his chronicles, and found not what I alleged: therefore, that I still
abuse learned men, and the Catholics most of all. As if one would say, to an
allegation out of the gospel: I have redd S. Mark, and have not found what
was alleged: therefore it is not in the gospel. The whole writings of the
autheur alleged should have been perused and examined, before such sequel
(and especialy with that word, still) showld seem forcible. Breefly, they
have more books in the college of Dublin, then M. Rider has redd. And
particularly they have the Metropol of Crantzius, according as I cited, and
spelled: so that you do and shall find him nappie, in thinking Crantzius only
to have written his Chronicles: Secondly, in his correction of my Spelling:
Thirdly, in his accusation that I have abused the learned and Catholics, by my
fathering the foresaid matter on Crantzius. And consequently, you may say with
the Prophet: Psalm. 75.
Dormitauerunt qui ascenderunt aequos; Riders, or they which are mounted on
horsback, have nodded. This to be brief is the relation of Crantzius.
Crantzius lib. 1. cap. 9.
What therefore said the King (he have thou seen which deliteth thee to have
viewed? He, as he was yet ignorant of Christian things, replied: I have seen
(whereat I meruailed) thee before two days, of a heavy countenance, being
uncertain what had hapened that might molest so great a King. It was the
remembrance of our Lords Passion that made the King of a sadd countenance.
Again says he, I have seen thee this (Easter) Day, first sadd, and most
pensive about thy employment (in preparing him self, to the B. Sacrament). But
when thou did approache to the middle table of the Church, thou did appear
to me of so ioyefull countenance, that I was amazed at the miracle of such
sudden alteration. For it was wounderfull to behowld, that in the hand of a
priest in rich ornaments, every one received into their mowthe a bewtifull
little child: Whom I perceived to approache to some joyfully and in have, to
others repyning and with countenance displeased, and yet entering into their
mouths, and not returning. What this should be, I do not yet conceive. Then
said the King: Thou have well proffited. There is some what more showed to
thee, then to all the God grawnt all others formerly ignorant of this mystery,
to receive like benefit by the same, as Wedekind did. Let it not seem strange
that Christ should appear like a young child after his ascension, it being no
more impossible or inconvenient, then that God almighty should appear like an
owld man: their proprieties of innocence and aeternitie, being cause of such
their apparitions.

Without inuectiues, or enforced accusations, M. Rider you have Crantzius
testifying amply all that I delivered succinctly and in a word. For of my
disposition I was never prolixe in my writings, but some time in a line do
include as much matter, as my autheur delivered in a leaf. And the rather in my
first answer to you, I followed brevity, that without toil if it could not be
without tediousnes, you might over run disproofs of your protestations. Now
also, I will make noe inferrences upon the premises, against you, for my own
behalf, (for a plain text needs no gloss) but will abruptly examine the
next, leaving all Readers behowlding Ciceroes words in Lucullo, to be true in
my defense. Non quaerere me rations eas, quae ex coniectura pendent, queque
disputationibus huc and illuc trahuntur, and quae nullam adhibent persuadendi
dignitatem. That I follow not such reasons as depend upon conjectures, and by
skill of disputers are wreasted off and on, and contain No, I have another
cause then they, who have but exordium commune, a common exordium, as fit for
the defendant, as the plaintiff; Iren. l. 5. c. 27. Vinc. lir. c. 42. Luth. in
conuiualibus colloquijs f. 144. Vide n. 19. examinis, and 75.
and no other proofs then peremptory protestations Sacram Scripturam se solos
and primum intelligere, and omnes alios ignorasse; that they only, and first,
understand the Scriptures, and that all others have been deceived; And you
shall find all the principal Protestants abundant in this vain. But I will
hold me to my text.

Catho Priests. Optatus lib. 2. contra Donatist.
Optatus reports a grieueous punishment of abusers of a facred Host.
156. OPtatus in deed speaks of two professed Donatists, Vrbanus Formensis,
and Faelix Iducencis, Rider.
who coming into the country of Mauritonia, and entering the Churches at the
time of the celebration of the holy Communion, commanded (Eucharistiam) the
Eucharist to be given to their dogs, but the dogs growing mad presently,
set upon their own masters, and rent their flesh with their teeth. A just
judgment of God for their vile attempt of holy mysteries. But how dare you say
that this was your consecrated Host? Optatus says it was (Eucharistia) the
Eucharist, that is to say, the whole mysteries of thanksgiving (and not a part)
which was cast unto dogs: but Optatus says not that Christ was locallie
enclosed in that bread. And you still continue your wonted course, that
wheresoever you find this word Ecclesiam, it is your Church: and where you
find this word Eucharistiam, that is your consecrated Host.

Whether Optatus commended or condemned Protestantrie.
Fitzsimon.
156. YOu have confessed sufficiently to overthrow you: to wit that God had
showed such severity for abuse against the Eucharist, so holy a mystery. By
the name of Eucharist has been ever understood our B. Sacrament of the Altar:
as appears in the 103. number out of S. Gregory. Out of him, and all others,
and the inviolable truth, dare we affirm Oil, all these together recorded by
Optatus so ancient a Father, do tell that the Donatists were your
Predecessors; and such as they persecuted, to have been ours. For what had
Protestantrie to do with chaste professed virgins, altars, holy oil, etc? When
no wreasting, nor wreathing will avail, it is strange you will trouble your
self in vain. When I hear you in manifould places of your book ad Donatist.
post collationem cap. 34. and cap. 1. Iudicem a nobis fuisse corruptum, and else
where; (de gestis cum Emerito) nos cognitoris emisse sententiam; and eos potius
potestate quam veritate fuisse oppressos; when, as I said, I hear you, and
Donatists, concur in these words, that we had corrupted the Judge; that we had
feed our stipendarie chaplins to give sentence against you; that you were
suppressed more by authority, then verity: then can I allow, that Donatists,
and you, are of consociation; which I could never find in Optatus, by any
sign, figure, or shadow extant in his wrytings.

157. But a less, you deceive the Catholics, Rider.
for you have neither the true Church (because ye lack the sincere preaching
of Gods word, and the lawful use of his two sacraments, which be the two
infallible marks of Christ's Church) nor yet have you Christ's sacraments as he
left to his Church; but as they are disguised and profaned by the late Church
of Rome, which does as far differ from the primitive practice of the ancient
Church of Rome, as Christ's institution differs from man's invention.

Whether the Puritan Church has the sincere Preaching of Gods word, and
lawful use of the two Sacraments; And thereby be sufficiently assured to be the
true Church.
157. IF you will to this place repeat what is presented in the number 124; You
will find M. Rider, Fitzsimon.
by them to whom he has tied him self to consent with all, to deny Baptism
of Children, and any other Sacrament to be allowed, besyd Christ hanging on the
Cross. Also repeat, what is delivered in the first 39. number, you shall find
him, and his brethren, make the Sacraments of the new testament no better then
weak, and beggarly ordonances. Lastly reuiew if it please you, the 62. and
122. numbers; and you shall find him denying all benifit of sanctification by
Baptism, saying it to be only a sign, and that only to the faithful. So that
children having no faith of their own, and the merits of others not profiting
(according to Protestantrie) any besyd them selves; and all justification being
(in their opinion) only by faith: he can not but mantayne children either not to
receive Baptism, or not to have any proffit thereby, it being (says he) a bare
sign, only to the faithful: or, them to be justified, without their own
faith. Let such assurances suffice, that he has not in his Church the lawful
use, of the Sacraments which according to their names should make things
sacred. Now are we to examine, whether his two marks here affoorded, are
co^petent alone to testifye the true Church. In which point of assigning the
true marks of the true Church, I find the whole brotherhod at great variance.
Luth. tom. 7. trac. de notis eccle. Melancthon. in resp. ad artic. Bauaricae
inquisitionis. Calu. Instit. l. 4. r. 1. n. 9.
First Luther numbreth 7. marks, as he says, requisite. The Magdeburgians
require but four. Melancthon exacteth but three. Calvin but two, as M. Rider
in this place numbreth them; yet with a diversity; that Calvin specifyeth not
the Sacraments to be two, or three, or four, but indeterminatly: as also that
he does not assign these two marks as infallible of the true Church, Loco
citato.
but only of some Church, saying; vbicumque hae duae notae reperiuntur, ibi
aliquam esse Dei ecclesiam; wheresoever these two notes are found, thereto be
some Church. Will you now behold the soundnes of these two notes?

Calu. Inst. l. 4. c. 1. n. 7.
First, by Caluins own confession, they which are adopted, although S. Aug.
epist. 48, and in breuiculo collationum collatione 3. diei.
Yet all Christendom professes, that they were execrable heretics. I suppose
in so perspicuous disproofs, superfluity to be needles: and therefore will
leave these notes discovered, to be notoriously insufficient. The greatest
notes of a true belief are, Vide Vincent. Lir. citatum in nostro 3. numero.
that it be Universal, Ancient, Consenting. Universal, as well for being
commanded by Christ to be published through all the world, as for being so
specifyed in the creed in the word Catholic. Ancient, as being thereby
warra^ted to be Christ's own Church, if the gates of hell may not prevail
against it. For if it continue still, it is known thereby as Gamaliel said, to
be the work of God. Consenting, because as S. Paul says, the Church of God
has not the custom to be contentious: as also because, as there is but one
God, so is there but one law, and one only faith. Lastly we are known
manifowldly to be the true Church: as is before manifested. Ad Romanam
Ecclesiam perfidia habere non potest accessum; To the Romain Sea (said the
ancient and glorious Martyr, and Doctor, S. Cyprian) misbeleefe, Cypr. l. 1.
ep. 3.
can have no access. Is cum episcopis Catholicis conuenit, qui cum Ecclesia
Romana conuenit. He consents with Catholic Bishops, (says S. Ambrose, orat.
de obitu. Satyri) who consents with the Romain Church. If then most assuredly
that be the privilege of a true Church, not to be able either to fail in
continuance, or to fall to misbeleefe, and to be consenting with the Romain
Church: who does not behowld, blasphemous to be their audacitie, that term
such Church the seat of pestilence, the whore of Babylon; or our Church not to
be the true Church? Could such Roman Sea not be subject to misbeleefe, and
yet apostated into idolatrous infidelity? Could it be once, the tuchstone of
truth, and Catholic belief, to consent with the Romain Church: and yet be
now a tuchstone of a suspicious, and idolatrous belief, to consent with the
Romain belief? Has Christ been untrue, or deceived, who promised, the gates
of hell should not prevail against his Church builded upon S. Peter, which all
the world acknowledge to be no other then the Romain Church, wherein he, S.
Paul, and S. Ihon, had preached, and S. Paul, in one and the self same day
rendered their sowles to God?

If there were nothing else to auerr it, yet the vanity and friuolousnes M.
Rider, you that affirm we lack the foresaid notes: what wisdom was it in you,
not to justify it by some proof? Nay, what simplicity is it in me, to expect
any, either Riderian, or other, in impossibility of having any? For unless we
take as a sufficient proof, your faith, truth, and honesty, which many
merchants would refuse to take for their seeliest wares, unless we believe
your bare protestations, that your clouds are very apparent, that your night is
brightest light, that your dreams are documents of Scripture, that goats are
sheep, that falsehood is truth, our expectation of any other proof, will
never be accomplished. At least, you may in patience be contented that I
collect the tyeth of your untruths and Calculat the 207. belonging to your
deprauations, The 207. untruth.
denials, affirmations, accusations, etc. in this place.

Catho. Priests.
Read Gregory Nazianzen in his funeral sermon of father, mother, and sister,
and you shall find miraculous demonstrations of the real being of Christ.
Rider.
158. YOu still abuse the ears of the simple: Gregory has no such matter as
you speak of wrought by your charmed Host: If you mean the spiritual real
being of Christ in your sacrament, This Gregory was dead 500. years before
your corporal presence was known.
that is none of yours: and if you mean of your corporal presence of Christ,
alas, Gregory never knew it. But Gentlemen you are to blame to urge these
fables to prove a matter of faith: you have alleged nothing that will weaken
your cause more then this.

Whether S. Gregory Nazianzen believed the Spiritual, Real, and Corporal
Presence.
Fitzsimon.
158. MR. Rider in his text, and Margent, warranteth that this S. Gregory who
lived within the first 400. years after Christ, was more ancient then our
corporal Presence, and dead before the knowledge thereof, 500. years. So that
by this account 900. after Christ our Corporal Presence was unknown. Yea else
where, by saying that Innocent the third was first autheur thereof, three
hundred years mare are added, before it had any acquaintance in Gods Church.
All the tenore, and purport of this book, consisting of proofs by Scriptures,
Concils, The 208 untruth
And now S. Gregory Nazianzen him self shall ratify the same to the world,
to signify that M. Rider has, in a desperation to be accounted ever
faithful, cast his bridle raynes upon his horses neck, to license him to run
into the wilderness of untruths, D. Greg. Nazian. orat de S. Pasch. and orat.
1. in Julian.
and deprauations. Absque confusione and dubio comede Corpus and sanguinem
bibe, fi saltem vitae desiderio teneris: Neque sermonibus qui de carne habentur
fidem deneges. Without confusion, and doubt, (says he) eat his body, and
drink his blood, if thou have any desyer of life: and distrust not for the
speeches which are of fleashe. Behold carefully, how we are advised by S.
Gregory to eat his flesh and drink his blood, and not to be distrustful
that there is mention of fleashe, whereby we might grudge. Whereto after he
adds, that we should not be let for his passion: as if he would have us
think, that Christ is not received by us in any passible or hurtful manner to
him self. And that we should be constant, firm, and immovable
notwithstanding the speeches of Christ's adversaries. To the same effect said
Theophilact, in cap. 26. Math: quoniam infirmi sumus, and horremus crudas
carnes comedere, All this will M. Rider say to be nothing; all to be
impertinent; and will rail, and stamp at it, as most absurd. But he will not I
trow, so steal away the senses of Readers, but that they will perceive his
shifts now to be naked, and naught else but ernest pangs of a desperate decaying
doctrine. The Pope in the mean time that is now, could say no more for Christ's
Real, and Corporal Presence, then Nazianzen, and Theophilact.

159. But if you will have the world to believe your miracles, Rider.
you must give over these iugling tricks, and show us what sick man by your
Host you have made sound: out of whom you have cast devils: Acts. 28.5.
what Serpents you have touched (as Paul did) and yet were not stung: which of
you have drunk drink deadly poisoned, and were not killed: which of you
speak with new tongues, that were never by time nor Tutors taught? unless you
can do these miracles, Mark.
the Catholics must esteem you no better then iuglers: And yet by your leave,
if you could do all these and more to, unless your doctrine be answerable to
Christ his truth, Galath. 1.9.
the Apostle will account you accursed: and we must not believe you.

Whether in wisdom we should by M. Rider be provoked to Miracles.
159. S. Paul distinguishing the diverse gifts of the holy Ghost, Fitzsimon.
teaches that diversely, and not conioyntly, they are among Christ's disciples,
saying; 1. Cor. 12.
But to one is given the speech of wisdom, to another the spirit of
knowledge according to the same Spirit; to another faith in the same Spirit; to
another the gift of healing in one Spirit; to another the woorking of miracles,
or virtues; to another Prophetie; to another discretion of Spirits; to another
the Kinds of tongues. etc. This distribution among all faithful, shows, that
of every one the speech of wisdom, or knowledge, or faith, or the gift of
healing, or miracles, or prophecies, or discretion of Spirits, or diversity of
tongs, is not rigorously to be exacted. Now to our M. Rider, for prophesying, I
find in deed, you Purita^s would seem to be expert, by your supplication to
his Majesty, to have prophesying allowed in rural deanries: as appears in
the sum of the Conference set forth by William Barlow, anno 1605. page 78.
But I would give three half pence, for every ownce of good proffit any
received by your Puritan prophesying: unless they esteem prophan and vain
speeches proffiting to impiety, to be good proffit: contrary to S. Paul. 2.
Tim. 2: or, that which he says in the next chapter following, proffiting to
the worse, erring, and dryuing into error, to be gaynfull, and proffitable?
And I pray you, my good friend, why should you demand these testimonies of our
vocation, unless you be able to find them in your own? Do not think but I
can show a diversity in our woorking of miracles, beyond your fraternity. Let
me be instructed for my S. Augustine. Ser. de tempore.
in these words? If you say to any of us (says S. Augustine) thou have
received the holy Ghost, why speak thou not all tongs? He ought to answer, I
speak with all tongs, because I am in the body of Christ, in the Church which
speaks with all tongs. The same answer serves for all other sorts of
miracles. For in our Church M. Rider, every one does daily behold, the blind
to receive their sight, the lame their limbs, the sick their health, yea the
dead their life. Yet not by every one of our church, but by several, to whom
God according to his good pleasure has divided such gifts. Your miracles, both
for all and some, are such as your Church; invisible: your Church, such as
your miracles; false, and ending in confusion. Look what end the miracles of
the sonns of Scena are said to have had, in the Acts of the Apostles: Acts.
cap. 19. v. 13.14.15.16.
the very self same had your two pillars Luther, and Calvin, in their intended
miracles. I therefore conclude with you in your own words; at which for their
importance, you say in the margent like a fawkener; Mark: Unless you can do
these miracles, the Catholics must account you no better then iuglers, etc.

Catho Priests.
I trust this will suffice for auerring the consent of the Catholics, with the
Fathers of the primitive Church, which is the first Article we were provoked to
prove.
Rider.
190. I Know you are utterly deceived, and I trust, this will suffice the godly
learned and in different Reader, that you and your late Romish Catholics quite
dissent from Christ's truth and old Romes religion: and therefore remember from
whence ye are fallen, and return to the ancient truth, (while God gives you
time) which God grant, etc.

FINIS.
How suitable the last words of M. Rider are to them of ancient Heretics.
160. FIrst, you affirm, that we are utterly deceived. Fitzsimon.
As hitherto we have through the whole writings of us both discovered, that we
were never stronger, then when you assured we were weak; never truer, then
when you protested we were false; never more approved, then when you said we
were most disproued; never more secure, then when you informed we were in
greatest danger: so now, we may be certainly persuaded, that we are in the
right, the rather for your proof-lesse saying that we are utterly deceived. If
you had not been such as M. Sabinus Chambers testifyeth before, and after; you
would never have brought your Oxford conclusion, ergo falleris, therefore you
are deceived, without some premises, or proofs. Every woman, or child, might
say as much, when they had no thing else to answer. But I leave your judicial
style, to every ones consideration, and compassion. To your conclusion, I will
confront like words of owld damned heretics: Come o ye fools said they and
miserable men, Vincent. Lir. in libello con. prophan. here is.
who are commonly called Catholics, and learn the true faith which has been
hidd many ages heretofore, but is now revealed and showed of late, etc. What
had we been, if we had consented to them? what proof or virtue is more in your
words, then in theirs? Therefore, because we yielding to them should have been
heretics; and have but allurements from you, no better then theirs; also
because many seducers are gone abroad; we will refrain you both alyke, and
remain upon the Rock, to wit (says S. Augustine) the Romain Church, S. Aug.
de vtilitate credendi cap. 17.
against which the proud gates of hell shall never prevail.

Conclusion.
WHen Luther did behold his wrytings to have conveyed him into a laberinth of
perplexities; some time by their being censured by all Christendom for
heretical, and thereby burned and he made odious; sometime by binding him self
to manifould denials, and affirmations, which in process of time he perceived
to be erroneous: then in shameful grief, he burst into these words; Libenter
vidissem omnia mea scripta interijsse: Luth. in presat. Germ. sup. r Tomos suos.
etc. inter alias causas vna est quod exemplum me terret: Quoniam non video
quid vtilitatis Ecclesia coeperit, cum extra and super Biblia sacra plurimi
libri colligebantur. I willingly would see all my writings perish: and among
other causes one is, because the example (of all my brethren, whose writings
benifit nothing) does terrify me. For I do not behold what proffit the Church
has received, when out and beyond the holy Bible, very many books were
collected. Which his saying, together with what follows does manifest, that
Satan, and pride, transferred him captive to his destruction. For says he,
tom. 2. Ien. fol. 273. Nunquam maiores grauioresque tentationes habui quam ex
meis concionibus. Cogitabam enim, ista tu solus incepisti. Ista tentatione s^pe
ad insernum vsque demersus sum. I never had greater and more grievous tentations
then by means of my sermons. For I thought, thou only have begone all this. By
this tentation I have been often swallowed into hell. O heavy, and dismal
remorse and torment of conscience, the greatest butcher, and mangler, of a
guilty mind, how wast thou not able to reclaim, that heart, which thou wast
able so to devour. Other grievous lamentations before his death, for his
unhappy wrytings, are testified in the examination of the Creed, number. 7.

The like remorse had Beza, when he said; Vellem omnia scripta euulgata abolita
esse quae paci and concordiae obstare, Beza in colloq. Monpelgart. page 260.
aut veritatem obscurare videntur. I would all wrytings published, which seem
to be against peace concord, or truth, were abolished. Alas Beza, so would I
from the bottom of my heart, that thou had thy demand both in such intention,
and in such execution, not as was, but as I should have been. Such to have been
the mind of Melancthon, is testified by Wolfangus Agricola, conc. de
matrimonio. when he said; Nullius se digiti iacturam refugere, si istum
reuocare laborem posset. Sed nunc se nimis profunde causae immersum, nullum
regressum inuenire. He would not refuse the loss of any fingar, if he could
revoke his writings. But now being so deeply entangled, he found no retraict.
These lamentable, and unfortunate successes, and terror of damnation in the
end upon and after their giddie courses, when so great pillars of the deformed
(I would say reformed crew) do acknowledge: how often think you in his mind
does M. Rider covet, that he had never putt pen to Paper? Oecolampad. ad
Lantgra. Hess. anno. 1529. Vide Seleccerum. part. 1. comment. in Psalm. fol.
215.
Oecolampad cried: Vtinam Princeps illustrissime, abscissa fuisset mihi haec
dextera, cum primo inciperem de negotio coenae Dominicae quicquam scribere; I
would most excellent Prince this right hand of mine were chopped off, when
first I began to write any thing of the treatise of the Lords supper. Renew,
renew the same cry, M. Rider, who first as is evidently showed by
inconsideration, In Aduertisment n. 9. and n. 130.
insinuated (you, you your self, I mean, in plain terms) all the state,
and Lords of the Council, to be fools heretics. etc. Secondly, you directed us
to autheurs most repugnant to your profession, testifying it to be against the
Catholic Church, and assuring, Numero 3.4.6.114.143.
us to be thereof; and by so testifying, leaving you forlorn and abandoned of
all excuse, or shadow of your apostasy, and impiety in being against our
belief.

3. You have by necessary inferrence employed your own profession to be
wicked, and damnable, late, base, and counterfeit. Number. 16.25.34.
4. You have betrayed your profession, Number. 30.31.
by the testimony of all the chief of the same, to a jury condemning you,
and them. 5. You have violated, corrupted, depraved, Number. 38.81.154.
and falsified the sacred Scriptures them selves, perspicuously to all men's
eyes, and above all excusation, or tergiuersation. 6. You have paragoned, or
compared, the mysteries of Christ's gospel, with all Sacraments and
sanctification thereof, to base beggarly ordonances of the old law. Number.
36.63.78.
7. You have disdayned the words of Christ's institution of his B. Sacrament,
and corrected them with a new institution of your own. Number. 68.
8. You have denied the whole merits of Christ's life and death, Exam. n. 14.
and imputed your Salvation to it which hapened after Christ's death. 9. You
have made Christ's institution by your active and passive commentary, Number.
76.77.
to contradict it self, and to be absurd, and false. 10. You have made Prince
and people, great and small who ever did break Images of Christ, Number. 96.
to be traitors against Christ. 11. You have testified your self manifouldly
to be a Puritan; that is a seditious resister, Number. 99.122.
by your own private diversity of judgment, to Princes and Parliament
ordonances of late reformation, and deadly enemy of Protestantrie which has
been established. 12. You have bound your self to believe, Number. 35.108 123.124
125.
and not to believe, Christ realy, yet not realy, spiritualy yet not
spiritualy, Sacramentaly yet not Sacramentaly, literaly yet not literaly, etc.
in the B. Sacrament. 13. You have concourse, and consociation, with Jews and
Iewishnes, in your self, and your Patriarchs; Number. 115.119.160.
as also with the most heinous heretics; and also disproued and condemned all
and every one of the most famous Protestants; Number. 122.123.
and by them you as generaly are refuted: which also is done against, and by
your own Confessors, and Martyrs. Number. 124.
14. You have entered bond and obligation, in print, to auerre in unity and
verity of Doctrine, all that ever might be blasphemed against God, and
Godliness. 15. You have most puritanicaly censured the acts of Parliament since
the suppression, to be heretical, abominable, repugnant to Christ's truth, to
ancient Fathers, and the practice of the primative Church. Number. 130.131.
16. You have contrary to your claim, and it of first Protestantrie disauowed
the General Council of Nice from you to us; and have allured the nobility of
Vlster in Irland, Number. 138.
to imitat them who intended to kill their King, and rebelled against his
constitutions. Breefly, what untruths, denials, interpretations, sequels,
arguments, contradictions, impudencies, and impieties you have besyd all the
former run into; they are not so obscurely or seldomly incide^t, but all that
favor your profession, may think you were hired, or of your self intended,
to disgrace, disable, and condemn your and there cause. Since you can not deny
any silable of these imputations, you may worthily cry the cry of Oecolampad.
Vtinam etc. You may worthily shun the light of the sun, and thereby profess
plainly and simply that heresy has no defense, but in a lie, and can but by
lies and darkness be protected and that coming to light, it is suddenly
disconfited.

Invincible, and infallible Spouse of Christ, the Catholic Church: I resign
and deuote my trauayles and wrytings to thy sacred doom. With thee I say and
unsay, commend and condemn, all doctrine by me, or others, professed.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE MOST PRINCIPAL MATTERS CONTAINED IN THIS BOOK. Which the
Reader (if he please) in many points, may fitly compare with the English
Table of the Protestant Doctors, Confessors, and Martyrs, printed in Black
Friars, commonly sold about the streets, and usually hunge up in sundry
houses. VVherin he shall find the foresaid Doctors to be painted in far more
truer colors.
ABBEYS.
Abbeys. Thomas Muntzer and his fellow Phifer, an Apostata Monk, destroyed in
one year 200. Abbeys and Castles in Franconia alone. page 217.

A hundred Abbeys built in France, by one only Moncke of Benchor Abbie, named
Luanus. Ep. ded. parag. 16.

AGNVS DEIES.
Of the great reverence exhibited by Charles the Great, toward an Agnus Dei,
sent unto him by Leo the third. page 378.

Of the piety and devotion of the Emperor of Constantinople toward another,
sent him by Vrbanus the fifth, ibid.

APOSTLES.
Apostles. How Heretics condemn the Church of the Apostles: and how
contemptiblie they speak of the Apostles them selves. page 31.

Beza affirms Antechrist to have then begun. page 31.

The Centurists, Beza, and Illiricus, have carefully calculated fifteen sins
of S. Peter's. ibid. Calvin says of S. Paul, that he was full of presumption,
temeritie, and precipitation. ibid. Quintinus; that he was not a chosen, but a
broken vessel, ibid. The Centurists; that he was dissentious toward Barnabas,
and an hipocrit toward James and others. ibid. Bullinger; that S. John sinned
in Apostacy. ibid. Quintinus calls him, a foolish youth. page 31.

Calvin calls S. Matthew, and abuser, and distorter of diverse citations. page
31. S. Marc, an Apostata, and disloyal. Luther; that S. Luke was to excessive
in commending good works. page 31. Calvin of all the Apostles; that they were
over superstitious and subject to vice. ibid. Pomeran; that the Apostles wrote
wickedlie. page 138. Luther that they are no true Evangelists. ibid. Calvin,
that they ought not to babble what they list. ibid. William Cowbridge; that
nether the Apostles, Evangelists, nor Doctors of the Church, have revealed how
sinners might be truly saved. page 308. See more in the word Cre^de.

Calvin; they wrest allegations Reply. Page 49. Depart from the right meaning
of them. ibid. Shuffle abruptly many sentences into their writings. ibid.
Term improprelie. ibid. Use wooodes improprelie. etc. ibid.

BAPTISM.
Baptism. Purita^s do imitate the practice of the Jews in imposing names
upon their children. page 273. Certain new fangled Puritan names noted by a
late Protestant. ibid. The Lord is near. More trial. Reformations.
Discipline. Ioy-againe. Sufficient. From-aboue. Free-gift. More fruit. Dust.
etc. ibid.

Haux, Foxes Martyr, denied Baptism of children to be necessary to salvation.
page 308. The Puritans; Baptism not to regenerate. Reply page 66. Not to
belong to Infants. ibid. Without it, salvation not to be doubted. ibid. page
67. To be no more necessary, then Circumcision. ibid.

BELLS.
The Assembling of people to Church by ringing Bells, to be Antechristian.

BELIEF.
Protestants Abssemled sundry times, and in sundry famous cities, to join in
a Fraternall attonment about Religion, confess that there is no hope thereof
to be expected, but only the hastening the day of judgment, to shut up all their
variances. page 159.

That Sectarists did never yet compose any form of Belief, whereunto them
selves would irreuocablie remain bound. page 133.

The Arrians, four times in few months, changed and revoked their Creed.
ibid. The same testified by su^drie Sectarists them selves, of their own
religion. ibid. By Clebitius. page 134. By Hosius. ibid. By Osiander. ibid. By
English Puritans, saying that the Church of England, is Antechristian and
Diabolical, and that none but betrayers of God do defend it. ibid.

How 12. choice Protestants at Ratisbon, joining to establish a form of
Belief; seven of them excommunicated the other five, as being the only
impediment of their agreement. page 135. See more in the word Unity.

BEZA.
Beza employed his whole life, in fulfilling his lust, writing his looues, and
revenging his corriualls. page 17. Beza by his own confession, used Harlotrie
with another man's wife, and Sodomie with a boy. ibid. The impious Elegy of
Theodore Beza. page 346. Of Bezaes d^ssembling with the Duke of VVitberge, and
of his boasting thereof, that he had singularly deceived, Ein tronkens bolts,
the drunken nobles of Almain. page 231. Beza charged by some with
dissimulation, answered, that it was lawful to cogge, lie, dissemble, and
deceive, to establish their Religion. ibid.

BIBLE.
How some Heretics corrupt the holy Bible, other some deny part of it, and
other some do wholly reject it. Luther rejects all the old Testament. page
152. Ochinus rejects all the new Testament. page 152. and page 177. Curious;
that he had rather never preach, then to expound any thing out of Moses: and
that Moses belongs nothing to us, page 152. That Moses belongs to the
Jews, and not to Christians. ibid.

Zuinglius prefers the old Testament before the new. page 177. The same
likewise does Ochinus. 178. The principal drift of Rider and other Reformers,
utterly to abolish all Scriptures, both new and old. ibid.

Johannes Dietenbergius (an Heretic) has collected in Luthers Translation of
the Bible, 874. Corruptions. Reply. page 47. Esmerus (who succeeded Luther and
Melancthon) 1400. Falsifications. ibid. Bishop Tunstall, gathered in the only
new Testament of Tindall 2000. Deprauations. ibid.

Broughton to the Lor. of the Counsel; that the Bibles of England were fowlie
corrupted. ibid. Doctor Reinolds requires that there may be a new Translation
of the Bible, because the former were Corrupt. ibid.

His Majesty that now is; that he could never yet see a Bible well Translated
in English, but the worst of all, he thought the Geneua to be. ibid. Luther of
the old Testament: Non mihi (Ecclesiastes) sed etc. Preacher; not to me, but
to the Jews, preach thy Moses. Reply page 48. Again; not a title, or point
of Moses belongs to us. ibid.

That it is a false opinion, that there be four Gospells. ibid. And he, against
all the holy Scriptures in express terms; Nihil est cum Scriptura, Bible,
Buble, Babel. The Bible, Buble, Babble, together with the Scripture, is nothing.
ibid.

The Puritans say; The public English Translations of the Bible, causes
millions of millions to reject the new Testament, and to run to eternal
flammes. Reply. page 68. They; it peruerteth the text of the oulde Testament,
in 800. and 8. places. ibid. They; the English Bibles, contain, very
partial, untrue, and seditious notes, too much sauouring of Traitorous
conceits. ibid. And finally, that it is inferior to the Turks Alcaron:
whereof see more in the word Scripture.

BISHOPS.
Of the hatred of Heretics against the names of Archbishops, Bishops etc.
page 228. Cartwright says; that Calvin would have shaken at the name of an
Archbishop, and have trembled at the name of a Bishop. ibid. The remorse of
Melancthon for the deposing of Bishops; would to God, would to God it lay in me
to restore the gouerme^t of Bishops. page 230. Such was afterward Caluins
remorce, saying. God does let us now see, what hurt we have done, that by
headlong inconsideration, and rash vehemency, we had so cast off the Pope.
page 230.

The complaint of Puritans against their Bishops. p. 217. Their watchwoord;
that they could not be blessed because of the Clergy. ibid. Martin Marprelat;
that such laws as maintain Bishoops, are no more esteemable, then those which
maintain stews. page 223. Bishops, to be members, not of Christ, but of the
Devil and Antechrist. Reply page 67. All that proud generation must down.
etc. Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, as such, be no members of the Church. page
67.

BLASPHEMIES.
Of diverse most horible and Blasphemous opinions of late Reformers, against God
the Father, against Christ, against the holy Ghost, and against all the holy
Trinity.

Blasphemies against God the Father. Calvin, Peter Martyr, Zuinglius, and Beza,
make God the author of sin, which is to transform God into the Devil page
140. Zuinglius says; when we commit adultrie, or murder, it is Gods work,
as the mouer, author and inforcer. ibid.

Calvin; the thief by Gods impulsion does kill, and is often constrained to
offend. ibid. He terms it blasphemy, to say that God is almighty, and
flouteth at this our Doctrine. page 141.

He; That God is not served in heaven without sin; even by the Angels
themselves. ibid. He; that it is foolishnes, to think that God the Father does
continually beget his Son. page 143. Others; That God the Father has a
spiritual kind of body having hands. page 144.

Calvin; That sins are committed, not only by Gods permission, but by his
will. Reply. page 40. and 41. He; All sins by whom soever committed, are Gods
good, and just works. ibid.

Item; the will of God is contrary to his commandments. ibid. The Devil lies
by the ordonance of God. ibid. God suggesteth dishonest desires, with
effectual decreee, operation, and will. ibid.

Luther; that at the day of Judgment, God will be mistaken, and judge many men
undeserved by page 150.

Of Selius, who affirmed there was no God, because he often blaspheming him, yet
lived thereby in greater prosperity. page 86.

BLASPHEMIES.
Blasphemies against Christ. Calvin doubts of the divinity of Christ. page
30. Castalio mistrusteth the Messiah to be yet come. ibid.

Francis Ket, Georg Paris, and John Lewis, executed in England for denial of
Christ's Divinity. ibid.

The true belief of Christ's body and birth, quite abolished by Beza. page 69.

The family of love; that Christ was no otherwise borne of the Virgin Marie,
then he is borne of their flesh. page 124. They; Of his rising the Sepulcher
being shutt; that the Angel had made the passage, and that there was no
miracle perceived therein. ibid.

Of his entering into his disciples the doors being shutt, Calvin says, that
he knocked, and so obtained entry. ibid. Next; that by his divine virtue, he
opened them. ibid.

Bullinger; that an Angel had opened them. ibid. Aretius; that they opened of
their own accord. ibid. Peter Martyr that he entered in at the windoe. ibid.
Simonius; that he entered in by the Chinkes of the door. ibid. Thalman; that
his body diuinished like a third, and so passed thereat. ibid. Others; that he
entered in at the Tonnell of the chymnie. ibid.

Beza; that the question of his Consubstantiallitie with the Father, and the
like, to be but trifles. page 140. Calvin; the name of God, to belong only to
God the Father. page 141. He, that Christ, considered according to his person,
may not be called Creator of heaven and earth. ibid. He, Christ to be but a
second king next to God. page 142.

Other Protestants; that Christ is not the Messiah. page 142. That the name of
Christ is a filthy name. ibid. That he was a deceiuer of the world. ibid.
That he was not Gods Son. ibid. That he was ignorant: in his discourses
absurd: and him self no more God then Socrates or Trismegistus. ibid.

Cartwright, that he could not be persuaded, the Israelites to be so madd, as
to believe him to be the living God, whom they saw with their eyes to be a
miserable and simple man. page 142.

Luther; that it is no marvel, if a Jew, if a Turk, if all the world, deny
Christ to be the Son of God. page 143. Cureus; that Christ's blood is
putrified in earth. page 144. Rider; his Birth, Life, and Death; not a
sufficient satisfaction for sin. page 145.

Calvin; that he refused to dischardge the office of a Mediator. page 145. That
at his passion he had no sufficie^cie above other men. ibid. That in his
prayer, appeared not a temper at moderation. ibid. That he was tormented with
doubtfullnes of his conscience. ibid. That he was astonished with the fear of
the Bottomless pit of horrible destruction. ibid. That ouer-whelmed in
desperation, he ceased to pray to God. ibid. this he.

Luther and Calvin; that Christ's divinity endured death. page 146. Heshusius;
Christ our deliverer, not our Redemer. page 145. Calvin; that the humanity of
Christ is not ascended into heaven. page 149. Celius; that his sitting at the
right hand of his Father, will continue no longer then till the day of
judgment. ibid. Calvin; they are furiously madd, who affirm any blood to be
longer conjoined with Christ's flesh. page 201. Socinus; that Christ was not an
instald Priest, till after his death, yea, after his ascension. page 232.

William Cowbridge; that all that did believe in the name of Christ were
damned. page 308. John Teuxsburie; that the Jews of good zeal put Christ to
death. page 309. Slibus; that Christ is dead, according both to Humanity and
Divinity. page 150. Musculus; That the divine and human nature of Christ,
died both together upon the Cross. ibid. Molineus, that Christ's meritts
profit us nothing. page 144.

Calvin; that his meritts are not to be opposed to the Judgments of God. page
146. That by all his works he deserved not heaven. ibid. He; that he wanted
some perfection of a glorious Resurrection. page 148. Others; Christ never to
have risen, but yet to remain dead. ibid.

Zuinglius; that the great Praetor of Luther, apparelled in his red hose, might
as easily have issued out of his Sepulcher, as Christ did out of his. page
149. Calvin; that Christ had not power to give us his body, and together to be
in heaven. page 123. Christ to be all one with S. Michaell. Replye. page 65.
These words to be untrue: In God the Son, who has redeemed me and all
mankind. ibid.

BLASPHEMIES.
Blasphemies against the holy Ghost. Melancthon, Calvin, and Beza, exclude the
Son and the holy Ghost, from infinite divinity and coequallitie with God the
Father. page 141. Others; that the holy Ghost was Father to Christ, in manner
of other Fathers toward their children. page 143.

Calvin flouteth at the holy Ghost; and says, that nether in the old
Testament nor the new, is there any thing to be found of his Divinity. page
151. Another; that he would return sooner to his Cloister, then believe in
him. page 153. John VVessell, (Foxes Martyr) denied the holy Ghost to proceed
from the Father and the Son. page 308.

Another; Iniquity is not fulfilled by men but by the holy Ghost. Replye.
page 41. Puritans; that the holy Ghost Baptiseth before Baptism. ibid. page
66. The holy Ghost not to teach the Church all truth. ibid. Whom he
sanctifies, though he afterward sin, yet never needs to repent. ibid.

BLASPHEMIES.
Blasphemies against the holy Trinity. Calvin wishes that the name of
Trinity were buried. page 140. The prayer; O holy Trinity one God have
mercy upon us, to be Barbarous. ibid. Rejecting out of his prayer books,
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son. etc. ibid. Ochinus (one of the
Apostles of England in K. Edwardes days) says the name of Trinity, to be a
Sathanicall name. ibid. The family of Love, reject the Trinity and Divinity
of Christ, as papisticall fictions. ibid.

Luther disclaimeth the forsaid prayer; O holy Trinity. etc. page 140. The
Seruetians, termed the B. Trinity; a three headed Cerberus, or hell hounde.
ibid. A solemn legation of Caluinists into Polonia, to have the mystery of
the Trinity abolished. ibid.

A Caluinian Sinod held, forbidding by public decree Ministers in sermons, to
mention the name of Trinity. page 140. Och nus; they of the old Testament did
not believe the Trinity, Coequalitie, Co^substantiallitie, Eternity etc. ergo
no more ought we. page 178. English Puritans; Glory be to the Father and to
the Son etc. to be a vain repetition. Replye. page 65.

BOOKS.
Of the hurt which proceeds by reading of heretical Books. page 163. Of the
censure of the Puritans, touching the Communion Book of the Protestants. page
12. Et Reply. page 88. and 89.

Books set out by Protestants with these Titles. Calvin tending to Iewishnes
page 272. Another Book; An admonition out of the word of God, that
Caluinists are not Christians, but only Jews. page ibid.

The prohibition of readinge heretical Books by Beda. page 270. The several
changes of the Book of Common prayer confessed by Doctor Dove. Replye. page
109.

CALVIN.
How impudently Calvin is commended by some Reformers. One says; Calvin the
chiefest interpreter of Scripture, then whom, never any better or wiser. page
15. Another, the most noble instrument of Gods Church, which has been since
the Apostles times. ibid. Another; that if in the same hour wherein Calvin
should preach, S. Paul come from heaven and preach, that leaving Paul, he would
go hear Calvin. ibid. Another;

Calvin the stone rejected by the bu^lders, made up in the corner head. page
15. Another; Calvin is to be preferred before all the Doctors of the Catholic
Church, that have been from the beginning. ibid. Another; then which the sun
never beh^ld any thing more holy, or more excellent since the Apostles
departure. page 334. Caluins form of ecclesiastical Discipline. page 219.

CALVIN.
In what contrary colors, other Reformers have pictured Calvin. One calls
Calvin; a Sacramental heretic. page 16. Another; Calvin died desperate. ibid.
Calvin at his death; rendered up his soul into the hands of the Devils. ibid.
Calvin died gnawed with worms, issuing out of a filthy sore in his prieuie
members. ibid.

Calvin marked on the showlder for Sodomie. page 16. Calvin, cruel, bloody,
tirranous, treacherous, etc. ibid. Another; Beware Christian Reader. beware of
the books of Calvin, and especially in the article of the Trinity. page 151.
Another; that he opens a gate to Mahumetisme and Arianisme. ibid.

Another; Arianisme, Mehumetisme, and Caluinisme, three brethren and sisters,
and three pair of breeches of one clothe. page 151. Another; who fears to
fall into Arianisme, let him beware of Caluinisme. ibid. Calvin, for his
insolency, together with Farrell, and Viret, his consorts, were banished out
of Geneua. page 219.

How sharply this angry Prince John Calvin, punished one of the best of the
City that year in office, a Minister, and one Perin, the Captain of the
town, for daunsing in one widdowe Baltasars house. page 220. Valentin Gentill,
and Michaell Seruet, for displeasing Calvin and Beza, were put to death. ibid.
Bullingers censure of Calvin and his proceedinges. ibid.

Calvin, and Caluinists, accounted by Pretestants no better then Jews. page
272. Caluins raising his man Brule from dissembled death, killed him outright.
page 365. Ochinus in contempt, terms Calvin, an earthly God, and Pope.
Replye. page 30.

CALVINISTS.
The censure of other Reformers touching Caluinists in general. That
Caluinists are proud, puffed up with glory and revenge. page 17. Less danger
to offend Princes, then to exasperate Caluinians. ibid. Their life infamous and
villainous. ibid. Caluinists, Masters of art in reproaches, lies, cruelties,
treason, and insupportable arrogance. ibid. Their holy City of Geneua, called
Babylon, Egypt, infamous Sodom, and they the children of Gomorrah. page 18.

Another says; the greatest and principallest of the Caluinists became Turks,
or Arrians. page 18. That Caluinists by dreams suggested by the Devil,
endeavor to destroy the Testament of the Son of God. page 137. Another, I
behold nothing to be more ambitious, nothing more insolent, nothing more
untoward, then th^se men. page 221.

Barrowes and Greenwood (their own brethren;) that they are pernicious
Dreamers; glosing Hipocrits with God; fasting Pharisaicall preachers;
counterfeit Prophets; pestilent Seducers; sworn, waged, and marked disciples
of Antechrist. page 222. Again; they are perfidious and Apostat Reformers;
precise Dissemblers; giddie and presumptuous Intermedlers, in all matters,
public and private; Watchmen over all actions. ibid. See more in the word
Heretic.

12. Double reasons to be constant Catholics. Ep. Ded. parag. 42. What
Catholic is, according to S. Hierom. page 2. The same, according to
Vincentius Lirinensis. ibid. The hate of Reformers against the word and name
Catholic, page 4. How and by what means Iustus Caluinus, a renowned
Protestant, acknowledges him self to have become Catholic. page 6.

CHVRCH.
Of the marks of the Protestants Church, and of their dissension of about this
point. A pleasant Epigram of the Inuisibilitie of the Church. page 86. The
absurdity of the Inuisibilit^e of the Church, refuted by Protestants them
selves. page 156. Melancthon terms it a monstrous speech. ibid. Luther,
Calvin, and others, a desperate opinion proceeding from Infidelity. ibid.

Luther numbreth 7. marks of the Church. The Magdeburgeans 4. Melancthon but
3. Calvin but 2. page 386. The Puritans teach, that without the Consistoriall
discipline, the Church to be no Church, the faith no faith, the Gospel no
Gospel. Reply. page 66. Lastly, the Church to have no head on earth, page 67.

COOK.
An answer to the L. Cook, concerning his prodigious amplification of the
words of Father Garnet, to wit; It is expedient that one man must die far the
people. page 61.

COMMUNION.
If Riders doctrine were true, God the Father should be made to eat and
drink, to receive and Communicate, the body and blood of Christ, page 46.
Protestants receive the Communion standing, for fear they should break the
Commandment, forbidding to adore (as they translate) Images. page 48.

How the Vicar of Ratsdall, dealt the Communion bread out of a Basket. page 48.
How Heshussius would by force have taken the Cup out of Clebitius hands at the
time of Communion, and of the good sport that passed betwixt them for their
liquour. page 175.

The answer of Oxford to the Puritan petition, that the Communion ought not be
administered without a sermon. page 184. Communion under both kinds, not
thought absolutely necessary in K. Edwards days. page 324. The same approved
by Luther and others. ibid.

Beza; that the Communion is to be ministered in any other food, when there is
no bread or wine at hand. page 123. Communion to belong to all Christians.
Reply. page 67. A Ministers exposition, to be an essential part of Communion.
page ibid.

CONFIRMATION.
Of Confirmation see Replye. page 66.

CONSECRATION.
Proofs of Consecration, both out of Catholics, and also out of Heretics
themselves. Proofs for Consecration, out of S. Ambrose. page 86. The same
further proved. page 92. Proofs out of S. Augustine. page 110. That to
Consecrate in a bad intention, even to kill, does not hinder Consecration. page
113. An objection out of Gabriel Biel touching Consecration, answered. page
116. Proofs for Consecration out of Hierom of Parage, a Protestant. page 303.
See more in the word Transubstantiation.

CONVERSION.
Of the late Conversion of sundry Princes to the Catholic Church. Three
Princes of Iaponia in the name of many more, rendered their homage to Sixtus
Quintus Pope, in Rome; having employed three years travail to come thereto.
page 348. Likewise two parts of the Grecian Church, prostrated them selves
before the last Pope Clement, in all devout submission. ibid.

CREED.
How Heretics are proved to deny every Article of the Creed of the
Apostles.] Calvin douteth whether the Creed of the Apostles should be of any
authority. page 135. The Anabaptists deny it in general and particular. ibid.
Erasmus, vnchristianlie calls it in doubt. ibid.

CROSS.
Proofs for the use and sign of the holy Cross. S. John Evangelist signed
him self with the holy Cross when he was a dying. page 80. The sign of the
Cross an Apostolical Tradition. ibid. Without it, no Sacrament to be duly
administered. ibid.

Thronges of people flocked to have S. Epiphanius and S. Hilarions blessing for
them selves and their children. page 80. Christians in England would trudge
before in high ways, to have Priests blessings. ibid.

Rider pulled down the Cross in S. Patricks, only to have stones to build an
^uen to bake bread. page 210. The devotion and Ancient custom of Christians,
striving to get a parcel of the holy Cross, to enclose it in gould and to
hang it about their necks. page 378. The reason, vvherof the first
institution of vvearing of Crosses and Agnus Deis proceeded. ibid.

Protestants affirm the sign of the Cross to be a part of the beasts mark.
Reply page 65. It to be superstitious. etc. ibid. Heraclius the Emperor in his
bravery could not once stir, or move the Cross; which he could do most
easily putt ng him self in poor apparel. page 79. See more in the word
Image.

DISPVTATION.
The crafty and usual practice of Protestants, provoking Catholics to a
Disputation. Aduertisment to the Reader. par. 7. The urgent and forcible
instigations of this Author, to provoke Rider to a Disputation. ibid. par. 8.
Diverse that were present converted, by Riders flinching from a Disputation.
ibid. par. 11.

DEVIL.
Of the familiarity which Heretics them selves confess to have had with the
Devil, and of their buying and selling of Devils one to another, and of
sundry of them which were murdered by the Devil. Of Oecolampadius;
Carolostadius, and Bucer; the Brethren them selves confess that they were
murdered by the Devil. page 16.

Luther says of him self; that the Devil slept oftener and nearer by him then
his Catharin. page 16. Conrade Risse (otherwise Zuinglius) bought and sold
Devils. page 231. Luther bought a familiar Devil of Carolastadius, and paid
for him, two shillinges. page 232. Scottish Ministers wholly addicted to
Nigromancie. ibid.

Of Berengarius, that he was directed and asisted visiblie by the Devil. page
136. Luther and Zuinglius, testify the same of them selves, and of
Oecolampadius, and Corolostadius. ibid. Calvin confesses, that he was not so
much guided by his own Disposition, as by his Goblins. ibid.

John Fox confesses a spirit (to wit, a black one) to have instructed him,
during his musing in his bed. page 137. And the same Fox confesses, that their
doctrine of Faith, was first revealed to Luther by an oulde man. ibid.

EXAMPLES.
The Example of Trasylaus, who, in his imagination only, had goods of his own
in others men's ships. page 180. The reward of Alexander to Churillus for his
verses. Reply. page 6. An Example of Francis King of France, and his challenge
to Charles the Emperor. Replye page 13.

Example of two Merchants of Collen, accustomed to utter their wares by lying
and swearing. Reply. page 32. and 33. The Prudent stratageme of the Emperor
Constantin, to discern betwixt the constant, and inconstant Christians.
Reply. page 100. Many notable Examples of diverse dissembling Hipocrits. Reply.
page 101.

The Emperor Valens, willing the noble Terentius to ask him some great matter,
in recompense of his labors and sundry victories obtained for him, only asked
liberty of conscience for the Catholics. page 104. and 105.

FATHERS.
The most Vilde, abominable, and contemptible words of late Reformers
against the ancient Fathers. Luther says, that he cares not if a thousand
Augustins, a thousand Ciprians, and a thousand Churches stood against him.
page 25. That Hierom does chiefly anger him. ibid.

Again; That Gregory was deceived by the Devil. page 26. That he has long
since excommunicated Origin. ibid. That he disdaines Chrisostom, as being
nothing but a babbler: ibid. That Basil is of none account. ibid. And Calvin;
that they were generally borne away in error. ibid.

Beza says; that they followed Paganism for a rule. page 26. Zuinglius; that
he alleged to the no Fathers, or Mothers, but to the word of God. ibid. And
Cartwright; that seeking in the Fathers, is a rakeing in ditches, and summoning
of Hell. ibid. That they imagined fondly. ibid. That they had many errors.
ibid. That Clement, Anaclete, and Anicete, are discharged for Rogues, and men
burned in the foreheads. ibid. That Damasus spoke in the Dragons mouth ibid.
That Ignatius was a Counterfeit. ibid. All this he.

Causeus says; that Dionisius was a doting Dreamer. page 26. Clement a
spreader of dross and dreggs. ibid. Ignatius an idle trifler. etc. ibid.
Others term Ireneus, a fanaticall writer. ibid. Cyprian, blockishe and
reprobate. ibid. Nazianzen, a babbler. ibid. Ambrose, betwitched by the Devil.
ibid. and page 87. Hierom, no less damned then Lucifer. page 26.

The Fathers of the 2. and 3. hundred years after Christ, condemned by the
Centurists. page 33. The Fathers of the 4. age, by Beza, calling the Council of
Niece, a Congregation of Sophisters, and the Creed of Athanisius, the Creed
of Sathanasius. page 135. Item, he proferreth his own expositions, not only
before Origin, but before many other of the ancient Fathers. page 163.

Cartwright scoffeth at the first general Council of the world, consisting of
318. most famous Fathers. page 237. He; that it is dangerous to allow
Chrisostoms proceedinges. page 263. He; that there is not sincerity to be
looked for at Hieroms hands. page 268. Item, that he is a Counterfeit. That he
often strayneth the text. That for milk, sometimes he draws blood. ibid.
That Augustine is approved unadvisedly. etc. ibid. All this he.

Beza says; that Leo in his Epistles does manifestly breath forth arrogancy,
of that Antechristian Roman sea. page 282. Luther; that if the Council of Trent
had allowed Communion under both kinds, he, in despite of the Council, would
maintain the contrary. page 322. Again, if the Catholic Church had
permitted the Clergy to marry, he would maintain such to be more in Gods
favor, who would maintain two or three whoores. ibid.

And again; If the Pope him self command thee not to eat flesh on Friday,
and in the lent, in no case obey him, but say; In despite of thee I will eat
thereof. ibid. All this he. Bullinger says; The Zuinglians will not believe
the Real presence, although all the Concills of the world, and all Angels
and Saints did command it. page 99.

Calvin says; Monica to have had an old woman's foolish desire to be prayed
for: and Augustine unadvisedly to commend it to be imitated. Replye. page 28.
Item they are called, pernicious Dreamers, doting Fools, idle Triflers,
fanaticall VVriters, Falsifiers, Deprauers, Blasphemers etc. Replye. page 47.

Item Fulke says; That Augustine and Epiphanius were deceived in esteeming
Aerias an Heretic. Reply. page 56. That S. Hierom rather rayleth then
reasons against Vigilantius, whom he calls, a good man, and his opinions
sound. ibid.

FAITH.
Of the Doctrine of Protestants concerning only Faith. Luther is angry with the
Apostle, for that he did not sufficiently extolle only Faith. page 137. Luther
adds the word only to the text, to make it affirm that only Faith
justifies. ibid.

Bucer, Brentius, and Mayor say; that, he is not a kind Christian, who
believes not with the same assurance, that him self in particular is elect,
as that Christ is the Son of God. page 137.

Zuinglius; that you can not be damned, unless Christ be damned, nor he saved,
unless you be saved. page 137. English Protestants; that to labor to make our
Faith assured by good works, is to shame the blood of Christ. ibid.

FATHERS.
What, and how, other some times, Heretics speak of the ancient Fathers.
Doctor VVhitegift in defense of the Fathers against the Puritans, says; The
Scriptures to have no other searchers, defenders, and conseruers but them. page
23. Calvin; that the Fathers do not disagree from Scriptures. ibid. Beza
imputes it to impudency and impiety, to divorce or sequester, Scriptures and
Fathers. ibid.

FIGVRE.
Whether words spoken Figuratiuelie, can not be true literally; pithiely
dicussed. page 40. Rider makes all Figures in the old Testament, equal with
Christ him self. page 177.

HELL.
The Doctrine of Heretics concerning Christ's descending into Hell. Carlisle
says, that it is a pernicious heresy, to say that Christ descended into Hell.
page 146. Beza says; that, this point entered into the Creed by
inaduertisement. ibid. Calvin, and others, make Christ's Descending into Hell,
nothing else but his burial in the Sepulcher. page 147.

The opinion of Doctor Humfrie and others, touching Christ's descending into
Hell. page 148. Bullinger affirms that Christ descended no otherwise to Hell,
then as he daily descends to us. ibid. Brentius; that there is no other but
an imaginatiue, figurative, and spiritual Hell, without other torments then
metaphorical. ibid.

HERETIQVES.
With what insolency, sundry Hereriques do praise and extol them selves,
and their own Doctrine. Zuinglius says; I know for certain my Doctrine to be
no other, then the most sacred and true gospel; by the testimony of this
doctrine, I will judge both men and Angels. page 151.

Luther says; I am assured, Christ him self to name me an Evangelist, and to
approve me his Preacher. page 151. Calvin says; the matter it self cries
out, not Martin Luther in the beginning, but God him self, to have thundered
out of his mouth. ibid. Luther; that they only, and first understand the
Scriptures, and that all others have been deceived. page 384.

A worthy saying of S. Athanasius touching the obstinacy of Heretics. page
241. Luther, Latimer, Frithe, Barnes, Cranmer, Iuell, Bale, Ridley, and Horn,
all censured by Rider for Heretics. Replye. page 39.

HERETIQVES.
How Heretics condemn the study of all learning, science and Divinity.
Luther burned the Canon laws. page 4. Zuinglians condemn all degrees of
Divinity. ibid. VVicliffe; that Universities, Studies, Colleges, and Degrees,
are Ethnicall superstitions and Diabolical. ibid. Luther in his sermon De
Studijs, says; that Studere, has Stultu^ in the supin. ibid. page 271.

Luther and Melancthon condemn all Sciences, as sinful and erroneus. page 16.
and 271. Richard Hunne, damned, as Fox testifies, universities, with all
degrees and faculties. page 271. A Prudent demand of the Emperor Theodosius, to
certain Heretics newly sprung up. Ep. Ded. par. 40.

JESUS.
All honor denied by Reformers, to be due to the name of Jesus. page 308. Item,
that the people should not be taught to bow at the name of Jesus. Replye. page
66.

IESVITS.
Of the malice and rage of Heretics against the Jesuits. page 62. and 63. Of
the continual endeavors and labors of the Jesuits for the saving of souls.
ibid. A Princely and most honorable testimony of Henry the 4. the French
King, of the integrity of the Jesuits. page 72.

IMAGES.
Calvin abolishing the Images of Christ and his Saints, yet allowed his own.
page 194. Caluins answer to some repining thereat; If any (quoth he) be
offended with this sight, let him either put out his eyes, or presently go
hang him self. ibid.

VValer, a Murderer and Minister, hanged on a gibbet, the picture of Christ
Crucified. page 210. Riders conclusion, that treason is committed by injury to
the pictures and persons alike. ibid. Riders own Son attempting to pull
down an Image, was by Gods Judgment precipitated from a height, and all to
crushed. ibid. Worship of Images proved out of Nicephorus. page 253.

INSTITVTION.
How Protestants fly and abhor the words of Christ's Institution. Bullinger
says; that, there is no virtue at all in rehearching them. page 122.
Zuinglius; that, they ought not to be read in ministering the Supper. page 123.
John Scut; that, Caluinists do so hate them, that they can not abide to see or
hear them. page 169. John Lassels; that, they should not be spoken in the
Institution. ibid.

A Scottish Minister, ministered the Communion without them. page 179. Item, they
are avoided out of the Scottish Communion book. ibid. Swenkfilde, flouteth at
them. ibid. Peter Martyr, terms the words of Christ's Institution (Hoc est
corpus meum) but a five woorded proof. ibid.

Luther says; Carolostadius wresteth miserably the pronowne This. That
Zuinglius makes lean the Verb Is. O colampad tormenteth the word Body.
Others butcher the whole Text. Some crucify the half thereof; so manifestly
does the Devil hold them by the noses. page 171. Thus he.

Luther again says; they fear lest they should stumble and break their
necks, at every syllable which Christ pronounced. page 175. Riders ridiculous
comparing the words of Christ's Institution, with the words of Circumcision.
page 178. Luthers confession that he strayned every vain of his body and
soul to avoid these words. ibid.

Persons, Testwood (both Foxes Martyrs) and others say, the words, This is my
body which is broken for you, to mean the breaking of Gods word among the
people. page 308.

IRELAND.
Diverse opinions of Authors concerning the first Conversion of Ireland. Ep.
Ded. par. 4. The universal Conversion of Ireland, attributed to S. Patricke.
ibid. par. 4. Of the fame of Ireland, for learning, Discipline, and Devotion.
Ep. Ded. par. 7. 9. 11. and 14. The testimony of S. Bid. ibid. par. 14. 16.
and 17. The testimony of S. Bernard. ibid. By what means learning and
devotion came first to decay in Ireland. ibid. par. 12. and 13. The testimony
of Marianus, Surius, Molanus, and Theodoricus. ibid. page 19.

21. Irish of Royal and Princely race, Religious persons, and Saints. Ep.
Ded. par. 20. The University of Paris and Pauia, errected by Irishe men. ibid.
par. 21. Ireland a 1000. years after Christ, retained the name of Scotland.
ibid. par. 26. and 36. Ireland in times past, the only known Scotland; assured
by two kind of Proofs. ibid. par. 26. 27. 28. 29.

JUSTICE.
Origin submitted his proceedinges to an Infidels arbitrament, and prevailed
against five adversaries. Reply. page 7. The same did Archilaus Bishop in
Mesopotamia, and others. ibid.

The memorable Justice of King Cambises against a corrupt Judge. Replye. page
20. A Counselor under Fredrick the 2. for abusing his authority, had his eyes
plucked out of his head. Reply. page 103. Another under S. Jews, was hanged.
ibid.

Jews of Luxenburge, Earl of S. Paul lost his head. Replye. page 104. Item
12. or 13. noble men of England, and else where, brought to utter ruin and
miserable death for the like. ibid.

LADY.
The Beggars answer to Mistress Kirie, who said she was as good as our Lady,
page 154.

LINCOLNESHIRE.
A true prediction of the Lincolnshire men, about the alteration of Religion.
page 343.

GOOD LIFE.
How Heretics generally accuse one another for lack of good Life, since they
fell from the Catholic faith; and of sundry other enormities. Calvin; that,
they have plunged them selves into all riot and laciuiousnes. page 17.

Smidlin; That the world may know they are no Papists, nor to have trust in
their good works, not one good will they practice. page 17. Instead of
Fasting, they use Feasting. ibid. For alms to the poor, they vnfleece and
fley them. ibid. Prayers they turn to oaths. etc. ibid. Spangberg; that, they
are become so wild that they acknowledge not God. ibid.

Luther says. They speak of the gospel as if they were Angels, but if you
regard their works they are mere Devils. page 115. They believe as hoggs,
and as hoggs they die. ibid.

Again he. After the Reformed gospel revealed, virtue to be slain, justice
oppressed, temperance tied, truth torn by dogs, faith lame, wickedness
continual, devotion fled, heresy remaining. page 206.

LVTHER.
How intollerably Luther is extolled by some Reformers. Luther set for a Saint
in Foxes Calendar. page 14. Luther begot truth. ibid. Jewel; calls him, the
most excellent man sent of God to lighten the world. page 15. Mathesius; the
supreme father of the Church. ibid. Amsdorfe; Luthers like, in spirit and
faith, in wisdom and profounditie of holy Scriptures, never was nor will be
in all the world. ibid.

Alberus; Augustine might not blushe to be Luthers scholar. page 15.
Sclushleburg; Elias and John Baptist were but figures of Luther. ibid. Luther
of him self; We dare be bold to say, that Christ was first prea ched by us.
Ciriacus After Christ and S. Paul, affirms Luther to have the first place in
heaven. ibid.

Fox calls him; a second Sun most brightly shining. page 171. Beza; The
principal instrument of Christianity in Germany. page 297. Alberus; A very
Paul. ibid. Illiricus; a second Elias, and one sufficient alone to appease Gods
wrat he. etc. ibid. Rider that Luther is more to be commended, then all the
Popes, Cardinals, Priests and Jesuits in christendom. Reply. page 39.

LVTHER.
What other Reformers affirm of Luther. Sclushilburg calls him, a seducter,
a false Prophet, a Crucifier, and a murderer of Ch is it. etc. page 16. Lindan
says; Luther uttered his drunken Dreams for the pure and express word of
God. ibid. Rider calls Luther, an heretical Monk. page 171. And lastly the
Zuinglians against all Lutherans, that they are posessed with the Spirit of
lies, and are contumelious against the Son of God. page 40.

LVTHER.
Luthers Verdict of him self, touching his filthy lecherous life, and
special familiarity with the Devil. Luther confesses to burn with the
great fire of his untamed flesh. page 16. That it lies no way in his power to
be without a woman. ibid.

That the Devil slept nearer and oftener by him, then his Catherin. page 16.
That the Devil favored h m much more then others. ibid. His prayer to the
Devil. Holy Satan pray for us, we never offended thee O most clement Devil.
ibid.

That by the vehemency of lust and love of women, he was almost become mad.
page 245 Whosoever is importunated by Sathanicall thoughts, for to repel
them, I consaile him to think upon some young maid. ibid. Luthers endeavoring
to disposesse one of the Devil. page 365.

MARRIAGE.
Of Priests Marriage, see page 328. Matrimony vainly made a Sacrament, and God
thereby made a liar. Reply. page 68. Diverse respects, for the which Sectarists
allow the dissolution of Matrimony. 1. mistaking on another to have been
Virgins. 2. Any unkind forsaking betwixt both parties. 3. Any great frowardnes
of either. 4. Dislike of parents toward the marriage. 5. If either refuse, or
can not fulfill the act of marriage. 6. If the husband can not beget children.
page 344.

MARTYRS.
John Marbeck, Antonie Person, Robert Testwood, and Henry Fillmer, made
Martyrs by Fox, being found a live long after. page 365. Fox confesses him
self deceived touching sundry of his Martyrs. ibid.

Foxes railing, to excuse him self, against such as had informed him, calling
them carpers, wranglers, exclaimers, deprauers, whisperers, raylers,
quarrell-pickers, corner-creepers, fault-finders, spider-catchers etc. page 365.

MASS.
Rider in condemning the Mass, codemneth King David, the Angels, the
Evangelists, and Christ him self, of Superstition, Heresy, and Idolatry.
page 196.

MEATS.
Of the forbidding of Meats, page 328. Of John Laney a Cutter, mayntaining it
to be unlawful, to eat Puddinges, or Hens whose necks were cracked: ibid.

MINISTERS.
Eaton the Preacher, first pilliered in Cheaepside and after at Paul's Cross,
for lyinge with his own daughter. page 18. Menno says; that, Ministers hunt
only after the favor of men, honors, pride, reuenwes, fair buildinges, and
loosenes of life. ibid.

Calvin says; that, they are emplie bellies, given up to all idleness, and so
that they may enjoy their own delights, do not regard whether heaven and
earth be confounded together. page 18.

Again Calvin; our Preachers are of such filthy example of life, that I
wonder at the patience of the people, that the women and children, do not
load them with mire and dirt. page 155.

Zuinglius says; we can not deny, but that the heat of the flesh has made
us infamous to the Churches. page 155. Luther says; that, Lewis Hetzer,
defiled 24. married women, besides maids. ibid. Quintinus says; that, they ney
after women as stoned Horses after Mares. ibid.

Erasmus says of another; that, he married three wives together. page 155.
Heshusius was exiled from six several cities for his sedition. page 218.
Philip Melancthon forsook his book to become a Baker. page 23.

Calvin says; Some are wonderful cunning to snatch. page 87. Some leave them
forlorn in nakedness, to whom they promise mountains of gould. ibid. Some what
alms they receive, they spend it in whooring, gaminge, or other riott. ibid.
Some what they borrowe, they consume lauishlie. ibid. Item, that, in these
crimes they have often the assiof their wives. etc. All this he.

None but of the basest will match with Ministers. page 105. Nothing more
frequent in Ministers sermons, th^n love matters. page 107. One cited in a
sermon, above 200. verses out of Ouids book, Of the art of love. ibid.

The punishmont of God showed upon John Amand, as he was preaching in his
Pulp^t. page 286. The answer of a Minister who had killed his wife with Poison
to have the use of other women. page 345. Georg David a Minister, married to
14. wives. And h^w many by his example, took 5. 6. 7. 8. wives. ibid.

Knox the Apostle of Scotland, abused his mother in law. par. 345. Knox
returned out of England into Scotland, leading with him three women sisters.
ibid. Knox committed a Rape upon a young gyrle. ibid.

MIRACLES.
Of diverse Miracles wrought by S. Patrick. Ep. Ded. par. 6. 7. and 31. Of a
voice which encouraged Dionisius of Alexandria, to the reading of books of
Controversy. page 163. How fire issued out of a place where the B. Sacrament
was reserved. page 318.

Of a woman, who not believing that Christ transformed the bread into his
body, had at th t me of receiving, a piece of other bread in her mouth
transformed into a stone. page 380. How Christ has sundry times appeared
visiblie in the B. Sacrament, in the likeness of a Child. page 371.

How a Pigeon descended from heaven upon Flauianus. page 371. Of Satyrus, S.
Ambrose brother, who was miraculouslie saved from drowning, by means of the B.
Sac. page 374. and 375.

Of VVedekind Duke of Saxony, an Infidel, being present in the Church with
King Charelemain, saw each of the Communicants, receive into his mouth, a
bewtifull young Child. page 383. and 390.

How the holy Bishop Stanislaus, raised up one Peter deceased three years
before, to testify the truth of a controversy betwixt the King and him.
Replye. page 28.

S. Optatus affirms, how the Donatists gave the B. Sac. to be eaten of Dogs,
and how the Dogs presently became madd, run upon their Masters, and slew
them. Replye. page 60.

Of a Tailor at Worcester, who affirmed that a Spider was more to be
reverenced then the B. Sac. And how at the same instant, a most ouglie Spider
descended from the roof of the house, and would have entered into his mouth.
Replye. page 60.

MONK.
A worthy defense of S. Augustine, both of the profession and very name of
Monks. page 277.

OATHS.
Of the sundry forms of Oaths of diverse Kings at the time of their
Corronation. Reply. page 112. The new Oath of Alle^gance, and the old Oath of
Supremacy, to be all one in substance. ibid. page 113 The new Oath of
Alleigance, represents the sl ight practiced by Julian the Apostata against
the Christians. ibid. page 114.

ORDERS.
How contemptibly Heret ques speak of the imposition of hands; calling it,
but a shaking of the elect into the Assembly. page 230. and 231. See more in
the word Priest.

PATRICIVS.
Of S. Patrick, and of his wonderful virtues, and holiness of life. Ep. Ded.
par. 6. 7. and 13. S. Patrick with diverse other captives being taken by the
Irishe men in the wars against the Brittons, was carried prisoner by them
into Ireland. Ep. Ded. par. 30.

PERSECVTION.
In the Abbay of Leuxouium in France 900. Monks were all murdered in one day
by pirates. Ep. Ded. par. 17. An Answer to the Objection of Reformers,
touching the Persecution under Queen Marie. page 4.

A notable history of Eusebius, concerning the Persecutions of primative
Christians, suitable to this of our times. Replye. page 90. How Master Nigram
was miraculouslie concealed in a search, in Master Belinges house; and how our
Lady appeared unto him. Replye. page 93. and 94.

Christians prohibited by public edict, to enter into any common house,
boothe, or markett, or to go abroad out of doors. Replye. page 96. The
inscriptions of Dioclesian and Maximilian in marble pillars, after their long
and great persecution of Christians. Reply. page 83. King Boleslaus of
Polonia, killed the holy Bishop Stanislaus as he was saying Mass. Replye.
page 28.

His Majesty's (that now is) Grandmother forced to use her conscience in a
private chamber. Replye. page 97. How Eudoxia wife to the Emperor Arcadius,
abused the Legatts sent to her husband in the cause of S. John Chrisostom.
Replye page 104. And how Valerius by violence, brake one of the Bishops
thumbes. ibid.

How the noble Sames, being a very fervent Christian, and abundantly rich,
having under him a 100. slaves, was by the Emperor condemned to serve as a
slave, to the most abject of all his slaves, together with his wife and all his
retinewe. Replye. page 105.

How Hunerick King, gave the wife of the Lord Saturus, to the very meanest
of all his grooms. Replye. page 105. and 106. Of the sundry sorts of pains
inflicted upon diverse holy Martyrs for the faith of Christ. Replye. page 116.

PIXES.
How Gorgonia adored Christ enclosed in a Pix upon the Altar. page 318. Pixes
used from the Apostles times. ibid. Of a certain woman who attempting to open
a Pix, was terrified by fire issuing out thereat. ibid.

Clebitius a Zuinglian Minister writes of Heshusius, another Reformer; that
when the silver Pixes were melted and made away he caused others to be made of
wood, to reserve his Eucharisticall bread in, which he kept so sluttshlie, as
was not good enough for a Cowheard to put his butter in. page 199.

PLACES.
That Christ was in flesh in two places at once, in heaven, and in earth,
proved out of the Acts. 9. and 17. page 132. That his ascending into heaven,
much more proves, then disproueth, his being in the Sacrament. page 131. See
more. pog. 276.

Christ never so tied to one place, that he could not be in another: proved by
VVestphalus and Melancthon. page 54. Christ both sat at the table, and held
him self in his own hands, and that according to the leter: as says S. Aug.
page 57.

POPE.
The universal authority of the Pope, excellently proved by S. Bernard. page
20. The Bishop of Rome, called Pope, and Apostolical Lord of the universal
Church. page 284. Flauianus chosen Pope by miracle. page 371. The Pope called
the Ruler of the house of God. The Chief of all Priests. The Head of all
holy Churches. The head of the universal Church. page 2.

POSSIBILITY.
Of the Impossibilities imagined by Protestants against the B. Sac. Whether it
be impossible that qualities can be without a subject. page 132. Whether any
thing beyond the condition of a natural body be possible. page 133.

PREISTES.
How ancient Heretics termed primitive Priests in contempt, Romanish, and
Roman Priests, as Heretics do at this day. page 2. Rider allows
Priesthood as well, to women as to men. page 228.

Luther defe^deth, that women may Preach, Baptize, and Consecrate: and
disputes against S. Paul commending silence in women. page 229.

PRINCES.
Of the doctrine of Puritans touching the deposing of Princes. Calvin says,
that, it is a villainous thing, unworthy, and wicked, that a Christian man
who is free, should be subject to other laws then heavenly and divine. page
218.

Beza, and Zuinglius; that, Princes are to be deposed, and that the people
should be only rulers of them selves. page 218. Sundry seditious Pamphletts,
dispersed by Puritans to this effect. ibid. That they have power to depose, and
dispose of Princes, with the least breath of their mouths. page 222.

Cartw^ight says; that, the Prince submitts his Scepter unto the Scepter of
Christ, and lickes the dust of the Churches feet. page 223. The like is taught
by Trauers, Knox, and others. ibid. Of the insolent vauntes of Puritans, that
they made a Prince of Royal blood, to lament his offense openly before the
public assembly. page 224.

That the supereminent authority of the King, must be confined within the
limits of some particular parish. Replye. page 69. That he is to subject his
sovereign power, to the pure, and Apostolical simplic^tie, as, of an
ouer-swayning and all commanding Presbiterie. ibid.

That his meek and humble Clergy, have power to bind their King in
chains, and their Princes in linckes of iron; and (if in case they see cause)
to proceed against him, as against a Tyrant. Replye. page 69. See more in the
three words Puritan, Rebellion, and Treason.

PROMOTORS.
The Promotors of these days, like unto those wh ch were employed in the
persecutions against the Primative Christians. Replye. page 82. Tertullian
says, that they were public Baudes, Iuglers, Magitians, Cheaters, etc. ibid.

Meliton says they were, impudent and perverse Sicophants, and ravenous
Thieues. Replye. page 82. The Lord Cook says; the Promotor is both a Beggar
and a Knave. Replye. page 91. Their office I confess is necessary, and yet it
seldom happens that an honest man is employed in it. ibid.

PROTESTANTS.
Protestants Religion, professed but 30: year old. page 30. Protestants
compared to Esops dog. page 109. Protestantrie had his original from a Jew,
named Josephus Albo. page 272. The Turkish Alcaron printed in Germany by the
direction of Protestants. ibid.

Above 200. several sects of Protestants. page 291. Whence Protestants were
first so called. page 300. How the common cause of Protestants, is engaged upon
Riders success. Replye. page 59.

PVRGATORIE.
Of Purgatory. Calvin testifies prayers, for the dead to be of above 1300.
years antiquity. Replye. page 28. See more in the word Resurrection.

PVRITANS.
What Puritans are, and what they teach and pretend. That Ministers may
excommunicate the greatest Prince. page 113. That he that is excommunicated, is
not worthy to enjoy, life upon earth. ibid. That it were good, that rewards
were appointed by the people, for such as kill Tyrants, as commonly there are
for such as have killed Wolves or Bears. ibid.

Doctor VVhitegift says of them, that, they seek to transfer the authority
of Pope, Prince, and Bishop, to them selves, and to bring Prince and Nobility
into a very servitude. page 159.

That Puritans seek by degrees, to be ridd of all laws, of all authority,
and to have all things subject to their Consistorian Discipline. page 200. The
definition of a Puritan, by one Butler of Cambridge. page 221.

A notable Description of the deep Dissimulations, and Hipocriticall
proceedinges first practiced by Puritans, to get them selves into the favor
and good liking of the people. page 221. and 222.

How Puritans dispense with them selves to dissemble, cheat, and counterfett,
to take all Ecclesiastical degrees, and to practice all Ceremonies, of Cappe,
Tippet etc. to remain in their offices and places of promotion. page 231.

Of the Puritans hyperbolical commendations and setting forth of their
Discipline. page 223. Rene^her says; that, the polliticall Empire, is but a
lower and inferior benche, to the Consistorian Discipline. ibid.

The Puritans appeache King James of perjury, because he dissaloweth their
Discipline. page 224. Puritans Caveat, that no names be used, which sound
either of Paganism or Papistrie. page 228.

The holy Consistorian Discipline of Puritans, borrowed from a Jew named,
Cornelius Bertram. page 272. Calvin teaches; that, as soon as a man is
illuminated with the knowledge of the truth, instantly he is freed from all
obligations, of obeyinge either Church or Prince. Replye. page 112.

PVRITANS.
What the Kings Majesty does censure of Puritans, and what sundry of the
Reformers them selves, do say of them. Barrowes says; they are pernicious
Impostors, presumptuous Pastors, Jewish Rabbis, Balaam ts, dissembling
Hipocrits, Smel-feastes, Apostats, and soldiers of Antechrist. page 161.

Others; they are pernicious Dreamers, glosing Hipocrits with God, fasting
Pharisaicall preachers, counterfett Prophets, pestilent Seducers, sworn,
waged, and marked Disciples of Antechrist. etc. page 222.

And again; they are perfidious and Apostat Reformers, precise Dissemblers,
giddie and presumptuous Intermedlers in all matters public and private,
watchmen over all actions. page 222.

The Kings Majesty speaking of them says; that, the Puritanicall spirit, is,
perjured, treacherous, inhuman etc. Replye page 16. and 17. They are very
pestes in the Church and commonwelth. Reply. page 70. No deserts can oblige
them, no oaths or promises bind them. etc. ibid.

Again says he; Ye shall never find in no border thieves, greater
ingratitude, and more lies and vild periuries, then with these frantic
spirits. Replye. page 170. And Knox him self says; that, nether can oath nor
promise, bind any such people subject to the Euangile, to obey and maintain
Tyrants. ibid. page 70. and 71.

REAL.
Proofs for the Real Presence, both by Catholics, and by Heretics them
selves. Corporal, and Spiritual presence not opposite. page 37. and 38. The
remorce of Bucer, Peter Martyr, and Oecolampadius, for having ever written, or
bewitched any with the Protestants opinion against the Real presence. page 53.
and 54.

Christ received with the fleshly mouth according to Luther. page 10. With
heart and mouth according to S. Aug. ibid. Our flesh is fed with the body and
blood of Christ, according to Tertul. ibid. He permits our teeth to be
printed in his flesh, accrrding to S. Chrisost. ibid.

He dwells in us corporally, according to Cyrillus. page 11. By natural
partaking, according to Ciril Alexandrinus. page 9. The body and blood, which
the Apostles did behold, and the Jews did shed, according to S. Aug. page 9.
Reallie, not Figuratiuelie, according to Lyra. page 53.

We receive not only a Figure, but the body of Christ, according to
Theophilact. page 53. Not significatiuelie, but substantially, according to S.
Anselme. ibid. The true body, taken from the Virgin, and which hunge on the
Cross, according to Innocentius. page 66.

The flesh assumpted for the life of the world, according to the holy Caenons.
page 67. That which was crucified, and which was buried. ibid. That which took
flesh of Marie, according to S. Aug. ibid.

That although it seem horible to eat the flesh of man. etc. Yet, that
notwithstanding such seeming, we both eat and drink the flesh and blood of
Christ. S. Aug. page 84. That it is a fearful thing for a man to devour his
Lord, which nevertheless we do in receiving. S. Aug. page 85.

In form is the flesh of the word of God true meat, says Origin. page 89.
Him self is received into the breast, says Clemens Alex. ibid. The same is
proved by Caietan, page 100. By Lanfrancus. page 106. By S. Ambrose. page 131.
By Bucer. page 132. By S. Chrisost. page 174. By S. Cyril. page 136. By S. Leo.
page 286. By S. Martial. page 289. By Anacletus. page 289.

The Real presence, fortified and confirmed, by the Confessions of all chief
Protestants, and those the most approved of all the world. page 303. By
Berengarius. ibid. By Wickliffe. ibid. By John Husse. ibid. By Hierom of
Prage. ibid. By Oecolampadius. ibid. By Bucer. page 304. By Calvin. ibid. By
Sir John old Castle. page 305.

REBELLION.
Of the Insurrections, and Rebellions, of Puritans against their Princes, and
of the infinite deal of blood which has been shed thorough this occasion.
Muntzer taken and executed, and above a hundred thousand of his followers,
slain in Rebellion against their Princes. page 218. In civil wars in France,
in the space of three years, not so few as a hundred thousand men weere
overthrown. page 218.

Of Puritans incensing the people against the civil Magistrate, and of the
answer of two Puritan Preachers in Stamford, to the L. Superintendent of
Lincoln, opposing him self against their public Puritanicall fast. page 223.

The Rebellious intentions of Puritans openly certified, by su^drie of their
own books, entitled; Martin Mar-plelat; Mar-Martin; VVoork for the Cooper;
The Counter-cuffe; An epistle to Huffe, Ruff, and Snuff; Hay any work;
Miles Monop etc. page 224.

A Description of the bloody spirit of Lutheran and Caluinian Ministers.
Sturmius says; they condemn, banishe, and nail to the Cross whom they
please. Replye. page 81. That if the Magistrate would but for three days lend
them the sword, would ensue etc. ibid.

Lanoy incensed the men of Rochell, to iterate their Rebellion against the
King. Replye. page 112.

RESVRRECTION.
Luther says of Caluinists; that, it is certain they tend to manifest
Apostacy concerning this Article. page 16. Villagaignon of the Caluinists; the
hope of life, not to belong to the bodies, but to the souls. ibid.

Almaricus, one of Foxes Martyrs, held that there was no Resurrection of
bodies. page 161. Others that no soul does remain after death. page 162. At
Geneua (to destroy Purgatory) they would have decreed, the soul to be
extuinguished together with the body. ibid.

RIDER.
Rider compared to a Painter. page 70. Of the Pisillia^s, who armed themselves
to a Conflict with the winds. page 71. Rider compared to a preacher called,
seek here and seek there. page 261. Rider compared to some, who being wounded
in their bowels, yet died laughing. page 290.

Riders words f^tlie agreeing with the words of the Heretic Dioscorus.
page 291. Rider compared for his lying, to Stratocles. page 292. Rider no State
Protestant. page 301. Rider fitly compared to Tarleton. page 362.

How Rider reprehended Minister Hicox for keeping a Trull, and of the pretty
quippes passed betwixt them upon these words, Base, Counter, and Tenor.
Master Sabinus Chambers testimony of Rider. Replye page 10. Rider used the
very express words of the old Heretic Felix, saying; that he would be
burnd and his Books, if any thing were written by him errenously. Replye.
page 14.

SACRAMENT.
How Heretics disanull the virtue of Sacraments. Zuinglius says; that, it is
the office of every Sacrament to signify only. page 10. Item he far
prefers the carnal and external Sacraments of the Jews in the old
Testament, before the Sacraments of Christ in the new Testament. page 177.

Reformers affirm Sacraments nether fruitful nor needful, if otherwise we
could be mindful of Christ. page 211. Others, that, about the word it self
many tragedies are risen, which will not cease until the world do last. page
211. That it is a name proceeding from the mere folly of man. ibid.
Carolastadius utterly rejects it. ibid.

Alice Potkins, Foxes Martyr, denied all Sacraments, saying; there was no other
Sacrament then Christ hanginge on the Cross. page 308. How wonderfully Calvin
and other Sectarists extolle the mystery of the B. Sacrament. page 367.

Diverse notable and worthy places out of Tertullian, Origin, S. Cyrill. S.
Aug. and other very ancient Fathers, touching the wonderful care to be used,
lest any of the B. Sacrament should fall to the ground. Replye. page 60.

Objections against the B. Sacrament answered. Whether the body of Christ may
be eaten by dogs, Cattes, or other beasts. page 58. Of the Sacraments in
general. Sacraments not necessary to salvation. Replye. page 68. Sacraments
no means of grace. ibid.

SAINT.
Of the deg^ading of Saint Thomas of Canterbury by Henerie the 8. to be
honored in Ireland for a Saint. page 164. Calvin plainly teaches invocation
of Saints. page 195.

SAYINGS.
The words of Menno giving the Bastanado to one of his soldiers for his
railing. page 203. Stratocles defense for his egregious lying. page 292. The
answer of Socrates to the harlot Castilla. page 359.

A notable saying of Varus Geminus to Augustus presuming upon the vprightnes of
his censure. Replye. page 6. The saying of Julius Caesar, when he had passed the
river Rubicon. ibid. page 13. The saying of a Gentleman to a Piper, who always
song one note. ibid. page 23.

The answer of Titus Tacitus to Motellut, in defense of his silence. Replye.
page 29. The saying of Diomedes concerning hautie minded persons. page 30. A
notable answer of S. Aug. to Faustus the Heretic, affirming he had the
truth. page 49.

The most memorable and courageous speech of S. Secunda, to Iunius Donatus,
who caused her sister Ruffina to be scourged in her presence. page 63. A
notable saying of S. Basil, of the falsely accused, and false accuser. page 96.

The answer of the glorious Hormisda to the King of Persia, desierous to have
him renounce Christian religion. page 100. The answer of the Emperor
Frederick, being demanded which of all his fauourits he most affected. page 101.

Isocrates saying, that the word of a King is more to be trusted then the
oathe of another. page 103. The answer of S. Basil to the Emperor Valens
being solicited to some unlawfulness. page 114.

SCOTS.
Ireland in times past, the only known Scotland; assured by two kinds of
proofs. Ep. Ded. par. 26. 27. 28. 29. Never King of Scots had any dominion
peculiarly named Slotland in Britanie, whilst the Pictes had Kings. ibid. par.
35.

The Scotts utterly extirpated and abolished the name and ofspringe of the
Pictes. Ep. Ded. par. 36. An universal rule to discern in ancient histories,
a Scot from an Irishe man. ibid. par. 37.

SCRIPTVRE.
How the verity of many Books, Chapters, and Places of holy Scripture, are
called in doubt by late Reformers. Luther; that the three Evangelists be
Apochriphall. page 32. The Tower Disputation; that S. Lukes gospel is
doubtful. ibid.

Rider corrupts the 6. of S. John, by adding the word Only. page 46.
Zuinglius says; that, Paul ought not to arrogate so much to his Epistles, as
to think that all in them were true. page 152. Bu^er doubts whether we be
bound to believe absolutely, every thing set down by the Evangelists. ibid.

Whitaker says; We pass not for the Raphaell of Tobie. Replye. page 51. It
sauoureth I wott not of what superstition. ibid. I little care for the place of
Ecclesiasticus, nether will I believe free will though he affirm it an hundred
times. ibid. As for the Book of Machabees, I do care less for it then for
the others. ibid. Judas dream of Onias, I let pass as a dream. All this he.
Of particular places corrupted in the English Bible. Replye. page 54.

SCRIPTVRE.
Of the prohibition of lay people, to read the holy Scriptures in the vulgar
tongue in S. Hierom and Tertullians times. page 269. Item the reading of
heretical books prohibited by Beda. page 270.

Calvin says; that, Satan has gained more by these new Interpretors, then he
did before by keeping the word from the people. page 270. Luther says; that
if the world continue any longer, it will be necessary in this matter, to
receive again the decrees of Concils. ibid.

SIN.
How Reformers make God the author of Sin. Let a man take his neighbors
wife, or his goods, either by force or fraud, because we can do nothing
unless God will, or approve. page 154.

If God were the author of Sin, what damnable conclusions would follow
thereon. Reply. page 54. No Sins forgiven, but by being not imputed. Replye.
page 67. No Sins in any one justified, to need repentance, or to deprive
from grace. ibid.

SPIRITVAL RECEIVING.
Absurd doctrine and contradiction of Protestants, about their Spiritual
receiving. page 10. The Protestants receiving by faith, proved to be
ridiculous. page 40. That spiritual things, may be received corporally and
reallie, manifestly proved by sundry instances, page 43.

SUNDAY.
Puritans cause their servants to go to plough and carte on Christmas day,
Replye. page 98. Only Sunday to be kept holy day according to the doctrine of
Puritans. Replye. page 97. and 98.

SVPPER.
Of the virtue and substance of the Protestants Supper. Proofs that Protestants
nether have Christ Corporally, nor Spirituallie, nor Faithfully, nor
Figuratiuelie, nor Sacramentallie in their Supper. page 37. and 38.

How Protestants agree together about this point. Almaricus says, the body of
Christ is not otherwise there, then in any other bread. page 48. Zuinglius; as
the Emperor is in his banner. ibid. Calvin, Beza, Peter Martyr, and Jewel, no
otherwise in the Sacrament then in a sermon. ibid.

Musculus says; that, nether naturally, nor personally, nor reallie, nor
corporally, nor spirituallie, nor figuratiuelie, nor significatiuelie is bread
the body of Christ. page 252.

SVPREMACIE.
Of the Supremacy of the Pope, and authority of the Church of Rome, confirmed
by the testimonies of the ancient Fathers, and of Protestants themselves. page
240. Diverse other proofs for the Popes Supremacy. Replye. page 35. and 36.

Of the new Oath of alleigance; and of the Popes Breue, and Cardinal
Bellarmins leter. Replye. page 109. 110. 111. and 112. What Sr. John Perrot
said to a shrinking Scismatick, who accepted the Oathe of Supremacy. page 115.

TRADITIONS.
Of diverse things believed by Protestants, not contained in the written word
of God. page 29.

TRANSVBSTANTIATION.
Diverse invincible proofs for Transubstantiation both out of Catholics, and
also out of Heretics them selves. By S. Ciprian. page 128. By S. Bid. page
129. By Berengarius. page 303. By Wickliffe. ibid. By John Husse and others.
ibid.

That it is the custom in Gods word, to call things altered, by their former
names. page 90. What sundry sorts of most forcible words the ancient
Fathers used to express Transubstantiation. page 128.

Proofs of Transubstantiation, by S. Anselme. page 66. By Lanfrancus. ibid. By
S. Ciril of Jerusalem. page 200. By Tertullian. page 244. By S. Damascen. page
255. By S. Ambrose. page 258. By S. Cyril of Jerusalem. page 265. and 266.

Of the change of substances, the forms remaining, proved by sundry
instances. page 366. The floute of a Pagan, saying; an infant shrouded in a
cake of flower, is given to them that are made Christians. page 370.

TREASONS.
Of sundry Treasons practiced by Puritans against their Princes, King James
our sovereign, restrained and endangered, by the treacherous practizes of
Puritans. page 224. Puritans for this fact, published a justification, under
the title of, A Declaration of the just etc. printed anno. 1582. ibid.

Primative Christians falsely accused by their persecutors of Treasons, as
Catholics are at this day by Heretics. page 225. Of the dutiful and loyal
respect of Catholics toward their Princes. ibid.

The Treason of Puritans against his Majesty, in Rutheuen, and in Striueling.
Replye. page 17. Puritans in France, Geneua, and Cabillon, not priuatlie, but
sinodicallie, resolved the killing of King, Queen, Princes and nobility.
Replye. page 69. The Queen Douager then Regent, was rebelliously contemned and
violently hastened to death. Replye. page 69.

By Puritans in Scotland, the King and Queens Secretary, was killed in their
sight. Replye. page 69. The Queen, great with child of his Majesty that now
is, designed to death with a Pistol, if it would have taken fire. Replye. page
70. She forced to surrender her crown to a bastard. ibid. Lastly, exiled to
her final destruction. ibid.

His Majesty that now is, imprisoned by Puritans, censured by
excommunications, and sought his death by the Earl Gowrie. Replye. page 70.
Finally, made him (as him self says) a King without State, without honor,
without order, where heardles boy^^ would brave him to his face. ibid.

VESSELS.
Of the uses of consecrated Vessels of gould and silver proved by S. Aug. page
198. Also by Theodoretus, Prudent^us, and Theophilactus. ibid. By S.
Chrisostom. page 234. How pagan Emperors cried out in admiration at the
sumptuousnes of holy Vessels. ibid.

UNCTION.
Of the doctrine of Reformers concerning Extreme Unction, see Replye. page 68.

UNITY.
Of the sweet Unity and agreement in doctrine, that is betwixt our late
Reformers. The Lutherans in their public writings, condemn the Churches of
England France, Flanders, and Scotland, and call their Martyrs, Martyrs of the
Devil. page 158. The courteous entertainment of Lascus Superintendent of 175.
fugitives, at Coldigna in Denmark. ibid.

Protestants assembled sundry times, and in sundry famous Cities, to join in
a fraternall attonment, confess that there is no other hope nor help, but the
hastining of the great day of Judgment to shut up all their variances. page 159.

Nicholaus Gallus says; that, the contentions amongst us are not small, nor
touching trifles, but of the highest atricles of Christian religion. page 172.
The Lutherans say of the Caluinists; that, they give the lie to the Son of
God. page 173. Tilman says; that, they enforce them selves against the words
of the Son of God. page 180.

Heshasius says; that, they blaspheme with an impudent mouth, the Son of
God. page 180. Again; they blaspheme barbarously, and are culpable of the
blood of Jesus Christ, and are murderers of him. ibid.

Luther says. They will say any thing, boast of any thing, confidently affirm
any thing, but prove nothing. page 296. And again Luther says. Let no man^^
leeue their Protestations, for it is certain that th y lie, and lie again.
ibid.

VVigandus says; that, they are nether flocks nor towe, but the capital
points of Christian doctrine that they contend about. Replye. page 50. Puritans
say of the religion professed in England, that ^t is Antechristian, and none
but betrayers of God do defend it. Replye. page 39.

George Mayor says. The evangelical Doctors, do more brutallie and cruelly
contend amongst them selves, then any barbarous Ruffians. Replye. page 50. And
the like has Chitreus, another brother in the Lord. ibid.

Caluinists to requite the Lutherans say, they have resuscitated damned
heresies out of Hell. Replye. page 56. And Lutherans again to them; The
Caluinists have allowed for their Catholic faith, the heresy of the Arrians,
Eutichians, Appolinarists, Tomotheans, Acephalists, Theodosians, Gaianits, and
Macarians. Reply. page 56.

John Scut says; The Sacramentarian profession, is a iakes or sink of many
heresies, and the last rage of Satan. Replye. page 56. And the Puritans; That
there is no right religion established in England. Replye. page 68. That they
be all Infidels, that go to their Churches. ibid. page 65. That it shall be
easier for Sodom and Gomor in the day of Judgment. ibid. That it is a very
Babylon. etc.

Again the Puritans say; that, the Protestant Ministers are dumb dogs; Idol
shepherds etc. Replye. page 88. and 89. And finally, the variablnes of their
doctrine is clearly manifested, by sundry examples of their own proceedinges.
Replye. page 97. 98. and 99.

WICKED.
Evident proofs that the wicked receive the body of Christ in the B.
Sacrament. By S. Gregory, Theodoret, S. Chrisostom, S. Hierom, Origin and
others. page 150. and page 212.

Sundry pregnant inferences, upon Protestant suppositions, to prove that the
wicked may eat the body of Christ. page 207. and 208. and 247.

WORKS.
Of good Works, see page 154.

ZVINGLIVS.
Zuinglius says of him self and his brethren, that leacherie had made them
infamous. page 18. Zuinglius died in rebellion, armed. page 18. His epitath.
ibid.

How a black or white Aduiser, appeared in the night to Zuinglius, and taught
him how to expound the word is, in this is my body. page 104.

An Errata of some faults escaped in the printing.
IN the Epistle Dedicatorie parag. 5. for notable, read not able. Par. 17. for
Add not only, read, I Add not only. par. 19.

In the Advertisement to the Reader, par. 7. for them learned, read the
learned. Par. 9. for obide, read abide. Par. 12. for our our Lady, read our
Lady.

In the Confutation page 3. for the 48. number, read the 34. number. Page 6.
dele, the 1. untruth. page 7. add in the margent, number 11. Rider. Fitzsimons.
and so consequenter to the 34. number. page 8. for en end, read entend. Page
16. for ad, read and. page 19. for then read them. page 20. for binghter,
read brighter. For dowke, read dark. ibid. page 24. For add. read and. Page
29. for, that not, but, read that not I, but. Pap. 31. for dissentions, read
dissentious. Page 29. for nor in any; read yet not in any. Page 34. for
condemned, read commended. Page 38. for so, read to. For thy, read they.
ibid. For any wise to consist, read any wise consist. ibid. Page 47. for he,
read be. Page 51 for can be, read can not be. page 56. for this my body,
read this body. Page 48. for does is seem, read does it seem. Page 87. for
fignum, read signum, Page 132. for Damaso, read Damasco. Pap. 155. for stood
horses, read stond horses. Page 166. for thus faith Church, read thus says
the Church. Page 184. for shll eat, read shall eat. Pap. 191. for vrgerd
read urged, Page 199 for herb, read herbs. Pap. 211. for befott read
besott. Pap. 213. for tear to, read to tear. Page 261. for woe for pointing,
read who for pointing. Page 262. for port of those words, read part of
those words. Pap. 312. for Rider replye, read Rider replies. Pap. 339. for
guggling stuff, read iugling stuff. Pap. 340. for facultatem prabeat, read
facultatem prebeat. Page 342. for illus, read illius. Page 344. for any great
forwardnes, read any great frowardes. Page 364. for all to have abused, read
also to have abused. For if by your cursing, read if by your coursing. ibid.
Page 388. for mare added, read more added.

Replye page 33. for from other perfections, read for other perfections. Page
62. for if forged, then is it calumny, read if forged secretly, then etc. Page
94. for several courls, read several courts. Page 105. for more then so
years, read more then 50. years. Page 113. for y t lawncing, read yet
glawncing.

The Corrector to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, there are some other faults which presuming upon thy courtesy I
omit to amend, as some times in some word, one leter for another: sometimes
one letter to litl^, in a word: and somt mes one let^er to much. If likewise
thou find any greater error, I pray the^ t^ pardon it, because I never had in
two years space, that this work was in printing; the help of the Author to
read or peruse any one sheet of all the labor. Vale.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS CONTAINED IN THE FIRST VOLVME Entitled; A Catholic
Confutation. etc.
THe Epistle Dedicatorie to the Catholics of Ireland, of all estates and
degrees. An Epistle of the Author to Master John Rider. An Advertisement to the
Reader. A Catholic Confutation of M. John Riders claim of Antiquity. page
1. Whether Romans and Catholics be not all one. page 2. Whether Roman
Priests be Catholic Priests. page 2. Whether the cawse of omission of my
Preface be truly alleged. page 5. Whether by Christ's being in heaven, his
real absence from the Church is proved. page 7. Whether corporal Communion
does exclude spiritual Communion. page 8. Whether our receiving by faith, be
only a figure. page 9. Whether any ancient writer, allows or mentions,
corporal receiving. page 10. Whether our Religion be wicked and damnable, if
the Antiphonarie was corrected. page 12. Whether wickedness of Prelates, be a
lawful condemnation of any Religion. page 13. Whether any late Reforming
Patriarchs were of commendable life. page 14. Whether S. Bernard reprehended
Catholics or Protestants of strange digressions. page 19. Of many extrauagant
digressions for want of matter. page 20. The Preface in effect, which was
concealed by M. Rider. page 25. Whether it be not all one to say, Scriptures
or Fathers to be for any opinion: as to say, the Scriptures and Fathers to be
for the same. page 27. Whether all Belief be contained in the written word
of God. page 29. Whether M. Rider has condemned his Church, to be base,
bastard, and counterfett. page 30. Whether we have changed the state of the
question or not: and whether the Real presence was ever denied by Protestants.
Whether Protestants do not falsely claim the term, Spiritual. And whether
all the terms of their Supper be not redeemed from them. page 36. The first
proof of Catholics for the Real presence, out of the 6. of S. John p. 39.
How sacred Scriptures are exorbitantly depraved. page 42. Whether M. Riders
unanswerable argument, be not unanswerable even by a child, to M. Rider
infamy, page 46. What the benefitts are of the Protestant Communion, and how
they frustrate all Sacraments. page 47. Whether there be any opposition
betwixt our Sacrament and Christ; And whether by entering into our stomaches,
Christ be pained or hurt. page 50. Whether Christ treated of the Eucharist in
the 6. chapter of S. John. page 52. Whether every Spiritual sentence or
mention, be a denial of Corporal and Real. page 56. How and when M. Rider
itterateth strange deductions arguments, and reprehensions. page 59. Whether
Christ's words teach Christ's flesh to have been given only on the Cross.
page 62. The second part of the Catholics first proof by Scriptures. page
65. Whether the Popes and Church of Rome, do in their Decretalls deny Christ
in the Sacrament, to be the same that was borne of the Virgin Marie. page 66.
Of M. Riders Arguments and their sufficiency; And how the 6. Chapter of S.
John does belong to the B. Sacrament notwithstanding it was before the
Consecration. page 70. The third part of the Catholics first proof by
Scriptures. page 71. Whether the words, Behold thy Mother, had one like
sense with the words, This is my body. page 72. Whether Christ's words do
testify a change of nature; And whether it was prophesied. page 73. When M.
Rider cites or omitteth our Authors. page 75. What blessing in the Sacrament
is commendable. page 79. That Protestants by their own principles can not
affirm Christ our Savior, not to be spirituallie it self in the Sacrament;
Also that S. Aug. disproueth them. page 83. How dishonestlie S. Ambrose is
treated by M. Rider. page 86. How the Fathers granting a Figure, yet deny a
Figure as it is taken by Protestants. page 89. How Caietan and the Master of
Sentences, are by him falsified. page 99. Of the Circumcisions being called the
Covenant, and the Paschal Lambs, being called the Passover: as if the B.
Sacrament no otherwise is to be called the body of Christ. page 103. How M.
Rider does avoid our objections, that they accept of the Sacraments, no better
then of bare figures. page 107. Whether Consecration be a new term. page
110. Whether there can possibly be any discord amongst Catholics in points
of belief. page 111. What the true Consecration is which the Gospellers
teach; And whether it be according to Christ's institution. page 121. Whether
Transubstantiation had been anciently known; And whether new names may consist
with old doctrine. page 125. What the sense of Transubstantiation is, and how
old it is. page 128. Whether the Article of Christ's Ascension, be not rather
a proof then disproofe of the Real presence. page 131. An examination of
Protestantrie concerning the twelve Articles of Belief in general. page 133.
An examination of Protestantrie concerning the twelve Articles of Belief in
particular. page 139. Whether Transubstantiation be but forty year old.
page 166. The fourth part of the Catholics proof by Scriptures for the Real
presence. p. 181. A discovery of more Puritancie in M. Rider; And of Puritan
Protestations how they are performed. page 183. Whether the vulgar latin
translation of the Bible, be to be preferred to all other translations. page
186. Whether Masses be said to Saints; And whether it be dangerous now a days
to honor Saints. page 194. Of his cruel threat against the Mass. page 196.
Whether Chalices were anciently consecrated, and of what matter they were
made. page 197. Whether the wicked receive Christ or no. page 204. Whether it
be treason to break Images. page 210. The last part of the Catholics proof
by Scriptures for the Real presence. page 214. A necessary digression,
containing a declaration what Puritans are, and what they teach and pre^end.
page 217. Whether M. Rider be a Puritan. etc. page 228. The second proof of
Catholics for the Real presence, by Concils and Fathers; By the Council of
Nice. page 237. The second part of the second proof; By the Council of Ephesus.
page 239. The third part of the second proof, by Tertullian. page 242. The
fourth part of the second proof by S. Cyprian. page 245. The fifth part of the
second proof, by S. Hilarie. page 248. The sixth part of the second proof, by
S. Athanasius. page 251. The second parcel of the sixth part. page 252. The
third parcel of the sixth part of the second proof. ibid. The seventh part of
the second proof, by S. Damascen. page 254. The eight part of the second
proof, by S. Ambrose. page 258. The ninth part of the second proof, by S.
Chrisostom. page 261. The tenth part of the second proof, by S. Cyrill of
Alexandria. page 264. The 13. chapter of the 4. book of S. Cyrill faithfully
translated, to testify the fidelity of Protestants citations. page 205. The
eleventh part of the second proof by S. Hierom, wherein is discussed, whom, and
how, we allow and dissalow to read Scriptures and Heretical books; And
whether Protestants or we, do most simbolize with Iewishnes. page 268. The
twelfth part of the second proof, by S. Augustine. page 275. The last part of
the second proof by S. Leo. page 282. A confirmation of all our former
doctrine by the Disciples of the Apostles, Martial, Anaclete, Dionise. etc.
page 288. A conclusion of these two several proofs, out of Scriptures and
Fathers. p. 251. The third proof, that the chief Protestants did believe the
Real presence, and alleged all the Fathers for the maintenance thereof. page
296. How our opinion, the Sacramentarian opinion, and Luthers opinion are
reported. page 298. Who are indeed Protestants, and wherefore so called. page
300. The second part of the third proof, how English Protestant Martyrs
confessed the Real presence. page 304. Of M. Riders binding him self to
consent with the first Protestant Martyrs; And of how many and monstrous
beleefes he makes him self thereby. page 307. Of Kemnitius citation out of S.
Ambrose, and Eusebius Emissenus. page 314. Whether Kemnitius allowed external
Adoration; When Pixes began; And of the triumph of Corpus Christi, feast.
page 316. How M. Rider behaueth him self toward Acts of Parliament; And of his
impugning Communion under one kind. page 321. Whether Continency of the
Clergy was anciently commanded. page 325. Whether we forbid Marriages, or
Meats. page 327. Whether Tertullian did write to his wife; And whether he
were for, or against Priests Marriages. page 328. Whether S. Ignatius did
favor Priests Marriages; And whether the Apostles were married. page 329.
Whether all that may not contemn their wives, may converse with them
carnally; And whether sometime married men may not be Priests. page 331.
Whether Paphnutius persuaded the Concill of Nice to allow Priests to marry.
page 332. Of M. Riders grant of the Concill of Nice to be ours; And his claim
of predecessors in Vlster. page 334. Whether S. Chrisostom and S. Gregory
allowed Priests Marriages. page 337. Catholic doctrine of the not marrying of
Priests. page 340. Whether Sectarists or Catholics be greater discommenders
of Matrimony. page 343. Of Priests marriages in the Oriental Church; And of
late Sectarists seeking their favor. page 347. Whether ancient denyers of the
Real presence were condemned as Heretics. page 350. Berengarius his
recantations and condemnations. page 355. Of many miraculous testimonies of the
Real Presence. page 358. What Miracles are reproved by Catholic writers.
page 362. Whether M. Rider understands any hard Latin. page 368. Whether
Eusebius affirmed true Miracles to have ceased. page 370. Whether Christ being
a man, may notwithstanding appear in the likeness of a child. page 371. How
ancient the Mass is. page 372. Whether S. Ambrose esteemed it a miracle by
the B. Sacrament, that his brother was not drowned. page 375. Whether Crosses,
Holy bread, or Agnus Deis, be allowable. page 377. Whether M. Rider, or I,
do misreport the relation of Sozomen. page 380. Of his evident deprauing Gods
word. page 381. Whether Crantzius be belied by M. Rider, or me. page 382.
Whether Optatus commended or condemned Protestantrie. page 384. Whether the
Puritan Church has the sincere preaching of Gods word, and lawful use of the
two Sacraments. etc. page 385. Whether S. Gregory Nazianzen believed the
Spiritual, Corporal, and Real presence. page 338. Whether in wisdom we
should by M. Rider be provoked to Miracles. page 389. How suitable the last
words of M. Rider are to them of ancient Heretics. page 391. The
Conclusion. ibid.
A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS CONTAINED IN THE SECOND VOLVME Entitled; A Replye.
etc.
A Replye to M. Riders Rescript. page 1. 1. Title, concerning the inscription
of M. Riders Rescript. page 1. 2. Title, whether it be true that I used
sleights and delays to confute M. Rider. page 5. 3. Title, whether M. Riders
pretense concerning the legible Copy be true. p. 8. 4. Title, whether it be
true that I refused to stand to the arbitrament of the College. page 11. 5.
Title, of the villainy and iniquity of these Puritans in this Judgment. page
16. 6. Title, of other untruths and false vawnts of M. Rider. page 21. 7.
Title, whether the corporal presence of Christ wis hatched 1200. years after
Christ. page 24. 8. Title, whether Beda be falsified concerning Scriptures in
the latin tongue. page 25. 9. Title, whether Caluins confession (that the
ancients a thousand three hundred years past, commended prayer for the dead)
be true. page 27. 10. Title, whether it be true that I misaledged Fathers, and
alleged fables, to confirm the worship of Images. page 32. 11. Title,
whether the Mass now used in the Church of Rome, was known to the ancient
Church. page 33. 12. Title, whether my proofs of the Popes Supremacy, speak
of the first five hundred years. page 35. 13. Title, of M. Riders blaming my
omissions, and attainting Luther of heresy. page 37. 14. Title, upon the
residue of the Rescript to the end. page 43. To the temperate Protestant
Reader. page 46. An Advertisement to M. John Rider him self. page 57. A
testimony of Henerie the fourth, the french King, of the integrity of
Jesuits. page 72. An exhortation to the constant Confessors of Christ now
afflicted for Religion. page 76.
FINIS.
A REPLY TO M. RIDERS RESCRIPT. AND A DISCOVERY OF PVRITAN PARTIALITY IN HIS
BEHALF.

TOGETHER WITH. A brief narration why this Author him self, renounced
Protestantcie. With sundry important reasons, tendered by him to the
temperate Reader.

ALSO. An Answer to sundry Complaintiue letters of afflicted Catholics.
Declaring the severity, of diverse late Proclamations; As, of the speedy
banishment of al Priests; Of death to them and their receivers, if any
remained; Of the oathe of Alleigance; Ransacking of Purseuants; And of utter
ruin, to any professing Catholic Religion.

AND Finally; A friendly Advertisement to M. John Rider him self.

At Roan. Anno 1608.

A REPLY TOM. RIDERS RESCRIPT. AND A DISCOVERY OF PVRITAN PARTIALITY IN HIS
BEHALF.
I being, unfeignedly disgusted, Fitzimon.
in the traversing of M. Riders untruths, as being a subject, loathsome to
any religiouse disposition, and prejudicial to other more convenient
employments; and having dispached my self of the Refutation belonging to his
Caveat; I thowght to take noe acquaintance of his last Rescript, but to leave
him a spectacle to God, Angels, and Men, by the only manifestations in such my
answer alredie imparted. But, perceauing his said Rescript to be brief, and
only to huddle up controversies by me already discussed; I will shape him, a
further succinct disproofe; yet not only of him, but also of the censure of the
Puritan Collegists of Dublin. How I showld name this his pamphlet, I long
dowbted, till at leingth, I found an occasion of naming it Postscript, or
Rescript, in these his words of his Caueats preface. My next treatise shall
manifest it to the world by way of a postscript, to which I will annex a
rescript. What was promised in those words, was performed Riderialy. What I
sought for, to wit the title of this discourse in those words is tendered.
Rescript it seems rather to be termed, as containing often rescription, and
reiteration of the same things.

1 TO ALL PRIESTS, IESVITES, AND TO ALL OR ANY, Rider.
that are so ordained by Roman authority, or that favor the same; the grace
of Gods sanctifying spirit touch your hearts, that you may see the feeble
foundation of your new sandie-superstition, and turn to Christ's ancient
Apostolical Religion.

1 Title. Concerning the inscription of M. Riders Rescript.
1 IT is by M. Rider, made a reproach, that priests, Fitzimon.
and Jesuits are ordained by Roman authority. A happy reproach; and more
desyrable, then the titles of Potentats. For, priests can not take that honor
to them selves, says the Apostle. Heb. 5.
And from whom cowld they more fittly receive it, then from him, whom S. S.
Ambros. in com. ad 1. Tim. 4.
Ambrose assures to be rectorem domus Dei, que est columna and firmamentum
veritatis: the ruler of the house of God, which is the pillar and firmament of
truth? whom Justinian the Empereur terms, primum omnium sacerdotum; Just.
in Authenticis de eccles. titulis. collat 9. Conc. Chalced. Act. 16
the chief of all priests; caput omnium sanctarum ecclesiarum, the head of all
holy Churches. Whom the whole Calcedonian Council in the year 480, intituleth,
caput vniuersalis ecclesiae, the head of the universal Church. To whom S.
Hierome boasting professes; Beatitudini tuae, S. Hier. ep. ad Damas.
id est Cathedrae Petri, communione consocior; To thy Beatitude, that is to the
chair of Peter, I am consociated in communion. Is not this rightly to incur
the curse uttered by the prophet Isaie? woe to you that call evil good, Isa. 5.
and good evil: putting darkness as light, and light as darkness: putting bitter
as sweet, and sweet as bitter. For what these Reforming men account
honorable, Io^. 10.1.
to enter into the flock and not by the door, and contrarywyse dishonnorable
to be ordained by Roman authority; Truth, and owld Christianity, thowght
thereof the contrary; to wit, such supposed dishonor, to be (as appears) most
honorable, and their pretended glory to be most ingloriouse. For thereupon
Optatus in way of disdain said, Optat. de persec. vand. l. 2.
to the Donatists: vestrae cathedrae vos originem reddite qui vobis vultis
sanctam ecclesiam vindicare; declare to us the begnining of your sea, you that
arrogat the having of the holy Church.

S. Cypr. l. 1. ep. 6.
And S. Cyprian in like manner vpbrayded the Nouatians, quia nemini succedentes a
seipsis ordinati sunt; because succeeding none, they were ordained of them
selves. In deed it is an heretical honor, of Victor the Donatist, Optat l. 1.
con. Parm.
to be a son withowt a Father, a soldiour without a Captain, a disciple
withowt a master, a follower without a predecessor.

According to which honor, if M. Rider will be a Lutheran, he can name his
ordination first from Luther, from him to Melancthon, from him to Pomeran, from
him to Mayor, from him to Schlusselburg; if a Caluinist, he may begin at
Farell, from him to Calvin, from him to Beza; if a Zuinglian, from him to
Bullinger, from him to Peter Martyr, from him to Gualter; if a Puritan, from
Cartwright, and so ane end. ye, if he be a Puritan, as he is openly detected
to be, Dangerouse positions page 113.
he is bownde to renownce all other ordona^ce, as the Donatists renounced all
other baptism then it which was administered by them of their own sect (as the
deposition of Richard Haugar manifests) but it alone which is according the
presbyterial discipline. But what needs this circuit? M. Rider says, as is
often showed, that all Christians are priests alyke, and consequently it
imports not whether he be ordered, or not ordered, in Rome, or in the class of
Northampton, Warwick, or London, where Puritancie was most in fashioning. So
then we must let him remain, disordred, or inordinat, as best lyketh him
self: since that he abides not but to be out of the jurisdiction of that
Church, of which said S. Hierome, above a thousand years a go, S. Hieron. in
ep. ad Damasum.
qui extra hanc domum agnum comederit, prophanus est. Qui tecum non colligit,
spargit. He that eats the lamb out of this house is prophan. He that does not
gather with thee, does scatter.

But because, as to other phrases, so to this of sandy superstition, M. Rider
is tied: choosing rather to be variable in his belief, then in his phrase; we
must once at least examine the reasonablenes thereof. First then I find in our
Savior a saying (whereupon it may seem that M. Mat. 7.16.27.
Rider has grownded these terms) Every one that hears these my words, and
does them not, shall be like a foolish man, that built his house upon the sand,
and the rain fell, and the fludds came, and the wynds blew, and they beat
against that house, and it fell, and the fall thereof was great. This may in
deed belong to that profession, Mat. 16.
which is not built upon the rock against which the proud gates of hell can
never prevail. Such are they that build not upon the Church of Rome, which S.
Cyprian, S. Hierome, Arnobius, Hippolitus, S. Cypr. l. 1. ep. 3. l. 4. ep. 2.

S. Hieron. ep. ad Damas: Arnob. in ps 106. Hippol. apud Prudentium. Dorotheus
in Synopsi. Prosper lib. de ingratis.

S. Cypr. lib. 1. ep. 3. S. Aug. in psalm. con. partem Donati.


Prosper, Dorotheus, etc. do term. Cathedram Petri, locum Petri, sedem Petri,
the cheyre of Peter, the place of Peter, the seat of Peter. To which Church,
for the promise made to Peter, that the gates of hell showld never prevail
against his faith, says S. Cyprian, ad Romanam fidem, perfidiam non posse
habere accessum; To the Roman faith error not to have accesses. And of which
Church, says S. Augustine, upon the same assurance of our Saluiour: Ipsa est
Petra quem superbae non vincunt inferorum por^ae, this is the rock, which the
proud gates of hell can not surmownt. Which also time it self demonstrateth
true, only of the Roman Church, obtaining, (says again S. S. Aug. de
vtilitate Credendi. c. 17.
Augustine) the topp of authority, frustra circumlatrantibus hereticis,
heretics in vain barking rownd about it; together with Infidels, Turks,
Jews, ambitiouse Emperors, and malignant Emulatours. So that the event
confirms the words of Christ to be true; and the words have performed the
truth of the event, that to build upon the Church of Rome, S. Math. 7.25.
is to build like the wise man, upon the rock; and the rain fell, and the
fludds came, and the wyndes blew, and they beat against that house, and it
fell not, for it was fownded upon a rock.

Who then must be the builders, upon the sands? all they that are not in the
forsaid Church, that is fownded upon the protected rock of Rome. For, the rain
falling from above, (that is the decrees of the Catholic Church) does wash,
and wast away, all their fanatical fantasies: as appears by induction in the
heresies of the Arians, Pellagians, Donatists, etc. The fludds (that is the
succession of time, over viewing the fruicts of their lives, and doctrine) do
bear away their pyles and propps of estimation, whereupon their hypocritical
building consists. The wynes, (that is their own mutual contradictions, and
contentions) do ruin and prostrat the hautie habitation, and bring it as a
second proud tower of Babylon, by disagreeing tongs, to utter destruction, yea
and oblivion. This we have perceived from the beginning, in all buildings, and
frames, erected besyd the rocK of the Roman Church: that now we can not dowbt
of the like destruction, to them of these times; which already we behowld to
crack, and sundre, in their fundations; by dislyking their scriptures,
sacraments, service, communion books, ceremonies, translations, and in vain
forming, reforming, deforming them, as always learning and never attayning to
the knowledge of truth. 2. Tim. 3.7.
So that we may well say, and they in shame can not deny it; that all the
figures of their figurative opinion, like leters, and lines, drawn in sand, by
such vain, fludds, and wyndes, are daily defaced, and already utterly
forgotten in many provinces, where they vaynly thowght to have had stidfast
fundation. Thus much for the title.

Rider.
2. GEntlemen, It is not unknown unto all, or most of you, that in Septe^bre^
1602. my Fryendly Caveat to Irelands Catholics, against the insufficie^t
answer and proofs of Master Henry Fitzsimon Jesuit, touching the Corporal
presence of Christ's invisible flesh in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
presented it self to the view and censure of the world: which being also
delivered to Master Fitzsimon his hands, he promised a present confutation if
I would procure his Nephew Carry to be his Clarke to ingrosse the same: which
presently I obtained of the right Honorable the Lord Lieutenant, and within
fifteen days after coming to Master Fitzsimon, he showed me twelve sheets
or therabouts, written in confutation of my work, promising me that within a
month, I should have a perfect Copy of the same. But what shifts and delays
since he uses to keep it from my particular view, which he offers to most
men's fight, I had rather his letters if need be unfold them, the^ I write
them: proclaiming still with his stentorian voice, to every corner of the
kingdom, That Rider is overthrown horse and foot: which when some of his
best favorites had told me, I urged him then more earnestly, assuring him
unless he gave me a Copy, I would recall his Clarke.

2 Title. Whether it be true that I used slights and delays, to confute M.
Rider.
2 HE that appealed to S. Vincent Lirin. Fitzimon.
as to one that did adward the title of Catholic to Reformers; to S. Bernard,
as one that did disprove the supremacy of the Pope; and now in his title
alluded to our fundation as forsooth upon sandy superstition, and the same,
new; all men may know him to be inconsiderat, or ironical, in speaking of all
things contrariously, and peruersly. Will you behowld him to follow on in the
same tenor?

He tells first, that upon the view of his book I promised a present
confutation, but that after I used many shifts, and delays, to keep it from
his particular view, and yet blondred abroad in a stentorian voice that Rider
was overthrown, horse, and foot.

Of all which, nothing is true, but that I promised a present confutation of
his Caveat. Of the residue, part is improbable, and part impossible. For it is
improbable, that I being close prisoner in the castle of Dublin, showld
proclaim, in a Stentorian voice, to every corner of the kingdom, that Rider
was overcome. And how cowld M. Rider persuade him self, that I together was in
the Castle (from which he knew I did never in five years depart) and also
abroad in every corner; he not being able to believe, that Christ him self,
can together be in many places? Or was my voice there, without my person? or was
my agents for me, none having access to know my mind? But this hyperbole, or
amplification of his; came from fear, and guilty conscience; because, quod
metuit auget, that which one fears he augmenteth: Seneca in Agam. Cic. pro
Milone.
and penam semper ante oculos versari putant, qui peccauerunt: and they always
think their punishment before their eyes, that have offended. He knew good
occasion of fearing that all men did discourse of his confutation, and so
affirmed that I had done what I cowld not do, althowgh I would.

And as I said, it is impossible, that I showld use sleights and delays to
make my word good, considering these two requests, the one to the L. deputy:
the other to the puritan Collegists, that they having me in their hands, would
be arbitrers in our cause; and being so impartial toward my profession, yet
that so soon I offered to stand to their arbitrament, and any arbitrarie
penalty they showld denownce, if I did not make my word good. The leters to
both contained as follows. First it to the L. Deputy, Earl of Deuonshyre,
verbatim in this manner.

Right honorable our most singular good Lord, occasion of my presuming to
write to your honor, is tendered by M. Riders book, in which it pleases him
to specify my name. He has chosen your honor, and the rest of her Majesty's
privy council, to patronize his labors, and I also for my part refuse not to
abide your honors censure and arbitrament. What Varus Geminus said to
Augustus, they that durst plead in his presence were ignorant of his greatness,
and they that durst not of his benignity; I may conveniently inuert and apply
to your Lordships: they that adventure to stand to your arbitrament, are
audacious toward your profession, and they that do not are timorouse of your
disposition, and vprightnes.

We are at issue (in a matter of fact, as was lately in France before the king,
betwixt both professions) that they of us are to be taxed for imposters, who in
our labors have wreasted, perverted, and falsified, the primative fathers of
the Church: which may easily be discerned, both by only perusing the volumes of
the fathers, and by verdict of all chief Protestants in the world, whom we
undertake to testify the foresaid fathers to stand with us against M. Rider.

Vouchsafe of your especial affability but one half days trial, and it shall
appear that either he is, of whom Homer latinized, speaks, Ille sapit solu^,
volitant alij volut vmbrae: or for his presumptuouse dedication of his book to
your honors, that he deserves to be treated as Aristo, whom the Athenians
punished for unworthy ^reating their commendations; or as the seely Po^t,
whom Lucius Silla both warned and waged never further to write; or lastly as
Ch^rilus, whose verses Alexandre considering, and finding but seven good,
adwarded for each of them a piece of gowld, and for the residue so many
buffets.

I truly ame of S. Gregory's mind, saying: Who althowgh weak, wowld not
contemn the teeth of this Leuiathan, unless the terror of secular power did
mantayne them? It is a duble drift for what these persuade by flatering words,
those do enforce with smarting swords. Dayne noble Lord, but to suspend so
long the sword, and fayntnes, and falshod in this matter will soon be revealed.
God almighty preserve your Ho: to his and your glory.

From the prison 28. Septem. 1602. Your Honors humble client to command
assuredly in Christ. Henry Fitzimon.


This leter being delivered within 10. days after that M. Riders. book came
into light; the most honorable Deputy being of fervent desyer to further the
disputation, sent for M. Rider, showed him the leter, and finding him relenting
from the point, he sent me word by M. Henry Kneuet his gentleman Vssher, that
if I would in deed come to trial, the only means to be, to entreat them of the
College upon the credit of their cause, and champion, to sue for such
disputation, and they them selves to be Vmpyers. A hard condition, but
necessary in that place and time. So then in great distrust of others, but
without all suspicion in my self, (for what enemy would betray another,
appealing to his fidelity?) I wrote this lettre following to them of the
College, but indorsed to D. Challenor.

Wor. Cousin. The Leter.

Great men in confidence of their cause have resigned their conference and
controversy to unequal judges, in sondrie respects. Origin submitted his
proceedings to ane Infidels arbitrament, and prevailed against five
adversaries. So Archelaus bishop in Mesopotamia, by like arbitrer, did
vainquish Manes. So lastly did the Israelits surmownt the Samorits. By whose
example, I have adventured to appeal unto, and endure, your, and the College
adwardisement, in this controversy betwixt M. Rider, and me: that whither of
us has perverted, dissembled, or denied the effect and substance of authors by
us alleged, concerning the consent of Antiquity in M. Riders cause, or mine,
must stand to any arbitrarie reprehension, and condemnation it shall please you
to denownce. VVherfor I crave, that it will please you to certify, whether you
will daygne to be Vmpyrs, to adward according to equity, and indifferency.

Whereunto, that you condescend the rather, I aduouch, and so Godwilling will
manifest, that also all chief Protestants in the world do stand with us in
this controversy confessing the ancient Fathers to be ours, and opposite to M.
Rider.

Let not my extraordinary confidence procure any inconvenience or pulpit
commotions and exclamations, that posterity may understand our courses to have
becomed Christians. I expect your awnswer, committing you to God with
affectionat desyers of your happiness.

7. Nouemb. 1602. Yours to command in Christ. Henry Fitzsimon.


To this leter, I received a mere puritanical awnswer, full of sugared affected
words, vainly applied, and all the matter wreathed in obscurity, with this
only parcel to the purpose.

Concerning the Judgment that you would have our College for to yield, The
Answer.
as tuoching the cause between M. Deane Rider, and you, (provided always that
you make us noe party) when we shall see your books, and have some small time
allowed to compare the same, by the mercy of God we promise faithfully to
perform it, without all respect of person, and partiality to the cause. And I
would to God, that what effect Eutropius fownde, and those that vouchsafed them
selves to be hearers of his judgment, the same, such among any of us might
feel, and find: that do err from the truth of God, of Ignorance or of
knowledge; for the Lords arm is not so shronken in, but that he may make us
yet of a Saul a Paul. To whose grace I affectionatly leave you.

Nouem. 9. 1602. Your Cousin, desyring in Christ you may be his brother. L.
Challenor.


Behowld the Puritans leter (in style, and pointing; of them selves) to
testify to all the world, that I being in prison, (not being able to shrink
out of their hands, or punishment, whenever it showld please them to cite, or
condemn me) yet did profre, urge, and importunat, the being confronted to M.
Rider, in manner aforsayd! Let any therefore judge, how Riderly it is assured,
that I sowght many sleights, and delays, from coming to this conflict.

Only I request all Readers to retain in their mind, the judgment by me
appealed unto, to have been concerning the allegations that M. Rider falsyfied,
depraved, and denied, as well his own as mine, in maintayning that the ancient
Fathers stood for Protestants, and not for Catholics. Such to have been the
state of the question, from the beginning, both his first challenge, and these
two appeals of mine, and his own confession following do evidently certify.

Rider.
3 VVhereuvpon within two days after, (being in May last) he sent me by his
Clarke a scroule blotted, interlined, crossed, and vnlegibile, assuring me not
withstanding, within three weeks after, to have a perfect Copy, which now
being ten months since, notwithstanding my many letters, more messengers, and
twice my self desired it, yet I cannot get.

3. Title. Whether M. Riders pretense concerning the legible copy, be true.
Fitzimon.
3. TO make M. Rider confute him self, I will allege certain of his words
in his dedicatorie Epistle, to the Lords of the Council. They (says he speaking
against them that did contemn his wrytings) that will censure before they see,
are like such wysemen, as will shoot their bolt as soon at a bush, as at a
bird. Now a little after in this place, talking of my copy, he says: the
highest in the land had a view of his scrowle, and the reuerendest, and
learnedest dilygently perused the same. What their opinion was of it, I
silence for a season. By these two clauses, say I, either M. Rider must confess
that my copy was legible: or that the highest in the land did not peruse it
diligently: or if they showld censure it without such perusing it as being
legible; that by his saying they can be noe wyser in that, then such wysemen as
censure before they see, and shoot as soon at a bush as (...) a bird. If he
can gambole over this block, without breaking the shinnes of his pretense, he
shall have my suffrage to bear the ball on shroue-tewesday.

Concerning the copy by me exhibited to M. Rider, you may understand, that
when I perused his Caveat, and at the first sight, considered his spirit to say
any thing for his reputations sake, and accordingly to auerr the most desperate
untruths that any bearing contenance of a man, might vttre; I wroote to him
the very next day, in most instant and intising terms, that if he had any
courage in his cause, he showld procure me one to extract my lucubrations, and
I would with unexpected speedines make notoriouse our several dealings. He no
sooner required it, then it was granted, and withal a warrant to protecte any
else that would dispute with him, and that the printer might publish his and my
intermedlings. As he confesses, within fifteen days, I had dispatched twelve
sheets in refutation of his Caveat, of which, during his being present, I read
part to him self, and proffered in the place to show the authors them selves
correspondent thereto. He absolutely refused all examination, and disputation,
(for as both the Constable and his own man Venables will not deny, he never
came at me, without a covenant, that we showld not confer in any matters of
learning; to which his own testimony following, accords, that in words I
showld be to hard for a hundred) requesting that reciprocatly, we showld
communicate our arguments one to another, and conioyntly imprint them at our
several expenses. To this I willingly accorded: God does know, not upon any
presumption of my talents, but only upon the assurance of the Catholic
belief. Whereupon I being fownded, althowgh being the meanest of a thousand,
and as a man of straw, yet in that height was more dreadful to them then any
scarre-Crow in ane open feelde to the dastard foul.

After this mutual promise, his mind being trubled with what I had then showed
to him, he cowld never abide that I might inioye the use of the print, always
alleging, that according to my promise he must first have perused what I
would print.

By this means, retracting his reciprocation to me for equal dealing, it was
his ordinary refuge in all assemblies, that I might print what I list, if I
would first present him with the sight of my wrytings. So then the 4. of
February following in the same year according to their date (my copy
containing two quyers of paper) having first kept an extract for my self, I
had another copied out and delivered to him. Judge also whether it was a
reprehensible delay, to spend four months in the making of as much as
replenished two quyers of paper, and in re-copying the same in as many quyers.
All these pains and charges must I have been at, he having upon me the
wringing vye, and following it egerly, that if I would not sustain, I showld
loose my game.

Now what excuse think you, cowld further be invented? forsooth my copy was
not legible. Yet you lately have seen him say, that it was, and it was not; it
was not, and it was. And after, you shall further behowld him assuring, that it
has this, and it has not that; and taking upon him, to tell many legible
points thereof. Notwithstanding, the print was debarred beyond all promises: yet
thereby if he would suffer my trauails to have passed, it both might be legible
to his hearts desire, and he not pointed at for not daring to awnswer objections
against his Caveat, unless he might first have them a time, to be well
considered. Which foul imbecillitie in a professor of learning, his own
master in Oxford (at this time my dear brother,) M. Sabinus Chamber does
testify to have been anciently in M. Rider. These are his words under his
hand. M. John Rider, came to me to Oxford, about the beginning of lent; (as I
remember in the year 1581. recommended by my awnt, by whom he was then
maintained. He remained there till the act, which is celebrated always in
summer, ordinarily after the 14. of Iulij. I none, and the same year, he
passed bacheler and master of Art, by means of I know not what iuggling, and
perjury. I never had any scholar more indocile, and unskillful. Before his
awns^ering, I must have instructed him in all that I would oppose; and yet the
next day, he was never the wyser. The kind offices that my awnt, and I did him
if he deny, he must be profowndly impudent. This I testify under my hand. At
Luxenburg, 24. December. 1604.

In the end, he saying, that the chief point of my Profession is Verba dare,
to delude; for justifying of him self, he propowndeth demands: which being
examined, will show the former declaration to be true; and it will appear to
contain nothing, but a dazzling mist betwixt men's sight and ^is filthy flying
from the point, according to the saying of I ^rece: Lucret. l. 6.
Et cra^ ^oluit caligine fumum
he in deep mist infowlded dimming smooke.


Rider.
4 He also appealed to the College to be Vmpier betwixt us, whither of us had
alleged Scriptures and Fathers with more truth, and whither be had altered
the state of the Question, as I charged him before.

4. Title. Whether it be true that I refused to stand to the arbitrament of
the college. And what arbitrament the collegists affoorded.
4. There being a jealousy betwixt them of the College, Fitzimon.
and M. Rider, my appeal to their arbitrament, was a heavy load upon his
reputation; they apparently not being partial in my part of the cause, and yet
he loath to stand to their kyndnes. Therefore first to gain time, and delay, he
would be tried no where, but in Oxford. When this evasion by all men as
ridiculouse was hissed at, and that in all meetings, at his own table, and
every where else, his slacknes to a public conflict, was reproached; all other
vain excuses vanishing of themselves; he at leingth was constrained, to
incroach under the lee, and into the frindshipp, of them of the College. What
packing there was betwixt the^, I know, not: but this I know, that he that never
durst before stand to their arbitrament, at that time seemed forward to resign
his cause to their decision. If any conjecture upon probable occasion be
allowed, in this conference they of the College informed him, that he had
utterly betrayed him self in the main point of the controversy: but yet,
that one only refuge remained; to wrest the matter of Christ's true presence,
(which my allegations did demonstrat) to the name, or term of
transubstantiation, by which all late papists do express such presence of
Christ in the B. Sacrament: that if I showld not discover this foisting in the
question of the name, in steed of the question of the matter M. Rider might be
well supported against my proofs, whereby the matter, and not the foresaid name,
is auerred. Such to have been the quirk of all their consultation, and the only
hope whereupon M. Rider hanged his confidence, by dilligent observation of the
circumstances, may be collected. But as I said, never before the month of
Apriel 1604. could M. Rider be purchased to abide the arbitrament of his own
pew-fellowes the Collegists.

Now was my banishment by his Majesty licenced, to the disgust and distrust,
of M. Rider, least, that being out of his gryphs, I would publish the
certainty of all our courses; and to the greater terror of him, because I
certifyed all Protestants reparing to the Castle, that I was syncerly
determined to do no less then he feared, at my first leisure, and commodity.
Whereat new exprobations at every incowntre falling upon him, he made that wise
Rescript, to which now I answer. Which being made, the right Worcester. Mayor of the
City not being ignorant of all circumstances (althowgh to his immortal
infamy, a most timorous Catholic, as one that most exactly knew their
impiety, yet for worldly fear, conformed him self thereto) challenged him
publicly, of dastardlines in wounding a man bownd, trampling on one in
restraint, and triumphing against one not permitted to resist, by writing
publicly against me, who was not allowed to defend my self: For according to
Seneca in his proverbs; victoria sine aduersario breuis est laus: it is a
seely and short commendation, to brag of victory without an adversary. Or as
Faustus some what plainer says: nil tacito quesita dolo victoria durat; the
victory, obtained by treachery, does never avail. M. Rider thereat, blustering
into choler, assured him, in the public market, that even to my face he would
confownd me to be guilty of all tergiuersation used in the proceedings, if the
Mayor would vouchsafe to accompagnie him to the Castle. To which motion, the
Mayor condiscended; in the mean time inuiting him to diner, least that he
would relent, or repent his wounted resolution.

At diner time, the Mayor sent one of his sergeants, to certify me distinctly
of all the foresaid occurents. I answered, (notwith standing my former
alienation, for the foresaid scisme of the Mayor, not denying but he had
otherwise ever obliged me,) that I would most willingly that such motion, in
any case, should not be ouerslipped, but brought to examination. In May, 1604.
The Mayor, Justice Palmer Captain Godl, (the Councelor Cook being within
hearing) and others to the number (with them of the guarde), of about a
hundred, standing in the Castle cowrt, I was sumoned by my keeper to appear.
Some little pause there was, before I came, and suddenly M. Rider began to
glorify, that he knew I durst not come. At leinght I came, and inquyred their
pleasure. M. Rider declared that he came to have a promised legible copy; or
my subscribing to that which I had delivered; or my going to trial before them
of the College.

To the first of these three points, I answered, his own mowth showld
confess the copy to be legible: which I proved in manner premised. To the
second, that if I cowld not prove his falsification of my private leter, I would
subscribe to my whole answer. Which when I did prove, (as all, or any then
present will auowch) so directly, and perspicuously, as he blushed, and they
all blamed him for abominable falsification I told them, there should need
noe such approbation, considering that our issue should be not upon the futur,
but even upon the Caveat, and my allegations therein contained, in legible
print. To the last, of going to the College, I accepted it at that instant,
reaching him a gowld ring which he showld not deliver me but in that place. He
took it, and now (as Julius Caesar said, when he had passed the river Rubicon;
Sueton de Iul. Cesar^.
Iacta est al^a the di^is cast) their cowld be no tergiuersation; either we must
have gone forward with main force, or we could not retire without both foil,
and dishonor. What was think you, the issue? M. Rider would needs restore me,
my ring: pretending, that he must have license of the state to so public an
act: which license he dowted not to obtain at their fitting the day following.
Nay, said I, you have had license from the beginning, to this disputation, by
lawful warrant, as you showed me your self So that I will not receive my
ring, until you present it me, (unless you have other excuse) in place
accorded. His own consociats, the Reformed crew, what in wayling, what in
railing sought to draw, or drive him from so ignominious reuolting from the
trial by him self first sought, in three years space daily boasted of, at
this time before my departure to be effected or not at all, and then disclaymed
in the face of the world, until needles new license might be obtained But he,
deuyding up, and down, sparkles of railing rage, gave them leave to say their
pleasure, and to swallow their displeasure, and threatened, if I would not
receive the ring, to throw it away, which notwith standing I would not accept,
alleging, the bargain for a lawful disputation, to have been fully, and
authenticaly, contracted, and now to be irreuocable. But he would not retain
it; and so the Mayor took it into custody, till hope, and speech, of a
disputation, vanished.

Was not then this provocation of our Iubelio, a perfect imitation of the
challenge betwixt Francis King of France, and Charles the Emperor? His
defia^ce, before he sent it, he caused to be openly read, Pontus Heuter, (...)
origin familia Austriacae.
therein giving to the Emperor the lie; and daring him to the combat; by a
Herald, publicly dismissed from the place. He thought the Emperor Charles
would not hazard his fortunes upon so dangerous trial, as being of a more
settled disposition. But Charles, the miror of Valor, receiving this affronte,
returned the Kings Herald with promise to send speedy awnswer to the King. And
accordingly, allowing of the combat, in an indifferent place, and specifying
the weapons, and time, he sent therewith his Imperial Herald, instructing him
fully of all circumstances. The K. Francis, supposing by the Emperors
deliberation, as being contrary to the French feru^r, that he would not
accord; understanding that the Emperors Herald was come, would not give him
audience but in public assembly. The Herald consented, so that he should
publicly report his answer. Thereat the King understanding the contents, in
silence smuthered the matter.

Now the next day the Council sitting, M. Rider, was called, (as his own phrase
is), to repetitions, and attainted with gross errors by sir James Fullerton,
and with great ignominy by Sir Richard Cook, for betraying in a manner their
cause, into such disproofe, as that it cowld never after be brought of, or
disingaged. All the Council coniointly rebuking his presumption, condemning his
demeanure, reproaching his ignorance, and his ouer-matching him self, he
thought first to stand in the defense of his wrytings, in the very express
words, of the owld heretic Felix; That he would be burned him self, S. Aug.
l. 1. de gestis ^um Felice. c. 12.
and his books, if any thing were written by him erroneously. Next, when he
was for such palpable impudency to be imprisoned, he became so abject, as
every one might stand with M. Rider a foot, and equal his hautines. At that
time, I thought convenient to sue for reparation for all defectiuenes by him
pleaded against me: but he, in so miserable countenance came to meet me,
(imploring that I would not exasperat further the state against him) that I
refrayned. For what reparation needed further, when by the highest in the land
(to whom he had consecrated his Caveat, and by whom he said in his Rescript my
answer was perused, and censured) an authentical sentence in open Council
chamber, was publicly given against him, (I nether being present, nor
producing any disproofe) that in the controversy betwixt him and me, he was
faulty, surmownted, and condemned? Thus God in his providence wrought, without
my cooperation (that all the honor might to him folly be imputed) that he
should be condemned by them, whom all men might condemn of folly not to have
supported him, unless they had in their wysdoms judged him beyond all defense,
and unable to be licenced toward trial, even them selves being vmpyres.

After this public sentence given by the state on my side, he repaired to the
College, for some protection against the infamy incide^t to his condemnation.
Then was frendshipp to be tried: then was brotherhood to assist: S^p. 2.12.
then was the saying of wisdom rethoricaly amplifyed; Circumueniamus iustum,
quoniam inutilis est nobis, and contrarius est operibus nostris, and improperat
nobis peccata legis, and diffamat in nos peccata disciplinae nostrae; Let us
circumuent the innocent, because he is unprofitable to us, and contrary to
our woorks, and does reproach against us the sins of the law, and diffameth
against us the wickedness of our discipline. Upon his solicitation, this
sentence following was among them concluded.

Being hereto, for the 7. of Nouemb. 1602, earnestly entreated, The sentence Of
the College.
and of late solemnly appealed unto, before the right worcester. M. Mayor of this
City of Dublin, and other worcester. persons, by one Henry Fitzsimon Jesuit,
prisoner in the Castle: and John Rider Deane of S. Patricks: to become Judges,
and Vmpiers between them (they having promised to stand to any arbitrarie
reprehension, and condemnation we should denownce) whether of them in their
handling the controversy of Transubstantation (as the same is publicly
printed in Dublin, 1602) has perverted, dissembled, denied, the effect and
substance of the Authors mynds, concerning the consent of antiquity in the
same. We who were appealed unto, after due search and deliberation had: do
hereby publicly declare and testify, that the said Fitzsimon has alleged
noe Council, Father, or Antiquity for 500. years after our Saviors ascension,
that proves transubstantiation, whereas allegations are browght by the said
deane, in the same time, that evidently convince the contrary. From the
College. this 15. of May. 1604.

Concordat cum Originali. Per me Ambrosium Vs^her, Collegij Natarium.

This sentence among them selves agreed upon, all the difficulty was, how
after the foresaid act of the Council, it might either be thought auaylable; or
adue^tured to be published. Therein, this course was houlden. The mayor was
requested by M. Rider, to send for it, to the college. He by noe entreaty
daring to disable the opinion of the state; and of himself, instructing M.
Rider, how notoriouse the cause was made already, and how frivolous such
sentence would among all be esteemed, I nether being in place, nor any bond of
M. Rider known to abyd the Collegial arbitrament; they not knowing what else to
do with their sentence, they sent it freely, and vnwished, to the Mayor, and
he to me, with a letter of the specifyed circumstances.

5. And to this end writ with his own hand a letter to his Cosine M. Rider.
Doctor Challenor, to that effect, which letter is extant to be seen, but yet
neither College nor I can come by sight of his opus operatum, but he and his
favorites blase it abroad, That I am confuted, and yet I cannot see wherewith.

When I saw Master Fitzsimons did but verba dare, as the chiefest point of
his profession is, then I urged him with my last letter, wherein I made to him
these demands.

First to have a legible Copy according to his promise made to me, both by
word and writing: otherwise how should I know what is opposed by him, and must
be defended by me.

Secondly, That if he would not deliver it to me, ye that he should keep his
touch with the College, and let them have it, and it should dispense with
breaking promise to me, or words to the like effect.

Thirdly, That both of us may charitably in Gods fear, for the satisfaction of
Christ's flock, (without gall or malice) print, correct, and equally bear our
several charges with the printer, according to the number, of sheets, pages,
and lines, according to the proportion of every man's labor.

Lastly; If none of the reasonable premises will be granted by him, then I
desired him to put his hand to this blotred abortius Scroule, and but say it is
his own work, yet with this necessary addition concordat cum originali, for
without this addition and subscription he might give me one thing to confute,
and deliver another to his favorites, and might after my trauails to confute
him, deny this scroule to be his work; as now to give me a legible Copy he
would feign deny to be his word: and yet I have the writing of his own hand,
to witness against him the promise of his own mouth.

Now Gentlemen, whether my requests were reasonable, and his denial unjust, I
pray you judge betwixt us without partial affection. The highest in the land
had a view of his scroule, and the Reuerendst and learned diligently perused
the same: What their opinion was of it. I scilence for a season, though many
of no mean place and judgment be privy to it. But this I must truly say,
unless he will father it under his hand, I can not properly call it his deed;
But all men may see the weakness of his cause by the withdrawing his hand, and
the breach of his promise. And if he were not aftaid of the weakness of his
cause, or ashamed of his slubering and insufficient handling of the same, why
should he deny a double promise so much to the blemishe of his Priesthood and
profession?

5. Title. Of the Villainie; and iniquity of these Puritans, in this Judgment.
Fitzimon.
5. IF you please to read over my Epistle of appellation to the College, you
may find a recital of certain Infidels, that had adwarded right to Christians,
against their own sects when they had engaged their word, to be true
arbitrers. The^ which preoccupation, to have them deal uprightly, I could not
excogitat any more convenient. For, as I said, what Barbarian, Jew, or Canibal
would betray one committing him self to his fidelity, when he needed not to
be in his danger? But now we need not to exemplify in Hanibal, (...). l. 25.
and 30.
of whom Liuie says, that he never stood to his word, but while it was
proffitable for him. We need not reproach the punical, compared with the
puritanical perfidie. Witness but his excellent Majesty that now reigns, in
his book of Kingly instructions to his Son, how perjured, how treacherous,
how inhumane, is the puritanical spirit. Acts of pralament i^ Scotland c. 7.
etc.
Witness the condemned treachery against his person in Rutheuen, anno 1582, and
in Striueling anno 1585. besyd all other treasons against him, and others in
Scotland. Witness our own Challenors Andronical treason, against Doctor Haddoc,
a second Onias; 2. Machab. 4.
after giving him the right hand with protestation of frendshipp, yet secretly
trained a drawght to apprehend him: Ierem. 9.8.
fullfilling the saying of the prophet Jeremy. In ore suo pacem cum amico suo
loquitur, and occulte ponit ei insi^ias; In his mowth he speaks peace with
his friend, and secretly he lays ambushe for him.

So then, if they use any legertie, treachery, and dishonestie, in this cause,
which we examine; (whereof I refuse noe enemy to be judge) it is but an usual
act of punical purita^cie. But let us debat the matter in order. First, they
affirm, there was a late solemn appeal unto them before the right worcester. Mayor
of Dublin. There was I say; none such. Only I alone had consented to go
according to an ancient appeal to the College, giving to that effect a ring;
but my prouoker in public presence, repealed to a further license. Also I
crave of them, how were they solemnly appealed unto, without form of
appellation? without themselves, or any for them, to accept our appeal?
without bond of both parties, and other requisite ceremonies?

Secondly, whereas I alone had appealed unto them, and M. Rider ever repealed
from them, and never entered into bond to stand to their decision, he him self
nether in his printed books, not private leters mentioning any such appeal, or
bond; and refusing publicly to give me any gage of coming to trial before
them; behowld how with faces of a puritanical wernish, such double appeal, and
forged bond, is fraudulently by them here protested! They are now engaged, to
show, such obligation of M. Rider, of a true and not falsified date, if any
regard of reputation, and synceritie, remain in them.

Thirdly, they affirm, that the case resigned to their decision, was of the
controversy of Transubstantiation, and the consent of antiquity in the same.
Fie upon all falsehood, what will all the world think, when to infer a
partial, and proditorious sentence, such shifting one controversy for another,
by a reforming deformation, of cownterfet evangelists, (to whose synceritie,
the adversary party, had confidently relied) is disfigured? For, as it shall
shortly appear, even by M. Rider him self, we were at noe diversity, for the
name of Transubstantiation, but for the signification thereof. So that to rack
the controversy, to the name, by none, can be accounted but a profownd
dishonestie. Could not the first occasion of this disputation, to wit whether
the ancient Fathers, stood for Catholics or protestants, it being imprinted by
M. Rider in his Caveat, and Rescript; or my expressing the case in my leter to
you, that you were only to judge; whether for the consent of antiquity in M.
Riders cause or mine, he or I, had perverted, dissembled, or denied the effect
and substance of the Authors mynds, in our allegations; cowld not the terror of
disproofe, (as for fear of God, or shame, I will not object them against you)
could not fidelity (which even according to Cicero among al nations, Cic. pro
Sexto Roscio.
is commune omnium presidium; the common sanctuary of all, and according to
Valerius Maximus; Valor. Max. l. 6. in principio.
is, Numen, ac certissimum humanae salutis pignus; the oracle, and certainest
pledge of human safeguard) hinder you from changing Quid, pro quo, as false
Apothecaries do, when they entend to poison? Be it, that you thowght such
iuggling to be the only counterpoise of M. Riders c edit, considering that
Scriptures, Fathers, Concils, Histories, Protestants, Jews, and Infidels, are,
irrefragably condemning him in the matter signified by the word of
transubstantiation, althowgh they have not the word; could not you suppose,
that the very protestant discrete Readers, perceauing him so overthrown in the
matter, would also condemn you with S. Augustine saying; S. Aug. ep. 174.
what is a more contentious part, then to strive about the name, where the
signification is apparent? But let Cicero a pagan convince what you are in
these words: Cir. l. 1. Ad Heren.
Calumniatorum proprium est verba consectari, and contra sententiam torquere;
Is is the right quality of forging Impostors, to chawnt upon words, and to
adulterat them from their signification.

Fifthly, they resolve that I have alleged noe Council, Father, or Antiquity
proving transubstantiation. In this again, they deprave the question committed
to their arbitrament, in two manners. First, the perverting, dissembling,
denying, of the Authors mynds in our several causes, was by them to be judged,
and not what I proved, or not proved. Secondly, by intimating, that I intended
to prove the name, and not the matter of transubstantion.

For the position of M. Rider, was, that transubstantiation, or the corporal
presence of Christ's body, and blood, in the sacrament, was never tawght by the
ancient Fathers. By which even he, (whom you defending have destroyed your
selves) shows, that he consisted, no^ in the word, but in the signification;
newly explicating it with the disjunction, Or, Take that fling as a reward of
M. Riders Mule. Nay, you shall not (by your leave) be quitt of him so. S. Ambr.
l. 4. de Sacr. c. 4.
We alleging S. Ambrose saying; The bread is bread before the consecration:
but when it is consecrated, of bread it is made the fleash of Christ; says M.
Rider thereupon: all this we grant to be true, but you come not to the point,
whether Christ's fleash be made of bread by way of transubstantiation: that is
by the changing of one nature into another, by hoc est corpus me^m This is our
question: So that not the word of transubstantiation, but the changing of one
nature into another, by hoc est corpus meum, is maintained to be the question;
and consequently the former infidelity of the Collegists, is evidently, even
by M. Rider, contestated.

Yet again, they shall have from their beloved brother, 2. reg. 20. Iudic. 14.
1. Machab. 13.
a Ioabs kiss to Amassa, a Dalilaes tears to Samson, a Triphons feast to
Ionathas, in this his awnswer to the foresaid words of S. Ambrose. He grants
all to be true, but requires a conversion of one nature into another by the
foresaid words. In such grant of truth he gives perspicuously the lie, to
both him self, and his supportors. For if it be true, that by consecration the
bread is made the fleash of Christ: then must the nature of bread be converted
into the fleash of Christ; and so one nature transubstantiated or converted
into another. Which also S. Ambrose in all that chapter intends to prove, S.
Ambr. loc. cit.
saying; Moises his rod was changed into a serpent, and again into a rodd;
Note.
the rivers of Aegipt into blood, and again into rivers; etc. And can not
then the words of Christ transform bread and wine? The heavens, the earth,
and sea, were not, nor any creature, and by a word they were made; he
commanded and they were created: if then of nothing his powerful word could
make things to be, how much more can he alter one thing into another? The
changing then of one nature into a another, or transubstantiation according to
M. Riders mind, and mine, being true; I say, that disproofe is given by M.
Rider against him self in pretending that the ancient Fathers within the first
five hundred years, had noe such matter; and against the Judgment of the
Collegists in his favor, containing that I had proved noe such matter.

Besyd which sufficient confutation of their arbitrament even by M. Rider, let
all the rest of my proofs in sifting M. Riders Caveat, (without recapitulation
of them in this place) declare these Puritans to be the schismatical Collegians
or uncircumcised gymnasists in Jerusalem, of whom the Scripture says; 1.
Match. 1.16.
Recesserunt a testamento sancto, and iuncti sunt nationibus, and venundati
sunt vt facerent malum; they have departed from the holy testament, and are
joined to the Gentiles; and are sowld to do evil; not at this time for any
price, but to dispawne M. Riders credit.

Lastly, they affirm, that allegations are brought by M. Rider, in the same
time, that evidently convince the contrary; to wit that no transubstantiation
was acknowledged for 500. hundred years after Christ. But first, the late
answer of M. Rider him self to the place of S. Ambrose, who lived within 400.
years after Christ, confessing it to be true, wherein the change or
transubstantiation of one nature into another is plainly veryfied; such his
answer, I say, does refelle this favorable sentence, as false. Next, I crave
of these Puritans (not how some time they durst controwle the contrary sentence
of the state: for that demand would implye an ignorance of their general
inclination; which is by me else where detected) how at least they durst
condemn in such covert contradiaction so malepertly the wisdom of the state,
as either to be ignorant of such M. Riders sufficient proofs; or knowing them,
of not confronting us together, to so manifest advantage thereby of the public
cause; by my being convicted by them? And in particular, how injurious they
have made sir James Fullerton to the whole profession, that not only he did not
commend M. Riders proofs in their manner, but that in greatest vehemency he did
condemn them to be guilty of all defectiuenes? To these demands, if they
refuse to answer by words, yet they will never escape the infamy engendered
in the mynds of all that will look on them, by not daring to justify their
noe less punical censure toward me, then their desperate presumption against
the body of the Council, in so thwarting their act, and discretion.

Valor. max. l. 6. c. 3. Helinand. l. 15. hist.
This judgment had it been under king Cambyses, how he would punish it,
appears by his memorable justice against a corrupt Judge: whose skin he
caused to be flaed of, and to be nailed on the chair of Judgment. Then,
electing the very son, of the said Judge, and installing him, in his Fathers
office, and seat, he willed him now to learn, how to judge, by such his
fathers example. If, as I said, a Cambises, had the collegists in hand, for
this judgment (by them selves, by him whom falsely they defended, by the state,
by all learned of the world, detected to be treacherous, filthy, and
unchristian) how would he uncase, and dismember them? But I leave them, as they
are.

Rider. I dealt not so with him in printing his book with mine, not one
word of his I omitted.
6. But to my last leter this is his last shift, and as he thinks a sufficient
excuse. That unless he may print alone, I shall have no Copy: but this was
nauer spoken of at first, neither is fitting to be yielded unto by me at last
Now you may see plainly, that Master Fitzsimon is afraid of being called to
Repetitions, he would pass the Press with an ipse dixit. If any man must see
his labors before they be printed, then they shall not pass: indeed his last
was so sifted, that nothing was left but dust, and if this be well boulted, I
doubt not but prove it Branne. He thinks to deal with me as he does with
others, that I will take any thing of his bare word: no, so I might be deceived
as well as they are now: but if it will abide the touch of Gods blessed word,
and the primitive practice of Christ's Church, I will allow it as pure gold,
otherwise I esteem it (if it be like his former) as dung in the streets, or
dust under my feet. For I assure you Gentlemen, if you will but read over his
first labors consideratly, or second scroule, and trace his Texts with Gods
truth, and every authotitie with the original Author, you shall find them
like the sands of Tagus in Spain, a show without substance, as that is a
grauel like gould. But he would print alone because his book would pass for
current and Catholic through the hands of the ignorant and simple, who are
coniured not to read mine, least his errors by them being discovered, they
might be converted to Gods truth, and his reputation weakened, and thus
prefers earthly policy before heavenly piety. But let him subscribe to
this scroule, and as I have been long since, so I am still ready to join
with him in the Press.

But let me entreat you that you would in a brotherly manner, (for he is
careless of my counsel) admonish him to reuiew his labors, indeed yet fitter
for the Peddler then the Printer: first, for his alteration of the state of
every question: secondly, for misalleadging, curtalling, and falsifying
Scriptures, Fathers, and late writers, often untruly, seldom pertynently,
writing every thing like a With, according to his own wit, to serve his
graceless turn, though it be against the known truth. I will but give you a
taste of one or two, and leave the rest to be delivered by him, or discovered
by me.

6. Title. Of other untruths and false Vavvnts, of M. Rider.
6. Having canuased sufficiently the breach of my promises, Fitzsimon.
of putting my hand, to first I know not what, (for I was ever known free to
trust as much, if not more then, I ought: that unless I had apparent cause to
fear deprauation I would not subtract my subscription, to any thing of mine)
next (I think) he means of the legible copy; he concludes, it argues
weakness of my cause, a shame of my slubbering and insufficient handling of the
same, a blemish of my preisthoode, and profession. I answer nothing to all
this, but that if he would have permitted me to print my book, it would be
legible, it would need noe subscription of my hand, it would testify that I
was not ashamed of my cause, and preisthood. He must rather be most ashamed,
and terrifyed most, who durst least have his cause made openly known.

He says next, that in my last leter, I contained, that unless I might print
alone he should have noe copy: Also, that so to do was never spoken of first,
nether is fit to be yealded unto by me, at last. To these two assertions, the
words partly of my epistle, partly of his own, shall be opposed, that his
synceritie thereby be detected. In his leter (as I take it) to me 27. of december.
1603. thus he writes. Your next exception is, unless you may print yours, you
mean noe publication, M. Fitzsimon, this will be granted I dowbt not, provided
ever I may print mine with you in the same volume, sheet, form and page,
every one of us correcting his own copy, and bearing his own charges,
suitable to the sheets, pages, and lines. But if you desyer to print your own
without mine (which thing the world knows I did not) your request is
unreasonable, smelling of faintnes; and tergiuersation. You behowld his words,
to me, not that I did intend to print alone, but that if I did so intend, it
were unreasonable etc.

To which conditional suspicion, (in this his Rescript, by a Riderian honesty,
made an absolute accusation) thus I presently answered: your dowbt to be at
charges with printing my labors, or that yours shall not be inserted with
mine, or that we should seem to think, that you have not of your self
confuted your, and your bethrens cause; I say, such your dowbt you may at will
depose, as wanting all desert and occasion. I tell him (as you behowld) that I
intended to conioyne, and insert, his writings with mine: he publishes, that I
wrote to him, that unless I may print alone, he should have noe copy. Pardon
him for this: it is but his ordinary condition, to mistake or at least
misreport, absolute, for conditional, graunts for denials, affirmatio^s, for
negatio^s, one matter, for another.

To the next, that it was never spoken of at first (that we showld have the
free use of the print) nether is fitting to be yielded unto at last by him;
First I oppose his own words in his printed epistle of his Caveat. You shall
have my good leave, and love, and my best furtherance, to the state, that after
you have replied to this, it may be printed; as also your persons for further
conference protected. Here you have the talker of promises, (if he were the
fullfiller, many would be gladd) in print, promises the print, to our reply;
without conditions of legible copies, without the before never heard of manner
of printing, above expressed, without any vnreasonablnes pretended in the
performance; and now you behold him confidently denying such promise, either to
have been ever made, or to be reasonable. Both are in print, his saying, and
his denying; and being opposite, at least the one of them must be untrue. Ezech.
^3.14.
I say with the prophet: I will destroy the wall, which you have ^abed without
mortar, and will make it even with the earth, and the foundation thereof shall be
revealed, and it shall fall. For, when the mortar of truth wants in any
relation, how be it that the height thereof be never so great, yet it will
shortly fall, and the false foundation thereof, be publicly revealed. Thus much
in this point for his contradicting himself.

Now, for his false vawnts. My answer to his challenge, (he says) was so
sifted, that nothing was left but dust; and if this be well boulted, he
dowbteth not, but he will prove it branne. First, I answer to the phrase; that
it is in part borrowed, in part natural. It is borrowed, from that arch Puritan
Martin Mar-Prelat, saying of him, and his brethren, that they have left nothing
to the protestants, but dust and branne, having taken all the fine flower away.
It is natural, Martin Mar-Prelat.
both from his Father being a Miller, and from him self being a baker. A
speech in season, tractat fabrilia faber, it is pity that he has changed
white for black. A second Melancthon, to have forsaken his book to be a baker:
Vide Cochle^, and Sur. and Colloq. Alt^mburg. fol. 360.
but one, that for having so many barrels of corn (without all function; (as
him self says) more then has every believing Christian) without any charges;
should be commanded to sell duble size to that of our poor Dublinian bakers,
that buy their corn in the Market, and must bear sesse, and press, watch and
ward, etc. But why might not S. Austins sentence have place in this arbitrament
against my wrytings? S. Aug. l. 5. con Faust. c. 11.
quorum oculum maleuolus error in solampalcam nostra segetis ducit, nam and
triticu^ ipsi viderent, si esse veilent: whose eye, malignat error leads to
our chaff only; for, wheat they might behowld, if they wereof our fraternity.

S. Gregory was of a different disposition to both these Puritans, S. Greg. l.
8. ep. 37. ex registro.
Martin Marr-Prelat, and M. Rider, as well in all things else, as in thinking
other men's flower and paste dainty in respect of his own. Si delicioso
cupitis pabulo saginari, beati Augustini opuscula legite, and ad comparationem
siliginis illius, nostrum furfurem non queratis; if you desire to be fedd with
delicat food, read the small treatises of S. Austin, and in comparison of his
purest flower, you will not effect our branne.

As for answer to M. Riders vawnts, I say only that my first and last answer
being subjected now not only to his censure, but to other men; it will appear
whither his boulter was course, or not, or his bread made thereof, be white, or
brown. And for all his repetions, of the same promises, and other reproaches;
I say as a Gentleman said to a Piper, that eftsoons reiterated the same song;
he having once given him four pence: Friend, vary they note, if thou will have
me increase my grote. Yet this I add: that among other parcels of wisdom,
sondrie euide^ces by M. Rider are affoorded, that my copy delivered to him was
very legible: For at every stepp, he carpeth according to his manner thereat,
with like success as the gugion carpeth the bayte, on hook and line.

Rider.
7. The first positition which Master Fitzsymon was urged to prove was this:
That the Corporal presence of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament, was
never taught by the Fathers of the first five hundred years after Christ.

Now M. Fitzsymon knowing it impossible to be proved by him, or any in the
world, because it was hatched seven hundredth years after that, he alters the
state of the Question, and says, That Christ is realy in the blessed
Sacrament, and thus starteth like a broken bow from the manner of the
presence, which he should prove to the matter of the presence, which was
never in question betwixt Protestant and Papist. And so in this scroule hudleth
up many Fathers, speaking of the matter of the presence to the worthy prepared
receivers by faith: But not one word of the Corporal presence, Page. 11.
and to be received by the mouth. And most fondly and childishly would
maintain the opposition to be betwixt Real and Figurative, not betwixt
Corporal and Spiritual. Besides he shows there to prove his presence, a
great deal of ignorance in a little Philosophy: nay Fooloso-fie: all which I
pray you wish him to mend them and multis alijs with his pen, least they come
in print to his shame and utter disgrace. And I assure you, and all that read
this, Master Fitzsimon with all his words and wit, or rather witless words,
has not proved one syllable in question, nor infringed any authority that I
brought against him.

7. Title. Whether the corporal presence of Christ, was hatched twelve
hundred years after Christ.
Fitzimon.
7. MY whole wrytings being replenished with above a hundred disproofs of this
Paradox, should I now resume them, superfluously? should I dispute against him,
that only for purchasing of time, during his not being confuted, audaciously
affirms what all Christians, as well Catholics, as Protestants, do deny;
and denies, what they affirm; he being in fact and word disabled by the
state for his enorme ignorance; and being so assuredly alredie disproued? Let
my Treatises be perused, and no reasonable man, but will judge such
satisfaction to be manifowldly exhibited, whereby this labor may seem to be
well spared, and now should foolishly be wasted. Worthily said S. Austin, S.
Aug. l. 6. con. Faustum cap. 8.
in altogether a like case: Eadem sepe vana reperere istum non pudet; sed eadem
sepe quamuis vera respondere me piget. Often to repeat the same vain things,
to him is noe shame, but to answer often even true things, I account it ablame
Again: Fortassis autem paulo prolixior ista respo^si^, sic lectorem iustruet
vt in caetaris responsionibus non a nobis tam multa verba requirantur. Perhapp
our first answer, a little prolixe, will so instruct the reader, that in other
aunswers many words of us will not be required. Which as I said, to have place
in our replye to M. Riders Caveat, impudency it self will not gayn-say.

8. Our second position was this; Rider.
That Gods Church had not their service in an unknown tongue, but in such a
language as every particular Church understood.

Master Fitsymon knowing this to be true, yet willing to say something for
fear of scilence, and censuring, alters the state of the question, and says
that scripture and service have been in vnvulgar tongues, but he should have
showed that they were vnvulgare and unknown, and not understood of that
vulgar* where they were practiced: yea, and that within the compass of the
first five hundred years after Christ his ascension, and then he had said
something, but now omitting the circumstance, he has failed in the substance,
and so proved just nothing. And I pray you admonish him of his falsifying of
Beda, wresting him to prove his Latin service, whereas his words be these: Hac
in presenti quinque gentium linguis, etc. This Island (says Beda) searches and
confesses at this present time, one and the same knowledge of the highest
verity, and truest sublimitie with the tongues of five nations: that is to
say, the Saxons, Britains, Scots, Pictes, and Latins, whose tongues by
meditation of the scriptures is become common to all the rest, I pray you
entreat him with all his Jesuitical and Transmarine Logicque, but to make out
of Beda one sound Syllogism in mood and figure to prove the matter in
question, and then erit mihi magnus Apollo: I protest unto you Gentlemen, I do
not spite him for his envy, but pity him for his ignorance, thus to abuse
the dead Father and living Reader, and all to underprop declining errors.

8. Title. Whether Beda be falsified concerning scriptures in the lating tongue.
8. M. Rider will, (whether I would, or not, Fitzsimon.
) prove him self Riderial. Of my proofs (what they were, may be gathered in my
treating whether the Mass had ever been in the lating tongue) that divine
service has never been in the vulgar tongue, to be at the capacity, or handling
of the vulgar; he in this place affirms, that I said scriptures and divine
service had been in vnuulgar tongues, but should prove that they were vnuulgar,
and unknown of that people wherein they were practiced. Have you ever heard the
like? I showed says he that they were vnuulgar, and yet I am willed to prove
that they were unknown of the common people. Who are the vulgar sort, but the
common people? Must not then it that is vnuulgar, be unknown to the common
people? He that teaches a fool is as one that glueth a po^-shard: he may well
propownd learning to his brains but never glue them, and it, to hold
together. Eccli. 22.7.


Beda l. 1. c. 1.
The words of Beda, are: This Island at this present to the number of the 5.
books of Moses, with five sondrie languages does study and set forth the
knowledge of one perfect truth, that is, with the language of the English, the
Britons, the Scots, the Picts, and the Latin, which by study of the scriptures
(...) made common to all the rest. If of these words, says M. Rider, with all
my Iesuitical, and transmarin logic, I can make one sownd sillogisme, to prove
scriptures to have been in an vnuulgar tongue, I shall be to him Magnus Apollo, a
great Prophet. You behold what a high preferment is offered to me, for so
small pains, in the thing it self; although to the party, it may be a hard
task, by reason, that homo assuetus in verbis improperij, Eccli. 23.20.
in omnibus diebus suis non erudientur; the man accustomed in words of
reproach, in all his days will not be instructed. Never the less if I can by
a vulgar similitude, I will accommodat this easy matter to his capacity. There
is noe doubt, but if four diverse families by right did draw water out of one
common well; you might well say, the water of those four families not to be
in the private possession of any one of them: So Beda saying, that the latin
tongue became common to four diverse nations, by their meditation of scriptures;
does not he intend that the meditation of scriptures was not in the private
language of any one of them? An enthimene is less then a sillogisme, and yet
this hard ridle is dispatched in less then ane enthimene: and consequently I
must be more then a great Apollo to M. Rider. I had rather, by much, to inioye
my old privilege during his preiudicated conceit; that he esteem me an
Apostat rather then an Apollo, a proselit then a prophet, a dowlt then a
Doctor. For, quod ille maledictum vehemens existimat, laudem ego duco maximam;
His greatest disprayse is my desired disblame. Only I would know, how, que
lingua, in the singular number, became in his translation, whose tongs, in the
plural number; and whether it befitteth the sense of Beda his sentence, or not?

Rider.
9. Our third question was, that Purgatory and Prayer for the dead were not
known to Christ's Church.

To this he says, That Purgatory and Prayers for the dead were believed: but
says not, within the first five hundred years generally of the Church, and
therefore says nothing to the matter in question: and to prove this matter
among other writers he brings in that learned man of God Master Calvin, and
thus falsely alleges him in these words: Institu lib. 3. Cap. 5. n. 10.
Yea and Calvin confesses that above 1300. years past, it was a received
practice to pray for the dead: but let us hear how truly (nay untruly and
unchristianly) he deals with the dead Fathers and late VVriters: Page. 245.
for Caluines words be these, recorded to Master Fitzsymons great disgrace
for falsifying them, and abusing the simple. Quum ergo mihi obijciunt
aduersarij ante mill and trecentos annos vsu receptum fuisse, vt precationes
fierent pro defunctis, eos vicissim interrogo, quo dei verbo, quo reuelatione,
quo exemplo factum sit: neque enim hic testimonia desunt tantum, sed qu^cunque
illic leguntur sanctorum exempla, nihil tale ostendunt. Therefore when our
adversaries object unto me that 1300 years ago it was a received opinion,
that prayers should be made for the dead: I do ask them again by what
scripture, what revelation, or example they do it, for here wants not only
testimonies of Scriptures, but what examples of holy men soever they allege;
they show me no such thing.

Must not all men condemn Master Fitzsimon, V^icked is that opinion that by
falsifications must be maintained. Acts. 136.
thus falsely to allege any Author to maintain his own heresy. God help
the poor ignorant subjects of this miserable land, that are compelled to
believe this Jesuit, nay Iebesite yea a second Bar Jesus that seeks by these
wicked means to turn the Lords flock from the Lords fould. But he that is
brought up in any of the brazen faced Colleges of Jesuits, and so sworn to
the supremacy of the Pope may boldlye, falsify, and misconster Gods word, or
men's writtings because easily for his service done for the Pope he may have
pardon from the Pope, Tam a pana, quam a culpa: but I beseech you, wish him if
there be any spark of grace in him, cease to delude Gods people and the Kings
good Subjects with these falsifications, and at last forsake this bad course
of spiritual consinage, or else Gods spirit and good men will forsake him. And
let him take Christ's counsel: Sin no more least a worse thing come unto
him. Ioh. 5.14.

9. Title. Whether Caluins confession, (that the Ancients a thousand three
hundred years past, commended prayer for the dead) be a falsification.
9. SO M. Rider; Inde grauis iudex, inde seuerus Eques; Fitzsimon.
both as a dreadful judge, and a as worthy squyre, in all vehemence assures:
such confession of the man of God to be untruly, unchristianly, falsely
alleged, a record of my disgrace, wicked means to turn Christ's flock from
Christ's fowld; if any spark of grace be in me I should cease to delude Gods
people, and the Kings good subjects with these falsifications; with this bad
course of spiritual cosonage etc. But if Calvin be a man of God, or not, he as
well requyteth M. Rider, for this undeserved defense, as M. Rider requyted the
Collegists for their perfidiouse protection of him self: each of them
controwling the wrongful excusations, sought by their own brethren, to cloak
their deformity.

First then, Calvin having the word, Ante, testifying the time of prayer for
the dead to be above thirten hundred years past, M. Rider ouer-gamboled it.
Secondly, Calvin, professing it to be the doctrine of the Fathers, and thereof
alleging the example of S. Augustine, and S. Monica; and only denying it, to
be in the scriptures, which he specifyeth by the word, Illic; nimbly also M.
Rider ouers-kipped to translate this word. Thirdly, M. Rider reporting
Caluins opinion, to be, that what examples of holy men soever we allege, they
show noe such thing; Calvin, the man forsooth of God, confesses the examples
of holy men to be for the prayer of the dead; but, veteres in eo aliquid
humani passos esse; in errorem abreptos etc. The Ancients (in his opinion) to
have therein endured human infirmity; to have been borne away into error;
Monica to have had an owld woman's foolish desire; Augustine unadvisedly to
commend it to be imitated, etc. Now then, Readers noe less foes, then friends,
Calvin, professing that I had not falsified him, and M. Rider protesting the
contrary: is not Caluins defense a lawful purgation that I had not wronged
Calvin; Is not M. Rider known thereby to have galloped astraye?

Breuiarium Romans 7. May.
Boleslaus, king of Polonia, being enormely leacherouse, the holy Bishops
Stanislaus publicly at leingth rebuked him. The king in revenge indyted S.
Stanislaus for wrongfully usurping a farm. He in his own defense, showed the
evidence of his lawful title thereto. But the witnesses fearing the Kings
displeasure, durst not justify their testimony. Well, quoth Stanislaus, since
that doubt seems to be made in this matter, I will produce within three days
Peter the party deceased three years past, whom it concerned, to auert the
truth of all circumstances. The assembly, derided his promise. But he, full
of faithful hope in Gods providence, after prayer, and fasting, resuscitated
Peter; and both together, before the king, declared the lawful bargain. Peter
re^urned to his sepulcher, departing in peace. Yet after all this, the king
Boleslaus, sent soldiers to murder the godly bishope; and they thrice from
above, resisted, the king him self killed him as he was s^ying Mass,
dismembring, and dispersing his parts: which eagles defended, until, by their
lightsomnes the Cracouian clergy fownd them; and placing them in order, of
them selves, they united, as if they had never been separated.

All this history for the most part, of the holy martyr S. Stanislaus, (on
whose day I write this answer) without presumption be it spoken, S. Cyprian.
in Conc. Carthag.
is appliable to my cause. I rebuked M. Rider for his adulterating truth, and
following the concubine heresy, by diuorcement from the spouse of Christ. He
in spleen, calumniated me, that I had wrongfully usurped a farm of Caluins
writings. None of my witnesses durst, for the state, to approve my cause; I was
therefore constrained to resuscitat Calvin him self, to testify that I had
dealt uprightly: his verdict of him self, will any now distrust. S. Optatus,
l. 6.
Li^^e intercedente, facile est iratis iactare conuicium. Sed semper dum
intenditur erimen, necessaria est manifesta probatio. Envy having place, it is
easy to the discontented to reproach. But always (says S. Optatus) when a
crime is objected, manifest proof is requisite. But this M. Rider never
observed. It was sufficient for him to impute falsifications. Proof besyd his
word, if you require, you loose your attendance. The least that I can say, is
with Gods word. M. Rider, Non contradicas verbo veritatis vllo modo, and de
mendacio ineruditionis tuae confundere; Eccli. 7.
Contradict not truth by any means and of the lie of their vnlearnednes be
confounded. For all this confu^on and heinous railing against me, next the
fault of contradicting truth, proceeded of mere ignorance in not
understanding the crooked latin of Calvin, wherein what he falsely denied (as in
the treatise of the Mass I have amplye demonstrated) to ^e fownde only in
scripture; M. Rider, by palbable vnlearnednes, understood absolutely and
universally of all, as well Scriptures, as Fathers.

This makes me, that I look for noe reparation of my good name,
notwithstanding all the former exprobations. I only say, as Titus Tacitus said
to Metellus. Facile est in me dicere, cum non sim responsurus. Note.
Tu didicisti male dicere: ego conscientia test didici maledicta conte^nere.
Valor. max. l. 7.
Et sicut tu linguae tuae, ita ego aurium mearum sum dominus. It is easy to
reproach me, whereas I am not, to reply. You (M. Rider) have learned to reuyle:
I having testimony from my conscience, have learned to contemn your railing.
And as you are lord of your tongue, so am I of my ears. The words that are
intermedled, in this point (But he that is brought up in any of the brazen
faced Colleges of Jesuits, etc.) being thus spoken by a man, either browght up
in brazen nose college of Oxford, (wherein his contrimen are only trained) or
at least (which to all men is known) if not often brought up, thrust down in
the iron faced cownters of London for debts, and chea^ing: what think you,
would not another besid a Jesuit, having such evident advantage, and
inequality over him, interchange some quipps, with him? But, one brought up in
the Jesuits Colleges, (wherein the greatest number of Princes in Christendom
are brought up) can not esteem a Minister, lately besyd all other infamies, by
public court condemned for a simoniacal cosener, in selling one and the same
benefice (as Beza, did his priorie to two, or three diverse; to be an equal
copes-mate for him, to contend with all, for bringing up.

Concerning the pardon, a culpa, and pena, which the Pope would give for lying,
and falsifying, in his behalf. I answer first, the priscillianists owld
maxim, S. Aug. her. 70.
to be now the Puritans often practice; Iura, periura, secretum prodere noli;
Swear, fors wear, the secret do not vttre. I have showed it before, that it
needs not to be confirmed, They also being so periurious, and not only
untrue, as in treating of them I have declared: Ochinus in dialogo con. Sectam
terrenoru^ deoru^ sieve Paparum.
Calvin, (as Ochinus terms him) an earthely God, and Pope, if he may not
forgive them, a culpa, and pena, from fault, and pain, (as him self assures
he can not) they are in an ill case: Leuit. 5.4. Zach. 5.3.
since that God almighty threatens revenge for their perjury. If he can
forgive them being their Pope; we have great occasion to think our Popes
power, as ample; as also is already proved. Secondly, the old heretical
lesson of reproaching the Pope, and his pardons; Luth. tom. 6. Iene. fol. 215.
Mathesius in hist. Lutheri, conc. 11. page 123.
Luther confesses that all reforming preachers do presently, and principaly
learn, Papam, Monachos, sacerd^tes, conuicijs proscindere omnes nouerunt; All
of them know how to inueigh against the Pope, Moncks, and Priests. So that it
is noe marvel that M. Rider among the rest, had learned this first
fundamental lesson of his profession. Lastly, as in the present case it is even
to winking understandings notorious, that the falsification objected to me is
void and need the noe pardon, so in every other case is it perspicuous that
the Pope can give noe remittal of fault, but by penitent confession of the
delinquent; and consequently with purpose of amendment, as, (for a
falsification of this kind) every other priest may do noe less. Wherefore it
is likewise notorious, that this exprobation concerning the Pope, is in his
case, noe less frivolous, them impertinent.

That, wicked his that Opinion that by falsifications must be mantayned; I
think to be most true. I would it had not only been marginal, but also
textual, as being more important, and pertinent, then any other part of all
this discourse. Ephesians. 4.25.
For the which cause (says the Apostle) laying away lying, speak ye truth
every one with his neighbor. But in this case I can not entreat you to omit
it. S. Basil. ep. 10. vide and ep. 73.
First because as S. Basil in a like case said; mihi illud Diomedis subit
dicere: ne prec^ris, quoniam vir est improbus. Nam procul du^to cum lenius
tractantur animi elati, solito insolentiores plerumque fieri solent To me the
saying of Diomedes seems now to be said: entreat him not because he is
froward. For hawtie mynds, without dowbt, by how much they are treated gently,
by so much for the most part do they become more insolent. For this, M. Rider,
I can not entreat you to deal uprightly, your disposition of it self being
inexorable. But the second cause is, that lying is intrinsecal, and
inseparable, to your profession. Quasi apud lapsos, and prophanos, and extra
ecclesiam positos, de quorum pectoribus excesserit Spiritus sanctus, esse aliud
possit, nisi men's praua, S. Cypr. ep. 69.
and fallax lingua, and odia venenata, and sacrilegia mendacia. As if (said S.
Cyprian) with them fallen, and profane, and placed out of the Church, from
whose breasts the holy Ghost is departed, anything else man befownd but a
depraved mind, and deceitful tongue, and venemouse hatreds, and sacrilegiouse
lies.

But you may lay in our way the late words of S. Optatus. That heynously
attainting you, at least, lawful proofs be not omitted. I therefore say, that
M. Edmond Buny confesses our Church to be that, from which you descend, (or
are fallen) which has continued from the Apostles age to this present. Luther
also confesses it, in one of his last books, Bunie in his treat to
pacification, tovvard the end.
Omne bonum Christianum a papatu ad nos deuenisse; All good of Christianity to
have descended to them from papistrie. To every ones senses it is so evident,
Luth in lil^o in An^bapti^.
that you are fallen from us, that I loath to declare it. Then which reproach,
to be separated from us, S. Aug. ep. 42. and l. 1. c. 5. de Symbolo ad Catech.
tanquam sarmenta, as chipps, ^. Cyp. l. de vnitate ecclesiae.
tanquam ramos as branches, S. Opt. lib. 1.
tanquam for as exuntes, as departers forth, Tertull. l. 4. con. Marcion. S.
Vinc. c. 37. S. Iren. l. 3. c. 4. Isa. 28.15.
tanquam posteriores, as later; the holy Fathers, S. Augustine, S. Cyprian, S.
Optatus, Tertullian, S. Vincent Lirinensis, S. Ireneus thowght none more
vehement, and ignominious, against owld heretics.

So the^, it being proved that you are fallen from us; we are now to know, that
such wynd-shakes, defend themselves as the prophet speaks; In making a lie
their hope, and protecting them selves by a lie Neque enim possunt laudare nos,
qui recedu^t: aut expectare debemus vt placeamus illis qui nobis displicentes,
and contra ecclesiam rebels sollicitandis de ecclesia fratribus violenter
insistunt. For they that depart can not commend us, says S. Cyprian: S. Cypr.
ep. 25.
or should we expect, that we should please them, that displeasing us, as
rebels against the Church, do violently employ them selves in soliciting the
brethren from the Church? By which premises, is employed, that if the cause be
wicked that must be defended by lies; the cause of the lapsed, of the departed,
or of the runnagats from Catholic religion, must be wicked: the cause of M.
Rider being such apparently must be wicked: the cause of one so often fownd in
prodigious untruths, must be wicked: which may suffice for this point.

10. Fourthly, Rider.
That Images and praying to Saints were then neither taught by those Fathers,
nor received of the Catholic Church. Here Master Fitzsymon according to his
wonted manner, says: That Images and Saints were worshipped: but how fondly he
endeuoreth to prove his wrested opinion, by misalledging Fathers, and bringing
in of fables, I defer to mention it, hoping by your good persuasion he will
mend it.

10. Title. Whether it be true that I mis-aleadged Fathers, and alleged
fables, to confirm the vvorshipp of Images.
Fitzsimon.
10. YOu have M. Riders, authority that I did both the one, and the other: but
not without Riderian verity; that is, to tell ever the contrary. What I have
said of this matter in my first book of the Mass, will show to every one, that
Scriptures, Fathers, and Antiquities, do justify, and certify, the worship of
Images, Cap. 4. tit. 5.
beyond all occasion of my misalleadging Fathers, and alleging fables in
confirmation of them. But, if both new and owld Testament were produced to that
effect; if all monuments of Doctors, Fathers, and Histories, were it not easy
to affirm, without al proof, or probalitie, contrary to all certainty, and
notwithstanding greatest remorse of fidelity, that all were but forged? what
idiot but might do do as much: to wit upon his bare word to depestre him
self thus of disproofs, to deny more in one hour, then all the learned in
the world may prove in one age?

To that end principaly, that his omission be known to have proceeded from a
guilty conscience, and impossibility to answer my proofs to that effect; I
have inserted the substance of them in the treatise of the Mass, or else would
here have exhibited them. For he that sought so seeliely to take howld on the
testimonies of Beda, Calvin, etc. where not withstanding as well occasion, as
appearance of all contradiction (as is showed most palpably) wanted; and yet
followed them so eagerly: what think you, (if he would seem wise) would he
but glawnce, at allegations if they were in deed false, and at relations that
were without dout fabulouse? But of his abusing the understanding of readers,
by so palpable delusions, so contentiously every where maintained; besyd what
is before said, some what may follow.

If it will please him, or his consorts, to be thankful for a proffitable
example thereby to leave these exorbitant forgeries, by them used in liew of
other answer; I present this history recorded by Cesarius, and others toward
their ame^dment. Caesar. l. 3. c. 37. Joan. Heroli. ser. 24. post Trinit.
Two merchants of Colen, confessed to their ghostly father two foul (although
ordinary) offenses; lying, and perjury, in saying, and swearing, that among
all others they alone had sound and cheap wares, from places of greatest
request, from woorkmen of greatest fame, from other perfections most esteemed;
in the mean time knowing that their wares in deed were inferior to them of
their neighbors, and had never been from places, woorkmen, and other
commendations by them vawnted. Their confessor according to his duty
instructed them of the heynousnes of those crimes, so effectualy, that they
being sorrowful for their former life, they promised to abstain heedfully for
the future time from all disordre and particularly that they would nether lie,
nor forswear in bying, and selling. In the beginning, they fownd them selves
somewhat interested thereby, until God had fully proved the firmenes of their
resolution. But after, in small process of time, their trade, customers, and
wealth, increased so exceedingly, that they came to incomparable wealth. So, if
our Reformers could refrain from the same offenses, in utterance of their
merchandise in writing, and deal plainly, without inhawncing glozing, or
returning their wares, without detracting, and belying the provision,
sufficience and substance of their neighbors store, or beguiling thus their
customers; I assure you, thowsands more, would peruse their stuff, and their
traffic would be much amended.

11. The fifth position was this, Rider.
That the Mass which now the Church of Rome does use, was not then known in
the Church, Master Fitzsymon knowing (or else he is ignorant in Durandus,
Durantus, Guido (and the rest of the Mass founders) that it is impossible to
prove the Mass to be either Apostolical or Catholic, and that in the first
five hundred years it was not hatched under the warmth of the Popes wings (for
then he was scarce Bishop of Rome) but that is was to his own knowledge
patched up in many hundred years after those 500 by sundry Popes: and
therefore Master Fitzsymon very wisely passes the matter over without one
text of Scripture to prove it, for knowing in his conscience that the Mass
never came within the letter of Christ's will, he will not afford it the least
warrant forth of Gods word. And for the Fathers that he alleges, I am sorry
that a man that has so fluent a tongue, should have so bad a mind, to wrest
the Fathers, so speak that after their death, which they never knew in all
their life.

11. Title. Whether the Mass now used in the Church of Rome, was known to
the ancient Church.
M. Rider denies, it to have been known, Fitzimon.
before Innoncent the thirds time. But in the two books precedent, even the
innocents may judge, whether such be not for the folly thereof, an Innoce^ts
opinion, and for the impudency thereof, a sycophants protestation. When that M.
Rider had threatened before (as often appears) so wonderfully the Mass, that
he would show from first to all to be magic etc; when he had promised to
trauers it at the first occasion; In (...) caveat n. ^8.
when he had taken upon him (as a little after follows) that he had followed
me closely in every line, word, syllable, and leter; then not only not to
accomplish his threat, not to embrace this opportunite now offered, not to
produce one word of all my proofs; and to deny that I had alleged any out
of Scripture: I know not what it is, if it be not to Ride as fast as his titt
can gallopp. And that he may not ride alone, Luther has sent this sentence as
a foot boy to compagnie him: Qui semel mentitur, hic certissime ex Deo non
est, and suspectus in omnibus habetur; Luth. in Asser. Teu: ho. art. 25.
He that once lies, he is not most certainly of God, and in all things is to
be to suspected. As I said, my treatise of the Mass will further, totaly, and
seueraly (for what part soever thereof you peruse it alone will discover the
foresaid ryding) demonstrat, not only M. Rider to be untrue, but that, magna est
vis veritatis quae contra omnium ingenia calliditatem, sol^rtiam* and contra
fictas hominum insidias facile se per scipsam defendet; Seneca in epist.
great is the power of truth, which by it self defends it self against all
wits, craft, industry, and treacherous ambushes of men.

If denials were disproofs, if the dissembling our arguments were the
dissoluing of them, if hypocritical protestations be allowed for lawful
pleadings: then our cause, and case will loose their process. But if truth
may have due regard, and proofs their deserved credit, and right but a lawful
judgment: then falshod, (as a disguised queen upon a stage, the Pagent being
ended) will be discovered; to have been but a cowntrefett, then dissimulation
will be unmasked; then words will be valued according the lightness of their
weight. As I said, my ^wo books of the Mass, (compiled upon the occasion of
such denials, dissembling and delusions), are committed to the regard of their
truth; the credit of their proof, and the judgment of their equity. Let
them be accepted, but according to desert, and they, and I will c^aue noe more,
nor others perhapp require greater satisfaction.

Rider.
12. The last question was, Of the Popes supremacy, and whether the Pope of
Rome has universal jurisdiction over all Princes and their Subjects, in
causes temporal and Ecclesiastical.

With this Master Fitzsimon, deals as with all the rest, and for the first
part he says, that the Popes supremacy was acknowledged, but tells you not
within the first five hundred years, and therefore is able to say nothing to
that first part in question. But impertinently misalleadgeth some Texts of
Scripture spoken either touching Peter's faith which he should hold: not one
word of his supremacy which he never had. And there he would cunningly
subborne the Fathers, to prove Peter's pretended supremacy, and the Popes
usurped supremacy, but all in vain for he takes them by the sound, not by the
sense, as shall appear Christ willing in sifting them, if he dare show them.

And for the second part of the position, he falls quite from the proof of
the Popes Jurisdiction, to the largeness of his possessions, which was never
in quest^on: as Sicilia, Sardinia, etc. here you see his weakness, that cannot
draw out of the Lords quiver one shaft in defense of the Popes Supremacy.

12. Title. Whether my proofs of the Popes supremacy, speak of the first
five hundred years.
12. YOu have sondrie evidences that M. Fitzimon.
Rider is nether lawful Judge, nor witness. In this article it appears
particulary, in his denying it, that Scriptures, Fathers, Protestants,
especialy, the Centuriasts, in great prolixitie do profess. If there had been
no other proofs the^ is in my first title to this Rescript: what think you,
are not they alone a stumbling block to humble our Rider into the synke of
confusion? I will but quote the Centuriasts showing from age to age the Popes
of Rome to have had and practiced supremacy of the whole world, Cent. 2. c. 7.
col. 139. col. 770. 778. 779. 781. 782. etc. 10. col. 1262.
and add to the foresaid proofs in my title a few more, that even those who are
loath to conceive M. Rider to be what he is convicted, may be as loath to dowbt
of the matter that he contradicts. For even by the centuriasts aforsayd, is
confessed; that the Popes of Rome sommoned General Concils, that they were the
presidents in them, that they confirmed them, and some time in part sometime
wholly, Vide Cent. 2. cap. 7. Cent. 5. c. 7. etc.
when there was occasion, disanulled them.

Anacletus living in the first hundred years after Christ's ascension, said:
Sacro sancta Romana and Apostolica ecclesia, non ab Apostolis, sed ab ipso
Domino and saluatore nostro Primatum obtinuit, sicuti beato Petro Apostolo
dixit, Cap. Sacrosancta. p. 1. d. 22.
Tu es Petrus and super hanc Petram edificabo ecclesiam meam. The most holy
Roman and Apostolic Church, not by the Apostles, but by our very Lord and
Savior has obtained the Primacie, as he said to B. Peter the Apostle; Thou
art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church. Origin, toward the same
time, says, Quis esset altior Apostolorum eo, qui est and dicitur vertex
eorum? Orig. ho. 2. de Euangelistis.
Who should be more high of the Apostles then he, who is, and is called their
head? The same question, in like phrase is inquyred by S. Austin. Who, S. Aug.
super Joan. c. 6.
as all others (excepting only certain obscure Reformers, that first denied S.
Peter to have been Pope of Rome, and after upon contrary knowledge revoked
their denial) do attribut to the Roman cheyre, all prerogatives of S. Peter: as
by diverse evidences, yea and Imperial decrees, is succinctly touched in the
first and second title to this Rescript, and not omitted in our answer to the
Caveat. And so the Fathers, say, S. Iren. l. 3. c. 3. S. Cypr. l. 4. ep. 8. S.
Hiero. ep. 57. ad Damas. S. Aug. ep. 162. S. Innoc. ep. 93. inter epistolas S.
Aug. S. Greg presat. in. con. S. Prosper l. de Ingratis.
S. Irineus: Every Church must reyle to the Roman Church. S. Cyprian: It is the
mother Church S. Hierome: It is the chair upon which the Church is bulded. S.
Austin: It has the pre-eminence of the Apostolical chair. S. Innocent:
According the ancient rule, it should ouersee all Churches S. Gregory: By Gods
appointement it is preferred to all Churches, Prosper; Rome by Pastoral honor
is made the head of the world.

To all these think you, will M. Rider have nothing to answer? yes I warrant
you. He has answered already; All these are taken by the sownd, and not by
the sense. The phrase, is pretty; and is a Riderian answer to all: which if
you will not accept you must have noe other: because it is their opinion, as
even Luther of the very sort says, Although they touch not one argument,
Luth. tom. 7. defens. verb. cene. fol. 394. 397.
yet that they have answered the matter passing well: and such is their
gredines to defend their credit, that it makes them giddie and frantic, in
such sort that what soever they take hold of, though it be but a straw, yet
they imagine it to be a sword, or spear, and that at every stroke they kill
thowsands. A truer man, could never have spoken of them more truly; in this
the rather to be believed, that none could be better acquainted with the
Childrens disposition, then their Father. Sed vanis stolidus haec omnia
parturit error, Lucretius.
But their reforming error allows them noe other shifts. That he affirms me
to have fallen in proofs from the Popes Jurisdiction, to the largenes of the
Popes possessions; For the first part, it is now detected to be what it is. For
the second, I ask all reasonable understandings, how could I more pertinently
satisfy his insidiouse article, that the Pope claymed not temporal
Jurisdiction over all Princes and their subjects in causes temporal, then by
rehearcing the few places whereunto, he pretends temporal claim? Those I said
to be Rome, Cicilia, Sardinia, Corsica, Terras citra Pharum, Patrimonium Petri
in Thuscia, Ducatum Spoletanum, Comitatum Venusinum, Comitatum Sabinensem,
Marchiam Anconitanam, Massam Trebariae, Romandi lam, Campaniam, Maritas
Prouincias illarumque terras and loca, Terras specialis commissionis
Arnulphorum, Bononiam, Cesenam, Ariminum, Beneuentum, Perusium, Auenienam,
Ciuitatem Castelli, Tudertum, Ferariam, Cl^macum. Of which in some he has noe
temporal command, as in Cicilia; in others, whereof many are but mean towns,
he so rules, as they were never so much contented nor happy, under other
government. And consequently, the greater credit may be given to the book of
dangerous positions; Pagina 30. 97.
that the rule of Puritans has wrought more mischefe in Geneua in thirty
years, the^ the Pope of Rome in five ho^dred. He is noe papist, that so
speaks, but the author of a book by public authority in our late Queens
days, approved. And it needs noe confirmation to him that knows even by
Caluins own confession, and by many others, that Calvin, and Farell, Calu. in
epistolis.
were banished with this elogium, out of Geneua: Tyranni esse voluerunt in
liberam ciuitatem; they would have been tyrants over a free city. Of which
their seditious and rebelliouse disposition; all contryes where they are,
cities, or other places, do witness their rule in deed not to be Papal, but
Pharaonical, and Pharisaical.

These foresaid territories I named principaly, that all may behold noe Pope
hitherto to have claymed Jurisdictions, in our parts, over, Princes, and their
subjects, in causes temporal: thereby to judge the better of the impertinencie,
of such malicious extrauagant, inserted by my Caualiero; and of the little
wisdom of our Challenor, who to be a Doctor, could find noe matter in
Divinity or other science of disputation, but out of all divinity, and partly
contrary to it, these only three ridiculous theses, being in part blasphemous
paradoxes, that Christ descended not into hell: the Church of Rome had
apostated: Irland was not Peter's patrimony.

13. And last of all, I pray you tell him, Rider.
that I will not digest his omissions in answering the matters in my Preface,
all of them being so material, as those two testimonies out of August.
Agolertus complaint of the blasphemous errors of the Popes Antiphonarie, which
shows the heresy of the Pope pronounced by his own Chaplen as also for the
filthy life and lewednesse of the Pope and his Cardinals exclaimed on by his
own Commissioners, 1538. Prostibulum Meritricum.
as also that the Popes own Palace of Lateran (by the Popes own Proctor his
confession) is become a most filthy stews: these things he would omit, and
foolishly frame to himself a By-matter out of the question to prattle on, as
against Luther: but omitting to answer me in this point that I urged him
withal, which was this. That Luthers opinion of Consubstantiation is Popery:
De Cons. did 2. cap. non prim. in glossa, tertia tenet.
And that Luthers foolish heresy was held and maintained in Rome 273 years
before Luther was borne, as the Popes own Records to the Popes shame witness.
Again he has omitted to answer to those twenty several opinions of the
Popes Doctors touching Consecration, one differing from another in opinion and
so no Consecration, and therefore no Transubstantiation, and so his Massing is
but a mockery. And he must mend his answer concerning August. and Lyra, upon
the sixth of John, or else he is overthrown horse and foot indeed.

Tit. 13. Of M. Riders blaming my omissions, and attainting Luther of heresy.
13. HE requesteth all Priests, and Jesuits, in the contrie, Fitzimon.
to tell me, that he would not digest my omissions to answer the matters in
his Preface, all of them being so material. First, I have answered them,
abundantly, and so little to his appetite, that I warrant you he had rather
swallow down his old sustenance, the gruell of wiggen, newly from the fire,
then have had his stomach charged therewith. For were he ane Ostriche, that
could digest iron, and steel; yet the matter now requested to his digestion,
is made such an ingredient, or drowg, so contrary to nature, and so vehemently
woorking upon the stomach, that it will burst the midriffe, and burn the
bowels, if it may not be instantly quitt away by purge, or surfett.

Read my answer to his preface, and behold, how untowardly he has mistaken
all matters; the correcting of an unknown book by a Catholic, from errors
inserted therein by heretics,) as his own Author professes) that, he makes a
blasphemouse error of the Popes book: the Popes reforming vices, and chasing
occasions of evil; he terms, filthy life, and lewednes, of the Pope, and
his Cardinals: the diverse opinions, of the manner of consecration; he affirms,
to be a flatt denial of consecration: the affirmation of S. Austin and Lira; he
interprets to be a negation. And in this last point, as in all the rest, so
the words of his conclusion in this place argues a wise and well styled
penn-man. He must (says he) mend his answer concerning August. and Lyra, upon
the sixth of John, or else he is overthrown horse and foot in deed. As if he
would seem to say, in nothing else I were ouetthrowen; all things else went
well; in all other matters my overthrow was but feigned, but in this I was
forsooth ouerthowne in deed. In deed, M. Rider, in deed, this was a judicial
discourse, and a conceit worthy to be registered in a book of your making.

Next, I would willingly be informed, what obligation I had to answer these
very material points of M. Riders preface, he having intierly gamboled over my
Preface, and never so much as once saluted it in passing by, but rather with a
squint regard given thereto, turned his back toward it. Certainly so great
reciprocation in me does presuppose an obligation from him, or else some
unknown inequality must excuse.

Thirdly, in the name of Jesus, what had either any, much less all of these
material points (as he speaks) to do with all, or any of the articles by him
propownded? Let me not be trusted, if I can comprehend by what engine, or cable,
they may be haled thereto. But a tottring religion like a giddie dronkard must
waver to by matters, whether we will or not. And let among all other
disgressions, this opinion of Luther, which he calls a foolish heresy (of
which a little after) testify his simplicity, and senselensnes in not knowing
what is with him, or against him. Luthers opinion of consubstantiation (says
he) is popery, and was held and mantayned in Rome 273. years before Luther was
borne. First, his Author informs him, that it was not popery, by confuting
it, as oposit to popery. 2. That it was taught in Rome, and maintained; his
Author tells not; only him self dreamed it. 3. In deed, I find, in the
first book of Guitmundus, and in the 2. tome cap. 43. of Waldensis, that
Berengarius after his second recantation; affirmed it. But can any be fownd
besyd M. Rider, that make Berengarius his opinion, Popery; he being by Pope
and Popery, to the shame of all his fauorits, so often condemned, as a rank
heretic? In my first fowerth proof, and M. Riders answer thereto in his
Caveat, is approved, that all the world, yea and M. Rider him self, accounted
him a protestant, and now, I must forsooth, as a material matter, justify his
opinion as Papistical.

But, if nothing else were conveniently written by M. Rider, I can not blame his
puritanical verdict, that Luthers opinion was a foolish heresy: to wit that
the bread remains with Christ's body in the B. Sacrament. For such his
censuring Luther, by howlding ane heresy wittingly, to be an heretic, Vide
Acts and M^^. page 500. edit Joan. Day. 1563.
does also censure and condemn all the first planters of Protestantcie in
England, (Latimer, Frith, Barns, Cranmer, etc) as being Lutherans, to be also
heretics. It censureth Iuel, to be an heretic, by professing that Luther came
first to the true faith: which being once had, Iuel in the Apology, Vide exam.
Symboli. Bale cent. 1. page 66. 72. cent. 8. page 678. In the epistle prefixed
Horn in the harborovvgh in the last oration.

Examen of the discipline. printed an. 1593 Land. by John Wolf page 3. 13.


(says the faith of Protestants) can never be lost. It censureth John Bale, to
be an heretic, by making Latimer, the first Apostle of England: before whom
(says the book of conference betwixt Latimer, and Ridlye) none preached the
true faith of Christ, and the gospel. It censureth Horn, to be an heretic,
saying that Luther begott truth. And lastly, it censureth. M. Rider him self
to be first a plain, and perfect Puritan, to whom all professions of
Reformers, besyd their own, even it that is now professed in England, is
Antechristian, and diabolical, and none but betrayers of God does defend it,
whether it come from Luther, Zuinglius, or Calvin, without the presbyterial
approbation. Next, to be untrue, in this verdict, that Luther held an heresy;
or at least, in his Caveat, in these words, n. 120. Luther is more to be
commended, then all the Popes, Cardinals, Priests, and Jesuits in Christendom:
who with Austin, though he did err, yet would not persevere in errors, as you
and they do, least he should be an heretic. Here it is said, he held an
heresy: there that he held none: can both be true?

In this censure of M. Rider, there is a secrecy, to many unknown, which I
will breefely vnfowld. The Zuinglians, (or such as affirm Christ's body to be
only in the Sacrament, in figure, and representation) perceauing the Lutherans
in greatest reputation, and authority, and their own proceedings to be
greatly blemished, by being by them contradicted, Schlusselburg. l. 2. a 13.
fol. 144.
and condemned; they, cum lachrimis largiter profusis coram Lant graueo
Hassiae: with tears abundantly sheed before the earl of Hasse, implored to be
auowed brethren by the Lutherans. What their repulse was, Epitome Colloquij
Maulbrunae anno 1564. page 82.
you may gather by these words following? VVheras the Zuinglians do boast that
we did acknowledge them our brethren: that is by them so impudently, and
vaynly, forged, that we can not sufficiently admit their shamelesnes. For
truly as we do afford them noe place in the Church, so much less do we
account them our brethren, fynding them possessed with the spirit of lies, and
contumelious against the Son of man. This is the wringing vie of Lutherans
against the Sacramentarians, that how heretical soever they make them, now that
they are by them disdained; yet that diverse times they lamentably implored to
be intertayned in their brotherhood, and were by them scornfully disclaimed.

But, this is not all the secrecy of this matter. For, M. Rider being a
Puritan, and noe Protestant, (but when the time, and tide, requires) may
boast, that if Zuinglians have had such affront, yet that Caluinists have not
been contradicted. To which you may answer, that even the former sentence
comprised them, as being Sacramentarians, or enemies to Christ's real being in
the Sacrament. Also, adioyne; that Beza him self, by testimony of Smidelin,
most ernestly presented, Smid^lin. in epitome colloq. Montisbel. an. 1588.
editi, page 64.
in the year 1586 to auow the Lutherans for brethren, if they would mutualy
accept Caluinists into their confederation. Nay their case, is much more
condemnable, whom both Lutherans, and Zuinglians do persecute, and not only
prosecute.

Although I loath to inroll their blasphemies in my wrytings, yet to redeem my
assertion of such their condemnation, and in deed to make them as odious as
their case demands, to all them that only for show of truth hitherto
complied with their opinions; I think good to specify the blasphemies and
abominations of Caluinists condemned even by Zuinglians, anno 1555. 3. Aprilis
by the whole state of Berna, which also then condemned Caluins Institutions,
and other woorks.

Calu. l. 1. Instit. c. 11.1. (...). 1. and 2. etc.
1. Peccata fiunt non solo Dei permisse sed voluntate. Synns are committed not
only by Gods permission, but by his will.

Ib. c. 16.17.18.
2. Quae cunque crimina a quocunque patrata, sunt bona and iusta Dei opera. All
synn^ by whom soever committed, are Gods good, and just vvoorks.

Ibidem.
3. Iniquitas non peragitur ab hominibus voluntate, aut arbitrio, aut proprijs
viribus, sed per Spiritum sanctum. Iniquity is not fullfilled by men, by
will, or intention, or propre force, but by the holy Ghost.

4. Voluntas Dei saepe repugnat eiusdem praeceptis. Ibidem.
The will of God is often contrary to his commandments.

5. Voluntas Dei est suprema causa indurationis hominum. Ibid. and l. de
pr^dest* and prouidentia. Idem l. 1. Instit. c. 1^. n. 1. l. 2. c. 4. and l. 1.
c. 23.24. Ibid. Ibid.
The will of God is the principal cause of the peruersite of men.

6. Diabolus menda^ est ordinatione Dei. The devil lies by the ordonnance of
God.

7. Deus suggerit inhonestas affectiones efficaci ordinatione, operatione, and
voluntate. God suggesteth dishonest desyers, with effectual decree, operation,
and will.

8. Impij and reprobi magis operantur in suis iniquitatibus opus Dei quam
proprium. The impious, reprobat do more fulfill the work of God in their
iniquities, on their own.

9. Deus creauit maximam partem mundi ad damnationem simplici decreto
voluntatis suae. God has created the most of the world to damnation, Ibid.
by the absolute decree of his will.

10. Suo decreto instituit vt Adam peccaret. Ibidem.
By his absolut decree he ordained that Adam should sin.

All which doctrine not only in seed, but in budd, crop, and shoot, to have
been toward harvest, in Cambridg, among Puritans, (teaching that all such
persons as were once truly justified, Conference before the King. page 4^.
though after they fell into never so greueous sins, yet remained still just,
though they never repented them; because forsooth they had done the will of
God, the woork of God, etc.) the deane of Paul's, Ian, 14. 1603. not only
assured, but also proved, before the kings Majesty. So that from first, to
last, it is a lawful excuse, in an unlawful matter, that M. Rider, termed
Luther an heretic, and that the Puritans term so the Sacramentarians,
considering that they are so odiously by them condemned.

That in these few lines, he names so often the Pope, dividing under him the
offices of Popes chapelin to one, of Popes proctor to another, of Popes record
or to another, of Popes Doctor to another, etc. partly it honors the Pope,
partly it tormenteth him that so repineth. Reformers, to the Pope, do offer the
sacrifice of the Lindians to Hercules; whom, diris deuouere pium habetur; S.
Nazianzen orat 1. in Julian.
ac Deum illum non alio quam conuiciorum and maledictorum honor afficiunt; to
curse, it was their piety; nether with other honor did they worshipp that God.
Malis dispicere, laudari est; it is a praise to displease the wicked; and
unjust irrogata, Sen. epist. 77. Idem in proue^. Act. 9.5. 2. Reg. 17.
infamia eius est qui fecit; an injury wronfully infixed, is the doers
infamy. It also tormenteth M. Rider, to kick against the prick. He may
sooner with Achitofel, by his malice destroy him self, then hinder David to
prosper. A sea may rore against a rock, but when it beats against it, what
remains but a fretting and vanishing froth? That to happen, in the Popes
case, is affirmed by S. Austin, saying: S. Aug. de vtil. cred. c. 17.
The Pope to obtain the height of authority; frustra circum latrantibus
hereticis; heretics in vain barking rownd about him. Nether are all the
defenders of Papistrie, either Chaplins, Proctors, or Doctors, to the Pope; but
many, if not most, such as leaving great estates, do eschew dignities, and
exchange wealth for want. In deed among Reformers, the contrary is observed;
they but of the basest sort, and preaching, to purchase, and having purchased,
leaving to preach.

Rider.
14. And whereas I brought the old Church of Rome, condemning the late, Church
of Rome for their fained miracles, with Lyra, Alexander de Hales, Chrisost. and
Augustine, approving the same against him: Master Fitzsymon so smothly passed
them over, with two hundred errors more, which I shall hereafter tell him of,
it he mend not by this your gentle admonition.

Now my earnest suit to you is this; That you would admonish him to mend the
premises, who has been hitherto careless of good counsel, being bewitched
with a self conceit, Praemonitus, Praemunitus.
which indeed is but a deceit. And if he think my terms too tart, thank
himself, it is against my humor: his breach of promise and foolish brag of
victory without verity, enforced me to use these terms to edge him to
aunwere, and to show his learning or ignorance, wisdom or folly; and, that
the world may see (if he scorn your brotherly admonition) that brag is a
good dog, more tongue then teeth, more talk then truth. But you must needs
deal with him by writing for otherwise in words he is too hard for a hundredth
of you, for you shall find him old dog, in copia verborum, and inopia rerum.
And thus hoping after your counsel, he will leave his woonted gadding
rouings from the matter, and follow me closely in every line, word, syllable,
and letter, as I have and will do him Christ willing: I commend you and him to
the blessing of our merciful God, whom I beseech for his Christ's sake, so to
touch your hearts from heaven, that you all may renounce your new popery* and
fear God in Christ with us, according to his Euangelical truth.

From my house in Saint Patricks Close this 30. of March. 1604. Yours, so far
as you are Christ and the Kings, ready to treble these kindnesses. JOHN RIDER.


A fa^t escaped in the print, namely quo for qua. page, 7, line 16.

Tit. 14. Upon the residue of the Rescript, to the end.
14. NVllam authoritate^ habet, vti, qui damnatus est, da^nat, Fitzimon.
says Seneca; his judgment has noe authority, Sen. ep. 77.
where he condemns that is condemned. This sentence M. Rider, has not only
force, but inevitable violence, many ways, against you. You pretend two
hundred errors; yet show none; and are besyd condemned by public authority:
what credit will be given by Catholics to your words, when Protestants discredit
you? The two hundred errors are but the spotts of cownterfet blood upon
Iosephes coat, Genesis 37.
whom Jacob after will find unspotted, and know the deceitful enuiouse
brethren to have been as treacherouse in selling him, as in lying to their
parent by his coat. And as for the point of miracles, I believe it to be so
answered, as that M. Rider will blame no further want thereof.

That I did not follow your counsel, was the same mercy of God toward me,
which was toward the late named Joseph, that he followed not the allurements of
his adulterous mistres: S. Cyprian in conc. Carthagin.
your reformations being a disloialtie toward the spouse of the Church, and
deuorcing your selves as concubins from truth to follow licentious sects and
errors. Roboams example shall make me never to follow, 3. reg. 12.3.
the young men's conseil, that is them, that are vpstarts in religion, such as
straying, are turned into vain talk, desyrouse to be Doctors of the law, 1.
Tim. 1.7.
not understanding nether what things they speak, nether of what they affirm.

I have chosen for my cownselor the word of God to be my compase, and card in
his holy arc; by which, I learn to divert and plye from you, as from the
rocks, and shelfs of certain ruin; by these sea marks following, placed at
your entry.

Observe those that make dissensions and scandals contrary to the doctrine which
you have learned. Romans 16.17. 1. Joan. 2.24. Galat. 1.9. Hebr. 13.9. Romans 16.17.
That which you have heard from the beginning, let it abide in you. If any
preach otherwise then you have already received, be it accursed. Be not
mislead by variable and strange doctrins. Avoid them: for such do not serve
Christ our Lord, but their own belly, and by sweet speeches, and
benedictions, seduce the hearts of innocents. By these cownsels, I was prevented
from being cownseiled by you.

Auolent, quantum volent, paleae leuis fidei, Tertull. l. de prescrip.
quocunque afflatu tentationum; Let the chaff of light faith be borne away as
far as they list, with every breath of tentation; let the blind, be guided by
the blind; Mat. 15 14.
into the same snare; let wavering children be carried about with every wind of
doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14.
in the wickedness of men, in craftines of the circumuention of error; Let the
denyers of knowing Christ and his word blush, Mar. 8.38. Luc. 9.26. Eccl^.
6.10.
and shrink to acknowledge him in this adulterous and sinful generation; let
the trenchoure friend, depart in time of tribulation; Isa. 51.12. 2. Tim. 2.12.
Mat. c. 10.38. c. 16.24. Luc. 9.23. c. 14.27.
let the timorouse for a mortal man, that is to wither as hay, forget his
maker; As for me, I hope to reign with Christ: therefore I know I must sustain
with Christ. I pretend as a disciple to follow Christ: therefore I must take up
my cross, hate my father and mother, Mar. 8.38. Luc. 9.26. 2. Tim. 2.12.
wife and children, brethren and sisters, yea and my own life, in comparison
of him. I attend, not to be denied of Christ, before God, and his angels: 2.
Tim. 4.8.
therefore I know I must not deny him, or be ashamed of him before men. I aspire
to a crownee of justice: therefore I must endeavor to fight a good fight, Romans
8.39.
to consummat my course, to keep my faith. For conclusion I say, that nether
death, nor life; nor angels, nor Principalities, nor powers, 1. Cor. 10.13.
nor things present, nor things to come, nether might, nor height nor depth,
nor other creature ( by the mercy and help of my faitfull God, that will
never suffer us to be tempted above our power) shall be able to separat me from
the charity of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, nor to conform me to
the cownsaile of the reformed sedition.

You affirm that you must deal with me in print, and not by word, Prou. 6.2.
because I am to hard for a hundred, in speech. I say, that illaqueatus es
verbis oris tui, and captus proprijs sermonibus; you are engaged by the words
of your own mowth, and taken by your own talk. You can not conceal the
confusion you had ever in talking with me, when at every word I disproued and
disturbed your conceits: which you heedfully provided to happen most seldom,
and spedely to be abrupted. I do but appeal to M. Tristram Eccleston Constable
of the Castle, whether it was so or not. If he will not disgrace his goss sip,
at least M. Alderman Iyans, M. Luke She esquyer, and others, can tell the
plundge you, and Minister Baffe, wallowed in, at our last meeting. So then to
God be the glory, and never to me, you felt the brunt of my words, at that
time by your own confession to be irrefragable. As for the print you provided
not to taste, how it would have proved: but how you should have felt it if you
would have endured the trial, I leave to be judged now that I might without you
permission, make it known. What, or how much, or how little that will be, to your
proffit, I trust at like opportunity you will certify, as you have now done
of my words.

To perclose the whole, and to conclude the late points pertinently, in token
that I am not very self conceited, as ever before I have desired to speak
rather in the words of Scripture and Fathers then my own, so I will now
conclude in the discourse of B. S. Austin, S. Augustine. l. 2. (...) de ciu. c.
1.
altogether and as if it were of set purpose belonging to this effect.

If the weak sense of human custom dared not to resist the reason of manifest
truth; but to wholesome doctrine as to a medecin would submitt the weakness
thereof, until by Gods assistance, the faith of piety entreating, it were
healed; there should not be requisite any long discourse to convict the error of
vain opinion, by them who are in the right, and susficiently can express
their meaning. But now, because so much the more the disease of erroneouse
mynds, is greater, and dangerouse, by how much they defend their unreasonable
conceits, yea after full satisfaction, as much as from man to man was due,
(whether forever excessive blindness, whereby they discern not things apparent,
or for peruers obstinacy whereby they will not endure things evident) to he
reason, and truth: of necessity, we treat more amply clear matters, as if we
delivered them not to be viewed of behoulders, but in sort to be felt of
handlers, and yet winking at them. Nevertheless what end of alteration, or
mean of speaking would therbe, if we would think it requisite always to
answer them that contradict? For they that can not understand what is said, or
are of so hard an opposition of heart, that although they understand they will
not yield, such do contradict according as is written: and they speak
iniquity and continualy they are vain. Whose co^dradictions, if I would as
often refell as they with a stowt forhead resolve not to care what they say, so
that howsoever they gaynsay our disputations, how infinite, how miserable, and
unprofitable it is, you behold. Thus, I conclude in opinion, and speech of S.
Austin.

Laus Deo Opt. M. Virginique Matri, ac B. Patricio.
To the temperat Protestant Reader.
I Confess my self to have been long time browght up in Protestantcie; and
also to have waded therim with resolut confidence, professing it in Catholic
contryes, not without as well danger, as firm intention, to have dyed for it.
And when I did abandon it, it was not for any greater temporal preferment, as
is known publicly by what I then was, and what possibilities I had, in
respect of what I now ame, and do pretend to be. The cause of my first
conversion from it, was principaly, because I observed the form of belief,
called the creed, and the reformed gospel, to be in all articles altogether
opposite one to another. I report me, even to your arbitrament therein, after
reading my examination of the Protestant belief toward all the articles of the
creed, whether I had mistaken, or not. Next, as after I addicted my self to
the diverse controversies of both sides, examining them curiously with their
allegations, I was much more confirmed to be a Catholic, by viewing besyd the
creed, all the whole doctrine of Christianity, from Christ's time hitherto, to
be wholly repugnant to reformations; Eber in pref. com. Philippi. super ep. ad
Cor.
and when Reformers pretended the contrary; that they and the ancients, did not
disagree in religion: such imposture I fownd to be so enormly sycophantical and
hypocriticaly pretexed, that I blushed to have ever been of that profession,
which cowld never purchase, or retain, any virtuous mind, but by such
forging, and dissembling, to be that most, which according truth and plain
dealing, with all vehemency it contradicted and was least. So is it plainly
confessed by Eberus, who succeaded Luther and Melancthon in wittemberg. Tot and
tantis confusionibus and scandalis deformatur totus caetus, vt nihil videatur
minus esse quam quod profitetur. The whole crew (of Reformers) is so deformed
with so manifowld and great confusions, and scandals, as that it is nothing
less then what it professes. Lastly, when I came to Gods holy book, the
divine Scriptures, and compared them in their originals to the translations of
Reformers, and these to them; I then in deed viewed, all to be treason, and
trapps; all to be a transfiguration of the angel of darkness into ane angel of
light; or his doctrine of liberty to bear most undeservedly the title and
countenance of the doctrine of piety; and in the mean time true godliness, to
be (as Christ, in his passion) blasphemed, derided, spoiled, crucified, and
buried. So with me it also rose the third day, and appears after with hands,
side, and feet pierced, in such palpable manner that of a dowbtfull disciple,
Joan. 20.19.
by so manifest revelation, I then, and now say, My lord, and my God: as he
then and now answered my soul, Because thou have seen me, thou have believed.

I have now informed, why my self renownced protestantrie. If you please, I
will tender some further important occasions, whereby you may also know what to
determine toward the same. Pondre them in the balance of a pure eye, and not
according any preiudicated persuasion, and sway with them only according their
desert, as you tender your sowls salvation.

When reformations pretended to exclude papistrie, (as they termed the
Catholic Profession) they alleged against it, that it was forsooth
idolatry, superstition, magic; that it was a following of Antichrist, the
cupp of the whore of Babylon, a stamp of the beast of the Apocalips, etc; that
the ancient Fathers wear pernicious dreamers, doting fools, idle triflers,
fanatical writers, falsifyers, deprauers, blasphemers, etc; as is showed in my
first preface. Now for their own authority, and warrant to abolish papistrie,
and to establish their reformations, they assuredly affirmed the word of the
Lord, Gods book, and the holy Scriptures, to be their direction; the love of
Christ, and his truth, to be their impulsion; the doctrine of the Apostles, and
their belief, to be their intended Reformation. So that, the nick of all their
coning consisted in fine fyled and forged dispraises of Papistrie, and as
curious sugared deceitful commendations of Protestantrie approving them selves
(as S. Austin says) dulcissime vanos, non peritos sed perituros, S. Aug. l. 1.
confess. c. 14. and l. 7. c. 20.
necta^ disertos in errore qua^ desertos a very tate, most delyt somely vain;
not so much read as reprobat; nor eloquent in heresy as empty of verity.
This whole imposture if it be fownd false, must not the frame, or building,
erected thereon, be also esteemed to incline to destruction?

Omitting to prosecute Luthers confession, Luth. in disp Lipsiaca cum Eccio.
that this reformation was nether begone for God, nor for him should be
followed; First then I say, in general, that their bibles by their own
verdict, have not been the word of God. Nether will I allege for proof
thereof, Zuingl. de sacram fol. 412. Sur. in Chron. adan. 1523. Lindan dial. 1.
page 84.85.98. etc.
any Catholics, but them selves. In Luthers translations I might affirm, that
John Dietenbergius had colleted 874, and Emserus 1400 falsifications; and that
bishop Tonstal, had gathered in the only new Testament of Tindal, two thousand
deprauations. I abstain from obiecting one of ours against them, that them
selves of them selves, be both witnesses, and judges. I will begin with
England, and such therein, as were, Carlisle in his book that Christ descended
not into hell.
and are most esteemed. Carlisle then, (for whose credit Puritans deny the
descension of Christ into hell,) says, of the translations in England. They
detorte the Scriptures from the right sense. They show them selves to love
darkness more then light. Brovvghtons epistle to the Counsel.
Browghton, who being of the feruentest sort of Puritans, brooked not to dwell
in England as being a contrie drowned in error, but came to Midleburg in
Zeland: and ^her wrote his book, admonishing therein the Lords of the Cownsell
of England, In the book of the said conference by william Barlovv D. of
Divinity, and deane of Chester. page 45. printed by V. S. anno 1605. page 46.
in like words to the former, that the Bibles of England were fowly corrupted.
And now lately, the 13 of Ian. 1604. (according our computation) at Hampton
court, in the sum of Conference before the Kings Majesty, thus speaks the
forma^ of the queast of Puritans, D. Reinolds: that there might be a new
Translation of the Bible, because those that were allowed in the reigns of K.
Henry the eight, and Edward the sixth, were corrupt, and not aunswerable to the
truth of the original. To which, accorded, his Majesty, saying, as is there
expressed, that he cowld never yet, Bible anno 1588.
see a Bible well translated in English, but the woorst of all, he thowght the
Geneua to be. Which his judgment, the translators of the Bible in english,
(professing to translate the Geneua Bible, and yet declining from it in very
many places, Luke 3.36 Act. 1.14. c. 2.23. c. 3.21. etc.
as by the quotations may be gathered, being ashamed universally to conform
them selves thereto) do apparently confirm, and justify. Thus then we have for
the first consideration, that the Scriptures hitherto delivered in England are
corrupt, Vide VVitaker. page 15. contra rat. Campiani page 15.
loving darkness more then light; and never well translated; even by their own
declarations.

Of Luthers translation for the owld Testament, he him self in several clauses
says, that it is no word of God, belonging to Christians. Moises, Luth. sermon.
de Mose. De 10. precep. lib. 2. con. Rusticos.
nihil ad nos pertinet. Seditiosi prophetae dicebant, oportet and vet^
testamentum seruari. Non mihi (ecclesiastes), sed Iudeis, Mosen tuum predica.
Nullus apex aut punctus in Mose ad nos pertinet: legem ad me nihil pertinere,
sed euangelium etiam december precepta ad nos non pertinent. etc. Moses pertains
nothing to us. Seditiouse preachers affirmed, that the owld testament is also
to be observed. Preacher: not to me, but to the Jews, preach thy Moses; not a
title, or point, of Moses, belongs to us; the law not to concern us but the
gospel. Yea, even the ten commandments, not to belong to us. etc. This is
plain dealing, out of the word of God, to shuffle and cut away all the owld
testament. But what thowght Luther, think you, of the new testament? Listen to
him self rowndly, and resolutely, declaring his mind. Non immerito igitur
admonui in prologo noui testamenti, Lectores, vt hanc falsam aboleant
opinionem, quod scilicet quatuor sint euangelia, and quatuor tantum
Euangelistae. Dixit autem Ioannis euangelium esse vnicum, pulchrum, Luth. sermon.
de pharisee and publ. and in 2. proem noui test. primae editionis.
verum. Not unworthily did I admonish the Readers in my prologue of the new
testament, that they should abolish this false opinion, that there are four
gospells, and only four evangelists. For I said, that the gospel of John was
only be wi^full, and true. I might allege besyd these blasphemies against so
much of the owld and new testament, his like impiety toward the epistle of S.
James, the Apocalips, etc: but what needs any specification of parcels, when
he determines in express terms, Nihil est cum scriptura, Luth. in Assert.
in prologo.
Bibel, Buhel, Babel, the Bibel, Bubel, Babel, together with the Scripture, is
nothing. Is not this a strange manner of translating and reforming Scrip^ures,
to make them finaly not to be any word of God, or of any importance, but all
the bible to be only a buble, and a Babel?

What greater modesty or synceritie might be attended in Caluins translation,
when he taxed thus the Apostles and Evangelists altogether? Si Apostoli sint,
ne garriant quicquid illis collibitum fuerit. Calu. Instit. l. 4. c. 8.. 4.
Calu. in c. 19. Joan. v. 23.24. In cap. 2. Mat. v. 15. in c. Mat. v. 13. in c.
8. Mat. v. 17. in c. 27. Mat. 9. In cap. 6. Luce v. 40. Calu. in prefat. noui
test Gal. 1567.
If they be Apostles, let them not babble all that they list. Of the Evangelists
he also says them, intempestiue trahere loca: a natiuo sensu discedere: multos
sententias ex abrupto inseruisse: nominare improprie: verbis vti improprie: to
wreast allegations: to depart from the right meaning of them: to shuffle
abruptly many sentences into their writings: to term improprely* to use
words improprely. Whereupon most truly says he against him self, and his
like: I confess that Satan has gained more by these new Interpreters then by
keeping the word from the people. To conclude his odiouse exprobration; I must
report for a woeful conclusion, toward all late translations, the saying of
Zuinglians, or Tigurins: No translations yet extant, nor which will be here
after, is the exact word of God, and the express meaning of the holy Ghost.
Which if any temperat mind either of Catholics, or Protestants, may now
distrust to be true, in all their translations: I can not imagine, what
satisfaction greater to be resolved, might be either imagined or required, since
that it is proved, as S. S. Aug. l. 11. con. Faust. c. 2.
Austin said, to Faustus, and his consorts: You are the rule of truth: what
soever is for you, is true, what soever is against you, is false.

Let their Etheocleal discords next present themselves to your consideration.
God gave some Apostles, some Prophets, othersome Evangelists, These. c. 4. v.
12.13.
and othersome Pastors, and Doctors, to the consu^mation of the saints, unto
the work of the Ministry, unto the edifying of the body of Christ, until
we meet all into the unity of faith, and knowledge of the son of God Such
teachers of one uniform permanent doctrine always to continue, our Reformers
may not possibly be accounted; first because of their long interruption without
predecessors; which in professing their novelty, they both acknowledge, Fulke
lib. lat. con. Stapleton.
and mantayne, saying parum refer si nullos proferre potuerint antecessores,
it to be of small importance, althowgh they can not allege any ancestors,
yet by the words of the Apostle is intimated that there showld be a perpetual
succession of Pastors, and Doctors, from the Apostle upward to the wordls end,
to continue the knowledge of the son of God. Secondly, because, as is often,
and evidently, showed, that these Doctors of reformation, are every day more
remote from all meeting in any unity of faith. Them selves deny it not; their
own evidences assure it; they in their quiet words, do plainly profess it,
as by these declarations is testified. Obijciunt nobis Pontificij scandalum
dissidiorum. Georg. Mayor. in orat de confessionibus dog^um.
Fateor id maius esse quam vllis vt lachrimis deplorari possit. Fateor turbari
infirmos animos, vt dubitent, vbi sit veritas, and an aeliqua sit ecclesia Dei
distincta a caeteris gentibus. The Papists object against (...) the scandal of
our discords. I confess it to be greater, then by any tears may be deplored.
I confess, the weak mynds to be trubled thereby, that they dowbt where truth
is, and whether there be any Church of God distinct from the gentiles. Euangelici
doctores immanius fere, ac truculentius, quam barbari milites inter se
digladiantur. The euangelical doctors do more brutaly, and cruely, contend
among them selves, Chytreus, in thema. deprau. August. Conf.
then barbarous ruffians. Sordet profecto mihi mundus, and Cathedra, Pulpita,
and suggestus sordescere mihi incipiunt, in quibus odia ista venenata, and
contentiones ruinam spectantes deprehenduntur. Nic. Selneccerus in Prefat. in
Catol. Council. A. 4.
Truly the world is loathsome to me, chaires, pulpits, and seats begin to
displease me* in which these venimouse hates, and contentions, tending to ruin,
are found. Non sunt lana, nec linum, de quibus disceptatur, VVigandus lib. de
ervoribus Maioris.
sed de Doctrinae Christianae capitibus. They are nether flocks, nor tow, but
the Capital point of Christian doctrine, that they contend about. And that until
the great day of God they may never better agree, Schlusseburg, in proem.
both their chief superintendent Schlusselburg professes, and their several
meetings frustrated in attempting agreement, at Smalcald, Ratisbon, Constance,
Zurick, Aroue, Basile, VVorins, Mompelgart, Rochel, Hampton, does demonstrat.
So that if either the Apostle may be trusted, or them selves of their discordant
and irreconcilable belief, (which by such discord is known not to be the one
faith of one God, Ephesians. 4. Cant. 6.8. S. Aug. epist. 166.
the unity of one spirit, the one hope of our vocation, the one dove, and
spouse of Christ) we must be reprobatly desperate, if we will not inquyre and
repair ad Cathedram vnitatis in qua est posita doctrina veritatis, to the
chair of unity, in which is placed the doctrine of verity.

In third place is is to observed, that if besyd their translations among them
selves accounted to be corrupt, and that they will be otherwise for the time to
come, and consequently the faith builded upon them (for who may know, when the
grownd is hollow, whether he has fownded his building safely, or not?) to be
uncertain, and as experience shows, wavering; also their kingdom being
divided not for flocks, or tow, but for the capital points of Christian
belief, as them selves profess; if I say, besyd this discovery of their
profession not to be from Satan, by being condemned in owld heretics the
greatest enemies of God, and assuredest confederats of Satan; I trust that noe
reasonable Reader will use any long deliberation, whether it be convenient to
persist in Protestantrie, or not. Only this I in the mean time forwarne, that
as we accuse them to raise up owld condemned heresies, so they impute the same
to us: but not otherwise, then with seared consciences, only to prevent, and
anticipat our accusation of the like in them. For, only by Popes of Rome, (as
the Magdeburgians them selves confess) have all general concels, to condemn
heresy, been collected: and till Luthers time, heresies, (which ever must have
been, 1. Cor. 11.29.
that they also which are approved may be made manifest) by noe reformers cowld
be condemned for their professed novelty, and late acknowledged gospel;
Whereby they cowld not have been, at least when such heresies must have been
confuted. Nether would I wish a more urgent provocation to abandon pretended
reformations, then to conferr, and examine, such their collusion, in taynting us
with owld heresies, with their allegations, and proofs, whereby they auerr it;
in like manner as I have ever said, Iuels unexamined writings among all late
reformers (for in deed all later of them are abject in comparison of him) to be
the most dangerouse mean to pervert Catholics; but being confronted with
authors by him cited, and his intention once detected, them to be a most
forcible reduction of them and others, from being Protestants. Now then to the
point before specifyed.

First, the ancient Fathers, condemned, owld heretics, for denial of many
books of Scripture: the S. Iren. l. 1. c. 26. S. Epiph haer. 30.
Ebionits for their denying all S. Paul's epistles; the S. Aug. l. 33. con.
Faustum c. 3. and 7.
Manicheans for denial of the Gospel of S. Matthew; the S. Aug. haer. 30.
Alogians for denial of the gospel and Apocalips of S. John; the Tertul.
depraescrip^ S. Iren. l. 1. c 29. S. Epiph. haer. 42. S. Hieron. praef. in ep.
ad Titum.
Marcionits, and the Arians, for denial of the epistle to the Hebrews to be S.
Paul's, etc: what then, think you, would be their opinion of Late Reformers,
for denials of these books following to be authentical Scripture? in the owld
testament all the books of Moises, Tobi, Judith, Hester, Baruch, Wisdom,
Canticles, ecclesiasticus, the two books of the Machabees; in the new
testament, the three first evangelists, the epistles to the Hebrews, of S.
James, the 2. of S. Biblia. an. 1579. in the argum. of the epist to the Heb.
Calu. apud Feuardentiam, com in Ru^h. in pref. Tovver disp. the 4. days
conference. Whitaker con. rat. Camp. page 10. Calu. and Beza, in cap. 8. Joan.
Bibles an. 1 62. 1577. 1^79. 1580. Tertul. con. Marcion. l. 1. in princip.
Peter, the 2. and 3. of S. John, S. Jude, the Apocalips; besyd parcels, as the
Prayer of Manasses, the song of the 3. children, the story of Bell, and part of
S. John's Gospel, namely the sixth chapter, which Calvin said he cowld never be
persuaded to be S. John's, and the history of the woman adulteres which Calvin
allowed, but Beza endeavored to confute. In Luther, lately alleged to this
effect, in the Tower disputation, in Whitaker (saying that he cowld not see by
what right that which was any time discredited to be Scripture showld by time
win authority of Scripture: which may be applied to all the parts of
Scripture now mentioned) in Calvin, and Beza, and in most late bibles, these
foresaid books are made suspitiouse and apochriphal. Marcion by Tertullian was
called Mus Ponticus, the Mowse of Pontus, for his nibling the Scriptures, as
the mowse nibleth cheese: therefore if these loppers, or shredders of Scripture,
had lived in his time, he might denominat them cormorants, or wolves, not for
nibling like a mowse small crummes, but for deuowring great gobbets, in
canceling whole, and principale volumes of Gods sacred word, notwith standing
the terrible curse in the Apocalips and Deutronomie in prohibition of such
presumption. Apoc. 22.19. Deutr. 4.2.
Can then any not ignorant of their mangling, or dismembring thus the
Scriptures, but abhor, and detest that profession, which has no other refuge,
then when it is repugnant to Gods holy word, to say, that his word is not his
word, or which is all one, that his authentical Scriptures, are not
authentical but Apochriphal; and that they believe not this, they care not for
that, they pass over that as a dream. Give attendance I pray you, to part of
their modesty (and that of the principal) in spea^ing of sacred Scriptures.
We pass not (says whi^aker) for the Raphael of Tobie, Whitaker con. Campian.
page 17.
nether do we ackno^ledge those seven Angels which he speaks of ^he same that
Raphael records, sauoureth I wot not what superstion. I little care for the
place of Ecclesiasticus, nether will I believe free will, thowgh he affirm it
ane hundred times. As for the book of Machabees; I do care less for it, then
for the other. Judas dream concerning Onias, I let pass as a dream. What
child, but might say as much against any pa^cel of Scriptures, and what Jew but
would tremble to say as much of certain Scriptures, never doubted of in Gods
Church, at least since the 3. Carthaginian Council, which was anno 397?

Next Scriptures, traditions by reformers disclaymed are to be exhibited in
most brief manner to your deliberation; as being of equal authority (when they
are vndowbtfull) with Scriptures; and containing little less mystery of our
belief then Scripture. For, by them we know the mystery of unity in
Trinity, Luc. c. 1. v. 2.
of the baptizing of Children, all contents of S. Lukes gospel which he
professes to have received by tradition. The whole creed of the Apostles. The
Christian keeping of the sunday in steed of the Sabbath of the Jews, the
perpetual virginity of our Lady; the communicating in the morning, fasting,
the communicating of lay people, especialy of women. etc; which are not
expressed in any written word of God, but only known, and believed, by the
unwritten word, or tradition. Of which says S. Paul: Therefore brethren, stand,
2. These. 2.15.
and howld the traditions which you have learned, whether it be by word, or by
our epistle. What cowld be said more manifestly, in commendation of any part
of our belief? According to which said S. Basil: I account it apostolical, S.
Basil de spiritis S. c. 29. in principio.
to continue firmly even in unwritten traditions. To whom all the Fathers are
conformable. And when the Gnostics, Marcion, Cerdon, Arius, Eunomius, S. Iren.
l. 3. Tertul. de prescr. and in Sarpiaco. S. Basil loc. cit. c. 27. S. Epiphan.
her. 53. S. Aug. l. 5. con. Max.
Aerius, Nestorius, and other owld heretics, opposed them selves to
traditions, denying, and disdayning them; they were disproued, and condemned,
thereby, by S. Ireneus, Tertulian, S. Basil, S. Eiphan, S. Austin, etc. to be
detestable heretics. I do therefore only crave, what would they affirm of our
Reformers, not abiding the name of traditions, (but when it may have ane
odiouse sense) translating in liew thereof, instructions, constitutions,
ordonnances? (...) in greek, Mat. 15. v. 2.3.6.
by them selves is translated a tradition, in S. Matthew, Baret in lit. D^n. 311.
when it bears an odious construction, and their dictionaries in english do
translat tradition thereof: yet in this place of S. Paul they would not abide it
to be so englished. What can be ane impiouse corruption, if this be not?

After dispising Scriptures, and traditions as the chief helps from God,
least there showld want any hindrance betwixt our salvation, and us, nothing
could after more preiudicialy be denied, then our having any free will. For by
denial thereof, all our actions being made fatal, and God being made (as before
by Calvin) the tempter, nay inforcer of us to evil, and not our own
concupiscence, contrary to the Apostle S. James; we are made deaf toward all
Gods promises, Iac. 1.14.
or threatenings; as being undeserved by us negligent toward all his
commendments; as being not to be fullfi led by us, but by God; every one
slowthfull to prepare him self to any good, or to avoid any evil, cum in
potestate sua non sit vias suas malas facere, Luth. de seruo arbitrio.
whereas (says Luther) it is not in his power even to make his own ways more
wicked, because forsoo^h he is applied not according his own inclination, but
according Gods disposition, as well Paul to be converted, as Judas to betraye;
and if either God should punish us, or any magistrate condemn us, for any
offenses committed against their laws, it should be accounted an injustice in
them, to torment us for that which was not in our power to have done otherwise.
Besyd all which absurd points of licentiouse freedom, and unbridled lewsenes,
toward all dissolution, by denial of the freedom of free will, also is
employed, that God should never be prayed unto, either for forgiveness of our
sins, or of granting his grace toward any good by us intented, we nether
cooperating to the evil, or good, of our own actions, and consequently they
not being ours, but Gods, he should be accessorie to need pardon, and not we.
Nay, according S. Bernard cesset voluntas propria and infernus non erit; S.
Bern. ser. 3. de resurr.
take away our will, and there will be no hell. Therefore, for taking away all
regard of sin, and good woorks, of heaven and hell, of God and Man's laws,
there cowld nothing be more propre, then to inculat, no freedom to be in us,
but that we were ledd by fatal necessity without controwlement to think,
say, and do what soever proceeded from us. This then seemed an important and
plausible heresy to Satan to suggest unto his Ministers, even from the
beginning of Christianity, thereby to intoxicat the world. Wherefore he suborned
first Simon Magus, S. Clem. l. 3. recogint. S. Hier. in pref. con. Pellag. S.
Aug. de haeres. c. 35.70. S. Bern ep. 194. Council. Constan. ses. 8. a 27.
Roffen. in art. 36. Lutheri.
after Bardisanus, then Priscilian, then Peter Abailard, then VVickleff, then
Luther, and after him all this late crew, and in particular the^ of Cambridg,
as before appears by VVhytaker, to disclayme, and deny, the freedom of our
will. Against whom, S. Clement, S. Hierome, S. Austin, S. Bernard, the Council
of Constance, the bishop of Rochester, and manifowld other champions of Christ,
disputed, and utterly disproued their Satanical heresy.

But what powerful dominion Satan had, and has, in and over such reforming
writers, you may conceive most pregnantly, by their deceitful corrupting all
Scriptures approving the freedom of will, in defense of the said infernal
error. First, whereas it is said in Genesis, Genesis 4.6.
of Synn; sub te erit appetitus eius, and tu dominaberis illius; under the
shall be the concupiscence thereof, and thou shall rule over it; the english Bible
of the year 1579, translateth this speech of God, from pertaining to synn,
Bible 1579.
to some rule of Caine over I know not whom, saying: unto the his desire shall be
subject, and thou shall rule, over him. Can any excuse be fownd, for this
deprauation? I will only allege out of the whole bunche, Joan. c. 1. v. 12.
a like corruption in the new testament. S. John says: as many as received
him, he gave them power to be made the sons of God. For power, (which
signifies the freedom of our cooperation to Gods vocation) the English
testament translateth, New testament 1580
Prerogative; and Beza, dignity; protesting his intention therein to avoid
thereby free will, by Sophisters (says he) gathered out of this text; and
reprehending Erasmus for not doing the same.

If then, Reader, this adulterating at every occasion the word of God, to
maintain every of their errors (which are testified to be old damnable
heresies) be not sufficient to reclaim thee from them; at least in this matter,
inculcat to thy own cogitations these main textes of Scripture, followinge to
be assured, that thou have freedom of will to be made the son of God, as S.
John says, and that doing otherwise, thy perdition is from thy self, and thy
help only from God. 1. I have propounded to you, life, and good, benediction
and malediction, therefore choose. 2. Choice is given you, elect this day, Oze.
13.9. 1. Deutr. 30.19. 2. Iosue 24.24. 3. 1. Cor. 7.37. 4. Isa. 66.4. 5. Mat.
23.37. 6. Romans 7.18.19.
what pleases you to whom you ought most to serve. 3. Not having necessity,
but having power of his own will. 4. What I would not (says God) they have
elected. 5. How often would I have gathered together thy children, as the hen
does gather together her Chickens under her wings, and thou would not. 6. To
will is present with me, but to accomplish that which is good, I find not. For
not the good which I will, that do I: but the evil which I will not, the same
I do. Unless our Savior, S. Paul, Moises, Isaie, Oze, and the whole bible
replenished with like assurances, be able to resolve any Christian what is to
be believed of free will, and other Christian doctrine, more then late reformers;
I have noe expectation to revoke any from his error: but If they be allowed to
bear any arbitrament in our controversies, Ps. 57.5. S. Iren. l. 1. c. 20. S.
Clem. l. 5. recog. 49. S. Aug. her. 54. Theodoret. l. 1 de fabulis hereticorum.
her. 9. S. Hieron. 1. con. pelag. S. Aug. her. 51. and 53. S. Aug. l. 20. con.
Faust. c. 3.17.18. Damasc. her. 80. Opta l. 6. con. parm^. Euthim part 2. tit.
23. her. 17. Petr. Clumac. de sacrifici^. S. Aug. her. 53. S. Epiph. her. 75.
S. Bern. in can. ser. 66.
I dowbt not to assist some, unless that adder like, they stopp their ears
against the holy incantations of Gods truth.

But that I may auerre this confederacy of late reformations with old
heresies, in a succinct manifestation: their solifidian justification borrowed
from Simon Magus, from Valentin (chief of the Gnostics) from Eunomius, from
Aetius, testified, and refuted, by S. Ireneus, S. Clement, S. Austin, and
Theodoret, will it further delight thee? Their hatred, derision, and
persecution of Moncks, learned from the Circumcellio^s, Donatists, Manicheans,
will thou justify, it being by S. Hierome, and S. Austin, so long ago
condemned? Their malice against the mass, and Church ornaments, discending
from the Manicheans, Messalians, Donatists, Bogomelies, Petrobrussians, as
faithfully record and assure S. Austin, Damascen, S. Optatus, Euthimius, Peter
Cluniacensis, etc. will it seem to any Christian mind here after commendable?
Their denial of Purgatory, the old heresy of the Aerians, Armenians,
Apostolicals, by S. Austin, S. Epiphanius, S. Bernard, so sufficiently refuted,
may it now seem warrantable? Their cauills, and contradictions against lent,
Tertul. de praescr. and in Scarp. S. Hieron. l. 1. con. Iouin. S. Epiph. haer.
53. S. Hieron. con. Vigil. Sozom. l. 5. c. 20. Socrat. l. 3. c. 3. Niceph. l.
16. c. 27. S. Aug. l. 2. con. Petil. c. 51. and 61. S. Hieron. Marcel. de err
Montani. S. Epiph. haer. 49.14. Opt. l. 2. Eusebius. l. 6. c. 35. Theodoret. l. 3.
fab. her. vide Prateolum.
and other appointed fasting days, the condemned heresy of the Gnostics,
Eustathians, Aerians, Iouinians, so odius to Tertullian, S. Hierom, S.
Epiphanius may they now be grateful? Their absurdities, and Prophanations,
against images, relics, and invocation of Saints, the old impiety of Julian
Apostata, Zenaias the Persian, Vigilantius Iconoclastes, and others elsewhere
mentioned, rebuked by S. Hierom, Sozomen, Socrates, Necephor, etc: who may
repute otherwise, then reproachful? Their rejecting with the Donatists, the
number of seven Sacraments; auricular confession with Montanus; the ceremonies
of baptism and confirmation with the Nouatians; holy ordres with the Pepusits;
matrimony from being a Sacrament with the Apostolicals; extreme unction again
with the Nouatians; who I say, esteeming of S. Austin, S. Hierom, S. Marcel, S.
Epiphanius, S. Optatus, Eusebius, Theodoretus, but together with them must
damn, and execrat these persuasions, by them so much detested?

Briefly, if (temperat Protestant) Caluinists seem true unto the at least
believe them, saying, the Lutherans, damnatas heareses ex inferno resuscitasse;
Smidelin epit. colloq. Montisbel. an. 1588. page 64. Stancarus in praef. l. de
Trinitate and gratia, Cracouiae, anno 1562. Fulke against Bristovves motives
page ^5. page 54.
to have resuscitated damned heresies out of hell. If contrarywyse Lutherans be
of more reputation wi^h the; believe that the Caluinists, Arianam, Eutichianam,
Apollinaristarum, Timotheianorum, Acephalorum, Theodosianorum, Gaianitarum, and
Macarianorum haereses pro fide Catholica admiserunt; have allowed for their
Catholic faith, the heresies of the Aria^s, Eutichians, Apollinarists,
Timothians, Acephalists, Theodosians, Gaianits, and Macarians. John Scutz
subscribeth thereto, saying: (in 50 causis in pref. A. 6. a. and Q. 3. a. b.)
Sacramentarismus camerina quaedam est in qaum multa haereses confluunt; vltima
sathanae ira. The Sacramentarian profession, is a ^akes, or sink of many
heresies; the last rage of Satan, etc. If Fulke, of England, bear any credit
with the; believe upon his word, that Austin, and Epiphan we are deceived in
esteeming Aerius an heretic for denying prayer for the dead: that S Hierome
rather rayleth, then reasons, against Vigilantius, who was a good man, and
his opinions sound: which is as much to say, as that in deed they of Fulks
profession consent with those, whom S. Austin, S. Hierome, S. Epiphanius, and
all ancient Christians, condemned as heretics; which was that which I
undertook to discover, as a sufficient motive to win, and wreast, every not
desperately minded Christian, from such their Profane co^spiracie, and heretical
co^sociation.

S. Hilar. in psalm. 138. sub finem.
So that at length, from first, to last, you may perceive the saying of S.
Hilarie, confirmed. Dolosa doctrina est haereticorum: sub nomine Dei,
blasphema; sub praetextu religionis, impia; sub veritatis specie, fallax.
Quorum in animo, and cogitatione, solum contentionis studium persistit. Nihil
ad salutem hominum laborant, nihil ad spem acquirunt, nihil Pacificum cogitant.
Deceiptfull is the doctrine of heretics: under the name of God, blaspemous;
under the pretext of religion, impious; under the show of verity, erroneous.
In whose invention, and design, the only spirit of contention abides. Nothing
do they endeavor for man's Salvation, nothing do they purchase for hope,
nothing do they machinat for peace. Then which assured saying, the premises
considered, their needs no further confirmation in this matter, to such who
behoulding the Reformed Scriptures to be acknowledged no word of God; the
reformed kingdom to be in it self divided; the confederation of Reformers
with old condemned heretics; they are not so desperate as to build upon such
confessed corrupt scriptures, nor so obstinat to conspire with such so
contentious, nor so unchristian to partake with such enemies of Religion. Jesus
Christ convert you.

An Advertisement to M. John Rider him self.
COnsider (says Ecclesiastes) the works of God, that none can correct, Eccles.
7.17.
whom he has despised. By this sentence, upon such satisfaction as God has by
me afforded toward all your doubts, will it hereafter be known, whither God
has despised you, or no. Otherwise, although you be as yet perverse, yet the
Scripture affirms not to be impossible, but only that hardly, Eccles. 1.15.
the peruers are corrected.

I find in Origin, and S. Austin, S. Aug. l. 4. de baptis. con. Donat. c. 16.
this subject worthily handled: why, upon competent resolution, Sectarists are
not reclaimed. First, because, not inuocating God, they tre^bled and feared,
where ther^ as no fear at all, to wit, of wordly confusion. Molesta res est
contentio, Psalm. 23.5.
destin^ aque voluntas resistendi, and etiam manifestis, pudore dis^edendia
consuetis opinionibus: Contention says Origin, is froward and the settled
purpose of resisting, although things be manifest, Origenes lib. 1. con. Celsum.
for shame of departing from wonted opinions.

Secondly, the debilitie of their purpose, and their obstinacy toward supernal
inspirations, whereby as the slowthfull man they will, and they will not, Prou.
13.4.
makes them heavy, and remiss, in shaking away, and disburdoning them
selves, of all delusions wherewith they were before entangled. Isa. 37.3.
So that as the Prophet speaks, the children came to the point of birth, and
there was noe force of their bringing forth. To which may be reduced, their
false surmise, that the way of virtue, and verity, is in deed a yoke, but not
sweet, a burden, but not light; that the commandments of God are not above
their power, Mat. 11.29. Deutr. 30.11. 1. Ioa. 5.3. Prou 21.25. Prou 26.13.14.
or that they are greauouse. So, desires killing the slowthfull man, dreaming
to him self, that a Lion is in his way, and a Liones in his iournies; he,
like a door turning upon hinges, walloweth in slowthfull intentions, now to be
open to Gods holy inspirations, now to be shutt against them.

Thirdly, many worldly commodities concurring together, their disingageing them
selves out of this slimie mudd, or birdlyme, or briers; the separation of their
hearts from this their treasures. To be brief, their reduction from all
impediments is thereby greatly retracted. For the rich shall hardly enter into
the kingdom of God: Mat. 13.22.6.^1.19.23. 1. Tim. 6.9. S. Aug. de vtil. cred.
c. 1.
considering that wilfully they fall into tentation, and the snare of the
devil, and many desires unprofitable, and hurtful, which drown men in
destruction. And to our purpose in hand, aptly says S. Austin; he is ane
heretic that for some temporal commodity, and especialy for his glory, and
authority, either inuenteth, or follows, new opinions. Which whether it has
place in them of our Contryes, that complye, and conform them selves, to the
present time, I had rather that M. Edmund Bunie, Minister at Bolton Percie, in
the liberties of York, showld certify, then any other. I now perceive, says
he, Bunie in his treatise of pacification, tovvard the end.
that men howld with us rather for respect of state, and civil commodities,
then of conscience, and belief. A disgraceful reproach, noe less to the
profession that by only commodities (which is noe great mark of a good
Christian doctrine) it has followers, then to the adherents; Hebr. 12.16.
that as profane Esaus, they sell their birth right for one dishe of meat I
have also else where showed other Ministers to confess, the reforming gospel to
have most followers, only that more commodiously they may abandon them selves
to all dissolutions.

Whereas therefore, M. Rider, in your particular, noe opinion cowld probably be
grownded, that upon any competent resolution you would be revoked; also it
being to me, ane odiouse employment, to prosecute and continualy reproach your
defectiuenes; finalye, their being great difficulty to imprint in english; and
manyfowld my ordinary employments from being vacant to study; it was with
them that command me long deliberated, whether this answer showld at all be
inprinted. And had it not been, that the Collegists, by their Puritanical
censure, did auow your writing against me, and thereby engaged the common cause
upon your success; it had indede absolutely been concluded, my time, and
talent, not to be due, or to be devoted, in replying to such, whose whole
streingth consisted ampullosis proclamationibus, in blustering exclamatio^s; and
whose whole intent was noe other, then bullatis vt vobis nugis pagina
turgescat, Persius satyra. 5.
that your volumes swell with only childish bubles of more them childish
errors.

So that M. Rider, if you bring here after noe other streingth then it of the
horses in the Apocalips, whose might was in their mowthes, and in their tails)
railing, and scorpyon like stinging; Apoc. 9.19.
you are not to expect any opposition in me, or correspondence. For, Sabell. l.
c. 9. Herodot. l. 4. Gell. l. 6. c. 11.
the Psillians being eternaly ridiculouse, to have armed them selves against
the trublesome wynds, do warn me from imitating their seely simplicity. But
if you leave figurative stuff, and once write realy, and substantialy, any
thing worthy of reioyndre; I oblige my self to refell, or ratify it, as I
best may, and it shall require.

I will give you ane instance, or two, of preposterous exaggeration, that not
only all others, but you may acknowledge, your self to be one of those, of
whom our Saluiour says, they tithe the mint, Math. 23.23.24.
and cummin, and anise; they strain a gnat, and swallow a camel; leaving the
weightier things of the law, judgment, and mercy, and faith: because you
enforce, and threape blasphemies where none is, swallowing thowsands in your
way, as none at all. And consequently, as I said, putting your confidence in
such sicophantical, or sophistical exprobations, noe less vaynly, then
untruly; you may not expect, that I showld contradict you. It may also be,
that for affinity betwixt your amplification now to be discussed, and the
altogether like in one Sr. Edward Cooks book of reports, which is lately come
into my hands; I may extend my examination, to both, that your shame be
deminished, in being so well accompagnied.

First, you for your part, upon a mere dream, or deceit of your own, do
thus write. You think it not inconvenient, Cats and dogs, Caveat number. 95.
rats and mice, hoggs and swyne, to eat the pretiouse body, and drink the
pretiouse blood of Jesus Christ. Thus you blush not to print, but I protest my
hand shakes, and my heart quakes to wryt it. Here together in a burning feure,
and a cowld ague, in the one your heart quaking, and in the other your hands
shaking, you torment your self noe less, but rather much more undeservedly,
then immeasurable. For who told you, that we think it not inconvenient, what
you lay to our charges in what one author of ours is it imprinted? Now if I
convict, that we hold it most inconvenient, any part of the heavenly Sacrament
to come to such danger: have not you improperated all this, like your self?

Tertull. l. de corona militis c. 3.
Fifteen hundred years ago, Tertullian said: Calicit, aut panis, aliquid
decuti in terram, anxie patimur, we unwillingly endure any parcel of the cupp,
or bread, to fall on the grownd. I appeal to the commentaries upon this place,
that if Tertullian now speak not of the B. Sacrament; yet that his regard
toward such parcels of bread, and wine, is only for relation thereto. Orig. ho.
13. in Exodus
But Origin, of the same time is more express, saying: cum omni cautela and
veneratione seruamus etc. We prevent the profaning of all parts of the B. S.
Cyrill. Catech. 5.
Sacrament, with all caution, and reverence. S. Cyrill of Jerusalem about
thirten hundred years past thereof said: Cave ne quid inde excidat tibi: quod
enim amittes, hoc tanquam ex proprio membro amiseris. Be ware least any parcel
fall from the: for what thou loosest, esteem as lost from a member of thy
self: S. Aug. l. 50. hom. ho. 26. Vide ser. 252. de temp. Et Conc. Trull. can.
102.
Also says S. Austin: quanta solicitudine obseruamus, quando nobis corpus
Christi ministratur, vt nihil ex ipso de nostris manibus in terram cadat? with
how great anxietie do we observe, when the body of Christ is ministered to us,
that no part thereof fall to the ground, out of our hands? So that what you say
we think not to be inconvenient, I show to be in our opinion impious, and
sacrilegious. And as impious do we esteem their error, or rather blasphemy,
that affirm Christ's glorious body, in the Sacrament, either by man, beast,
element, or devil, to be corruptible, anoyable, or passible, whether the forms
under which it is contained be abused, or not, by man, or by beast.

But shall I show, how old Predecessors to late Reformers, namely the
Donatists, thought it not inconvenient to present to be eaten of Dogs, the
precious body of our Savior? S. Optatus affirms it: S. C^ptat. l. 2. con.
Dona tista. fol. 23.
and that they having so done, their dogs became madd, and set upon, and slew
their impious, and sacrilegious masters, namely two Ministerial
Superintendents, Urban Forin, and Felix Idicre, in the year 366. Shall I show,
how at home in England, in the presence of Thomas Arundel bishop of London, of
the bishop of Norwich, of Duke Thomas of Oxford, being then L. Chancellor of
England, and in open court, a tailor of worcester, thought it not inconvenient
to affirm about the year 1384. that a Spider was more to be reverenced,
Thomas Waldensis l. con. VVickleff. Ioa. Garret. cent. 14.
then the B. Sacrament? I have vnsuspitious authors thereof. But what was the
conclusion? At the same instante a great and most ougly spyder descended from
the rofe of the plac and by all vehemency would have entered his mouth: which
although with m^e, difficulty he avoided, yet could not he escape to be burned
for an heretic. These are they, and not we, that think it not inconvenient
that catts and dogs, etc, should eat the precious body of our Savior, or
that it should be more regarded then the most loathsome creatures. And this M.
Rider, is your often fault, to make your brethrens assertions to be our
opinions.

Next for Sr. Edward Cook. He certifying, that F. H. Garnet lately executed,
had written out of the tower, with the juice of a lemmon, in this manner: I have
been often examined, but nothing has been produced against me. But yet,
expedit vt vnus mortatur pro populo, it is expedient that one man must die for
the people. I pray you by the way, to remember that by these words he assures
his expectation of death: to know thereby what fidelity is in relation of his
execution, assuring the contrary.

Upon these words, writes Sr. Edward Cook; Sr. Edw. Cook in his book of
reports.
that he never heard a more horrible blasphemy proceed from an Atheist,
making his hayr to stand on end to think of it. what man! in all the troop
of Atheists, D. Whitgift a page 31. ad page 51. Mantuanus.
(with whom D. Whitgift confesses, the English congregation to be
replenished) not so great a blaspemie, as this? I know that, diuitijs inhians
audacem venderelinguam doctus, a ravenous lawiour easily does imboulden his
tongue: I know that, causidicus, amaris litibus aptus; Martialis l. 12. Vide S.
Hieron. in ^a. 23. Hieremie.
the lawyer fitted to bitter wrongs, is hyperbolical: but feign would I know,
how any boldness, or bitterness, can fashion, or forge, a blasphemy in this
place.

Of S. Michael the Archangel we read, even that he durst not to infer the
crime of blasphemy against the devil him self. But legisperiti, and scribae;
Jude. 9. Luc. 5.21. Luc. 11.46. Mat. 23.2.
the lawyers and scribes, have inferred it against Christ him self. And now
also a lawyer is found, that makes it in a man, for knowing the measure of
his foes, in whose clowches he was, a blasphemy, only to apply a sentence
spoken by Caiphas, signifying that he expected to die. But it may be that Sr.
Edward surmised, the meaning of F. Garnet to have been, that by his death the
people should be redeemed: For so in deed, he in that persuasion might exclame
at his blasphemy. But I can not think, that the meanest clercke under him,
much less him self, could be so absurd, to think any Catholic so impiously
unchristian, And if such was not his surmise; verily I can not conceive, how
otherwise by any construction, the foresaid words may be made blasphemous. Much
would such Alchymists have drawn toward their exaggerations, if F. Garnet had
said with S. Paul: that he rejoiced in suffering for the Collossians, Coloss.
1.24.
and did accoumplish things that wanted in the passion of Christ, in his flesh
for his body, which is the Church; whereas they exaggerat when no occasion is
guien, and but a vain occasion is by them selves pretended. S. Gregory
Nazia^zen informs, that conficta si sint crimina, est sycophantia. Id si
latenter, tum vecem Calumniam. Impune cum quis carpit, est Blasphemia.
Maledicus autem est, qui cunctos petit. If the crimes be forged, then is it
sycophancie. If forged, then is it calumny. If any exprobrat without just
punishment, then is it Blasphemi^. If be reproach generaly, then is it
sclawndre. But M. Atturnies case might seem according S. Nazianzen nearer as
yet to blasphemy, by how much for his heavy imputation without all proof,
noe punishment has hitherto been inflicted. But at least, in the doom of S.
Nazianzen, he hardly escapes to stand for a sycopha^t. Thus much for Sr. Edward
Cook, only for resemblance in prodigious amplification with M. Rider; (and to
enable him, to comb his head, if there be noe other impediment then the before
mentioned stiffenes of his hear) for this blasphemy. Which if it will not
serve, I will add, that as the Ephratheans could not pass Jordan, which
signifies the river of judgment; nor the watchful Galaadits, signifying
heaps of testimonies; as not being able to pronownce shibboleth, Iudic. 12.6.
which is interpreted, aene ear of corn: but Sibboleth, without the
aspiration H, So I trust (for the point of blasphemy) the said word by him
pronownced like an Ephrathean, wanting the aspiration H; that all remaining at
the river of judgment, and acquainted with the true pronuntiation of the late
shibboleth, or ear of corn, will give him noe credit, in such dissimulation
of a blasphemy.

My second instance M. Rider, of your exorbitant inuectiues, (where not only all
occasion wanted, but also the blame redownded only to your self) is of these
your words against my being a Jesuit: this Jesuit, nay Iebusite, Rescript. n.
9. Caveat. sub finem.
yea a second Bar Jesus. Else where: that false arch Jesuit, Bar Jesus. Which
words, giving me occasion to defend the Jesuits profession: I know not, why
thereof I may not a little delate, to occasion you, and your brethren to be
better conceited of Jesuits, if you love truth, and synceritie; and if you do
not, at least, to manifest how undeservedly you malign us of that order, we
stryuing to preserve you, and you to destroy us, we of love searching your
salvation, to the danger of our corporal death, and you of hate persecuting us,
to your own and others perdition.

I confess first, that Jesuits are odious, I believe also, offensive, to
Sectarist Reformers: which they them selves manifest, in expelling them first,
and furthest of all others; in maligning their name; in deminishing their fame;
in indomaging their means; in calu^niating their lives; in every way by a
peculiar hatred pursueing them; and most rigorously persecuting them when they
have such power. But in this hatred is the Jesuits pride; because as S. Hierome
says; S. Hieron. in ep. ad S. Aug.
Signum est maioris gloriae, quod omnes heretici aliquem detestentur; It is
proof of great dignity when all heretics detest any: Is it not a praise, of
S. Justin Martyr, to have had oppositio^ to Triphon; of Origin to Celsus; of S.
Ireneus to Valentine; of S. Ciprian to the Nouatians; of S. Nazianzen to
Eunomius; S. Athanasius to the Arians; of S. Ambrose to Auxentius; of S.
Hierome to Vigilantius; and of S. Augustine to the Pellagians and Manicheans?
If any other religious should more partake this dignity, the Iesuists would
have such holy emulation, as the noble S. Secunda had (when Iunius Donatus
caused her sister S. Ruffina in her presence to be most horribly scourged)
saing. what doste thou, thou impious man and enemy of God why doste thou so
honor my sister and dishonor me, where as I profess Christianity no less
then she; and for this particular perogatiue, many follow the Iesuitical
standart, Vide Baron ad Anno. 260.
neither had I otherwise greater impulsion there to, then for the same.

Next I certify, that I can not imagine, how Jesuits might better endeavor to
deserve the love of men, then they do. For by their second rule, next their
own salvation, they should intend to advance by all means possible, the
salvation of their neighbors; and to that purpose, be indifferent toward all
places where the greater glory of God may be sought. Whereby through cold and
heats, sease and lands they are at a beck, to forsake house and home (yea,
they that otherwise are great princes and nobles) to inquyre to Christ's flock,
the lost sheep. Which their labor, the benedictio^ insueing, does assure to be
most acceptable to God; were it but for three hundred thousand late Christians
in Iaponia alone; where, before the Jesuits coming among them, about three
score years past, there was not any one that ever heard of Christianity. To
the same purpose, in all places where they are, their whole time, and study, is
employed to catechize Children as soon as they can speak; to bring them up,
as soon as they can read or write, through all sciences; to rescue them from
sin; provoke them to frequent the Sacraments; to counsel them in their
doubtfulnes; to confort them in their distresses; to reconcile them in their
controversies; and breefely, in supplying their spiritual, and corporal wants
by all possible means. Whereunto they intertayne as many woorkemen, as their
estate by any measure is able to supporte; omitting thereby hospitality toward
all others, by whom in their opinion Gods honor, and the good of the common
wealth would receive less assistance.

And least that wealth, or sloth, hereafter should pervert their first feruor,
all the chief Fathers of them, namely the professed, besyd the ordinary vows
of all religious Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, do make these peculiar
vows: never to permit any change in their poverty, unless it be more to
restrain it; never to suffer the teaching of children to be omitted, but
rather to do it by them selves; never to linger (at commandment of the Pope)
even without al means, to travail for the conversion of Infidels or Heretics
into al countries, how barraine, barbarous, or remote soever. etc. Lastly, the
said professed Fathers, when the burden of teaching is to heavy for them
selves, by infirmities, or years, they follow voluntary poverty, and
begging: that others of greater streingth, being under the heavy charge of
teaching, may inioye the commodities of all the rents bestowed (until they also
be become unwieldy to that toylsome office, or are to preach, write, or govern
in some house) thereby to be exempted from al distractions; and hindrances,
incident to them that together were to teach, as also to live by alms.

To these professed Fathers, they being the principal pillars of Jesuits, as
soon as their church and house, is once furnished for the present time, they
nether expect, nor accept any revenues, but always depend upon voluntary
alms. The residue, by every fit increasement of their revenues, are bound to
multiply their number, that the place be more duly served in all religious
offices. And when the town wherein they dwell, may spare any to be absent;
they are sent to al villages round about, to fructify for our Saluiour. Now,
because that by these holy employments, Satan sustaineth continual loss, the
world loses many followers, sin is diminished, virtue daily augmented: Who
can blame the impes of Satan, the admirers of the worlds vanities, the thralls
of sin, the emulators and enuiers of virtue, to detest, defame, and
persecute, such impugners the Jesuits? So that if any particular Jesuit, not
withstanding his institution to the contrary, 1. Tim. 2.4.
had ever or should hereafter, being once a soldiour to God, entangle him self
with secular business, and thereby blemish his order, and so many Princes either
founders, or followers thereof; or if either Garnet, or other be in any
state-maters assuredly attainted; Aristophanos.
from my heart, I say with Aristophanes.

Modis omnibus de illo questionem habe:
Scale impone: suspende: loris cede:
Deglube: torque: acetum naribus infunde:
In all manners condemn him: trusse him on the lader: hang him: scourge him:
flea him: rack him: pour vinegre into his nostrells. For noe torments are
sufficient for him, that leaving the discipline of peace, degenerateth, or
rather apostateth into Reforming rebellions, Caluinian coniurations,
Puritanical proditions: such being their turbulent and natural spirit,
quifreta, quiterras, Ovid in Hermione.
and suaregna quattit, which seas and lands, and propre kingdoms trubleth.

For they are the gospellers, whose reformation says Martin Mar Prelat, in the
book of dangerous positions page 140. and Erasmus in his epistle, aed fratres
inferioris Germaniae, thirsts, and can not be quenched, without blood. Yet
to be tolerated in the beginning, nothing but peace is in their mowthes: nothing
but inuectiues against the most peacible, as against peace breakers, is in
their declamations. But of this subject we have else where discoursed; and now
the world knows, sensibly, by many woeful destructions of Common wealths,
by many daily conspirations, that not Jesuits, but Puritans, preach seditious
combustion, of all places, and desolation, where in they may have footing.

But if I would now abrupt this discovery without specifying the particular
paradoxes of the said spirit, as well concerning religion, as concerning state;
Fest. Pomp.
I might be blamed in manner as Sulpitius Galba blamed his horse, stumbling in
the entry of a long journey, in saying: thou beginest to faint before thou have
well entered into thy travail. Therefore I will enlarge this declaration with
their own blasphemous articles, concerning the foresaid two points, that by
them selves they receive an Apocalips, or Revelation, who are wont (as our
Saluiour says of them that do evil) to hate light, Joan. 3.20.
and extrauagantly to gloze upon the Apocalips of S. John, S. Aug. de Ago,
Christ. c. 16.
only (as S. Austen observed in owld heretics) to raise up darksome mists,
and thick clouds betwixt themselves and the truth, which is hardly perceived,
even of a stayed and quiet mind. And first concerning Religion, they affirm.

Of Glory to be to the Father. Survey of the book of common prayer, Anno
1606. page 47.

The saying, Glory be to the Father, to the Son, and to the holy Ghost, to
be a vain repetition.

Of the pater noster.
The Pater Noster, not to be said, Richard Alison in his book of Puritans
dedicated to Sr. Tho. Henege anno 1590. The answer of Oxford to the petition.
page 12.
nay not for saving life it self. whereupon say the Accademists of Puritans:
some omit, some refuse to repeat, some condemn this the Lords prayer.

Of the name of Jesus.
Supplication to the King, in the 3. point. The answer to the petition. page
14.
No Ministers showld be charged to teach their people to bow at the name of
Jesus.

Of Christ.
The survey of the book of common prayer page 59.
Christ to be all one with S. Michael. No other then Christ to teach the Church
all things. Cartwright in the 2. reply, page 191.
That the Jews, Ibid. page 99.
Apostles, and Disciples had been most senseles to think him to be the ever
living God, whom they beheld to be a simple and miserable man. Survey. page 118.
These words to be untrue: In God the Son who has redemeed me and all man
kind. Ibid. page 119.
The death of Christ not to be effectual to redeem all universally.

Of the holy Ghost.
Survey page 106.
The holy Ghost only baptiseth effectualy, so far as the Minister can discern;
and that before any baptism is to be ministered. Ibid page 99.
The holy Ghost not to teach the church all truth, but only Christ. Hampton
Conference an. 1603. page 14. Ibid. page 16. 28.
The holy Ghost to sanctify only the elect. Survey page 116.
Whom he sanctifyeth never after to fall totaly from grace; or synning to need
to repent.

Of the Gospel.
Ecclesiastical Discipline page 13. Tho. Cartvvr, in his epistle to the Church
of England. The answer to the petition, page 20.
The gospel of Christ Jesus to be of no more importance then the consistorial
discipline of Puritans: without which the Church to be noe Church, the faith,
noe faith, the gospel noe gospel.

Of the sign of the Cross.
Survey page 102. 103. Nisi adhibeatur frontibus credentium, sieve ipsi aquae
qua regenerantur, sieve oleo quo Chrismate vnguntur, sieve sacrificio quo
aluntur, nihil eorum rite perficitur. S. Aug. tr. 118. in Joan. Ezech. 9.4.
The sign of the Cross to be a part of the beasts mark: it to be
superstitious, unprofitable blinding; and not used in the forhead before the 2.
of Edward the 6. To my thinking by the beast, they should understand God:
consideringe the Cross, or letter T, is by the prophet declared, to be the
mark of his elect.

Of Baptism.
Survey of the book of common prayer. page 87. 88. 104. 125.
Baptism not to regenerat: not to belong to infants: page 56. 107. 112. 125.
not to be auaylable but by only Ministers: page 100.
not acceptable to a tender conscience with the sign of the Cross; d not to
be necessary, absolutely: page 105.
without it, salvation not to be dowbtfull: The use of conditional baptism is
more ancient. Quoties non inueniuntur firmi testes qui eos absque vlla
dubitatione baptizatos esse dicant, nec ipsi per etatem de sibi tradito
mysterio apt respondere possint, debere baptizari. Sexta synod. can. 84. Idem
habetur Conc. Cartag. 5.6. Conc. Affric. c. 39. and Conc. VVormat. c. 70.
Survey page 88.
112.
not to have been used conditionaly, before the year 1161: 106.
not to be more necessary, then formerly circumcision.

Of Godfathers and Godmothers.
Godfathers and Godmothers to be papistical: such to be only witnesses and not
suerties.

Of Confirmation.
Confirmation to be a corrupt following of the Apostles: the same to be
unwarranted, unprofitable, Survey page 128. 129. Hampton Conference page 10.
idle: Vainly made by English Protestants a Sacrament, with imposition of
hands, Survey page 117. 118. Additions to the late Catechism, E. avvn. 3.
as a sign signing and sealing, and an inward spiritual grace.

Of the Eucharist.
Survey page 129.
Communion by Luke. 22.29. to belong to all Christians: and that by Act. 20.7.
on each sunday. Cartwright. l. 1. page 158. Answer to the petition, page 11.
A Ministers exposition, or sermon, to be an essential part of Communion.
Survey. page 117.
The supper to be a maintenance of our spiritual regeneration.

Of Penance.
No sins forgiven but by being not imputed, Survey page 87. page 116. Hamp.
Confer. page 28. Survey page 116.
by Romans 4.7.8. No sins in any once justified, to need repentance, or to
deprive from grace.

Of Order.
Bishops to be members, not of Christ, The Arraignment of Barrous 20. Apr, 1593.
but of the devil and of Antichrist. Alison against Puritans. artic. 15.
Ministers of the words to live by alms only. Barrovves arraignment.
The Church to have no head in earth. Alison. artic. 14.
No oaths to be taken before Bishops, but only before magistrates. Ibid. art. 12.
Every private man to have license to preach and expownd the Scriptures. Hampt.
Confer. page 34. Survey p. 114.
Bishops not only Ministers of Confirmation, Survey page 89.
The name of priests in all the new testament, never to belong to the Ministers
of Christ. Survey page 5. Hamp. Conf. p. 36.
Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, as such, to be noe members of the Church: Survey
page 127.
Them to have noe proof of Scripture. Cartvvr. Admonition tr. 2. and 3.
All that proud generation must down.

Of Marriadge.
Survey page 132.
Matrimony even by English protestants is vaynly made a Sacrament, and God
thereby made a liar.

Of Extreme unction.
Survey page 129.
Extreme unction also by English protestants most absurdly to have been
practiced and prescribed, in the 2. of Edw. 6.

Of Sacraments in general.
Survey page 120. 121.
Falsely to be said in latest Catechismes even of English Protestants,
Sacraments to be necessary to salvation; Ibid.
as also the said Protestants, to implye wrongfully, the being of more then
two Sacraments: Survey page 104.
also them to err, in saying Sacraments to be means of grace, and not only
pledges.

Of assembling to Churches.
Barrovves arraigument 20. Apr. 1593.
The assembling of people to Churches by ringing bells, to be Antechristian.

Of Ceremonies.
Survey page 98. 99. Hampton Confereuce page 67
No ceremony, only significant and not sealing, in the gospel. Yet in Hampton
conference, they affirmed the contrary.

Hadd I not been deprived of the often mentioned Survey, by some deceites, as
also of the collections I had therout gathered; I had produced many like
artickles of Puritance; which upon recovery of the said book, shall after, God
willing, be recorded. Now to their disprouing of their bretherens belief.

Puritans against the late profession of England.
Brovvghtons Advertisement to the Lo. of the Counsel, of corruptions. Anno
1604.
The public English translation causes millions of millions, to reject the
new testament, and to run to eternal flames, Ibid.
It peruerteth the holy text of the owlde testament, in eight hundred and
eight places. Ibid.
It is inferior to the Alcaron. Hampton Conference page 45. 46. 47.
The English Bibles, ill translated all together; and them according Geneua,
to be the worst. Ibid.
They contain very partial untrue, and seditious notes, to much sauouring of
traitorous conceits, as of allowing disobedience to Kings, and taxing Asa, for
deposing his mother, and not killing her. A b, c,


a There is no right religion established in England, b They be all infidels
that go to late Churches of England. The two Admonitions to the parliament.
c It shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, then for
the court of Parliment, by which the Protestant religion was confirmed. Alison
articulo 4.5.6.7.8.
The English congregation consists of all sorts of unclean spirits, and is
no membre of Christ. Ibidem.
The regiment thereof is unlawful, Perpetual Government of the Church. page
339. alleges much more of this kind.
and Antechristian Ibidem.
Their Sacraments, no Sacraments Ibidem.
It is a very Babylon.

Puritan Articles against State, out of the answer of Oxford, and Cambridge to
their petition. page 28. 29.
1. That the supereminent authority of the King must be confined within the
limmits of some particular parish: and then to subject his souerainge power to
the pure Apostolical simplicity, as of an ouerswaying, and all-commanding
Presbiterie.

2 That his meek and humble Clergy, have power to bind their king in
chains, and their Prince in lincks of iron: and (in case they see cause) to
proceed against him as against a Tyrant.

3 All appeals in causes ecclesiastical (and what do they not make
ecclesiastical?) must finallye lie, not unto the Prince, but unto the
assembly Provincial.

4 That they allow the supreme magistrate, not potestatem Iuris, but only
Facti: to mantayne their proceedings, but not to command: that finaly the King
submitt his scepter unto the scepter of Christ, and lick the dust of the
Churches feet.

Lastly, that some of high place yet alive, and othersome dead, have felt the
smart of this their professed doctrine in their own experience, and have seen
the worst of all this put in execution.

Thus far out of their own evidences. I blame them not here to confess, that
some alive have seen the worst of all these putt in execution; considering
first in France; how in Geneua and Cabillon, Genebrard. ad An. 1560. 1567.
1570. 1575. Petr. Frat. orat. con. Sectarios def. Reg. and Relig.
they not privately but synodicaly resolved the killing of King, Queen,
Princes, and nobility; and the spoiling of all the Churches in France;
Secondly how by their two first civil rebellious, on both sides in France only,
were slain above a hundred thousand Christians. As for Scotland, who of any
knowledge is ignorant, how the Queen dowager then regent was rebelliously
contemned, and violently hastened to death? Sur. an. 1560.
who knows not by whom the King and Queens secretary, was killed in their
sight, the King him self, his Majesty's Father, murdered; the Queen great
with child of his Majesty, designed to death with a pistol, Holinshead hist.
of Scot, anno 1566. Dangerous Positions lib. 1. c. 6.
if it would have taken fire, forced to surrendre her crown and scepter to a
bastard, at leingth exiled to her final destruction?

Who Declarat b. 1.2.3.4. Parliament. sect. 1584. cap 7. and 1582.
beseeged, surprised, and imprisoned his Majesty; deprived him of his guard,
violently subjected him by oath in his minority to their discipline; censured
him by excommunications; intended his destruction by the Earl Gowrie; and made
him (as him self declares) a Hampton Conference page 4. and p. 20.
King without state, without honor, without order, where beardles boys would
brave him to his face? The answer to the Petition. page 13. 8. and page 20.
Who, fasted, and mourned, upon the fifth of August, when all good subjects
feasted, and rejoiced, in memory of his Majesty his wonderful escape, from
being murdered? you willingly would say, they were Papists, and Jesuits: but
the chronicles, the parlaments, the monuments of reformed brethren, and as is
said a little before The answer to the Conference page 29.
many yet alive in their own experience, do proclaim to the world, and to all
posterity, perfidious Puritans, the vipers S. Chrysostom. hom. 46. in Math.
(as S. Chrysostom most conveniently termed their predecessors) of all common
wealths wherein they are harbored, because they never deem them selves
lawfullye borne, until they rent the boweles, and breed the death, of both
their temporal mother the common wealth, and spiritual, the Church; I say, that
al do agree, perfideous Puritans, to have been the conspirers, the conducters,
the principal delinquents, and executioners, of all such abhominablet reasons,
and machinations.

2. Joan. 1.3.
Whereas therefore his Majesty may say with the Apostle; what we have heard,
what we have seen with our eyes, what we have perceued, and our hands have
felt etc. we anounce to you; Marvel not to hear him in these grievous terms
following, to deliver the true pourtraiture of Puritans.

(...), or his Maiestios book to his son page 41. 42. edit. Felicis Kingston.
Take heed therefore, my Son, to such Puritans, very pests in the Church, and
commonwealth: whom no deserts can oblige, nether oaths or promises, bind;
breathinge nothing but sedition and calumnies; aspiring without measure;
railing without reason; and making their own imaginations (without warrant
of the word) the square of their conscience. I protest before the great God,
and since I am here as upon my testament, it is no place for me to lie in, that
ye shall never find, with any highe-lande or border thieves, greater
ingratitude, and more lies and vile periuries, then with these frantic spirits
etc.

Knox in his 2. blast, and 3. proposition, printed in Geneua an. 1558.
Al which Ihon Knox the Proto-puritan in Scotland, confirms by these words.
Nether can oath, nor promise, bind any such people (subject to the blessed
euangil) to obey and maintain Tyrants. That they understand by Tyrants, their
lawful Kings of different religion, appears every where by their style, and
in particular, Responsum trium ordinum Burguodia 1563. Mich. Fabrit. cp. de
Beza fol. 62.
by the 40. canon of their Sinod of 20. Ministers, at Cabillon and Berna, in
these words. Until it shall please God, in whose hands are the hearts of Kings
to change the heart of the french Tyrant etc. That also, it is an article of
their religion; fas esse suum Euangelium fucis and technis promouere; Erasm.
cp. ad Fratres Infer. Germ. Fox in the end of his Calendar. Erasm. lib. 16.
ep. 11.
to advance their gospel by guile and treachery, Erasmus, one of Foxes
confessors, (although Erasmus reclaim, Lutherum non agnosco, Ecclesiam Romanam
agnosco; I renounce Luther, I cleave to the Roman Church) dowbteth not to
affirm. By whose words I am made myndfull of my Puritan M. Rider, in whose
discourse nothing is more often repeated, then that he is a man, sine suco and
fraud, without fetch or fraud: whereas not withstanding for one replenished
fuco and fraud, the London Counter prison often embraced him, Dublin senate
house, or Toulsel denownced him a sir; and now lastly for like fuco and fraud,
as Beza used in selling his benefice to diverse, and such enormities, he is
deposed from his ample deanrie of S. Patricks, and is also like in time, to
pass from houlding a Prouostrie, to be howlden in a Prouostrie.

The premises considered concerning Puritans, as well toward religion, as
state, we will conclude in the words of the Accademists of Oxford, Answer to
the petition. page 28.
confirmed by the express consent of the university of Cambridge as is said
in the Title, saying. Look upon the face of all the reformed Churches in the
world, and whersoeuer the desire of these petitioners does take place, be it
duly considered, first how well their proceedings do suite with the state of a
monarchy, and then how poverty on the one side, and lack of learning on
the other does creep upon the whole clergy in those dominions. To which being
so pregnant, so vnsuspitious, so inexcusable at testations, of them selves, of
parlaments, of Kings, of Universities, of chronicles, I need add nothing to any
not voluntary blinded, unless perhaps this only inference out of Platus, as a
pericope or summa to all that is said, leaving to them selves to make english
thereof.

Nam id hominum genus, hominibus vniuersis est aduersum, Plautus Tri.
atque omni populo malefacit male fidem seruando. A most roial, and real
manifestation of the contrary spirit of the Jesuits, containing in it self
beside the public assurance thereof, important reasons of the truth, and a
clear resolution of any doubt that might be conceived, is in this defense
following of the present French King, whereby notwistanding the greatest
extremity used against all the society in France, yet their innocence as
well of him that was executed, as of all the rest, is to all the world at
leingth revealed. I will relate it as he gave it, and after translate it: that
M. Rider, and all Ministers may behold, the accusations of Jesuits vulgarly
spread, to deserve small estimation. For, quis innocens esse poterit, si
accusasse sufficiat? who of what integrity soever, can be innocent, if it be
sufficient to accuse? S. Cyrill. l. 10. con. Julian.
it being as S. Cyrill said, prone to every varlet, mentiri and temere
vituperare; to forge, and rashly to accuse: as in the case of of our Saluiour,
the Apostles, Mardocheus, Susanna, etc. is to all men notorious. Thus then he
says.

A testimony of HENRY the Fovverth, the French King of the integrity of
Jesuits. Ex apparatu Antonij Posseuini.
QVOD nonnulli ecclesiastici Iesuitis aduersantur; scientiam semper odio habuit
imperitia. Obseruaui autem, cum de ijs restituendis loqui cepi, duo inprimis
genera hominum restitisse; hereticos, and improbos ecclesiasticos. Quod quidem
a criorem mihi stimulum ad eos reuocandos addidit.

Quod de Pontif. Max, optime sentiant, cumque reuereantur, id quo que ipse
facio. Attamen non sum nescius, nil ab ijs amplius de summi pontificis
potestate dici, doceriue, quam reliqui Theologi, Catholicaque docet ecclesia.
Neque vero aliquid docent, quod ecclesiastici mihi non tribuant, quod est
tribuendum. Nec vnquam inuentus est, qui ab ijs necem regum didicerit. Quare
totum hoc, quod illis obijcitur, nihil est. Triginta and amplius anni effluxere
cum in Gallia iuuentutem excolunt, centumque scholasticorum millia ex eorum
collegijs, aut studia absoluerunt, aut ad ea quae iurisprudentiae, sieve
Medicinae sunt, accesserunt. Anne istorum aliquis id se didicisse, vel
audiuisse a Iesuitis, fassus est? Addo, Ministri exstant hereticorum, qui
plares annos apud Iesuitas vixerunt: interrogate eos, quid de vita Iesuitarum
sentiat. Profecto censendum est eos quam pessime de ijs loquuturos, si non ob
aliam causam, saltem vt suam ab ijs emigrationem excusent. I am vero mihi
liquido constat, id fuisse ab ijs quaesitum, respondisse autem, de moribus
Iesuitarum nihil esse, quod obloqui quisquam possit. Quod vero ad doctrinam
attinet, neminem latere, quod doceant. Sane pauci huic examini se subijcerent,
and conscientiam eius est opus esse securam, qui aduersarij sententiae stare
velit,

De Baterio, qui me voluit interficere, tantum abest, vt Iesuita eius
confessionem (vt vos dicitis) exceperit, vt a Iesuita premonitus de tota re
fuerim: Bareriumque alter Iesuita monuerit, damnationem aeternam incursurum,
s^id vnquam attentasset.

De Castello nil vnquam cruciatibus and tormentis extorqueri potuit aduersus
Varadeum; neque contra alium quemlibet Iesuitam. Quod nisi ita res habet: cut
eis pepercistis? nec supplicium de ijs sumpsistis, qui and in vestra potestate,
and adeo erant in vinculis.

Sed demus (non tamen concedentes) aliquem ipsorum id ausum fuisse: anne omnes
Apostoli ob vnum Iudam plectendi fuerint? Vel an ego satisfaciam pro
lattocinijs criminibusque omnibus quae posthac commiserint quicunque aliqua^do
sub me militarunt etc.

The same translated.
THat certain Ecclesiasticals are adversaries to Jesuits; alvvayes
vnlearnednes has hated learning. I have observed, when I began to speak of
their restitution, two sorts especially to oppose them selves; Heretics, and
bad Ecclesiasticalls, which indeed gave me a greater provocation to revoke
them.

That they, of the highest Bishop sheake well and reverence him, I also do
the same. Neither am I ignorant that they of the supreme Bishops authority,
nether speak, nor teach more then other Divines, and the Catholic Church
does teach. Beside, they teach nothing, that the Clergy should not give me
my due. Nether was any ever found, that of them learned the destruction of
Kings.

Wherefore all that is objected to them is nothing. Thirty years and more, are
run over, since they have trained the youth in France, and a hundred thousand
of their scholars, have either ended all their studies, or become Lavviers, or
Physicians: of all these, has any ever confessed to have heard or learned of
Jesuits, any such matter? I add, that there are Ministers of the heretics,
that many years have lived among Jesuits: enquire of them what they think
of the Jesuits life. Verily it is to be thought, that they would speak most
slanderously, were it but only to excuse their running away from them. I am
preuie, it to have bin demanded of them, and them to have ansvvered, the
Iesuitts proceedings to be inculpable: as for their teaching it to be public.

Verily, fevve others would submit them selves to such trial: and his
conscience must be secure, that dares to abide his adversaries verdict.

Of Barrery, that would have killed me, it is so untrue, that a Jesuit had
heard (as you say) his confession, that by a Jesuit I was forvvarned of the
whole dessigne: and another, Jesuit intimated to Barerie, that he would
incurr eternal damnation, by such attempt.

Of Castle, by noe torments could ever be vvreasted any thing against Varad,
or any other Jesuit. Which, if it was not so: why did you spare them, and
did not execute them they being both in your power, and prisons?

But let us (yet without condiscending thereto) admit, that any of them had
been faulty; are all Apostles for one Judas to be punished? Should I be
thought guilty for all thefts, and crimes committed by them, who had some
time been my soldiers? etc.

By this Royal record, learn M. Rider, that only for the smarte feared to
your festered ulcers, the Jesuits are odious to you, Chirurgians to any
greueously mayned, or lightsomnes, to bleared, and affected eyes. Wherefore,
Celius.
vt Cantharides letioribus frumentis and viridioribus innascunturiosis: sic and
inuidia eos arrodit precipue qui boni sunt, quique ad gloriam serpunt via
virtutis. As glasse-wormes breed sonnest in the purest grain, and rypest
roses: so envy, nibleth or gnaweth, at them most, who are good, and who by
virtue become glorious. O dirum exitium. mortalibus! O nihil vnquam crescere,
nec magnas patiens exurgere lauds, Syllius l. 17.
inuidia! O detestable ruin to mankind. O envy, smothering all increase, not
suffering great deserts to have their praise. But, as I said before, Plin. lib.
18. c. 16.
your envious rancour makes us, as the grecian grass, the worse we are used,
the more to flourish. All our grief is, for your interest thereby: because as
Democrates said; inuidus seipsum vt ini^^u^ conturbat; Democrates.
the malicious do torment them selves as their own enemies. If you can content
your selves, spare not us: who in deed; moneremur, si M. Cato; si Lelius
saptens, si alter Cato, si duo Scipiones ista loquerentur. Nunc talibus
displicere laudariest; Wowld be extremely afflicted, Soneca de Remed. for tuit.
if Marcus Cato, if the sage Lelius; if Cato the younger, if both the Scipioes
did condemn us. But now, to displease such, is our great commendation. To lie
in wait, and seek impiety in the just man's house or in the socie^ie, Prou.
24.15.
by forging: how can it be, but most desyrable? S. Ambros. l. 2. de interpell.
c. 2. 3.
Quia volens inimicus aliquid dicere aduersurus nos, quo crimen affigeret, non
inuenit quod verum est, sed falsa pro veris composuit; Because our enemies
intending to diffame us, and not finding any true occasion to calumniat, they
were constrained (as S. Ambrose in like case said) to forge false accusations.

Therefore M. Rider, since that it is publicly known, by all chief Princes in
the world, affecting and erecting the Jesuits in their common wealths, and
committing their consciences, especialy when they are most burdonsome, to their
synceritie, and moderation, that they can not be but godly, learned, and
temperat; for otherwise they would not so generaly, and continualy be admired:
for your own reputation sake, how soever others calumniat the Jesuits, having
impiously restored the Athenian temple, erected by Epimenides aduife to
Contumely, Cit. l. 2. de legibus. Ezech. 18.18.
and Impudency, yet refrain you from attainting them, since God is determined
to suffer calumniators to perish in their iniquity, and least that in the
mean time you become to your profession a Balaam to Balac, by blessing them
whom it would have you as a Mercenarian, to curse. Otherwise experience will
teach you; Sunecade vita beata.
that duricies silicis nulli magis quam furientibus not a est; the hardness of
the flint, is to none better known then to them, that stryke it; and that in
ea quae firma and insuperabilia sunt, quicquid incurrit malo suo vim suam
exerceret; what soever iustleth against things strong, and insuparable, it
strugleth to the propre harm of it self.

To perclose my, I fear (as I said) fruictles pains in your behalf, S. Aug.
op. 162.
either toward your reclaiming from error or from misconceit of Jesuits; I say
with S. Augustine. The heretic him self thowgh swelling with odious, and
disdainful pride, and frantic with the testiuenes of impious contention, as I
admonish least he deceive the weaklings and little ons, that he be avoided, so I
refuse not by any means possible, to seek his amendment, and reformation. This
mind not only I, but every Jesuit is of, by obligation of our profession. But
says S. Hierome: S. Hieron. in Ezech
quid prodest dicere si nolit auditor facere quod docueris? what avails it to
teach, if the hearer refuse to be instructed? Every one (says he) shall be
judged according his deserts: thou, if thou teach not; he, if he become not
conformable: which Hieremie the prophet confirms, Cap. 33. Hierem. S. Ambr.
ser. 85.
in most vehement terms of protestation. In regard thereof in the words, and
inte^tion; of S. Ambrose: Malo eos contumaciae reddere rationem, quam me
negligentiae sustinere iudicium. I had rather them to be accomptable for
obstinacy, then that I should be condemned for negligence. Non pigebit sicubi
besito, querere; nec pudebit sicubi erro, discere. Proinde quisquis haec legit,
S. Aug. l. 1. de Trin. c. 2. and 3.
vbi pariter certus est pergat mecum; vbi pariter besitat, quaerat mecum; vbi
errorem suam cognoscit, redeat ad me; vbi meum, reuocet me. It will not loath
me, if I stagre, to seek; nor confownd me, if I fail, to learn. Wherefore
whosoever reads this, where he is likewise certain, let him proceed with me;
where he likewise dowbteth, let him inquyre with me; where he fyndeth his error
let him return to me; where he discovers my error, let him revoke me.

Your well willer according Christ Jesus. Henry Fitzsimon.

To the Constant Confessors of Christ now afflicted for religion.
I have received (Ioial Champions of Christ) your several leters, declaring
your afflicted estate, and your fixed resolution therein, to endure all
calamity, and to suffer the greatest extremity even of torments, and death it
self, rather then to renownce the Catholic faith. I may affirm, that as I
exceedingly rejoice to hear many of you saying with S. Paul: If we be
immolated we rejoice; Philip. 2.18.
and the self same thing do you also rejoice, and congratulat with us: so in
regard of your exorbitant sufferings, I may also say with Job: I did some time
weep over him that was oppressed, and my soul did condole with the poor.
Job. 30.25.
What you do crave at my hands, (being only to animat you with ghostly
instructions toward subjection, and not toward sedition; to facilitat that you
resign your selves to your oppressors and not to resist them, to induce you to
fulfill your duty toward God, and not to infringe your duty toward your
Prince) seemed to me so reasonable, as nether could I, nor would I suspend
expected satisfaction, that was in my power longer, then so as it might come to
your notice to my thinking most conveniently, by being inserted in my book
against M. Rider, which to you is dedicated, and is now in forwardnes toward
you. My method shall be according the principal particulars of your informations,
with more succinct brevity, by how much, in the Resolutions of F. Persons,
(especialy of the last edition) many chapters are directed to the consolation
of afflicted Catholics. Whereof I greatly commend to your careful reading, it
against supposed difficulties; it of fear of persecution, and it of examples
of true resolution. Now then orderly to your complaints, as at several times,
and by several of you, they have been certified, do I answer.

Afflicted Catholics. 1.
1 Presupposing your compassionat disposition, R. F. we certify your
reverence, that shortly after your departure, namely 28. of September. 1605. were
published (without all allowance of any parliament to that effect) sondrie
proclamations, of speedy banishment to all priests; of death to them, and to
their receauers (whereby many priests abondoned us, and many of us eschued them)
if any remained; and of utter ruin to any professing him self a Catholic by
any duty, or fact of his profession what soever. By which their severity
toward us, finding in them ane opinion it to be a nicenes, and inconsideration
in us to feel any oppression, much more to complain thereof: we are hardened to
tolerat their greatest violence as we best may, and for our further constancy
desirous to have your fatherly directions.

The Author.
1 I should not deserve the reputation of being a member of Christ's Church, 1.
Cor. 12.25.
unless the saying of S. Paul (if one member suffer any thing, all the members
suffer with it) might be verifyed in me. For who of so flintie a nature, and
senseles disposition, but must commiserat the so excessive persecution of a
people, to all laws so subject, to al offices so forward, in all trials of
loialtie so trusty, to all defense of their Prince, and contry, so
affectionat, as that their rulers have often professed, their servile, and
patient subjection, not only to strive with, but also to surmount their
commanders iniquity, and extorsion?

But to every part of this first clause, we are to have regard. That first you
note exactly the particular time, and other circumstances of your affliction,
is commendable; and according the desire of S. Clement, and Fabian, primative
Popes, Ex Martyrologio and Damaso.
who ordained to that use certain notaries, or clercks, who most diligently
should registre, and record all particularities, in the time of persecution.
Which studious observation, I request you still to follow.

Secondly, that your calamities proceeded without all allowance of parliament,
or ordinary course of law, only by bare proclamations; does argue such to be
the godly disposition of your nobility, and the whole state of the contrie, as
that impiety, and wrongfulnes, could never presume to have their allowance.
The like in first Christianity happened in Alexandrie, Vide Eusebius. l. 6. c. 34.
by testimony of Dyonise Bishop thereof, saying: Before any edict, or lawful
permission of the Emperor was obtained, a whole year, our persecution began
etc. Whereas then, you would be loath, that any should suffer beyond you, or
testify more their affection to their Saluiour, and Lord, then you: now that
you know in this mentioned wrong, that you are not incomparable, or without
corriuals, strive with them to patient with noe less commendation then the
Alexandrians (of whom after) deserved. Whereto S. Peter does imbowlden you, in
these words: 1. Pet. 3.13.
who is he that may hurt you, if you be emulators of good? that is, if you
strive in all duty toward God, that noe others surpass you.

Nether do you want examples of tolerating their surmise of daintines in you,
that you feel, and especialie that you complain of any smart. For when God
almighty was to deliver the children of Israel out of the servitude of Aegipt,
Exodus 3.7.
it was says he, for the austeritie of them that were ouer-seers of the
woorks. For when the Israelits would sacrifice to God, it was objected against
them that they were wanton, Exodus 5.17.
and vacant: and because they performed not their impossible task they were
also whipped. So A man accused the people of Israel who were in subjection and
servitude under king Assuerus, Esther. 3.8.
in all submission; that it was not expedient they should be insolent throwgh
licentiousnes. Toward these also be you emulators in good, that you repine not
at what soever any before you had for their profession endured.

If your Pastors or ghostly Fathers, have abandoned you for terror of any
proclamations, by the assurance of Christ, they have been mere hirelings. The
good Pastor, (says our Saluiour) gives his life for his sheep. But the
hierling, and he that is not the pastor, whose own the sheep are not, Ioa.
10.11.12.
sees the wolf coming, and leaves the sheep, and flies, and the wolf
raueneth, and disperseth the sheep. And the hireling flees because he is a
hireling, and he has noe care of the sheep.

If you also have eschued your ghostly Fathers for timourousnes, and threats of
man; First you have been far inferior to Abdias steward to K. Achab, 3. Reg.
18.4.
and Iezabel. For he when by Iezabels sacrilegious impiety, the prophets of
God were persecuted; he I say alone preserved, and nourished a hundred of them
in fellers under grownd. Secondly you had lost the reward belonging to your
said ghostly. Fathers, or which is all one, the merit of hospitality, which
you might have used to Christ in person. He that receaueth you (says Christ to
his disciples whom he sent to fructify in his Church) receaueth me: Mat.
10.40.41.
and he that receaueth me, receaueth him that sent me. He that receaueth a
Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive the reward of a Prophet.
Thirdly, you have been thereby in evident peril of greater damnation, then which
is due to the very Sodomits and Gomorrheans; which also our Savior in the
same chapter foretells, saying. whosoever shall not receive you, Mat.
10.14.15.
nor hear your words: going forth out of the house, or city, shake of the
dust of your feet. Amen I say to you, it shall be more tolerable for the land of
the Sodomits, and Gomorrheans in the day of judgment, then for that city.

In these duties the scripture exempteth us from laws of men. Commanding (said
a certain Magistrate) we commanded you, Act. 5.28.29.
that you showld not teach in this name: and behowld you have filled
Jerusalem, with your doctrine, etc. But Peter aunswering and the Apostles, said
God must be obeyed rather then men.

That you have a settled resolution to tolerat all extremity, rather then to
abjure your profession, deserves much commendation. In that especialie the
words of S Paul are to be understood; Patience is necessary for you, that
doing the will of God, you may receive the promise. Hebr. 20.36.
And reason leads you thereto. For it is a fyxed decree of God that if we
would reign with Christ, we must suffer for Christ: 2. Tim. 2.12.
if we would be crowned we must combat lawfully: 2. Time 2.4.
if we would be confessed and auowed by Christ be for God and his angels, we
must confess him before men. Luc. 12.8.9.


It is known, that the cupp or chalice of Christ, is sour, that his sta^dard
is the cross, that his crown is pricking, that his liuerie is read, as of one
that had troaden the press; and that his paths, Isa. 63.2.
and of all his saints, are the ways of continual tribulations. Who then to
be a Benjamin to Christ would not be contented to have his cupp found in his
sack; or to be on either of his sides, Genesis 44.12.
would not with the children of Zebede profess him self able to drink of his
chalice? Mat. 20.22.
Who willing to bear the victorious cross of Christ, would not with Heraclius
Emperor (finding him self in his bravery not to be able to move it, but in
his outward poverty, Vide Breniariu^ de exaltatione S. Crucis.
with ease to transport it) permit him self to be spoiled of all state, and
magnificence? 1. Pet. 5.4.
Who, hearing in Gods assured word, promised; that when the Prince of Pastors
shall appear we shall receive the incorruptible crown of glory; and that
blessed is the man that suffers tentation; for when he has been proved, he
shall receive the crown of life; but in the mean time would endure thorns of
reproaches, Iac. 1.12.
crowning daily his ears? Who considering the most aspiring arrogance of
Aman, Hoster. 6.^.
to have only intended to be adorned with the Kings apparel, to ride on a horse
appointed for the Kings sadle, to have the Kings diadem upon his head; but in
all Christian modesty, should be contented, to be of one liuerie with his God,
and all his dearest beloved; satisfied to be mounted on his Gods fairest horse,
which was the cross, of suffrance and acknowledge him self abundantly
glorified, to wear his Gods diadem, which in this world did only pearce, and
torment? Lastly; who heareing the broad way to lead to perdition, Mat. 7.13.14.
Psalm. 24.4.
and the narrow way to conduct to life, but from his heart will say with the
Prophet: thy ways o Lord, demonstrat to me, and teach me thy paths?

Afflicted Catholics. 2.
Ministers, by whom these proclamations were urged against us, converted all
their pulpit railing against the magistrate, that now having the sword in their
hands, they did not destroy us* Promotors also pretended all forwardnes to
persecute us. All unthrifts, bankrupts, dronkards, ho^r masters, and scurfe of
the kingdom* offered them selves to be ernest spies, zealous accusers,
aduenturous assaulters of us. Nether R. S. a gentleman of your acquaintance
(after, consuming his whole estate, in gaming, and disodre) disdained to
fulfill base offices against us.

The Author.
THey that vsurp the office of Preests, and preachers, not being thereto
canonicaly ordered by a lawful Bishop, but break into that function by
unlawful favor, or force, S. Iren. l. 3. c. 3. Tertul. de praescrip. S. Cypr.
de vnitate eccl. n. 7. S. Aug. ep. 165. and con. ep. Manich. c. 4. Joan. 10.10.
S. Aug. contra Petil. l. 2. c. 83.
contrary to all due election, and holy ordonance; they are (as all principal
Fathers do interpret) the thieves or heretics that come not in among the flock
by Christ, the door, but by violent intrusion. Such, says our Saluiour, come
to steal* and kill, and destroy. Therefore S. Augustine demands of them, why
they boast of clemency, considering that they never could, but they would
hurt: and if they were at any time mild, that it was as the kyte, when being
repulsed from snatching away the chicke^, she counterfetteth the dove.

Therefore their coming into the flock to steal, and kill and destroy, being
forwarned, we are not to marvel, that they fulfill their intention, when
opportunity is presented. And that your Ministers are the very thieves so
specifyed by our saluiour; these following informatio^s of their own brethren,
may be your assurance. Denique cum omnibus conspirant, Sebastianus Castellio in
lib. de Calumnia c. 16. page 98. edit. Aresdorfij an. 1578.
dum sanguinem effundere liceat, sed aliena manu quoniam nobis (inquiunt) non
licet occidere quemquam. Breefely, they conspire with all to shed blood, but by
a strange hand, because (say they) it is not lawful for us to kill any. This
is spoken of Caluinians, whom their brother, in this, and all other respects,
declares to resemble the scribes and pharisees, for all impiety, and
arrogancy. Non enim sufficit illis, Joan Schutz lib. 50. causarum, in serpe^te
antiquo page 155.
quod animas falsis dogmatibus occiderunt, verum vbicunque pacem externam
perturbare possunt, and efficere vt corpora etiam occidantur, nil faciunt
reliqui ad summam diligentiam. For it is not sufficient for them that they have
murdered the sowls with false opinions, but whersoeuer they may disturb
public peace, and procure the bodies also to be slain they omit noe
diligence thereto.

That also the Lutheran Ministers are guided by like instinction, and none of
the brood free from this bloody spirit; Sturmius apud Lauath. in historia
Sacramentaria, 4. anno 1561. page 49. a.
these words of Sturmius, do demonstrat. Quos volunt, and quae volunt,
improbant, vexant, condemnant, proscribunt, palo prope and cruci affigunt, in
ipsas prope vstrinas, and rogos impellunt. Postremo si Magistratus illis
hominibus per triduum gladium suum concederet, crudelissima statim sequutura
condemnationum tonitrua, fulgura, fulmina, qua ne in abnepotum quidem
conquiescerent supplicijs. Whom, and what they please they reject, vex,
condemn, banish and almost nail to cross, and gibet; they almost enforce
into flamme, and fire. Lastly, if the magistrate would but for three days lend
them their sword, most cruel thundrings, lightnings, and thunder bowlts, which
would persecute to the third generation, would ensue. I add this testimony of
Calvin him self, to make the matter irrefragable. Calu. in admexi^* vlt. ad
Ioachimum VVestphalum, and in harm. euanglica.
Accusant Principum segnitiem quod non exerto gladio protinus deleant
sacramentariorum memoriam They accuse the slacknes of Princes, that with their
unsheathed sword they do not forth with abolish the memory of their brethren
not believing Christ to be in the Sacrament.

Erasmus (whom they make a saint in their Calendar) thus writes of their
whole crew of euangelical Reformers, (as they would be called) without
exception. Erasmus in spongia aduersus Huttenum.
Nunquam eorum ecclesias ingressus sum, sed aliquando vidi redeuntes a
concione, veluti malo spiritu afflatos, vultibus omnem iracundiam ac ferociam
prae se ferentes, sicut discedunt milites a concione ducis ad praelium
exhortati. I never entered their Churches, but some time I have viewed them
returning from their sermons, as if they were puffed with an evil spirit, in
their countenances breathing all rancor and cruelty, in manner as soldieours
depart from their General exhorting them to a conflict.

Ca^ you then, afflicted brethren expect other measure at their hands?" Nay
rather rejoice; that they who do vndowbtedly impugn piety, destroy Gods holy
howses, corrupt his scriptures, profane his sacraments, and blaspheme his
church, are the fire brands of co^bustio^, the intisers of destruction, the
bellows of spite and indignation against you. Such is the fruict of that tree.
Zuinglius approves it, saying; Euangelium vult sanguinem, their ghospel
thirsts blood. Erasm. ad fracres inferioris Germ. Dangerous Positions page
140.
Martin mar Prelat ratifieth it, professing: Reformation can not be without
blood. Gaspart Colligni assures it, repeating often: I came not to send Peace,
but the sword. When therefore they swell with spite against you, and their
followers come from their sermons with eger famine, Joan. Hay. demand 4. aux
Ministres. Tob. 12.13.
and sharpened teeth to ruin, and devour you; you have occasion to glorify
God, because for being acceptable to God it was necessary that this te^tatio^
must prove you: 2. Tim. ^.12.
because for living godly in Christ Jesus, you must suffer persecution: because
if you had been without discipline, whereof all are made partakers, then had you
been, (as Gods word affirms) bastards, and noe children.

Ad Heb. 12.8. Tertul. in Apologet. c. 42.
"Also for the residue of your pursuiuants, and betrayers; they are as
conformable to the old enemies of Christians, as your profession is the same
of old primative, and often persecuted Christians. Tertullia^ declares such
promotors to have been, public ba^d^s, iuglers, magitians, Apud Eusebius. l. 4.
c. 25
cheaters, etc. and Meliton specifyeth them at another time, to have been
impudent, and peruers sycophants, and reuenous thieves. Learning can never have
an enemy, but ane idiot; nor virtue, but a reprobat; S. Cypr. ep. 55. n. 1.
nor religion, but an infidel. Therefore think with S. Cypria^, saying; It
imports not who betrayeth, or rages, whereas God permits thee to be
betrayed, who^ he appoints to be crouned. Nether is it reproachful to us to
suffer what Christ suffered, even of our brethren, nether is it glorious to
them to imitat Judas.

"Concerning the Gentleman R. S. of who^ you inform; I admired little, that he
who now above six years had imitated their dissolute and libert in life,
should at leinth profess their barren, and broad belief. For, Abyssus abyssum
inuocat, One depth te^deth to another. And as Cicero said; Cic. erat. ad Brut.
Est in quibusdam tanta peruersitas, vt inuentis frugibus glande vesca^tur; In
some so great is the peruersitie, that having fownd corn, yet they choose to
feed on ackorns. So did the prodigal child forsake the abundance of bread in
his fathers house, to feed on husks among swyne. Alas! that the bra^ch of so
noble a stock, should sequestre it self from the lyfe-giuing vine, Joan. 15.5.
and ent, or graffe it self, in the dead solifidia^ figtree, upon which Christ
finding but leaves only said: never grow there fruict of thee for ever: And in
which, as Ecclesiasticus affirms, Mat. 21.19. Eccl. 34.11.
he that is implanted (or graffed) will abownd with wickedness. I will humbly
request almighty God, that he resemble not the dissolute young man, whom the
comical Poet long since thus discribed.

Imberbis iuuenis, tandem custode remoto,
Horat. de art poetica ante medium.
gaudet equis, canibusque, and aprici gramine campi:
cereus in vitium flecti, monitoribus asper,
vtilium tardus prouisor, prodigus eru,
sublimis, cupidusque, and amata relinquere pernix.
The beardles youth, his Regent lost, to horse and hound
inclines; to wander rownd, thirsting for new contents:
Plying to vice; peruers to his aduisers sound;
lavish; playing with unthrifts, all his goods and rents;
Hawtie, wanton, wavering, hedlong to new intents.
But how is not their triumph lamentable, that rejoice of his falling into
their misery? It being said long since by Christ: Every branch in me not
bearing fruict, Joan. 15.2.6,
(such as long time he has been known to be) he will take it away. Again: if
any abide not in me, he shall be cast forth as the branch, and shall wither.
Their extremity is to be deplored who when they purchase the only withered and
cast away branch, the light chafe, and noe sound grain of corn, the dead
carcass, and noe living membre; they applaud as at a rich prise. Let us at
least amend his conditions. Which as I daily crave at Gods divine bounty, so
I most instantly commend it to the ernest prayers of all that shall hear or
read this awnswer.

Afflicted Chatolicks. 3.
During their preparations, continual threats were blundred abroad, that
Papistrie was now with all speed to be abolished: that the gospel was to be
established: that every one maugre his profession, should come to Church etc.
Churches were repaired upon such assurance. Ministers, and their wives, and
children, as also promoters* and Catch powles, took upon them higher looks,
and furnished them selves with unwonted apparel, and other provision, in
confidence of their increased revenues. What soever we had, either land, or
house, or horse, or jewel, etc. they eyed, and predestined to them selves,
either by way of fine, or bribe, or morgage.

The Author.
FIrst, concerning their vaunt to extinguish religion; they did noe more then
before them Diocletian, and Maximian; who were then the only and most potent
infidel Emperors of the whole world. These two, employed all their wits, and
power, to suppress Christianity; which beyond all admiration, augmented by
suffering, and prevailed by destruction. When the two Roman Emperors, so
opposing them selves, would not seem to have employed their trauail in vain;
they having commanded all Christians through all places to be most cruely
tormented to death; Finaly to persuade that they had vanquished, they for
perpetual memory of their noble victory, caused to be ingraue^ in marble
pillars, among other titles of glory; Nomine Christianorum deleto, Baron. tom.
2. Anno. 304. page 850. edit. an. 1591.
The name of Christians abolished: Superstitione Christi vbique delet^, cultu
Deorum propagato; The superstition of Christ in all places extinguished, the
worship of the Gods amplified. But finding by daily experience, that, sanguis
martyrum erat semen Christianorum; The blood of martyrs was the seed of
Christians; Tertul. ad scapula^, and in Apologetic^.
and that they did strive against the stream; they both together, for saueing
of their credits, surrendered their imperial dignity, concealing (which after
was known) the cause to have been, that truth, and piety had utterly
confownded them.

Like was the dismal threat, as also like impiety, and like success of
Luther, saying: That if he might preach but two years longer his euangelical
doctrine, Cochleus in Actis. Lutheri, anno 1525.
there should not be fownd Pope, Cardinal, Bishop, Monk, Nun, steepel, Bell,
Mass, etc. Yet experience disproueth this Prophet, notwithstanding his
preaching two and twenty years beyond the prefixed term; there being never
more filial affection toward Pope, more officiousnes toward Cardinals, more
subjection toward Bishops, more reverence toward monks, more benevolence toward
Nunns, more expense toward Churches, steeples, and Bells, and more fervent
devotion toward the dreadful sacrifice of the Mass, then is now at this
present, being above a hundred years after Luthers vain prediction.

But while they vainly vawnt against our profession, they unfeignedly acknowledge
one to another (which in vain they conceal, it being to every one notorious)
that them selves do sensibly vanish. Heshusius in epist. de exorcismo.
I call to witness their own words. Quoquo vertimus oculos, intuendo Christi
cetum, nihil propemodum occurrit, quam noua docentium dissidia, incrementa
errorum, insignium doctorum defectiones a veritate. Whersoeuer we turn our
eyes, behoulding the troop of Christ, almost nothing is so frequent, as new
dissentions of our teachers, increased errors, Silnec. in praefat. in Catal.
Council. A 4.
and recantations of our principal doctors. Another says; suggestus sordescere
mihi incipiunt, in quibus odia ista venenata, and contentiones ruinam
spectantes deprehenduntur. Pulpits begin to disgust me, wherein such poisoned
hatreds, and contentions tending to ruin, are observed. Joan. Spangebergius in
sua vera informat. Iene. an. 1562.
Another says; I am deinceps nolunt Deum agnoscere. Hence forward, they will
acknowledge noe God: to wit, because they decline from their protestant
profession, which lately they had received. But this notorious decaie is
acknowledged in express terms by Nicholaus Gallus, Gallus in praef. Apol.
Maiestatis hom. Christi.
saying; perit iusto Dei iudicio, non armis hostium, non inuictis hereticorum
armis, vera a nobis religio and ecclesia, sed nostrorum inter nos perfidia,
infidelitate, incuria. By the just judgment of God, true religion and the
Church does perish, not by arms of enemies, Amsdorf. in publica confessione.
VVormatia. 1557.
not by arguments of heretics, but by our own treachery, infidelity,
carelesnes. Finaly says Amsdorff: omnia nihil prae se ferunt aliud qua^
euangelium apud nos pessum iturum, and loco euangelij meros, eosdemque egregios
errores nos habituros. All things demonstrat nothing more then that the gospel
is perishing among us, and that in place of the gospel will remain mere and
enorme errors.

To the same effect, it is to be understood, that when the Puritans began to
multiply, and dangerously to impugn parliament protestants, (so called,
because they frame their profession according to parlame^tal statuts) the said
Parliament Protestants, to make them odious, revealed principaly by two books
all Puritan dissignes, as well displaying what their consistorial discipline
was, as to what distructio^ of all religion it aimed. One of these books, was
entitled the Survey of the pretended holy discipline, the other dangerous
positions. By virtue of which book (and of others of like subject: as, A
treatise of Ecclesiastical discipline; The Remo^stra^ce; Quaerimonia Ecclesiae;
The 5. books of the laws of Eccl. polit; The answer to the abstract; etc.)
the cause of Puritans seemed so detestable to the state, that ever since, more,
and more they in their wysdomes thought good to suppress them. Now in the last
year, 1606. the unquiet Puritans collecting all abuses that might be objected
in the profession of Parliament Protestants, they have dedicated their said
book to his Majesty, appealing to his oath by the great name of the Lord, In
praefatione page 23.
that he would defend according his power, all the days of his life, under the
pain contained in the law, and danger both of body and soul, in the day of
Gods fearful judgment, the altogether Puritanical liturgy of Scotland. This
book, in requital of the former Seruey against them, they have also named, A
Survey of the book of common prayer.

Now to our former purpose, that Protestancie, and Puritancie are together
decaying, is auerred in this new Survey. First, Page 160.
they relate that the late Archbishop of Canturburie, upon remorse uttered
these words: Good Lord when shall we know what to trust to? And that suddenly
he was surprised with a palsy, was carried from the cowrt, and died shortly
after. A plain demonstration, that all their profession hitherto invented,
wants all assurance, and fades away like a smoke. Breefely, in the said
Survey, the Puritans acknowledge their own delusions also to be at a non plus,
saying; The times decline fast to Popery: these times be declining to Popery.
Page 52. Page 105.


Whereas therefore, their threats of our decaie are but like the dying candle,
which before quenching casts out greatest flamms; in the name of God, I. Joan.
2.24. Galat. 1.9.
that which you have heard from the beginning (as S. John advises) let it
remain in you. To which S. Paul accords: If any preach otherwise then you
have alredie received; be be accursed. For if you be wise, you will not for any
threats exchange the suer fundation, and rock, against which the gates of hell
shall never prevail, for the sandy foolish man's choice, which for rain
falling thereon, for wind blowing, Mat. 16.16. Mat. 7.27.
and fludds coming, is ruined, and surmounted. Such as is this new invisible
profession, by the rain of man's will, like a figure formed in sand defaced,
and by wynds of opposition, and fludds of oblivion, upon the point to be
utterly overwhelmed.

So that their Church which they said first was invisible, (because they could
produce noe predecessors among Christians that ever had believed as they did)
being now again by their own confession vanishing out of sight; this
epigramme, should be allowed to be after a short time true.

"You hold your church invisible til Luthers time:
"with Luther also has it lost all bewties prime.
"And now invisible it grows with Luther dead,
"so invisible the members, and the head.
"Invisible in deed they are, as deep in hell:
"for utter darkness, darkneth all that there do dwell.
"So first it was obscure, as fetched from lightles pit:
"it is so again, as drowned, where Lucifer does sit.
5. Reg. 1. 5. 9. 19.
If your Ministers, and Promotors, like Adonias, before their time have furnished
them selves insolently; they are not therefore greatly to be maligned. For that
sinners by impiety come often to wealth, Psalm. 72.12.
the Prophet David fortould, saying: Ecce ipsi peccatores and abundantes in
seculo obtinuerunt diuitias. Behowld the very sinners, and abownding in the
world, have obtained riches. Upon which place says S. Augustine. S. Aug. in
Psalm. 72.
Quot sunt quila sciuijs, vt boues, and vaccae, ad iugulum tendunt, and
canentes, and saltantes parant iter ad infernum? How many are they that by
riot, as oxen, and cowes do march to their destruction, and singing, Prou. 1.33.
and dawnsing, do dispose their voyage to hell? Prosperity of fools will
destroy them, says the proverb: For (as follows in the wyseman, Sap. 14. 28.
) either while they rejoice they are madd, or truly they fortell lies. In their
madness, they blaspheme God, and his saints, and calumniat his people. In their
predictions of lies, among others, may be numbered, if they tell that you will
apostat from religion; honor them as true pastors; defy papistrie; and that so
doing, you will do according to the gospel. They occasion me to remember one
Selius, in Martial, who inferred there was no God, because forsooth, that he
often blaspheming him, yet, thereby lived in greater prosperity.

Nullos esse Deos, inane coelum Martial. li. 4. epig^.

affirmat Selius, probatque quod se
Factum dum negat haec, videt beatum.
No God, heaven vain, affirmed Selius:
and proud it, for that he was prosperous,
denying them, and always glorious.
Cicero was able to say of such men; Cic. l. 1. offic.
Adducuntur plerique vt eos iustitia capiat obliuio, cum in imperiorum,
honorum, gloriaeve cupiditatem inciderint. The most of such are forgetful of
equity, when they fall into the aspiring desire, of rule, honors, and glory.
So that they do but according to the wont of arrogant people, when they insult
upon vain expectations. I wish (for their creditours sake) that it be never
heard, what Calvin, well experienced in the like of him self, and his
brethren, writes of his fellow Ministers. I will faithfully translat part of
his plain declaration, omitting the latin this time for breuities sake. Alij
ad captandum miri artifices, nudatos relinquunt, etc. Calvin. lib. de scandalis
page 65. 66.
Some of the^ (says he, writing (as I said) of Ministers) wonderfully cunning
to snatch, leave them forlorn in nakedness, to whom they promised montains of
gould. Some, what alms they received, either they spend it in whooring, or
play, or other riot. Some, what they borrowed, they consume lauishlye in
idleness. And in these crimes they have often assistance of their wives. Some
vncleanlines insueth wherewith this awnswer shall not be defiled. Only as I
said, I crave, that our Ministers, and Catchpowls defraud not their creditors.

Afflicted Catholics. 4.
Although their Doctrine to every one is known to be uncertain; even among
them selves; and they in continual discords; yet they strive to enforce us to
renounce our belief, they propounding no other belief out of controversy,
among them selves, which we might safelye profess for every part thereof.

The Author.
I Esteem it an especial favor of Gods divine bounty, that although they bend
all their power, and industry, to deprive you of teachers, and books, yet
that he supplieth by natural reason, that you perceive their doctrine to be
wavering, and consequently unlawful. For S. Paul in assurance thereof,
Apostolicalye advises us; Hebr. 13.9.
with variable and strange doctrins be not led away.

I have before showed their Doctrine to be uncertain, in as much as the late
Archbishop of Canturburie, Survey of the book of common prayer, page 160.
in desperate manner exclamed: Good lord, when shall we know what to trust unto?
The Puritans who among you rule (at least in good will) the roast, in the end of
their late survey, do affirm; That they nether will, nor may consent to the
religion commended in the book of common prayer; The humble petition of 22.
preachers, in London, and the suburbs thereof. conjoined (as ane abridgme^t) to
the foresaid survey.
First, because they can not make any reasonable sense of part of it. Secondly,
because it contains contradictions. Thirdly, because it contains
untruths. Fowerthly, because it auerreth doubtful matters. Fifthly, because
scriptures are disgraced in it. Sixthly, because manifest untruths, as
scripturs are taught therein. Seventhly, because it inioyneth unlawful
ceremonies. Eighthly, because it contains prayers implicating contradiction.
Nienthly, because certain epistles, gospells, collects, savor of superstition.
Tenthly, because it corruptly translateth scriptures. I might add more.

Whereas therefore innumerable are the puritans, in as much as a thousand
preachers (for every Minister among them must be such) opposed them selves to
the other protestants; and all these do contradict the protestant profession
hitherto established: you have reason to admire, and all the world to be
astonished, that you should be enforced to believe, what so many of them selves
think to be so impious. Page 163.
Nay, I add somewhat more out of the foresaid survey. Seeing (say they) some of
the Bishopes themselves (namely the Bishop of wincester) profess, they will
not subscrib to every thing contained in the book of common prayers, etc. Then
say I, noe catholic has any reason to subscrib thereto, until (at least) they
among them selves have other consent, then with Edward, to destroy what Henry
had determined; with Elizabeth, to disprove Edwards belief; and with his
Majesty now reigning, to controwle the belief of Elizabeth. For if the
scriptures by them published, must after be amended as formerly corrupt; and
the communion book, as false, be corrected; (they being de facto often
amended, and corrected as such) I can not conceive how all the frame builded
upon such fundation, by good consequence, must not also be false, and corrupt.

As for their dissentions, I need discover noe more then is alredie said, in
treating of the communion of Saints. What will be the issue thereof, Luc. 11.14.
Christ declares, saying; Every kingdom divided against it self shall be made
desolat. I can not therefore blame them, that they would rather be impudent some
times, in denying such division to be among them, or in affirming it, not to be
for any material points, then by professing it, to condemn the impiety of
their whole cause. But it is co^cealed only in wodcock manner, the beck being
hidd, and all the rest discovered. For it is not for capp, or surplice, bells,
or organs, that now they stand, but (say they a little before) because the form
of religion established, is senseles, implies contradictions, contains
untruths, auerreth doubts, comme^deth false scriptures, inioyneth unlawful
ceremonies, uses incohere^t prayers, allows superstitious epistles,
gospells, and collects, and depraueth scriptures. What can be main, and
important imputations, and improbations, if these be not? And all this they a
firm even of the book of common prayer, now explaned by his Majesty's
authority. Page 26. and page 161.
Which their detestation of the said book, is so abundant in their hearts, that
by their mouths, yea, and writings, they impeach all bishops, and other
Ministers, that justify the said book, to be; Dumb dogs, and idol
sheapheards; the shame and bane of the Church of God, Page 166. and the 2.
epist. of the 22. London preachers. Page 159.
etc. By idol, in this place understanding the said book of common prayer, as
by this their 198. quere, or demand, is insinuated: whether reasonable and
indifferent men, may not think that Bishops make an idol of the book of
common prayer, etc.

Before I perclose this point, I can not but require of our purita^s, how they
are not ashamed, that in their Millenarie petition to his Majesty they
professing them selves; Puritan petition. 1.
The number of more then a thousand greauing under a common burden: they have
so shrunken in the trial, as 1. Nouemb. 1605. there could be fownd, but 277. to
be as much as in question; but 70. to be deprived of their livings; Survey page
161.
but 113. not suffered to preach; and about 94. to be under admonition? Are not
these fit compagnions, to whom you should consociat your selves, who in so
short a time, without all torments, can command them selves to conformity,
with that which they had before so exorbitantly condemned, of all defectuositie?
Rather embrace the advice of S. Paul, saying: Therefore my beloved brethren be
stable, and immovable. 1. Cor. 15.58.
That now we be not Children wavering, and carried about with every wynd of
doctrine. Ephesians. 4.14.


Afflicted Catholics. 5.
To proceed with more dredf^ll ostentation, nothing was omitted that might
seem convenient to terrify timorous mynds. Many commissioners (and not a few
of them of the basest sort) were appointed. Martial law, and Martials, with
co^pagnies of horsemen, were ordained to scour the contrie, to make away
priests, and rogues. It was death to trauail from place, to place, without
passeports. And by this course, as every martial might, so many did, for
revenge, and malice, putt diverse without all form of process to death.
Another lawles disordre, was, by searchings. Doors, cheasts, cuppboords were
broken, and rifeled and howses ransaked, like a fort won by conquest. It was
the sport of searchers to behold the tears of house howlders, the trembling
of all the family, and to hear the scrithchings of women, and children. Small
boxes, and casketts, must have been searched for priests. All that came into
their netts, was fish: our jewels, for being Agnus Deis; our silver bowls, for
being chalices; out best attire, for being church ornaments. A third disordre,
was, by fynes in several cowrts. Some in one day, were compelled to feed the
greedines of officers of four diverse cowrts. And our refusing the oath of
allegiance (as for it of the supremacy, to satisfy the Puritans, it is
suppressed) is made a matter of the star chamber These fynes are unmeasurable,
to our qualities. Yet if we consent not suddenly to satisfy them; first, they
clapp us up into prisons; and then they them selves in all tulmutuous manner
resort to our howses, take notice of all our substance, valueing every thing at
a ridiculous rate, to all, but to them that are entitled in the goods; and of
all together gould, merchandise, corn, howsowld stuff, evidences, appareil,
they make up their fine, (if it exceed not all the means of the party)
conueying away as much as serves their own turns, and intending to return
by some pretext, or other, if their remain any thing to their advantage.

The Author.
A Lamentable declaration; Wherein the commissioners, Martials, searches, synes,
violence, oppression, and impouerishme^t of innocent subjects, do altogether
make up a noble persecution, comparable to some of them of primative Christians.

I read a relation of Dyonisius Bishop of Alexandrie, recorded bv Eusebius in
his history, and altogether like (but that it contains far greater
calamity sustained by primative Christians) information, deserving for your
consolation (to behold the faith then persecuted, yet to flourish, and in vain
to be impugned) to be imparted to you.

Eusebius. lib. 6. hist. c. 34.
Before any Edict, or proclamation of the Emperor (for the space of a whole
year) began our persecution. Wherein it seemed, the greatest sacrifice that
they could offer to their idols, to imbrue the^ selves with the blood, and
slaughter of Christians. They crushed the body, and picked out the eyes of
old Metra, and in the end stoned him because he would not recant. They drue
the virtuous Quincta to their temples, and when she detested their sacrilege,
they trayled her by the heels through the streets, brusing her against the
stones; after they tore her with scourges, and in the end, they also stoned
her to death. Then with one consent, without all commission, or warrant, they
rushed into the howses of Godly Christians, every one betraying his neighbor,
and extruding him out of doors, ransaking, and spoiling all his wealth, and
howsehowld stuff; purloining what soever was to his purpose, or all that was
precious, and throuing into the street, or fiar, the residue; so that every
corner, seemed a place given up to the pillage of ravenous enemies, etc.

This was in deed a merciles martial law, not subject to the laws of all
nations, nor to it of the twelve tables among the Romans, Deuteronomy. cap. 13.6. c.
19.15.
nor to it in Gods law; that, nemo inde^natus; etc. none withowt lawful
witness, should be condemned. To think that you were so used, in a Christian
common wealth, wherein every one was foorthcoming upon all citations, and
warnings; and wherein justice without all impediment might hold her natural
course: pardon me, it cannot, for the enormitie, sink into my mind; nether
will it enter into the conceit, of any Christian imagination, that the rigor of
justice should not be thought sufficiently sever against innocent Catholics,
without extending against them the martial iniquity, or lawlesnes, which is no
where followed, but where effusion of blood or probable destruction of a whole
army, is prevented, by a hastened private execution without ordinary process.
And if it be true, Survey of the book an common prayer page 123.
which I read in the puritan survey, that parliament Acts may not be explaned
but by authority of parlame^t; and consequently laws made by parliament (as
all true laws if I he not deceived, should be) can not be infringed but by
contrary acts of parliament: then have I greater cause to distrust this
informatio^, by how much Purita^s (the bloody trompetors to all cruelty
against Catholics) do repute by this testimony such violence to be unlawful,
because it is not warranted by any acts of parliament.

I take hold in this place obiter of part of a speech had at Norwich 4. of
August; before the Assizes (to testify what their own opinion is of promotors)
printed at London, this very year, 1607. under the title, of the L. Coke his
speech, and charge. Tovvard the end.
Wherein is said: The promoter is both a beggar, and a knave. A little after:
their office I confess is necessary: and yet it seldom hapeneth that an
honest man is employed in it. A good verdict, or rather, A good sentence, being
from that sage judge. But concerning your heavy disasters. If such course as
you speak of was followed, it was most pertinent to dismaie dastard mynds. I
say dastard mynds: For the just Christian is confident as a lion, Prou. 28.1.
says the word of God, adding after, Prou. 30.30.
which as the strongest of beast is never terrified at any incowntre. Therefore
in the business of God, or profession of our belief, says Christ; Fear ye
not them that kill the body, Mat. 10.28.
and are not able to kill the soul. Again; see that you be not trubled, for
these things must be done. Mat. 24.6.
Brother shall deliver brother unto death, and the father his son, and the
children shall rise against their parents, and shall work their death. And
you shall be odious to all men for my name. But be that shall endure to the end
shall be saved. A most happy conclusion of the former sorrow, and fare greater
good, then in comparison whereof, the greatest grief might not be thowght the
cheifest gain. Romans 8.18.
So esteemed S. Paul, saying: For I think, that the passions of this time, are
not condign to the glory to come, that shall be revealed in us.

So that all that ever you have, or might loose by such adversity, account it
more gaynefull, then had you putt it to greatest usury. Christ Jesus is our
assurance thereof, Mat. 19.29.
affirming; Every one that has left house, or brethren, or sisters, or
father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my names sake: shall
receive a hundred fowld, and shall possess life everlasting. Which S. Paul (as
every true Christian is bound) did believe when he said; Philip. 3.7.8.
The things that were gaynefull to me, those have I esteemed detriments. Yea
but I esteem all things disproffitable for the passing knowledge of Jesus my
lord: for whom I have made all things as detriment, and do esteem them as
dung, that I may gain Christ. So did the Hebrews believe them, to whom the
same Apostle gratulateth; The spoil of your own goods, Hebr. 10.34.35.
you took with joy, knowing that you have a better and permanent substance.
Do not therefore leese your confidence, which has a great remuneration.

Which being so true, as being affirmed by the truth it self: what merchants
aduenturing all their stock, what husband man spending all his seed, what
usurer exposing all his wealth, what gamester hazurding all his thrift, upon
uncertainties, but may exclame at us, if we think that stock lost, which is
laid out for so excessive gain; that seed perished, which is spent in so
fertile soil; that interest desperate, which is assured by more then bonds of
the staple; and that chance distrustful, which can not possibly mischance?
Iudie. 7.20.


4. Reg. 2.23.
Gedeon had been unwise; if for sparing earthen potts, he would have failed of
so great a victory. Elias had been madd, if he had accounted of the loss of
his cloak, when he was in the way to paradise. Genesis 39.12.
Joseph had been indiscret, if he had preferred his garment to his danger. 1.
Reg. 25.22.
Abigail had been destroyed, had she not prevented to utter ruin, with loss
of part of her substance. Therefore, to come to the eternal triumph, let us not
regard the destruction of our earthe-pitchers. To go more freely to heaven,
let us not stagger, to let fall from us our superfluity. To be undefiled from
sin, let us be content to escape naked. To redeem a greater and eternal
inconvenience, S. Bern. hom. in ecce nos reliquimus, etc.
let us abandon our corruptible commodities, and mammon of iniquity. For if
the former words of our Saluiour, as S. Bernard says, filled cloisters with
religious, and Deserts with Heremits, when they might have inioyed their
commodities peaciblie, and together follow the duties of their profession
toward God: what remiss slacknes, nay what distrust of Christ's promise, and
what disdain of his dignity and disloial impiety toward so divine a redeemer
and lord would it be, for all worldly respects together to abjure, yea or to
dissemble our belief and expectation?

Their searching priests in boxes, and casketts, does either intimat, that they
believe you can do more then God almighty, by seeming to imagine, that you can
convey a man's body into an unnatural streitnes, whereas Christ (say they) can
not dispose his body into a small host: or else that they are now more
faithful toward Christ's power to that effect, then they were before, and so
infer, that by his supernatural power, and providence priests may be hidd,
where natural reach could not conjecture. Which is not by them much
misconceaued, for some times; although at other times priests fall into their
snares. Yet says S. Paul to such surprised; Philip. 1.28.29.
Be ye in nothing terrified by the adversaries, which to them is cause of
perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God. For to you it is given for
Christ, not only that you believe in him, but also that you suffer for him.

And that always, as I said, they do not misconceaue, but that supernaturaly,
priests in our time, may be, and have been preserved; this relation following
assures. I have been present when diverse worshipful persons have corporaly
deposed the truth thereof: and the principal parties mentioned are yet living
with that reputation, that impudency it self may not except against them for
deserving any discredit.

In Dona moore, seven miles from Dublin in Irland, M. Richard Bealing Justice
of peace dwelled, when Catholics were persecuted under the lord Graye, about
the year of Christ 1580. He being an emine^t person, was accused (by Sir. R.
D. the blind knight, and blood sucker) that he harbored one Patrick Nigram a
priest, even then to be found in his house. Searchers being in all have sent
(for at that time James Fitz Maurice, Doctor Sanders, and diverse others, coming
into the contrie, had made the state jealous toward matters of religion) as they
environed the house, the Mother of God, our B. Lady appeared to Mistress
Bealing, saying: se^d insta^tly to Sir. Patrick Nigram, that he descend into
such a cave, or seller, and that removing a stone in such a corner, he further
descend by stairs, where they shall conduct him. Which she althoug once, or
twice admonished (supposing it to be a dream) neglected, till at leinth in
visible manner, with admirable beauty, and brightness, the immaculat Queen of
heaven objected her self, and renewed the commandment so districtly, that
she promptly procured it to be fullfilled. Nigram was a Godly priest of
unspotted life, and rare zeal, my quondam schole fellow, whom of purpose, I
visited upon his death bed, and from him self, besyd all others, received the
assurance of this declaration. When he removed the stone, he found in deed the
degrees, or stayres, of five, or six stepps, guiding him to a small neat
chamber, of some 20. foot long, and 12. foot broad, wherein a bed, and chair
was duly placed. He being bestowed in his cabinet, the searchers coming in,
with all diligent inquiry, sought every place of the house, every sellar, and
corner, but all in vain. After three days, frantic to be frustrated, and
weary to inquire without hope of their purpose, they departed. Nigram by
Mistress Bealing, being repealed out of his celle (wherein he had all that time,
abounded with spiritual delight) they covering again the place, never after by
any inquiry, were able to find so much as any show thereof remaining. Wherefore,
at leest some times, narrow, and unnatural places, may by Gods divine
providence, serve, to conceal miraculously what he would not have discovered.
Whereof innumerable like instances might, if brevity permitted, be alleged.

And as for the several courls to which you are drawn, it is noe meruail that
you have disdain thereof. For what have the innocent Catholics to answer in
the kings bench, where crimes against the crown, or common wealth, are
examined? what, in the starr chamber, where periuries, imposturs, slandres, are
punished; especialy their case being, not that they had perjured, but that they
would not periure? What in the common pleas, where controversies between parties
are decided, they commonly being so rightful, as rather not to claim their
due, then to have any thing due upon the^. What in the escheaker, where fynes,
towls, and tributs are exacted, they never being slack to any satisfaction of
that kind? What in the chawncerie, where profession is made to mitigat the
rigor of other courts, and to deminish their duties by conscionable moderation,
there ^^ing noe such matter intended toward afflicted Catholics, but rather the
contrary? And so of the residue.

In the mean time, the confort of the said afflicted Catholics, is, that all
these extremities are not only now known to Christ, but also by him were long
agone fortould, saying; They shall deliver you up in councels, Mar. 13.9.
and in synagogs shall you be beaten and you shall stand before presidents and
kings for my sake, for a testimony unto them. Since therefore he declares, Mat.
5.11.12.
that blessed are you when they shall revile you, and persecute you, and speak
all that naught is against you untruly for my sake, be gladd, and rejoice, for
your reward is very great in heaven: the least that you may do, in all the
courts, is to say with the Prophet David. I have announced thy justice in a
great congregation, Psalm. 39.10.11.
behold I will not debar my lips, o lord, thou know, thy justice I have
not hidd in my heart: I have spoken thy truth, and thy salvation, etc.

Afflicted Catholics. 6.
Infinite are the affronts that we sustain. If we walk abroad, or frequent our
neighbors; we are taxed to be to public, and popular. If we be retired, and
private at home; we are censured to plott secret machinations. If we be of
cherfull contenance; we are calumniated to be fedd with foreign hopes. If we be
mournful, we are condemned to be mal-contents. If we be frugal, and sparing;
we are misdeemed to detest their conversation. If we be lavish; we are maligned
for our abundance. If any malign and molest us, he is zealous. If any condole,
or compassionat our calamities, he is dangerous. If any would frustrat our
claims, debts, or other rights, it commonly suffices to object that we be
recusants.

The Author.
I Have noted in my accompagnying some times the army, that every nation as
they are more noble, do covet the vawntgard in danger of conflict, with such
honorable ambition that some time they break into contention for it. Such
emulation as I said before, is most commendable in Christ's quarrel, that every
one aspire to be of the most afflicted. You therefore without partiality
comparing your adversities with them of primative Christians, may find your
measure so mean, as that you are to complain rather of want, then of excess.

To all the particulars alleged, it may first in general be said, that as you
esteem not a reproach of one frantic, the misconceit of your pale to be read,
and your read to be pale, by one that is blind, or gogle eyes, or that
behouldeth through miscoloured spectacles: so should you rather compassionat
the frenzy of their error, and the blindness, or skewdnes, or miscoloured
spectacles, of their profession, then any way feel their censures during their
being so distemperatly deluded. You would have them judge right of you, their
judgment being perverted, toward Christ, his Church, his Sacraments, and all
his truth. Pray therefore with Anna mother to Samuel, repent with Magdalen, fast
with S. Johan Baptist, althoug Heli condemn you of dronkenes, Simeon the
Pharisee, of unworthiness to aueere Christ, and the Jews of having a devil.
Next S. Basil seems to comprise the principal of all your molestations in
these words. Mendacium sine timore effutitur, S. Basil, ep. 73.
veritas obscarata est. Et qui quidem accusantur, mox sine iudicio
condemnantur: qui vero accusant, sieve omni examinatione fidem inueniunt.
Forgerie without all fear is bruted abroad, truth is obscured. And they that
are in deed accused; are suddenly condemned without judgment: but they that
accuse, without all examination, are credited. But what is this to the
oppression of your constant predecessors? Eusebius. l. 5. c. 1.
who were as they wrote themselves, by public edict prohibited to enter into
any common house, booth, market, or to come abroad out of doors. S. Justin. in
Apologet. orat.
Every Christian (says S. Justin) being excluded from his possessions, and in
all the world none permitted to live in quietness. Which venerable Beda, in the
acts of the said Justin Martyr, thus relates.

Bedatom. 3. in Actis S. Iustini.
Non illis emendi quicquam aut vendendi copia:
nec ipsam haurire aquam dabatur licentia
antequam thurificarent detestandis idolis.
They could not buy ought to their need nor sell in public place: yea water
was to them denied unless with great disgrace to idols they gave frankensense by
impious offense.

Couradge therefore, my hearts, but not for my provocation, but for the glorious
Apostle S. Paul, who as in Doctrine he animated most nobly, so in life he was a
most heroical example, by his own testimony, 2. Tim. 47.
saying; I have fowght a good fight, I have consummated my course, I have kept
the faith. Concerning the rest there is laid up for me a crown of justice. He
I say, having laid before us the worthy combats of first believers, Hebr. 12.1.
thus infers; And therefore we also having so great a clowd of witneses put
upon us. laying away all weight, and sin that compasses us, by patience let
us run to the fight proposed unto us. Which being spoken by that worthy
instrument of Gods praise, it might seem presumption to add any thing thereto,
and an unworthy imagination of your zeal, to think any further incouradgment
to be requisite.

Afflicted Catholics. 7.
They not being able, through Gods mercy, to pervert any one of us, of any
account, to their profession; they at least for their own proffit can inuert,
and accommodat their profession, to our further incombrance. For besyd
imprisonments, fynes, bribes exacted in general, they extort 12. pens for every
one of competent age, that is absent from their Churches or sondayes* or holy
days. Now, the holy days which before they could not abide, that God might be
glorified by, and in them, they urge now to be observed, that them selves might
be advanced by them.

The Author.
THe variable application of their Doctrine, Goodman lib. how we ovvght to
obey superior Magistrates.
is deservedly by you observed. When it was for their purpose, as in Queen
Mary's days, they found it unlawful, that women should reign: but in Q.
Elizabeth's days, that unlawfulness was lawful. Knox in (...) appellation. Page
36. Conference at Ha^pton. Page 81.
In scotland they found it lawful, that the Queen dowager grand mother to his
Majesty might be supreme head of tne Church: but when they multiplied, and
Catholics were suppressed, even by testimony of his Majesty, they not only
changed their Doctrine, but also violently deprived her of all liberty to use
even in a private chamber her conscience. So they incroched into Geneua, as
appears in treating of puritancie. Your Challenor, could not first allow any
marriage of Ministers: but now, the spirit has so moved him, that after once
being married, and plentifully multiplied, he has taken a second wife. Did not
puritans by their own confession to their immortal infamy dispense with their
consciences, as they write them elues; in respect of times to subscrib to the
book, In supplication to his Majesty in Apr. 1603. some upon protestation,
some upon exposition given them, some with condition, rather then the Church
should be deprived of their labor, and Ministry
(it had been truer to have said, rather then their riotous lives should have
been deprived of fatt benifices, and plenty) yet now we to the number of more
then a thousand, etc. Do forsooth find great enormities, and abuses in that
whereto we had before subscribed. But there needs noe further evidence, when we
have, fatentem reum, the guilty acknowledging (as now for former, and they the
meanest respects, that they have chopped, and changed unlawful to be lawful,
in their profession) his crime: Otherwise this theme might worthelie be more
amply prosecuted.

To come to the only point by you propownded, Synod Dord. an. 1574. deer. 48.
of feasts they have been in deed most variable. First, in their Synod of
Dordrect, in the 48. decree, is said; conclusum est solam diem dominicam
seruandam esse. It is concluded the only sunday should be kept. Apud Cornel.
Schulting l. 9. hierarchy Anacriseos.
A second Synod of theirs, allows only, above sondayes, the feast of the
nativity. Another at Midleburg, Synod Midleb. an. 1581. decret. 51.
in the 51. decree permits, the Nativity, and the Ascension. Another in the
Electoral Palatinat, adds the two mondayes next Easter, and whitsontyde. And
in the foresaid supplication of puritans to his Majesty, Supplication to his
Majesty an. 1603.
they again disalow all others, excepting fondayes. For they crave; that the
lords day be not profaned, and the rest not so strictly urged. Where upon the
answer of Oxford, inquireth; The avvnsvver of Oxford page 13.
would they have men upon holy days go to plough, or ^art, as some of their
humor have caused their servants to do, on the very feast of Christ's
Nativity? Survey of the book of common prayer. Page 65.
And this is the determinat Doctrine of their late survey. Wherein first they
declare that Ministers proclaming any other holy days, then the days of the
lord, do communicate the especial honor of the lord to another; secondly, that
thereto they have no warrant of the word.

Page 66.
Thirdly, in the 52. Quere, or demand, they inquyre whether any holy day on
fixed time, though only, and immediately unto the lord, may be sanctified, so as
at noe time thereof any work may be done. Fowerthly, Page 67.
they conclud, that it is all one to make any holy day without Gods express
appointment, as to violat, any day holy by his appointement: yea that it is as
great idolatry, as it was in the Israelits, Page 68.
to have set up a Calfe. Fifthly, that if the translation of the sabbath into
sunday be not justified by scriptures, it is not lawful for Christians to
sanctify it. For the justifying whereof, these only to their seeming are the
principal fundations. Joan. 20.19.26.
First, that Christ appeared to his disciples, the doors being shutt, and said
peace be unto them. Secondly they cite the first chapter of the Acts, and 13.
verse; wherein I find noe mention of sunday, or reason of sanctifying it. For
therein is only related, how the Apostles went up to a chamber, 1. Cor. 16.2.
and did abide therein. Thirdly, because S. Paul wished collections of alms,
for the necessity of the poor, to be collected on the first day (which is our
sunday) of, or after the sabbath.

Behowld these feoble reasons are by them exhibited, that way be made to take
even the sondayes away; noe impediment thereto being specified in any of these
reasons. And so (as appears in the examination of the creed) they behaved
them selves toward the divine mystery of the Trinity, and Unity, founding it
on the weakest proofs it had of scripture, (as if there were no others) and in
the end, Stancar. lib. de Trinit. and Mediatore. Schlusselb. de Theologia Call.
showing those proofs, to be noe proofs of any force, and inferring thereupon,
that Christ and the Holy Ghost, were not coequal to the father. Which
sacrilegious impiety, is with all heynousces charged on Calvin, by his own
brethren Stancharus, and Schlusselburg. And for their proof they cite Genes.
3.15.22. Genes. 18.2.3. Genesis 19.24. Number. 24.17. Isa. 4.2. Isa. 43.24. Isa.
50.4.6. Isa. 53.8. Isa. 63.1. Ierem. 11.19. Ierem. 31.22. Dan. 2.34. Osc.
13.14. Joan. 10.30. Joan. 14.1.28. In all which places, and many more, what
soever proof is by the ancient fathers brought for Christ's eternity, or
divinity; he deflecteth into a contrary sense, or disgraceth them for
manifould insufficiency. Contrariwyse, he seeming to find, Vide Synephim P.
Hadriani ^ang^. l. 3. c. 6. page 306.
but one only argument for Christ's eternity; which is, that God by his people
wowld be termed father, and consequently must have a son; (whereby not
withstanding no eternity of Christ is gathered, at least before Gods people
were created) this a gument being left to the decision of the first that would
ponder it, Calvin thereby insinuated, that the eternity of Christ, had noe
better proof. And so as I said, is it the intention of Puritans, to found the
sanctification of any holy day whatsoever upon arguments of noe worth, that in
the end they may be thought to be without all lawful allowance.

By the premises you may behold, that your puritan Ministers (such as almost
only are among you) thinking in all their Synods, and other resolutions, noe
such holy days to be, yet for 12. pens of each parishioner, their mercenarian
consciences, to be able to find all their Synods, and resolutions false, which
shows them in the mean time, to have perfect liberty of such conscience, as
may strive with the rain bow for variety. Therefore they are sufficiently
known to blow could and heat from one mouth. Which is so notorious in all the
reformed brood, that them selves write; aliquos religionem flectere, fingere
ac refingere, ad nutum and cupiditates Dominorum vel caetuum, quorum gratiam
pluris faciunt quam gloriam Dei. Eberus prafat. in Comment. Philippi super
Epist. ad Cor.
Some of their preachers to inflect, turn and return their religion, to the
will and wantones of their lords, and congregations, whose contentment they
search more then the glory of God. This, Eberus, next successor to Philipp
Melancthon, expounding his commentaries upon S. Paul, writes of the
brotherhod. Whom Peucer (son in law to the said Melancthon) testifies,
Poucer contra Paula^ Crelliu^, in Articulis Torgensibas an. 1574
to have been himself, and Mayor, so mutable; as, vno momento mutati,
repudiato eo quod pro^certo and vero habuerunt, amplexarentur contrarium; that
in an instant quyte changed, rejecting that which even now they held for
certain, they would auerr the contrary. So that from first to last, their
variable doctrine according to every time; and commodity, being detected; you
may have consolation, that these are your infesters, to whose profession, it
can not but be a credit to be repugnant.

Afflicted Catholics. 8.
Of the few that have shronken in this trial, either by Gods judgment, or by
some other secret cause, they are little respected, and less advanced, by the
adverse party. And in them selves, so great a remorse is observed, that nether
in contenance, nor in heart, can they be confortable. VVherby, very many have
taken occasion to remain more setledly in their profession.

The Author.
IT argues a great wisdom in his Majesty, and the state, not to esteem our
Cameleon compagnions, when they become false to their religion. Theod. l. 5. c.
38.
For as the glorious Hormisda said, to the K of Persia: Tripart. l. 10. c. 30.
Sir, your Majesty deceaueth him self in affecting our renouncing Christian
religion. For if we become treacherous toward God, we shall never be loial
toward man: Niceph. l. 14. c. 20.
So ever will it be experienced in all other Apostats, and Gnatonical
sycophants of Kings, whom they will approve; Ennius.
Adulatores qui cum fortuna mutant fidem, quique siccatis dolijs diffugiunt,
the flattrers who (as Ennius said) with fortune do change their fidelity,
retiring when the barells are empty.

Constantius a most famous Emperor, and father of Constantin the great, Arrian.
lib. 2. in Alexandrum.
considering these flexible parasits, to be as Arrianus affirms, aeternam
regibus perniciem; an everlasting destruction to kings; as feeding their ears
with lies, their eyes with hypocrisy, and their understanding with error: he
to be free from them used this most industrious, and prudent stratagem. Whereas
he only in mind favored Christians, it never being known but that he
worshipped idols, as all Emperors before him used; he summoned all Christians of
his Court, Eusebius. l. 6. c. 32.33. l. 7. c. 10.
to his presence. To whom they being assembled, he said. Whereas many of you, or
all, do despise the worshipp of our Gods, and follow Christ; this is now to
advertise you, that either you must renownce your Christianity, or depart from
my court. Take therefore in this place your choice, either to accommodat your
selves to my appointments, and then separat your selves on this side: or
persisting obstinatly in your profession, remove your selves to that side.
Diverse renownced suddenly and shamlesly their religion. But the most of them
present, constantly professed their fixed resolution, to be, rather not only to
loose the Emperors favors, but also their very lives, then to abjure their
Saluiour. Which being perceived by the Emperor; converting him self to the
Apostats, he said: you wretched Miscreants, that have for uncertain expectation
of base fortunes, falsified your faith to God, I can never but expect
faythlesnes from you toward me. And therefore instantly avoid out of my sight,
and compagnie. Contrarywyse you others remaining loial toward your God, I elect
you as most trustfull about my person, and fittest to be (which afterward he
fullfilled toward them) placed in all offices of trust in the common wealth.

What would this most judicious Emperor have done, if he should be hold so
many Catholics, with Clisophus to counterfeit lammes, because K. Philipp of
Macedonie limped with Carisophus to offer his face to K. Dyonisius his
spitting, protesting that his spetle seemed to him as sweet as honey? With
Lelius to offer to Caesar, to form, and deforme him self, to every fashion,
and fancy; and for his sake to be ready, to tear his brothers breast, to out
his fathers throat, to murder his wife; yea Dispoliare Deos, ignemque
immittere templis.
God to dispoile, and temples all to burn? Iucan.



Doubtless he would disclaim and disauow them, for being of his cowrt, or with
whom any honest man might covet conversation. So would Frederick the third
Emperor, who being demanded of all his fauorits whom he most affected, did
answer; S. Greg. l. 1. ep. 33.
such as fear me no more then God almighty. According to which, said S.
Gregory the great; he will be only faithful to thee, that loves thee more
then thy gifts. Whereas therefore, says the wise man; wickedness is timorous, Sap.
17.11.
and gives testimony of condemnation, for always the troubled conscience
forthinketh cruel matters; whereas such fickle, and faithles friends do find, as
the prophet says, that they had putt a lie for their hope; Isa. 28.15.
whereas they approve the certainty of holy Jobs saying; Job. 3.13.
The hope of hypocrites shall decay, and of Salomons; The hope of wickedmen
shall perish: Prou. 10.28.
can you blame them to be of heuie heart, and contenance? Can you blame him to
be heuie, pensive, and almost frantic, whose state the foresaid holy Job thus
specifieth? Job. 15.
The sownd of terror is always in his ears, and although it be in time of
peace, yet he always expects some treason against him. He believes not that
he can rise again from darkness to light, expecting on every side the sword
to come upon him. When he sits down to eat he remembers that the day of
darkness is ready at hand for him, tribulation terrifieth him, and anguish of
mind inuironeth him, even as a king is environed with soldiers when he goes
to war.

S. Chrysostom aueareth this description, saying of one having such hellish
conscience. S. Chrysostom. hom. 8. ad pop. Antioch.
His accuser he always carries about with him: and as he can not fly from him
self, so nether can he escape from the inward accuser, by which he is
continualy persecuted, and scourged with incurable ierkes. O miserable plight,
whereby that endless worm, does butcher, and gnaw the mind.

Qualiter in Scythica relegatus rupe Prometheus
assiduam nimio gutture pauit auem.
Martial. l. 1.
As loves owgly gorged bird, in endless need, on Prometh bownd on Caucas rock,
does always feed.

Not so the quiet conscience, not so. The secure conscience, says the holy
Ghost, Prou. 15.15. 1 Cor. 1.12. 1. Joan. 3.21.
is as a continual banquet. The testimony of our conscience is our glory.
When our conscience does not reprehend us, we have confidence with God. As if
it should be said: when security of conscience wants; in liew of banquet,
their is a continual loathsomnes. When the testimony of conscience is not
good, but reproachful; for glory is to be expected confusion. When the
conscience does not defend, but reprehend; for confidence incrocheth despair.
According to which says S. Augustine. S. Aug. in praefat. Ps. 31. and in Ps. 34.
He whom the guilt of conscience does pinch, retireth back from hope, and
hops nothing but despair.

Blessed therefore they whom other men's harms do make, to be ware, and who by the
anguish of these Cains, by the perplexity of these Antioches, and by the
despair of these Iudaes, do eschew the guilt of conscience, by which anguish
of mind, perplexity of thoughts, and despair of salvation are engendered.

Afflicted Catholics. 9.
We can not conceive by what means it happens, but true we find it, that
such is the deceit of our Impugners, as they preoccupat so the ears of his
Majesty that our informations, our agents, and our suffrance can not attain
to his knowledge. Nether are any found that dare repair to declare our
Calamities to him, our former Agents being imprisoned, and not daring to auowch
the answer, that his Majesty gave unto us upon our suit of indemnitie for our
being Catholics: which was (say they) that we should not be molested (if we
would be loial) for our ancient unviolated profession. We are assured
manifoudly, that nether his Majesty allows the hundred part of our vexation,
nor his Deputy, or the chief of his Cowncell, but only that it is inflicted
by hongrie vpstarts, (and in particular, the President of Monster, the chief
Justice, etc) who as they impiously molest us, so they slanderously suggest by
all lykelihood all misconceits against us, and as we said before, thereby prevent
all our declarations of their persecuting us, that either they are not heard, or
at least not believed.

The Author.
I Am the apter to believe, and to answer you, that you remove from his
Majesty, his Deputies, and the chief of his state, the rigor that is followed
against you. His word to me is an assured warrant, contained in his speech to
the Parliament, that he would not be a Roboam to Catholics, or on that would
molest them more then his predecessor. For the word of a king, 3. Peg. 12.14.
Isocrat. orat. 1.
said Isocrates to K. Nicocles, is more to be trusted then the oath of another.
Which the rather I am persuaded of, that in his roial breast (wherein is
treasured the purest blood of Princely honor, derived from all, or the most
principal Potentats of Christendom) nothing but mildnes can by all lykelyhod
be entertained.

I lately propounded to you a worthy fact of the Emperor Constantius. Now
understand as commendable a deed of Constantine the great his son. He being
informed of exceeding abuses of his under officers, did proclaim, that all of
what degree soever that might evidently prove any injury, extorsion, C.
Theod. l. 9. t. 1. de accus. Sigib. l. 3. de occid. Imp.
or offense of his judges, familiars, or servants, should confidently inform
against them; he obligeing him self both to punish the delinquents, and
liberaly to reward the informers. Which if kings of these times would imitat;
our Balaams, Architofels, Amans, Herodiases, and such other as abuse Princes
ears by false aduises, and accusations; and solicit the destruction, or
disturbance of their subjects, by malignant, and ambitious suggestions, would
be avoided. Our Crommells, treacherously cownterfetting their Princes letters,
for their own private lucre, would be excluded. 2. Reg. 10.3.
No messengers to K. Hanon would be violated. No bribs, noe extorsions, noe
villainy, would be accepted, or committed. Breefely kings without all clouds,
or mists, as from a height, like the son, among planets, would reign, and
regent, and all the under sphers would keep their regular motion, and all by
them governed their tranquillity, and due constitution.

If your President of Mownster, and your chief Justice (as you mistrust) do
exceed their commission; by being injurious, so did Pedro de las vinnas, under
Frederick the second, whom he did not only advise, but direct. But for abusing
his said authority, at leinth his eyes were plucked out of his head. Peter
Broca governed under Philipp son to S. Jews, or rather some time over him.
And he for his insolence during his authority, was hanged. Jews of Luxenburg
Earl of S. Paul, and great constable of France, ruled, and in a manner reigned.
But for abusing his Princes favors, he lost his head. To come homeward,
Cardinal Wolsee, Duke of somerset, lord Cromuel, Earl of Essexe, in England;
Earl Moray, and Earl Morton in Scotland; in France, the Prince of Conde, the
Admiral Colignie, the lord Montgomerie; In Flanders, the Prince of Orange, the
Count Egmond, the Count de Horn, the lord Lumey, etc. What brought them to
utter ruin, and miserable death, but want of moderation in their dignity, or
irreligion against Catholics? I say nothing how Drurie, Wallop, Sir Ralph
Laney, Heth, etc. partly died suddenly, partly were so buried as they were not
found to be buried, or at least were so intolerably stinking as they were cast
suddenly away. But this matter some time is to be discussed particularly, and
till then to be deferred.

As for your Agents imprisonment, it is altogether lykely that it was without
his Majesty's notice. Malice, and machiuillian policy, dare often to attempt
a greater injury then that. Nicep. hist. l. 13. c. 33.
When Pope Innocent in the cause of S. Chrysostom, sent diverse Bishops, and
others, as his legates to the Emperor Arcadius: Eudoxia wife to Arcadius, with
her adherents, caused them secretly to be apprehended, imprisoned, reviled,
racked, and spoiled of all they had; and when they did not promptly deliver
their leters, one Valerius violently wreasted them away, breaking thereby a
thumb of one of the Bishops. Could not then your Agents, unknown to the king,
as all the former sacrilege was unknown to Arcadius, by some of Eudoxias
spirit, be violated?

They whom you affirm to be timorous to agent for their contrie, let them
blush thereat, remembering Hester, and Judith, although women, yet for their
common wealth, audacious. Pericula, labores, Cic. lib. 1. de finibus.
dolorem etiam, Optimus quisque pro patria and pro suis suscipit; Every honest
man, says Cicero, undertakes dangers, trauail, and vexation for his contrie,
and friends. Let them imitat the noble General Terentius. Theod. l. 4 cap. 28.
He having subdued gloriously the Armenians, and been often victorious; the
Emperor Valens admonished him to pretend some great matter in recompense of his
labors. Why then quoth Terentius, since it pleases your Majesty to respect my
pains, and of your benignity to profre we my most desire contentment: I crave
the contents expressed in this supplication. Therein was only contained, that
the Catholics might inioye one only Church in Antioch. The Emperor offended
with that demand, broke the supplication, aduising Terentius to require some
more important dignity. No said Terentius, gathering the pieces of his
supplication, I accept these broken pieces, of your Majesty for my full
satisfaction. For, fortes viri non tam praemia sequi solent recte factorum,
Cic. orat. pro Milo.
quam ipsa recte facta; Worthy men do not so much follow, (said the late
alleged Cicero) the rewards of their good deserts, as the deserts them selves.

Whereas you grudge at the baseness of your Impugners; as I said before, such are
fittest to impugn religion, as are of basest quality. It is now more then 10.
years, since reformations began: in all which time if in every place where
they prevailed, none but the basest are found that would be of the Ministry,
and none that would match with these, how Euangelical so ever they, and how
eminent soever these, but the basest: would you have others to be their
promotors, or catchpowls, but of the basest? Yet I will not deny, but cum
omnis seruitus sit misera, Cic. in Philip. ^.
tum vero intolerabile est seruire impuro, impudico, etc. Whereas every
servitude is miserable, it is most intolerable to be subjected, to one base,
and shameless. As the late Earl of Essex, a man of great gifts, if he had not
wanted moderation, indorsed upon a petition presented to him, to obtain the
synes of certain recusants; Turpe lucrum; a base gain: so will fame register
to posterity, over the remembrance of your molesters; Turpe propositum; a base
occupation.

In the mean time feed your memory with the worthy president laid before you,
by the thrice noble Sames. Tripart. l. 10. c. 32.
He being of great wealth, as besyd other riches having in his retinue a
hundred slaves; the promotors, in hope of the foresaid base gain, accused him
to the Emperor, that he was, as in deed he was, a very fervent Christian. The
Emperor examining him, and in vain laboring instantly to pervert him, said at
leinth: Sames thou for thy obstinacy, thy wife, and all thy whole retinue,
from hence forth shall serve in all slavery, the most abject of all thy
slaves: whom having singled out of the whole crew, he made absolute lord of
Sames, and all his estate. Judge your selves, what servitude, what unspeakable
drudgerie, Claudian. 2. entrop.
what misery, he sustained under that imperious vpstart. For, nec bellua
tetrior vlla est, quam serui rabies in libera colla furentis. No brutal beast
his fury less does slack, then Caitiue crept, upon, his masters back. S.
Victor. lib. 1. de persec. Vandalica.
The like hapened to Saturus lord steward of Hunerick K. of Vandals. His king
not being able by any procurement to pervert him from his profession, at leinth
deprived him of all his estate, and gave his very wife to the meanest of his
grooms. I may then repeat again the words of S. Paul. Hebr. 12.1.
And therefore we having so great a cloud of witneses put upon us, laying away
all weight and sin that compasses us, by patience let us run to the fight
proposed unto us; Whether it be with the loss of our lives, or that which is
more, of our liberties by subjection to slaves.

Afflicted Catholics. 10.
Their diligence in preaching is redubled, but to their small proffit. For
ordinarily in every sermon by some on thing or other, they condemn some part
of their former profession. So that for one that commends any sermon, three
of them selves do discommend it. Truly among us they were never less
esteemed, or in less possibility to purchase any to their religion, they are
so impious toward God, and dishonest toward man: in so much as all most honest,
do loath to conuers with them, their words from their thoughts, and their
works from their words being always repugnant.

The Author.
OF their preaching, and of what they preach now, we need not delate,
considering they them selves, as I have else where showed, have not fully
determined what they may preach. When they are consenting upon their doctrine,
(which is for ever impossible) then will it be fit time that we discuss the
subject of their sermons, and not before. As long as they blundred fables of
Friars and Nunns, of cisterns full of childrens heads, of Pope Joan, of papal
pomp, of their own fictions; it was a sport to behold, with how devout
mirth they would all, Page 161.
without danger of after recknings, return to their lodgings. But now they
must make repetitions of their lessons, and as their late survey complains
some times for their folly; Vide superius resp. ad 2. quaerimoniam.
a hundred and thirten be together debarred from preaching. A happy
prohibition; it being known the place instantly to become most unhappy wherein
they have audience. Witness the book of dangerous positions, the puritans to
have wrought more mischief in Geneua in 30. years then the Pope of Rome in
five hundred. Page 30. Page 95.
So that now Castalio, a brother, doubted not to say of Geneua, and the
Ministers thereof: Beza in libro quem sycopha^tem inscripsit. Colloq. Mompelg. a
Smidelino edit. 1588. Page 64.
O Babylon, Babylon! O Aegypte! O sacrificuli Aegypti, and Babilonici
incantatores! O Babylon, Babylon! O priests of Egypt, and Inchanters of
Babylon. Another testimony is out of Smidelin, saying: qui mendacium, and
perturbationem rerum publicarum and Ecclesiae oderunt, sibi ab hoc spiritu
caueant qui mendax est and homicida. They that hate lies, and disturbance of
Provinces and the Church let them eschew this spirit which is a lier, and
murderer. Io. 8.

Others of their own do reproach their Ministers, that they omitting their
inuectiues against us have noe matter more frequent in sermons then love matters.
And that in such abundance, VVigand. de bonis and malis Germ. malo. 6.
as Wigandus affirms one of them to have cited above 20. verses out of Ouids
book of the art o^ ^oue. Hamilton is to be perused of this matter. I will add
one approbation, Vide Hamilt. de calu. confusd. l. 2. c. 29.
of the effects thereby insueing reported by Cochle, of such enormitie, that in
verity my mind grudged to read it, and much more to relate it. Cochleus in
Septicipiti Luthero. c. ^9.
In morem canum public in vijs, and plateis, contra omnem pudorem foeminas and
adultas virgins obuiantibus sibi casu viris and inuenibus dixisse, veni,
tauriza me; women and mayds in public ways as bitches to encounter men, and
to say, come, and bull me, etc.

But besyd that which we have said before to the second article, or complaint,
and else where, let it now suffice to allege one only general declaration,
out of Henry Bullinger a principal brother. Porro, ex huiusmodi concionibus
simplex and misera plebs exiguam vtilitatem percipit. Neque enim ex his vt
oportebat aedificant and confirmant fidem, Henr. Bullinger in proem.
adhortationis ad Ministros verbi ad mutua concordia^.
aut peccata agnoscunt, aut fugiunt vitamque emendant; sed magis turbantur and
implicantur, and contumaces ac deteriores fiunt, sic vt demum dicant se
ignorare quid tandem sibi credendum sit, etc. Finaly, by these sermons (of
contentious Ministers,) the simple and miserable people gathers small
proffit. For they do not (as is were meet) thereby edify or strengthen their
belief, or acknowledge their sins, or eschew them, or amend their life; but
rather they are troubled, and perplexed, and become stubbern, and are made
worse, so as they affirm not to know what at leinth is to be believed by
them, etc. Wherefore I conclude, without further manifestation of their impious
preachings, the rather that to every ons knowledge their dealing being clear,
and these testimonies alleged being both perspicuous, and insuspitious,
nothing else needs to be in this matter informed.

The conclusion of the Author. 12.
FOR the grownd of all consolation in this point, there is nothing to be
accounted more confortable then as I showed before, by persecution that we are
disposed toward the highest estate in heaven. The words are great, yet true by
the testimony of our saluiour, Luc. 22.28.
saying; you are they that have remained with me in my tentations, and I
dispose to you as my father disposed to me, a kingdom. To which effect, in the
answer to the first article of your complaints, I have showed, that without
suffering for Christ, we can not reign with Christ: without lawful combat, we
can not be crowned: without professing Christ before men, we shall not be
professed by Christ before God. In the answer to the second, I have confirmed,
that by persecution, we are proved to be acceptable to God, to live Godly, and
to be his children and not bastards. And so in every of the rest, I have to my
power manifested, that it is the greatest favor of Christ, the prerogative of
his Beniamins, the title to sit at his side, the liuerie of his fauorits, and
the narrow pathe through which has entered in to heaven him self and all his
saints. Are not these consolations to the most desolat, and dastard mind what
calamity soever it does endure?

A second impulsion is the ardent zele, in other manner of tribulation, of our
predecessors the primative Christians. In respect of whom I may use the words
of S. Paul; Hebr. 12.3.4.
Be not wearied, fainting in your mynds. For you have not yet resisted unto
blood. Such was their feruor, and forwardnes, that each of them learned of the
same B. Apostle to say.

Afflicted Catholics. 11.
They have lately (as it seems) fallen in dislyke with their oath of
Supremacy, for which so much blood was shed, and so many Catholics
impouerished, and imprisoned: and now they have made a new oath, full of
vehement and dreadful words, (as, I do from my heart abhor detest, and
abjure, etc.) and that oath also is suddenly exchanged into a another, in deed
of more temperat style, but we know not, if of different substance. These
oaths they urge us to swear, our loialtie and subjection being never
violated, and we intending never to violat them, and having besyd occasion not
to swear any of their oaths, considering that the very correction of them in
so short space, does argue a condemnation of the former by the later, and
consequently of them that had sworn the former, as also may shortly happen,
toward them that will swear the later.

The Author.
IT is their manner universally to be every day changeable, as new advantage
appears, or show of inconvenience arises. Of Eberus, and Mayor, thus writes
Gaspar Peucer, son in law to Melancthon: Vno momento mutati, Contra Paul.
Cre^iu^ in Artic. Torgensibus anno 1574.
repudiato eo quod pro vero and certo habuerunt, amplexi sunt contrarium; In
one moment variable, that which now they held true and assured being rejected,
they embraced the contrary. Of other Brethren, Eberus informs; Religionem
flectere, fingere as refingere ad nutum vel cupiditates Dominorum, vel caetuum;
Them to ^rest, Eberus praef. in Comment. Philippie in ep. ad Cor.
turn, and return their religion to the will, and wantones, of their lords,
and Congregations. Domestical witneses are most desyrable, and pertinent, such
as in this point D. Dove can not be denied to be: D. Dove persvvasion page 31.
whose words to this effect, are carefully to be considered. When the Mass
(says he) was first put down, K. Henry had his English lyturgie, and that was
judged absolute without exception. But when K. Edward came to the crown, that
was condemned, and another in the place, which Peter Martyr and Bucer did
approve, as very consonant to Gods word. When Q. Elizabeth began her reign,
the former was judged to be full of imperfections, and a new was devised and
allowed by consent of the clergy. But about the middle of her reign, we grew
weary of that book, and great means have been wrowght to abandon that and
establish another: which although it was not obtained, yet do we, at the least
at every change of Prince, change our book of common prayers, we be so wanton
that we know not what we would have.

This as much as D. Dove might in wisdom affirm, and as little as in truth and
plain dealing might be affirmed. I will auerre his testimony but with one
suffrage out of the late survey of the book of common prayer, whereby the book
of Communion aforsayd, now lastly in his Majesty's reign, (yea after the
conference at Hampton, Ian. 14. 1603.) corrected, Survey of the Book of common
prayer. Page 159. 160.
is demonstrated to be most deficient, and faulty; which confirms the speech
of D. Dove before alleged: in that survey I say, is said; The late Archbishope
of Canturburie, as is credibly reported, took such a grief, when the
Communion Book should be altered, discovered by these or like words, Good
lord? When shall we know what to trust unto, Desperate perplexity of the
protestants.
that he presently fell into his palsy, was carried from the Court, and died
shortly after Let D. Dove call this mutabilitie, Wantones, in not knowing what
they would have; let the Puritan Survey, impute it to desperate perplexity, in
not yet knowing what they shall trust to; how soever it be acknowledged, it is
too apparent, in their books, and oaths, as impudency it self can not deny
it, that in their whole profession noe stabilitie, or stidfastnes can be
observed.

As for the oath of supremacy, you have well noted it, to have been a bloody,
and ruinous oath to Catholics, and should have been so still if diverse of
their own profession had not, as after shall appear, been entangled within
the compass of denying it. Manifould acts of Parliament making it high treason
to deny the said supremacy even to a woman, Parlam. An. 1. Eliz. c. 1. An. 5.
Eliz. c. 1. An. 13. Eliz. c. 1. etc.
Holinshed An. 1. Eliz. page 1802. 1569. etc. Stous. page 1192. etc.
manifould relations of their own approved Chronicles, and manifould
inditments of Catholics executed in most butcher like manner for such denial,
to the knowledge, and memory of millions yet living; are so many disprouing
Daniels to the impious Judges that deny any Catholics to have been executed or
trubled for matter of conscience, or otherwise then for treasons. But I omit to
unfold more concerning this oath of supremacy, it being now suppressed, that
I may more amply discuss the other oaths by you mentioned, they being in
prime.

First therefore you may understand, that his holiness, has by two Breues utterly
condemned the said oaths, Paul. 5. 1. October. 1606. and 1. September. 1607.
as being grievously wrongful to Gods honor, opposite to the Catholic faith,
and hurtful to the salvation of our sowles. Against two which Breues, and a
leter of Bellarmin to the same effect, there is published in London by public
authority an Apology, An. 1607.
entitled; Triplici nodo, triplex cuneus; which is to say, a threefowld wedge
to a threefowld knott: in which the Apologist indeuoureth to justify the said
oaths, and to refute the Pope, and Bellarmin. This book I received after
having otherwise answered this point of your leter, not knowing whither this
present answer may in time come to the remote printer: so that such
incertaintie, and the haste thereto annected, and my other employments will
procure this discussion to want some perfection, and exactnes, which otherwise
the subject, and my goodwill, would require.

Holinshed in Rich. 1. and 2. page 476. and page 1005.
Secondly understand, that every K. of England (as in like manner all other
Christian kings from about the time of S. Gregory the great) at his
coronation; does swear, in particular to maintain the Catholic faith, and to
defend all privileges, and liberties, granted to the Church, and clergy, that
ever were granted from K. Edward the confessor to that time: and toward the
laity, or all other subjects, that he will administer to them equity, and
will abrogate all unjust laws, and customs. Which ceremony finished, the
Archbishop of Canturburie lowdly inquyreth of the people, will they submitt
them selves to such Prince? Whereto they condiscending, he anointeth him,
girdeth him with the sword, crowns him, puts a ring on his finger,
betrouthing him to the common wealth, and gives a scepter into his hand,
adiuring him by God omnipotent, that he undertake not that charge, Sleidan. l.
1. an. 1519. Alex. ab Ori^ho in Chim. fol. 106. 288. Mass^nus in vita Henr. 1.
Conc. Fol. 6. c. 3.
without intention to accomplish such plighted protestation. Conformable in all
respects is the oath of the Emperor, K. of France, and the residue: with this
particularitie in the K. of Spain, from the year 686. that he swears never
to suffer any heretic to abide in his realms. And this oath for greater
solemnity, was given in writing, and placed upon the altar, as of certain
Emperors of Greece Zonaras, Zonar to. 3. in Anast. Dicoro, and Michale^
R^ngabe. V.S. Th. Cantuar.
and others intimate; and of the K. of England appears by this speech of S.
Thomas of Canturburie, to K. Henry the second; Be myndfull of your protestation
which you made, and putt upon the altar at westmonaster, to defend the liberty
of the Church, etc. And for more manifestation of their settled resolution to
fulfill their promise; the K. at least of Polonia, declares, after the
coronation ended; Bodin de la rep. l. 2. c. 9.
Si (quod absit) iuramentum meum violauero, nullam nobis incolae regni
obedientiam debebunt; if (which God forsend) I shall violat my oath, the
inhabitants of the realm shall owe me noe obedience. Which is according to the
rule of law; Nec obstringitur quis iuramento ad implendum quod iurauit, si ab
alia part non impletur cuius respectu praebuit iuramentum. Nether is any bound
to his oath, Decret. Greg. tit. 24. c. 21. and 29.
if the other party fail in his obligation.

Thirdly understand, that at the Princes will, Conc. Later. c. 43. and habetur
in c. Nimis. De iureiurando.
there is a reciprocat oath due to him by his lay subjects: for them of the
clergy are exempted by the general Lateran council. And this some time they
make by them selves, some time by their nobles, and magistrates, some times
rather by some real sign (of howlding up hands, Vide vvitichindum. lib. 1.
Gest. Saxon. in fine. anno 936.
throwing up hatts, acclamations, etc.) then by any verbal speech. How soever
it be made, or not made, the law of God, and man, does determine, and resolve,
that allegiance, subjection, loialtie (which in any equity may be demanded) is
due and belonging to Princes, not only for policy, but also for conscience.
This is, and ever has been, Romans 13.5.
the Doctrine of Catholics. Not so of our adversaries, as is manifested in
treating of Puritan Plotts, they maligning all Monarchy, and admitting only
their co^sistorian discipline, which says his Majesty agrees with a
Monarchy no better then the devil with God, Hampt. Conference page 79. 4. 20.
as whereby Kings are kept, without state and honor. Which is confirmed by the
puritanical Synod, at Cabillon in these words; Exterminandos esse e rep.
Christiana tres illas orbis terrarum pestes, and quisquilias, Prateol. in
Alphab. l. 2. c. 22.
Pontificiam Ecclesiam, nobilitatem, and iuris prudentiam; Those three plagues,
and chipps of the world, the pontificial church, Nobility, and law, to be
banished out of the Christian common wealth. Conformably to which says Beza;
Tota illa priore hominum and principum generatione sublata; Beza in ep. theol.
37. 40.
That he hoped in God to see a new France, the whole generation of former
people and Princes being abolished. So that according to Puritans, we should
have noe loialtie, subjection, or subordination to Princes, as not being to
have any Princes that might command.

Fowrthly understand, that our formentioned Apologist, for the oath of
allegiance, producing needlessly many canons especialy out of the cowncells of
Tolledo, to certify the duty of subjects toward the Prince, did heedfully
avoid the most pertinent instruction to the matter, in the said cowncells,
although it lay in his way, in these words of S. Isidor. The oath that
wickedly and unadvisedly is made, is not to be observed. Conc. Tollet. 8. c. 2.
S. Isidor. in 22. q. 4. Non est.
In unlawful promises revoke thy word. Change the purpose vowed dishonestly.
It is a wicked obligation, that by wickedness is kept. For by this Doctrine we
might have learned, either not to swear any impious oath, or what by impiety
of weaklings had been sworn, by piety and religion to be broken. Which had
answered the most of his exceptions, against the two Breues of the Pope, had
testified his commending the oath of allegiance, to be only for that which it
hand commendable without intermedling the poison with the potion, and notifyed
a sincere intention of manifesting the truth, that those spanish cowncels did
not patronize any heretic, but provide for the safety of a Catholic, and
Christian King, against any Moorish, or Jewish usurper: no other contry more,
or before that, having by general consent deposed Kings only for being
heretics; as was by them done toward Swintill, and Richimer, in whose default,
they exalted Sisinand. Vaseus.
But this was not to his purpose, nor what he has alleged to any purpose
against our doctrine, or demeanure.

Were happily his Majesty a Catholic, the Apologist being a Caluinian might
find for his purpose this decretal doctrine of Calvin; Call. l. 4. Instit. c.
13.. 21.
Vt primum quis notitia veritatis illuminatus est, simul vinculis omnibus
obediendi Ecclesiae, and Regibus solutus est; As soon as any is illuminated
with the knowledge of the (Caluinian) truth, instantly he is freed from all
obligations of obeying Church, or Prince. Of which positions, store is
presented by Calvin in the same place, without more favor toward a good Prince,
then toward a badd. Whereupon Lanoy being founded, incensing the Rochellers to
reiterat their rebellion, only because some others of their brethren had
revolted, and they answering that the K. had given them liberty of conscience,
and thereupon that they had sworn fidelity, and allegiance to him: Lanoy
replied; You can not keep any promise opposite to Gods glory; Histoire de
Poplin. l. 37. f. 203.
Nay we assure, to observe any such oath would be a duble sin, as it of Herod
to give his daughter the head of Johan Baptist. Whereupon the ever disloial
Rochellers, after such their oath made in July before, Genebrard ab anno 1567.
ad 1575. M. Pig. l. 7. c. 17.
rebelled in January next in sueing: as also their brethren, what oaths
soever they made to rest in peace, they dispensed with them as aften as the
least advantage appeared.

Fifthly understand, that what words you deservedly term vehement, and
dreadful, in the oath enforced upon you, them not to belong to any point of our
Doctrine, but altogether to be a part of the Doctrine of our adversaries; as
partly before appears, and is manifest in these their articles. Buchanan. page
6. 13. obed. page 25. Vide Survey of pret^. h. discipline p. 283. 284.
Dangerous Positions. l. 4. c. 3. 4. Bellarm. in ep. ad Blackvvellum.
The Ministers may excommunicat the greatest Prince, and he that is
excommunicated, is not worthy to enjoy any life upon earth: It were good that
rewards were appointed by the people for such as kill tirants, as commonly
there are for uch as have killed Wolves, or bears, etc. That such Doctrine has
been held by Catholics, the Apologist although he lays down Bellarmins
demand (where was it ever heard, that ever a Pope either commanded to be killed,
or allowed the slawghter of any Prince whatsoever?) Yet lawncing only at the
Friar that had killed the K. of France, he wyndeth from the matter to carpe at
pretended contradictions in Bellarmins controversies. But nether if a Friar,
yea or Pope, in matter of fact should transgress, may therefore it be said, to be
an impious, heretical, and damnable Doctrine or position of ours, (as the words
of the oath import) that any such transgression should be committed?

Sixthly understand, that of these oaths of allegiance although the first
eschew the name of supremacy, and the second the name of Pope, yet in
substance both of them to be all one with the owld oath of supremacy. This the
Apologist most stoutly, and vehemently denies, but unknown to him self he
danceth in a nett. For how may these words of the oath be interpreted
otherwise then to impute supremacy to the K. and to deny it to the Pope! I do
utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that the kings Highness is the
Only supreme Governor of this realm, and all other his Highness Dominions, and
contries, as well in spiritual, or ecclesiastical things or causes, as
temporal. And that noe foreign Prince, person, or Prelat, has or ought to
have any Jurisdiction, power, superiority, pre-eminence, or authority
ecclesiastical or spiritual within this realm, etc. If his Majesty be only
supreme Governor in all Spiritual and ecclesiastical things or causes; if noe
Prelat has any jurisdiction ecclesiastical; then loud and palpable must be
these untrue assertions of the Apologist; Apology page 47.
This last made oath only medleth with the civil obedience of subjects to their
sovereign, only in mere temporal causes: the said oath concerns in noe case
the Popes supremacy in spiritual causes: Ibid. page 52.
there can not one word be found in all this oath tending or sownding to matter
of relgion, Ibid. page 62.
etc. Who does not behold, how impudency does captiuat these men into
voluntary confusion, to defend falsehood? But although we would silence how
much this sworn supremacy of the K. sowndeth matter of religion: yet his
brethren, yea and his Majesty him self, do testify, that among them selves
it is a principal point, and article or religion, to profess the contrary. It
appears, first by Willet; Willet. Synops. contr. 7. q. r. D. Morton. par. 2.
Apol. l 4. c. 18 p. 340. D. Field. page 228. D. Sutcliff. subu. p. 119 and con.
Kellison. p. 41. 42. 102. D. Ceuel against the plea of Innoc a page 103 ad 109.
D. Down ep. Dedic. contr. con. Bellarm. Hooker. l. 5. eccl. pos. 77. Bell.
motives l. 2. a. fol. 78. ad 81. Hamp. Confer. p. 82. 83.
Nether do we give unto the Prince absolute power; then noe supremacy, to make
Eccl^siastical laws. Secondly, by D. Mortion; A general cowncell is the
supreme Judge. Thirdly, by D. Field; The supreme binding and commanding
authority, is only in Bishopes in a general Cowncell. Whereunto consent D.
Couel, D. Sutcliffe, D. Dowram, Hooker, Bell, and all those preachers mentioned
by his Majesty, that preaching even before him self, eschew to intitule him
the supreme head of the Church. God grant these oppositions make the Apologist
known to him self: for suer they detect him to others to be of the described
by Terence: Imperarunt ipsimet sibi omnia assentari, and principum ingenia
admirari: quicquid Principes dicant laudare: id si negant laudare id quoque.
Such as swim with the stream, and sway with the time: if Princes would be
supreme heads of the Church to justify that their determination: if they would
in substance so remain, but in show disclaim to challenge any such
prerogative, to justify also such dissimulation.

Upon all these premises, I conclude, that seeing the head of the Church
condemns the said oaths, seeing also the Apologist fails so fowlye in
justification of them; Theodor. l. 4. c. 19.
in depth of constant Catholics resolution, you are to say with S. Basil, he
being in like manner solicited to some unlawfulness by the Emperor Valens; That
you esteem much his Majesty's favor with piety: but piety debarred, that it
is pernicious. And for your loialtie, that you will never fail to demonstrat
it at all occurrents: but to swear these present oaths, that you may not,
because they contain ane abiuration of his authority to whom Jesus Christ
has committed the charge of all his flock. S. Nazian. orat. 1. in Julian.
So that the oath represents the sleight of Julian the Apostata: who not
being able to constrain Christians to worshipp idols, placed them in the
portraicts of the Emperors before whom they bowed reverently: thereby causing
diverse by deceit, at least in ane indirect, and remote manner, to worship them.
Which if they did not, then were they afflicted as dispisers not of idols, but
of the Emperors. So now with a lawful allegiance, the oath implies a secret
lawles abiuration: which being therefore not accepted, you are accused to be
disloial, and enemies to your Sovereigns dignity. But as I said, give him
that is Cesars, and to God what to God belongs. The Archpriests fall, is noe
block in your way, noe more then it of Origin, or Tertullian, to the primative
Church. Conc. Later. c. 43.
He did against his privilege, and his fidelity, for which he is to answer: as
you are to be rewarded reciprocatly by Christ our Saluiour, for professing him
before men courageously. And give me credit, they that have sworn the oath are
not esteemed even by the state, so trustfull as they that have not: but as Sir
John Perrot said to one shrinking schismatike accepting the oath of supremacy,
among manifould resolutly refusing it; Believe me, I should trust thee least of
all this compagnie, because I know that in thy conscience thou think as the
residue, yet dissemblest to give me satisfaction. Cic. orat. pro Rosc. com.
Nom maiore religione ad periurium quam ad mendacium perduci consueuit. He that
belyeth his conscience, consents as lightly to perjury. I had rather think
them greaued by wanting such pretext to impouerish you, then more confident of
your loialtie after receiving your oath.

Who then shall separat us from the charity of Christ? tribulation? Romans 8.35.
or distress? or famine? or nakedness? or danger? or persecution? or the sword?
A little after is a speech rather beseeming a celestial spirit, then a mortal
weakeling; and such, as whereby every mind of any Christian generositie, should
learn what to think, and do, in Christ's quarrel. I am suer that nether death
nor life, nor angels, 38.
nor principalities, nor powers, nether things present, nor things to come, 39.
nether might, nor height, nor depth, nor other creature shall be able to seperat
us from the charity of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

These are the thoughts, and words, beseeming as I said all worthy champions
of Christ. Which not only by men of strong resolution, but also by women, and
children, were most constantly fullfilled, when Barbara, Agatha, Agnes,
Cecilia, Catharina, Lucia, Dorothea, Apollonia, Margarita, Christina, and
innumerable other virgins for the most part of eminent degree; and when Vitus
and Mammes of seven, and Flocellus of ten years owld, and such others,
despised the terror of rageing lions, the stings of serpents, and teeth of
tigres; when they the scorned the stripes of riueted scourges, the tearing of
burning rakes, and hooks; when they contemned the burning fornaces, the
boiling lead, the drownings, precipitations, butcherings, quarterings, of man's
whole malice. And should not we then think very abiectly of our selves, if in
Gods cause any loss of temporal goods, any affronts, any suspicions, any
oppressions, may move us to repine? Therefore that which might seem to you most
heinous, that being putt to death, or torments, they do taint you with the
odiouse name of treasons, and not with the title of martyr, S. Ambros. in Ps.
118. s^r. 21.
that impaireth nothing your merit. Gratis igitur persecutionem patitur qui
impugnatur sine crimine, impugnatur vt noxius, cum sit in tali confessione
laudabilis; impugnatur quasi veneficus, qui in nomine Dei gloriatur. For in
vain, says S. Ambros, is he persecuted who is impugned without offense; is he
afflicted as a malefactor, whereas he is laudable in that trial; is he tormented
as an inchanter who glorifieth in the name of God: the name not making, nor
marring, the martyr, but the cause.

If then you aspire to their crown who before are commended to your imitation,
S. Aug. ser. 47. de sanctis.
I say with S. Augustine; Imitari non pigeat quos celebrare delectat; let it not
grieve you to imitat whom in mind you do consecrat. Think happy to be the
effusion of your tears, and blood, whereas theternal fiar of hell is thereby
extinguished; and whereas the robes of your sowles are thereby blanched.
According to which is said in the Apocalips; Apoc. 7.14.
These are they that are come out of great tribulation, and have washed their
robes and have made then white in the blood of the lamb. Think that in the
furnace of adversity for godliness, if you were earth you are streinthned, if
you were iron you are vnrusted, and if you were gowld you are purifyed.

^say. 58.2.
Lastly if you be they of whom the Prophet says; They day by day do seek me,
and they would know my ways, as a people that has done Justice, and has not
forsaken the judgments of their God: think whether you do not wrong to God,
that withowt amendment of your faults, you would have the freedom of
innocents. Psalm. 38.12. Have. 14. 6.
Are you ignorant, that for iniquity God has chastised Man, and that, therefore
we are delivered up into the hands of our enemies, because we have offended in
his sight? Tobias then resolves you; Tob. 3. 4.
because we have not obeyed thy preceps, therefore we are ahandoned to the
spoil, to captivity, to death to a speech and to a reproach in all nations.
So does Achior in informing Holofernes. As often as besyd their own God they
worshipped any other God, Judith. 5. 18.
they have been forlorn to a pray, to the sword, and to reproach. So lastly
does Baruch. What is it Israel that thou art in the land of thy enemies?
Baruch. 3. 10. 11. 1^*
that thou becomest ancient in a strange land? that thou art polluted with the
dead? that thou art reputed with them that descend into hell? Thou have
forsaken the fontaine of wisdom. For if thou had walked in the way of God,
thou had without dowbt dwelled in peace upon the land.

So that if you would know the ways of God, you must do justice, and not
forsake his judgments. If you lament to be a spoil etc. obey his precepts,
worshipp God alone, and walk in his ways, and as the psalmist says:
apprehend discipline, least God be angry, and that you perish from the just
way. Psalm. 2.12.
Which because you seem more willingly to fulfill of late, then formerly, as
appears by your godly resolutions mentioned in your leters, and by your
constant standing for truth: you may, I warrant you, auayleably exclame in the
words of David; Sinners have unsheathed their sword, they have bent their
bow, that they might beguile the poor, and needy; and upon, Psalm. 36.14.
these words receive from above answer; the enemies of our lord, suddenly as
they shall be honored, and exalted, fading they shall vanish away as smooke: that
is, 20.
as another Prophet expowndeth: they shall be as if they were not, and the men
shall perish that contradict the. Not that it is always intended, they should
perish in person, (which we never ought absolutely to desyer) but only in
profession.

And not only because of your amendment, may we presume of such divine bounty,
but also least they should (says God) become proud and say, Our high hand, and
not the lord, has done all these things. Deuteronomy. 22.27.
By which their becoming insolent, the spirit of God instructs is in the
person of David, to implore of God, to auert his wrath, and their opposition,
saying; Do not o lord abandon me from my desire to the sinner. They have
consulted against me, forsake me not, least by chance they be exalted. Psalm.
137.9.


Finaly whereas you find them selves to profess their shame, that they have
departed from the mother Church of Rome, as they term it, in these public and
plain words; D. Couel. in exam. p. 185.
we are sorry that their weakness (he speaks against Puritans) takes offense
at that which we bowld as an honor and virtue in the Church of England, namely
that we have sparingly and as it were unwillingly dissented from the Church of
Rome, etc. In all joy of mind for a sovereign consolation, not with standing
all extremities specified, you may applaud to your selves, that you abstained
to depart at all from that Church, which as Christ assures nether in more nor
less shall be ever overcome either by one error, or many, or by any other power
of hell gates; or which is all one, which never is to have spott or wrinkle how
little soever; and is, in nothing to fail, but to confirm all others: it being
assured, that had you offended in one, you had been made guilty of all; ^ac.
2. 10.
although such one dissension from that Church, had been never so sparingly or
unwillingly followed.

And upon this confession I say first to Doctor Couel: it is in deed near to
honor and virtue, sparingly, and unwillingly to dissent from that Church, but a
true honor and virtue, had it been not to dissent at all. And as by dissenting
in one point, the self same guiltines is incurred, as by dissenting in all; so
there remains noe other manner to be free from all guiltines, but to consent
again with that same Church, in all Christ made it not a pillar of truth,
without being altogether sownd, and free from every crack. He made not that
Church his spowse, withowt exempting it from every spott and wrinkle. He
builded not that house upon a rock, not to be permane^t in some, but in all
trials of sease, wynds, and rain. He assured it not against the infernal
gates, but that noe error or force, or fraud of hell, Iac. 2. 10.
could prevail, either first or last against it. Therefore, a primo ad vltimum,
he that offe^deth in one toward it, is made guilty of all, because it is
altogether priuileged from defect. Secondly I say to you Puritans, Bell. in the
dovvnfall of popery, page 134.
that in the depth of all error, and folly, you exagitat the rytes and
traditions of this Church. For whereas you confess, (as to deny it had been
profou^d impude^cie) that you know not your bible to be the word of God, but
because you receive it for such, by a tradition of Papists, (for from whom else
could you have received it, you being (as you affirm) but in the infancy of
your gospel?) I require thereupon: whether you hold such authority, or
certificatio^, in auowing the said bible, to be infallible, or not? What soever
you answer, you remain engaged. For, if it be infallible in that point; such
infallibility must come from the former promises of Christ: which being
general, do assure infallibility in all other points, as well as in that. And
then cursed you, for departing from that infallible fundation. If you affirm
that such allowance, or tradition, is fallible: then have you noe infallible
certainty, whether your Bible be authentical, or not, The Survey, with 177.
queres.
as inioying it only from authority (in your opinion) but fallible. Answer me
only this one quere, (which is your own new fangled term for a demand) and I
protest before God and his angels, and the world, that I will consent with you.

The God of mercy, and truth, be with us all. Amen. 26. Sept. 1607. Yours to
command in Christ. HENRY FITZSIMON.


