A DEFENSE OF THE CATHOLYKE CAUSE, CONTAINING A TREATISE IN CONFVTATION OF
SUNDRY VNTRVTHES AND slanders, published by the heretykes, as well in infamous
lybels as otherwise, against all english Catholyks in general, and some in
particular, not only concerning matter of state, but also matter of religion:
by occasion whereof diverse points of the Catholyke faith now in controversy,
are debated and discussed.

Written by T. F.

WITH AN APOLOGY, OR DEFENSE, OF HIS INNOCENCE IN A FEIGNED CONSPIRACY against
her Majesty's person, for the which one Edward Squyre was wrongfully condemned
and executed in November in the year of our Lord 1598. wherewith the author
and other Catholykes were also falsely charged. Written by him the year
following, and not published until now, for the reasons declared in the preface
of this Treatise.

Psalm. 118.

Redime me a calumnijs hominum, vt custodiam mandata tua.

Redeem me o Lord from the slanders of men, that I may keep thy commandments.

Imprinted with license 1602.

THE VNTRVTHES AND SLANDERS CONCERNING matter of state, and some particular
persons, confuted in this Treatise, and in the Apology following.
THE first, concerning the conquest of England, which The second, touching the
Catholyke Kings late The third, concerning Sir. William Stanley and his
delivering Dauenter The fourth, touching father Parsons, and his great labors
in Gods The fifth, an impudent and malicious untruth avouched by O. E. The
sixth, the improbable and absurd fixtion of Squyres conspiracy The seventh, a
slanderous untruth published as well in these later as
VNTRVTHES AND SLANDERS CONCERNING MATTER OF RELIGION DISCOVERED and confuted
upon diverse occasions, in this Treatise, and the Apology following.
The table of the chapters follows in the end of the Treatise.
THE PREFACE, WHEREIN THE AVTOR DECLARES HIS INTENTION IN THIS TREATISE, AND
THE CAUSE why he wrote the same, and why the Apology concerning Edward Squyre
being written three years since, was not published until now.
IT is now more then three years, gentle reader, since that one Edward Squyre,
Edward Squyre executed for a feigned conspiracy, and the author of this
treatise charge therevvith.
having bin sometime prisoner in Spain, and escaping thence into England, was
condemned and executed for a feigned conspiracy against her Maiestyes person,
whereto my self and some others were charged to be privy; and for as much as it
seemed to me that this fraudulent manner of our adversaries proceeding against
Catholykes, by way of slanders and diffamations, authorized with show of publik
Justice, The reasons that moved the author to write an Apology in his own
defense.
and continued now many years, did begin to redound not only to the
undeserved disgrace, and discredit of particular men wrongfully accused, but
also to the dishonor of our whole cause, I thought it convenient to write an
Apology in my defense, and to dedicate the same to the Lords of her Majesty's
privy counsel, as well to clear my self to their honors of the crime falsely
imputed unto me, as also to discover unto them the treacherous dealing of such
as abuse her Majesty's authority and theirs in this behalf, to the spilling of
much innocent blood, with no small blemish to her Majesty's government, and
the assured exposition of the whole state, to the wrath of God, if it be not
remedied in time.

This Apology being written by me in Spain, The Apology stayed from the print,
in hope of some toleration of Catholyke religion in England.
and made ready for the print (now almost 3. years past) it seemed good as well
to me as to other of my friends, to stay the impression of it, until we should
see the issue of the treaty of peace betwyxt England and Spain then expected,
with no small hope conceived of many, that liberty of conscience, or at least
some toleration of religion might ensue thereof to the Catholics of England,
and therefore seeing my principal intention was no other, but with the occasion
of my own purgation to seek remedy of the wrongs done unto us, by discovering
to the lords of the council the unchristian and pernicious proceeding of our
cheef persecutors, it seemed to me that if the desired effects of toleration,
and consequently our remedy did follow of the treaty, the labor and charges of
printing my Apology should be needless.

Hope of toleration frustrate.
And although after many months expectation, and the meeting of the
commissioners at Bullen, there appeared no lykelyhood at all, either of peace
betwyxt the two kingdoms, or toleration of Catholyke religion in England (in
which respect it seemed convenient to some that my apology should be published)
yet for as much, as so long time was then over past, that the matter of Squyre
seemed to be forgot, and that therefore the defense of my innocence might
either be to little purpose, or at least seem out of season, I resolved to
suppress the same, Squyres matter seemed to be forgot.
and the rather for that I understood that howsoever some simple men might be
deceived in Squyres cause, yet the wysest considering the weakness, and
inualydity of the proofs, and his denial of the fact at his death, did take it
for an invention, and a stratageme of state, Squyres matter held by the wise
for a stratagem of state.
conform to diverse other of like quality, which many wise men amongst the
protesta^tes themselves have noted heretofore.

Squyres matter lately reuyued by 3. lybels, and much urged against Catholyks.
But now coming hither to Rome, and seeing the matter revived and mightyly urged
to the prejudice of all Catholykes, by 2. several lybels composed lately in
England, the one by an heretical minister ashamed of his name, and therefore
Sutly shrowding it under a falls Visar of O. E. and the other written very
lately by a puritan, as it seems, calling himself Thomas Diggs, I have
determined to set out my apology for the full satisfaction of all indifferent
men in this point; The authors determination to set out his Apology.
whereto I am moved the rather, for that I have also sufficiently treated therein
some other matters handled by O. E. O. E.
who labors to prove that all the persecution which Catholykes have hitherto
suffered, In his new challeng to N.D. Chap ^
is justly to be ascribed to their treasonable atte^pts, besides that he is not
ashamed to affirm, that none have be^ put to death in all her maiestyes reign
for matter of religion, which impudent assertion of his, I have so sufficiently
confuted in my said apology, as no more needs to be said in that matter.

Nevertheless upon this new occasion given by him, I have thought good to prefix
this treatise to thesaid Apology to give thee good reader some more particular
satisfaction concerning this point, and first to answer sincerely and truly
upon my own knowledge an other slanderous and malicious conceit of his touching
the il affection as he supposes of diverse principal Catholykes to their
country, and therefore for as much as I intend also, upon occasions that may be
offered, to debate and discuss in this treatise some points of Catholyke
religion now in controversy, and withal to clear our doctrine in those points
from certain malicious slanders of our adversaries, I have thought good to
entytle the whole, A defense of the Catholyke cause. Wherein I make no doubt
but that thou wilt easily note (good reader) amongst many other things, the
inconsideration of our adversaries in that they are not content only to wrong
us in our goods and persons, by extreme injustice used toward us, but also to
wound us so deeply in our fame by their calumniatious and slanderous lybels,
and reports, that they force us much against our wills to lay open to the
world their shameful and unchristian proceedings, in defense of our own
innocence, and for the honor of our cause, which not only all laws of God
nature and nations do allow and permit, but also conscience urges and byndeth
us unto in this case. For although private men may somtymes with great merit
suffer themselves to be slaundered without contradiction, when no further
detrime^t ensues thereof, then the loss of their own fame or their
particular hurt, yet when the same is joined, with other men's harm or with a
publyke damage, espetialy of religion, they cannot without offense to God
neglect or omit their own just defense. Therefore I hope no man will blame me
or other Catholykes in like case for offering just purgation of our selves and
our cause though it be with the reproach of them that slander us, vt obstruatur
os loquentium iniqua, that the mouths of calumniators may be stopped.

And whereas the same may seem to redound to some disgrace or dishonor of the
state by reason of the publyke authority and pretense of her majesty's service,
wherewith our adversaries do commonly cover and color all their malicious
actions, I purpose for my part, to use in this my defense, such due respect to
the state and to the supreme governors thereof (I mean her Majesty and the
honorable Lords of her counsel) that I hope to avoid all just cause of
offense; and give ample testimony of the loyalty of a most dutiful subject
discovering to her Majesty and their honors by way of humble complaint, the
great abuse offered by our adversaries, no less to them, then to us, as will
more particularly appear in my Apology directed and dedicated to the Lords
of the council.

AN ANSWER TO TWO MALITIOVS SLANDERS CONCERNING the conquest of England,
falsely supposed to be pretended and solicited by the Catholykes, and touching
the late enterprise of the king of Spain in Ireland. Also concerning Sir
William Stanley.
CHAP. I.
AMONGST many malicious slanders, wherewith O. E. and other heretyks seek to
make us and our cause odious to all men, one of the principalest is, that we
desire and conspyre the conquest of our country by the king of Spain,
wherewith they charge not only F. Parsons and the Iesuytes, but also other
English Catholykes that have served and serve the Catholyke king, in which
respect I cannot forbear to testify the truth of my knowledge in this point,
having had sufficient means and occasion to understand what has been treated
with the Catholic kings of Spain by any of our nation since the year of our
Lord 1589. The author answers and confuteth this sla^der upon his own
knowledge.
at what time I passed from the court of France (by reason of the troubles
there) to the service of their Catholic Majesty's, whom I have served ever
since, and for some years together in the court of Spain, until now of late,
that I retired my self from thence to Rome, to satisfy my private devotion, by
dedicating the rest of my declyning days, to the service of God in an
ecclesiastical function.

The autors protestation upon his conscience.
Therefore I here protest upon my conscience, not only in my own behalf, but
also in the behalf of F. Parsons, and the English Catholykes that serve his
Catholyke Majesty, that our dealings have bin so contrary to that which is
imputed unto us, that we have done far better offices for our country in
this point, then the malice of our adversaries suffers them to suppose. For
having well considered that the breach of amity betwyxt her Majesty and the
Catholic king, growing daily by sundry acts of hostility on both parts, to an
implacable quarrel, might move him to seek the conquest of our country (whereof
his puissant preparations in the year 88. gave no small suspicion to the
world) and not having any hope to be able to diswade his Majesty from seeking
some sharp revenge of the attempts made against him by sea and land (whereto not
only reason of state, but also respect of his reputation and honor seemed to
oblige him) we determined to do our uttermost endeavor so to temper and
qualify the same, as it might not turn to any conquest of our country. To
which purpose sir Francis Englefield, The endeavor of Sir Fran. Englefeld, F.
Parsons, F Cresvvel and of the author to divert the Catholic king from the
conquest of Engl.
whylst he lived, Father Parsons, Fa. Creswel, and my self, have at diverse
times represented to his Matie. of glorious memory, many important reasons to
persuade him, that it was not convenient for him to seek the conquest of
England, nor probable either that he could conquer it, or yet if he were able
to do it that he could long keep it in subjection; and this we have urged so
often and with such pregna^t reasons, as well to his Matie. that now is, as to his
father of glorious memory, that I verily believe, that if they ever had any
inclination or resolution to seek the conquest of England, we have done
sufficient diligence to divert them from all cogitation thereof.

But whatsoever may be thought of their majesty's intentions in this behalf
(which is not my intention here to defend nor treat of, but to signify what
has been our treaties or dealings with them) sure I am, The Catholyk kings
answer concerning his intention.
that their Maties. have upon diverse occasions assured us, that their meaning
was no other, but only to seek reparation of wrongs do^ne unto them, with the
advancement of Catholyke religion, howsoever the quarrel should end, either by
extremity of war, or composition of peace, for though the prosecutio^ of the
war should prove more prosperous unto them then we imagined it could do, yea
and that the crown of England might thereby fall to their disposition, yet they
affirmed that their intention was no other, then to restore and assure
Catholyke religion there, Restitution of Catholyk religion in England.
by establishing a Catholyke king, with whom they might renew, and perpetually
hold the ancient leagues so long continued in times past betwyxt the two
kingdoms of England and Castile to the mutual benefit of both. And if it
should so fall out that they should grow to treatyes, of peace (which was most
lykely would be the conclusion of this war, Ease of persecution by treaty of
peace.
sooner or later) they promised to make instance to her Majesty either for
liberty of conscience for Catholics, or at least for relaxsatio^ of penal
laws and ease of the present persecution.

Now then; The reasons why the Catholyks rather expected remedy by peace then
by war.
this being the resolution of their majesty's (as they signified unto us)
consisting on two points, the one, no doubt in their own opinions uncertain,
and in ours altogether improbable, if not impossible (as before I have
declared) and the other, most lykely in time to ensew, especially considering
the frequent ouertures these later years to a treaty of peace, Frequent
ouuertures to treatise of peace these later years. Impossibilites of conquest.
and the continual reports of her Majesty's propension, nor only thereto, but
also to give some toleration to Catholics; any indifferent man may judge,
which of these two points we were more like to expect and solicit, though we
should be as i^ affected and unnatural to our country, Her majesty's propensio^
to peace, and to give toleration to Catholyks.
as our adversaries imagine, who measuring our charity and zeal in religion,
by their own fury, and malice against us, persuade themselves, that because
they would if they were in our case, wish and procure by all means possible
our utter overthrow and ruin, The heretyks measure Catholyks by themselves.
we therefore do the like by them; whereas we following the doctrine and
example of out Savior and his saints, The charity of Catholyks toward their
enemies.
in forgeuing our enemies, and heartily wishing the conversion of sinners, do
daily and instantly pray to almighty God for them, that it may please him of
his infinite mercy to forgive and illuminate them.

The Catholyks desire restitution of religion by svveet mea^es.
And although we desire nothing more in our country, then the extirpation of
heresy and the restitution of the Catholyk faith, yet we wish that it may
please God to woork it by such sweet means, that not only our monarky may still
retain the former liberty, dignity and honor that heatherto it has had, but
also that no man's finger may so much as ache for the same;

And whosoever does note and regard with an indifferent eye, the proceeding of
such Catholykes as have labored most in our cause, and especially of him whom
our enemies do most malign, The erection of Seminaryes tends not to force
of arms.
and calumniate at this day (I mean the proceeding of father Parsons in the
erection and careful mayntenance of Seminaryes) and does further consider the
fruits thereof, and the progress of Catholic religion in England of late
years, he can neither think, that the fathers intentions tend to force of arms
or violence of conquest, nor yet that our cause is in such desperate terms,
that we need to use the sword seeing the force of the word, The svvoord
needles where the word preuayleth.
and apostolical preaching woorketh so good effect, that we may well hope, that
heresy decaying daily as it does, Heresy daily decaying.
will fall of it self within a while, and that in the mean time, The wise
governors can not but note Gods handivvork, in the progress of Catholyk
religion in England.
our wise governors noting the special woork and hand of God therein, and how
little humain policy or rigor preuayleth against true religion, will not only
moderate the rigorous course hitherto held with Catholics, but also willingly
receive the light of truth, for the which we daily pray to almighty God, and
daily will.

This then is the conquest that we desire and expect in England, to wit, a
conquest of souls to God, What conquest the Catholyks desire in England.
with the suppression of heresy, and iniquity, to the end, that the force of
truth and piety may so captiuate and subdue the hearts of all our countrymen,
that they may be freed from the bondage of the devil, wherein they live, and
that the Catholyke Church and our country withal may flourish, in the old
manner, to the glory of God, and salvation of infinite souls that daily perish,
and thus much for this point.

Now forasmuch as I understand that rumors are spread abroad and a conceyt or
suspicion bred thereby, in the heads of many, that the english Catholykes have
also solicited the Catholyke king to the late enterprise of Ireland, I think
good also to say somewhat concerning that point, that I verily think no English
Catholyke was acquainted therewith otherwise the^ by common fame or opinion,
seeing that neither F. Creswel nor my self (both residing at the same time in
the court of Spain) nor Sir William Stanley who was also come thither upon
occasion of busynes, were made privy thereof, Neither F. Pars. at Rome nor any
Englishman in Spayn made privy thereto.
which I ascrybe partly to the prudent manner of proceeding of those
councelers, The prudent manner of proceeding of the council of Spayn.
who never impart any matter of impottance to any whosoever, except to such, as
are necessarily to be employed therein; and partly to the circumspection that
the Irish use in their treaties in that court, The circumspection of the Yrish.
who considering that their affairs, do no way perteyn to us, are wont not
only curiously to conceal the same from us, but also to desire the Kings
ministers not to communicate them with us.

Of which small correspondence betwyxt us and them in matters that concern
their country, Witness may be taken of Hugh Buy agent of late. for Odonel in
Spayn, and now in her maiestyes service.
there muay now be sufficient testimony taken of Hugh Buy, who having ben one
of the most principal agents for Oneal and Odonel in the court of Spain, and
most gratful there (as appeared by the reward given him at his departure thens)
passed nevertheless shortly after his return to Ireland to the service of her
May and therefore may testify, if he be demanded, whether he treated with any
Englishman in Spain, or was willing we should be trusted with his affairs,
sure I am, and I think he will witness it, that during the time of his
negotiatio^ there, which was some months, we never conferred together, nor so
much as saluted one another.

And verily for our further purgation of all suspicion in this matter, I may
well say, that if we had been as badly affected in that cause as is conceived,
and had been consulted withal, or list to have intruded our selves to speak our
opinions, we could never have aproued the plot that was executed, Not lykly
that Sir William Stanley could approve the plot that was executed.
which any man may believe at least of Sr. William Stanley, as well for the
particular experience he has of Ireland, and Irish wars, as also for his
wisdom, and exact skill in military discipline, and all martial affairs,
wherein, as it is well known, he is inferior to few men living, and seeing the
occasion is offered to speak of him, I will ad a word or two concerning him, The
ridiculous folly of a lybeller, in obiecting to sir William Stanley his
delivering of Deuenter to the true owner.
and his delivering Daue^ter to the Catholyke king, for that the same is
opprobriously carped at in a late pamphlet of a puritan cauling himself Thomas
Digges, who as it seems has so little conscience and knowledge of a Christian
man's obligation, that he cannot distinguish betwixt treachery and discharge of
duty, it being evident in conscience, and true divinity, that Sir William was
bound under pain of damnable sin, to deliver it to the King who was the true
owner thereof, and from whom it was wrongfully detayned by his rebels; besides
that, his manner of doing it was such as argues no less his generosity, Sir
VVillia^s generosity and sincerity in tendering Dauenter.
then his sincerytie, seeing he made no composition for money or other reward,
as many others in like occasions have done, but rendered it simply without all
respect of lucre and gain, for the only discharge of his conscience, being
then at liberty to serve where he would, to which purpose my Lord of Leister
his general, had given him an ample pasport, which he has yet to show.

But herein I mean not further to enlarge my self, seeing my late Lord
Cardinal of happy memory sufficiently de^ended and justified Sr. Williams
action in this behalf with a learned and grave treatise of his, at the same
time, only I will say of his person for the particular knowledge I have of him,
that the honorable course of life he has led ever since he became a Catholyke,
and servant to the king, does make him no less recomendable for true Christian
piety and virtue then for wisdom and valor, in so much that he is woorthely
held of all strangers for the honor of our nation, and the true mirour or a
Christian soldier, and as for his affection to his country I do protest I am
well assured, that no man wysheth more honor and happiness thereto or is more
alienat from all desire of conquest thereof then he, though our adversaries
will needs imagine otherwise of him, and all others that either serve the
Catholyke king or receive any benefit of him, whereby thou may perceive (good
reader) how lamentable our case is, seeing that we are neither suffered to
enjoy the comfort and benefit of our religion country and freindes at home, nor
yet permitted without suspicion and slander of ill affection to the state, to
sustain our lives abroad with the liberality of him that only has the means
and the will withal, to relieve us, as he releeueth and entertaineth in like
sort no small number of strangers of all nations, without any bad
constructions made of him, or them for the same. But whether it be reason that
to avoid the uncharitable conceyts of our adversaries and to satisfy their
desire of our ruyn, we suffer our selves to perish rather the^ to receive
relief of the Catholyke king, I leave it to the judgment of any indifferent and
unpassionate man and so will proceed to say somewhat in particular of F. Parsons
against whom O. E. does spit forth or rather vomit so much venim and poison,
as he shows evidently what spirit possesses him, and gives notable
testimony to F. P. his rare virtues, and great merits.

CONCERNING FATHER Parsons in particular, and that the extreme malice that the
heretykes bear him, is an evident argument of his great virtue. CHAP. II.
The hatred of heretyks, is a notable testimony of F. Parsons his great virtue.
WERE it possible that father Parsons should be so extremely maligned, hated and
calumniated, The greatest saints of God alvvayes calumniated.
as he is, by heretykes, if he were not a great servant of God and guyded by
his spirit? for was there ever any great saint in Gods Church who labored
more then others, either to confound heresy, or to reform corrupt manners,
that felt not in his fame the cruel sting of the slanderous tongues of
heretykes, and of other instruments of the devil? for as the Church was
planted so it must be restored; As the church was planted so it must be
restored.
and therefore as the scriptures do signify; the persecution that our Savior
him self, and all his Apostles and disciples suffered by slanderous tongues,
Joan. 7 and 10.
in the first planting and buylding of the Church, Luc. 2^.
so also the ecclesiastical histories do witness the like of other servants of
God, Act. 6. 14. 17. 21. 24. 23.
who endeavored afterward to repair the same, when it was decayed in some
places by heresy and sin, Gods servants so cunningly calumniated by evil men,
that good men sometimes held them suspected.
and that many of them besides the punishments inflicted upon their persons,
were so craftily calumniated by heretykes, that they sustained much suspicion
and obloquy not only of many weak and bad Catholykes, but also otherwhyles of
some good men; God suffering it for his greater glory and their more merit,
whose innocence he ever cleared in the end, to the confusion of his enemies and
theirs; A few examples may suffice, for that the matter is clear enough of it
self.

No man that has red the ecclesiastical histories can be ignorant of the
continual and violent persecutions that saint Athanasius suffered in this kind,
S. Athanasius extremly ca^lumniated.
who being the cheef champion of Gods Church against the Arrian heretykes, was
by the^ falsely accused of a rape, of burning houses, Baron anno 336. and 339.
335.
of breaking chalices, of extorsion, of wiche-craft, murders, yea and treasons;
Theodoret. lib. 1. cap. 30^
as well against the Catholyke Emperor Constantine the great (who by that
means was alienated from him, Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 21.
and moved to banish him) as also against the Arrian Emperor Constantius,
Epiph. haer. 68.
to whom he therefore wrote an Apology of his innocence.

S. Basil for his great learning and rare virtue surnamed the great, Athan.
Apo^log. ad Constant.
being also a notable impugner of all the heretykes of his time, Baron. anno
363. and 371.
was impugned and slandered by the^ with such art and cunning, that the very
monks of his own institution and rule were incensed against him, S. Basil.
in so much that after he had suffered it, as he says, Basil. Ep. 7^. and
epist. 79.
3. years together, and suppressed the sorrow of his heart with silence, he was
forced to write an Apology in his own defense, as also many other famous and
learned me^ did for him at the same time, and such was the diligence and craft
of the heretykes, and such the credulity of many Catholykes, that he complained
pitifully thereof, giving to understand, that not only all his actions, but also
every word he spoke, Basil. ad Eustachium epist.
was watched, calumniated and wrested to a wrong sense, and that he found
himself in such case that he knew not who to trust.

S. Hierome one of the lights of the latin Church, S. Hierome.
and the scourge of the heretykes of his age, Baron. To. anno 39^.
having written a notable work against Iouinian the heretyk in defense of
virginity, was slandred to have defaced matrimony, through the subtilty of one
of Iouinians sect that counterfeyted him self a Catholyke, and enuyed greatly
S. Hieroms great credit, and the matter was so clamorously prosecuted against
him in Rome, that many good Catholykes were alienated from him and his friends,
in which respect he was feign to write an Apology in defense of his book. And
at another time being him-self in Rome, and writing against some vices of the
clergy though in general terms, ^ro^^anno ^.
he received such a violent impugnation and persecution of all the bad priests
in the city, that he was forced to depart thence; which nevertheless, how
little it impaired his credit in the end, he signified 30. years after in an
epistle to Demetrias, Hieron. epist. ad Demetria.
wherein he makes mention of the said treatise that caused all that broyle
against him, and adds further quid profuit, armasse exercitum reclamantium,
and vulnus conscientiae d^lore monstrasse, liber mauet and homines perierunt,
that is to say, what did it avail them, to arm an army of clamarous men
against me, and to bewray the wound of their own conscience by their greef,
the book is yet extant, but the men ar dead and gone, thus far saint Hierome;
whereby he signifies, that although good men for good works suffer somtymes
great persecutions, The good vvoorks of good men remayn honorable, vvhyles
their persecutours perish with igno^iny.
yet the good works remain, and not only the persecution passes away, but
also the persecutors themselves perish and come to naught, which by the way I
wish the heretyks Fa. Parsons adversaries to note; for let them rail upon him,
slander him, and cry our against him never so much, the memory and monuments
that he shall leave behynd him of his great service to God and his Church, will
remain honorable to all posterity, when their clamours, and slanders shall
vanish away like smoke, and they themselves shall be either clean forgot, or else
remain ignominious for their heresy and the persecution of him, and other good
men.

S. Chrysostom so calumniated that he was tvvys banished by Catholyk Bishops.
S. Chrysostom Bishop of Constantinople the ornament of the east Church, who
made continual war against paganism, heresy and vice, as well by the example
of his saintly life, as by the force of his eloquence, and deuyne preaching was
so exagitat by the calumnious, and contumelious tongues of heretykes, and all
sorts of wicked men, that he was expelled twyse, from his bishopryk, by
Catholyke Bishops, being falsely accused of treasons and many heinous matters,
and dyed at length in banishment; which shortly after God did punish
notoriously in all his adversaries, and calumniatours, and in some of them (as
Palladius notes) by loss of their speech and horrible pains in their
tongues, in regard, Baron. ann^ 427.
no dout of their contumelious speches and slanders given out against him, and
within a few years after his death, his innocence was made so manifest to all
men, that his memory was celebrated in the Church and he served for a great
saint of God, as he has been ever since. Baron. anno 369.
I omit to speak particularly of S. Hilary, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine Greg.
Nazian oratione ad 150. Episc. and in vita sua
S. Gregory Nazianzen and diverse other notable antagonists of the heretykes of
their times, Idem an. 387
all of the^ notably calu^niated by their adversaries, whom I say, I will omit
for breuityes sake, Aug. contra Iulianu^ lib. 6 cap. 12. and Baron. anno 426.
and conclude with S. Ciril Bishop of Alexandria, the hammer of the Nestoria^
heresy; who in his epistle to the clergy of Constantinople signifies that
Nestorius the heretyke, did send abroad certain wicked and lost companions, to
defame him every where, as now the heretykes of England deal with father
Parsons whom they seek to disgrace and defame by their spies, Item epist. ^
editio nouae
that they send throughout Christendom, whereof the experience has been seen
these years past not only in other places, Ciril. epist. 7^ and 14.
but also in the very Seminaries of his own erectio^ in Spain, Baron. anno
429.
where have been discovered within these 2. or 3. years diverse spies sent from
England, S. Ciril slandered by me^ sent abroad of purpose to defame him
who counterfeiting great holiness and zeal in religion, endeavored nothing else,
but to alienate the students from the Jesuits their superiors, and
particulerly from Fa. Parsons, Spies sent abroad to defame F. Parsons.
filling their ears with such monstrous lies, that if God of his goodness had
not sooner discovered it, one of those Seminaries had been put in as great
combustion, Spies discovered in the seminaries of Spain.
as was the English college at Rome some years ago But S. Ciril who received
like measure at heretics hands, as Fa. Parsons now does, shall answer for
both, Baron. ^od. an. and Ciryl. epist. 8.
who in certain letters of his to Nestorius him self says thus. S. Cirils
answer to Nestorius applied to F. Pars.
They cast a broad against me reports no less mad, then malicious some say I
have injuriously oprest the poort and blind; others say I drew a sword upon my
own mother; and others, that I stole gold with the healp of a maid servant;
and some again say, that I have been always suspected of such wickedness, as a
man would be loath should be found in his greatest enemy. But of these fellows,
and such like I make small account, least I may seem to extend the measure of
my weakness above my master and lord, yea above all my predecessors, for
whatsoever course of life a man holds; it is skant possible for him to escape
the sharp teeth of malicious and wicked backbyters. But they having their
mouths full of slander, and malediction shall one day answer for it before the
Judge of all, and I in the mean time, will discharge my part, and do that which
becomes me, to wit, admonish thee, Nestorius, of thy duty as my brother in
our lord, etc. Thus said S. Ciril to the heretyk Nestorius; and so will I say in
father Parsons behalf, to the heretykes his adversaries, to wit; that he little
regards their railing, considering he cannot look to be more free from that
kind of persecution then his master Christ, and other servants of God, that
have labored in the Church before him, and that therefore leaving them to
answer for it, before the just and rigorous Judge, he will in the mean while,
proceed to do his duty toward God and them, as heatherto he has done,
Parsons repayeth the malice of his enemies with charity.
repaying their malice with charity, their fury with patience, their railing
with prayers to God for them, their slanderous pamphlets and libels, with
learned and godly books, and their employing of spies abroad to defame him,
with sending in priests from his Seminaries to convert them, and to save their
souls, Hiero. epist. ^7.
which is all the hurt he wishes them, for all the rancour and malice they
bear him, and the injury they do him, Miserable to do injury but not to suffer
it.
for the which he thinks they rather deserve pity then hatred, for that as
saint Hierome says, apud Christianos non qui patitur, sed qui facit iniuriam
miser est, that is to say, Of F. Pars. his great, and profitable labors in
gods Church.
not he which suffers the injury, but he which does it is miserable.

And now to say somewhat particularly though very breefly of his labors in
Gods Church, which makes him hateful to the devil and all heretyks; His
notable books.
if we consider the same, and the fruits thereof, as the souls he gained to
God whiles he was in England; Souls gained to God by him in England.
the notable books he has written; the four notable Seminaries which he has
erected; (whereof 3. do still flourish in Spain, and Flanders, besides two
residences for priests in S. Lucar, 4. Notable Seminaries erected, and 2.
residences for priests.
and Bishon) the important releef of two thousand crowns rent, 2000 Crowns
rent procured for the seminary of Doway.
that he procured at one time for the Seminary at Doway, erected by my Lord
Cardinal; The tumults of the English in Rome pacified.
the pacification of the scandalous tumults in the English College at Rome,
attempted by diverse in vain, and reserved, as it should seem, by almighty God
to him, for the testimony of his wisdom and virtue; His wise and examplar
government of the English college at Rome.
the present government of the said College in such tranquillity, unity and
love, such aeconomy and discipline, and such exercise of all virtue and
learning, that it serves for an example and spectacle to all Rome (so that all
our Seminaries which are now the honor and hope of our afflicted Church, and
in time will be the bane of heresy in England, All our Seminaries either erected,
or relieved, or exceedingly benefyted by him.
have either ben erected, or relieved and repaired, or otherwise exceedingly
benefited by him) and if we consider withal, the great care and pains he
has taken in all this; the many long and tedious iourneys to strange and
remote countries; the difficulties he has past by contradiction, and
opposition somtymes of great parsonages; and the prudence longaminity and
patience he has showed in all; His life so religious, that his greatest
enemies, can justly reprehe^d nothing therein.
and if we ad thereto his religious life, so examplar for all kind of virtue,
that those which malign him most, can find nothing justly to reprehend therein,
and therefore to have somewhat to say against him, F. Parsons charged for lack
of better matter with the actions of his very enemies.
are feign either to inue^t manifest lies, such as here I have touched, or else
to calumniate his good works with vain surmises, uncharitable suspicions,
and falls interpretations, from which kind of calumniation neither the innocence
of Gods saints, nor yet the prefection of our Savior himself could be free His
good vvoorks calumniated, and il interpreted as our Saviors were.
; lastly if with all this, Gods manifest co^curre^ce with his labors in the
progres of Cathol. religion.
we consider concurrence and manifest assistance of almighty God to his
endeavors in the progress of Catholyke religion in England, advanced ^otably
as all men see, no less by his books and other labors then by his
Seminaries, we may evidently conclude ^^ree things, the first that God having
of his infinite mercy and providence determined to repair the wracked walls of
our Jerusalem, has raised him for a special means, and instrument thereof,
Three con^lusions ^ravvn of ^he premises
giving him for that end, extraordinary graces and blessings, as well of credit
with Princes abroad, as also of singular zeal, prudence, fortitude,
longanimity, God has ^aysed F. Parsons for a special instrument to repair his
Church in England.
and no marvel, seeing that for the buylding of his material tabernacle he
bestowed upon some of his people extraordinary gyfts of caruing, grauing, and
woorking in wood or metal all kind of woork, whereof they had no skill before.

The second conclusion of these premises, is, that it is not possible, Exodus
31. ^5. 3^.
but that he being employed by almighty God in the service of his Church, so
particulerly, and with such It is not possible but that F. pars. being
employed, by almighty God shall be impugned by the devil, and all his instruments.
for the devil seking by all means to overthrow the Church of God employeth
all his instruments, and discharges the rage of his fury chiefly against those
that are the cheef pillars and vpholders thereof.

The third and last point is, that if he still continue to the end, and
co^summate his course, according to his beginning and proceedings hitherto, as
by Gods grace he will, he shall not only gain an eternal crown of glory in
heaven, His Apostolical labors shall be the more glorious to all posterity for
the great co^tradiction he receaueth of Gods enemies.
and much the rather, for the contradiction, hatred and persecution that he
receives at the hands of Gods enemies, which already makes him famous
throughout Christendom, and will ever remayn for an evident argument of his
great virtue and merits.

Thus much I have thought good to touch breefly and truly here, to serve for a
counterpeyse to the multitude of malicious slanders that O. E. heapeth upon him
in his two lybels, The author proceeds to the discovery of the impudency of O.
E affi^^^ing that none are pu^ to death in Engl. for religion.
the particular answer whereof, I leave to one that has undertaken the same,
meaning only for my part to examine here a little further how truly he avouches,
that none are put to death in England for religion, which besides former
examples and many reasons alleged in my Apology, almost every man's
experience in England may convince for a notable untruth by the martyrdom of
those, which have suffered in diverse parts, within these 3. years since the
Apology was written.

EXAMPLES OF DIVERSE Catholykes executed since the Apology was written for the
same causes that the martirs were put to death in the primative Church, and of
the great injustice done to two Priests condemned at Lincoln by Judge
Glanduyle. CHAP. III.
I Appeal to the remembrance of al those that were present at the araignment
of M. Rigby a lay Gentleman in the year 1600. whether there was any thing
concerning matter of state or the least suspicion thereof laid to his charge,
M. John Righby exe^cuted in the year 1600.
who being no way accused or called in question for any matter whatsoever, but
coming to the sessions at Newgate of mere charity to excuse the aparance of a
Catholyke gentlewoman that was sick, was examined of his religion, and
condemned within a few days after; for being a reconcyled Catholyk, whereof
nevertheless he might have been discharged if he would have consented but only to
have gone to the Church, which was offered him, both before the Jury gave their
verdi^; and also after.

Further-more what matter of state was so much as objected to M. Palaser the
priest, or to M. Talbot, and to M. John Norton, M. Palaser. M. Talbot. M. Ihon
Norton.
condemned and executed the same year at Durham, the first only for being a
priest, and the other two for having ben aquaynted with him, and not detecting
him, or to a virtuous wydow the last year at York for harboring a priest called
M. Christopher wharto^, who was executed also with her, or to Mrs. line the
last year at London for having received priests, Mrs. Line.
against whom no matter of state, but only their religion and priesthood was
proved, M. Ihon Pibush. M. Mark Barkvvorth. M. Robert Nutter. M. Edward
Thvving. M. Thurstan Hunt. M. Middleto^. M. Harrison, ^ a lay man.
which was also most evident in M. John Pibush, M. Mark Barkwoorth at London
the last year, and M. Robert Nutter, M. Edward Thwing M. Thurstan Hunt, and M.
Midleton, at Lancaster, as also in the case of M. Filcock, and now this year
M, Harrison at York, all of them martyred only for being Catholyke Priests,
and a lay man for having received the foresaid N. Harrison into his house.

Therefore can O. E. or any man be so impudent to say that these lay men and
women dyed not for religion, or that the priests for whose cause they were
condemned, Catholyke Priests traitors now in to other ^ort, then were the
Christian Priests in the primative Church.
or the other here mentioned were traitors in any other sort or sense then
were the priests of the primative Church, accounted in like manner rebels and
traitors only for doing the function of Christian Catholyke Priests, as
appears in the story of the blessed S. Alban the protomartyr of Britany, who
was charged by the Judge to have received into his house and conueyghed away
rebellem and sacrilegum sacerdotem, Beda histor. Eccles. lib. 1.
a traiterous and sacrilegious Priest, S. Alban our first martyr, charged with
receiving a traiterous Priest.
for that he put on the Priests apparel, and so offered himself to be taken by
the searchers, that the Priest might escape; for the which, and for the
constant profession of the Christian faith he received a glorious crown of
martyrdom; S. Alban martyred about the year of our Lord. 300. An example for
Catholyks.
wherein may be noted by the way how it pleased almighty God of his divine
providence, to give us in our first martyr such a notable example of Christian
fortitude and charity, in harboring a persecuted Priest, and saving his life
with the loss of his own, to the end that in the like cases, and occasions
(which now daily occur) no terror of temporal laws, nor pretense of treasons
may withhold us from using the like charity toward the Priests of God; whereto
our Savior Christ also inuiteth and incowrageth us with promise of great
reward saying he which receives a Prophet in the name of a prophet, Matthew 10.
shall have the reward of a Prophet, and he which receives a just man, in the
name of a just man, shall have the reward of a just man.

But if we consider the proceedings of the persecutors in those days,
Christians martyred in the primative Church by paynims, for the same points of
religion, that Catholyke are persecuted now.
we shall find that the Christians were not only persecuted as traitors, and in
the same manner, but also for the same points of religion that we are
persecuted now, whereof I will breefly represent unto thee (good reader) an
evident example, to the end thou may the better judge whether we die for
religion or no, or whether there be any difference betwyxt the martyrdom of
the old Christians, and of the Catholykes at this day. Baron. To. 2. anno 303.
Surius. 11. Februa.


We read in the ancient and Publyk records of the acts of the proconsuls of
Africa under Dioclesian, The sacrifice of the Mass forbidden upon pain of
death by Dioclesian.
and Maxi^ian Emperors (under whom saint Alban was martyred) that they made
an edict wherein amongst other things they forbad upon pain of death the
blessed sacrifice of the mass which is called Dominicum in the said records,
Council. Roman. sub Siluestro 1.
and therefore dominicum agere or celebrare is understood there to celebrate
mass; Con. Carth. ^ can. 3.
and if our adversaries marvel what warrant I have so to expound it, they shall
understand, that this word Mass in English, Leo Mag. Epist 81
and Missa in Latin, used by ancient ^ouncels and Fathers above 1200. years
ago, Aug. ser. 9^. de tempore. Ambros. li. 5. epist. 33.
and derived of the hebrew word missah (which signifies a voluntary sacrifice
or oblation) has diverse other names in the an^^ent Fathers as in the greeks
liturgia tremenda misteria, Liturg. Dionys and Basil. and Chrisost. Tertul lib.
3. ad vxorem, li. de Castira. li. de oratione.
and crificium tremendum, and in the Latins solemnia, ablatio per sa^^rdotem,
cena Domini and to omit diverse other more ordina^^, Dominicum as appears in
saint Cyprian, who speaking of the sacrifice offered at the altar in remembrance
and representation of the passion of Christ (which we call the sacrifice of the
mass) terms it sometimes, Cypria. 63.
sacrificium quod Christus obtulit sometimes ipsum nostra redemptionis
Sacramentum, Ibidem.
etc. somtymes only Dominicum, saying, nunquid post caenam dominicum
celebramus? that is to say, do we offer the sacrifice of the body of our Lord,
or do we say mass after supper? and this is evident by all his discourse in
that Epistle, where he treats principally of the blessed sacrifice, and says
that Christ is buius sacrificij author, and doctor, the Author, and teacher of
this sacrifice, and that the Priest representing the person of Christ does
offer sacrificium verum and plenum, a true and full sacrifice.

Christians martyred under Diocletian for heating mass.
This then being presuposed, it is to be understood that certain devout
Christians in Afrik being secretly assembled at mass, were taken and brought
before the proconsul Anulinus who examining them began with fair words to
persuade them to have care of their lives, and to obey the commandment of the
Emperors, they answered, The answer of the martyrs concerning the necessity
of mass.
spem salutemque Christianorum Dominicu^ esse, that the mass is the hope and
salvation of Christians, and that therefore they could not forgo it; upon which
confession they were condemned to death; and amongst rest there was one
Emeritus in whose house mass had be^ celebrated, to whom the Proconsul said,
was the assembly made in thy house, contrary to the commandment of the
Emperors? he answered, yea; why did thou, said the Proconsul, suffer it? I
could quoth he, do no less, for that they are my brethren; yea; but thou
oughtst to have hindered it, said the Proconsul; I could not said the other, for
we that be Christians, sine Dominico esse non possumus, cannot be without
mass; as though, said the Proconcul; thou art not bound to obey the edict of
the Emperors, God, said the martyr, is greater then the Emperors, and ought
more to be obeyed, where upon he was condemned, and executed as the rest; here
now I ask our adversaries whether these men were put to death for religion, or
no, and whether it fares not even so with us at this day, as then it did with
them.

For although the mass be not now made treason but a money matter, yet by a
certain consequent, To hear mass in England is treason by consequence.
it is drawn within the compass of treason, for it cannot be celebrated
without a priest; the receiving of whom is treason, I mean a Seminary Priest,
there being now so few other in England (if there be any at all) that the
Catholykes must either receive them with danger of their lives, or lack the
necessary food of their souls, which they hold more dear then life, as the
old Christians also did.

But let us compare breefly the proceedings of the persecutors in those times
and these. A comparison of the proceedings of the old persecutours, with those
of this time in Engl.
In the examination of those Christians the old persecutors would not content
themselves with their confession, that they were Christians, and so put them to
death for their religion, but sought to bring them within the compass of their
statute; we ask you not, say they, whether you be Christians, but whether
you have hard mass contrary to the co^maundment of the Emperors, the like is
done now with us, for it suffiseth not our persecutors that we confess our
religion (as that we are Catholykes) but they examine us whether we have
heard mass, whether we have been reconcyled by a Priest, or whether the Queen
be supreme head of the Church, and such like, thereby to draw us within the
compass of the laws, that they may put us to death under color of treason.

Furthermore the old Christians said for their just defense, The answer of the
old martyrs conform to ours now.
that they being Christians, could not be without mass, and we now say the
same, and that we cannot forgo absolution of our sins, nor other spiritual
comforts to be received at the hands of Priests only; to this, our persecutors
reply as the others did, that it is against the laws and statutes of her
Majesty, Act. cap. 5.
we answer with the old Christians, God is above all Kings, and his law above
all laws. Et portet magis obedire Deo quam hominibus, we must rather obey God
then men; nevertheless we are condemned for disobedience to the laws, as the
old Christians were; and dyed they for religion and not we? The old martyrs
were condemned for disobedience to the temporal laws. as Catholyks are now.
were they martyrs and not we? were their enemies persecuters of Gods Church
and not ours? the cause is one, and the self same, the proceedings like, no
difference in the issue; breach of laws and treason is pretended, but religion
condemned, and therefore as the whole Church has hitherto held, and honored
those old Christians for glorious martyrs, Treason pretended but religion
condemned as well in the old martyrs as in ours now.
so does it now at this day and ever will esteem these other for no less, as I
have showed in my Apology more at large, and therefore I will proceed to speak a
word or two of the great injustice done since my Apology was written, to two
priests called M. Hunt, and M. Sprat, condemned, and excuted at Lincoln in the
year 1600.

Notable injustice done to M Hunt, and M. Sprat condemned at Lincoln anno
1600.
These two being taken in a search and confessing themselves only to be
Catholykes, were first imprisoned, and then shortly after indicted for having
conspyred, and practiced the death of her Majesty moved her subjects to
rebelion, withdrawn them from their natural and due obedience, and from the
religion now established in England to the Roman faith, and finally for having
mayntayned the authority of the Pope, of all which points, no one touching
matter of state was proved against them, no witness being produced, nor so
much as the least presumption of any attempt or co^spiracy against her
maiestyes person or state, or that rhey had persuaded any man to the Catholyk
religion, ot said any thing in favor of the Popes authority more then that
which they answered to the captious question of the Queens supremacy demanded
of them there, after their apprehension; lastly, it was not so much as proved
that they were Priests, which though they denied not, yet they did not
confess, but put it to trial, urging to have it proved by witnesses, or other
sufficient arguments; whereas there was none at all but light presumtio^s
thereof, as that there was found in their males, two breuiares (which many lay
men use as well as Priests) and a few relics and some holy oil (which they
might have carried for other men's use and not their own) so that to
conclude, of all those great treasons whereof they were indicted, there was no
one proved, except the matter of the Queens supremacy, which is a mere point
of religion, as I am sure the puritans in England, and all other heretykes
abroad will witness with us, who impugn the same as well as we; and yet
neither by the verdit of the Jury nor yet by the sentence of the Judge, were
they cleared of any one point, but condemned for all, as though they had bin
guilty of all, and so in truth, executed for matter of religion, though
slandred with matter of state, whereby their martyrdom was far more glorious,
the malice of our adversaries more manifest, the injury done unto them
inexcusable; the sin of the Judges, and Jury most execrable, which
sufficiently appeared by the justice of God extended upon Judge Glanduile who
had showed an extraordinary malice and fury against them, Judge Glan^duile
punished exem^plarly by al^mighty God
and was therefore (as well may be presumed) within a few days after strooken
by the hand of God, in such miraculous man^er, as the rest may take example
thereby if their hearts be not indurat.

And besides these late martyrs before rehearsed, M. Tichborne, M. Fr. Page,
and M. R. Watkinson, were arraigned and condemned at London, for being made
Priests beyond the seas, and coming into England, contrary to the statute, and
were executed at Tiburne the 20. of April this present year 1602. being there
not suffered to declare the truth of their cause and suffrance. And this was
done even at such time; as hope was both given and conceived of a more mylder
course of proceeding toward Catholykes; then heretofore.

It is most grievous to consider how M. Tichborne by one of his own cote was
betrayed, and apprehended: almighty God vouchsafe to restore to that wretched
man so great grace as he fell from; in the doing of that act.

M. Page and M. Watkinson were apprehended in the time of the sessions, the one
by a wicked woman; suborned to dissemble religion for such purposes: the other
by one Bomer, who having late before played the dissembling hypocrite and spy at
Doway, returned into England there to become the disciple of his master Judas.

At the same sessions was condemned for felony, and also executed, one James
Ducket, a Catholyke lay man, and another lay man with him, about a treatise
written by a martyr diverse years since, concerning the cause of Catholyke
sufferers.

OF THE IMPVDENCIE OF a minister, who being present at the death of two martyrs
aforesaid, affirmed publykly that our country was converted by saint Augustine
the monk, to the protestants religion, by occasion whereof the truth of the
point is evidently declared. CHAP. IIII.
^^l^en the ^inister.
I Can not omit to say somewhat here of the notable impudency of a foolish
minister, who being present at the death of the two martyrs at Lincoln
aforenamed, and hearing one of the^ declare unto the people his innocency,
protesting amongst other things that he dyed only for the profession of the
Catholyke faith, to the which our country was converted from paganism, in the
time of Pope Gregory the great, was not ashamed to say publykly that the
religion now taught, and preached there, is the same whereto England was first
converted.

And although I hold not this minister for a man of that worth that he may
merit my labor or any man's else seriously to confute his idle babbling, yet for
as much as the same has bin often published, and preached by many others, and
many ignorant abused thereby, and seeing the narration of our first conversion
may no less profit and edify the unlearned reader, with the testimony of the
truth, then content and delight him, for the pleasure of the history, I will
breefly treat, first of the conversion of the Saxons or English in the time of
King Edelbert, and after of the conversion of the Britains in the time of King
Lucius, and evidently prove that our Catholyke faith was preached and planted
in our country at both times, and that our Kings and country continued ever
after the latter conversion in the obedience of the Church of Rome until the
time of K. Henry the eight.

It appears by our chronicles, and histories, that in the year of our Lord
582. (according to S. Bedes computation) S. Gregory surnamed the great, the
first of that name, Beda hist. Angl. li. 1. c 23.
sent into England, saint Augustine a monk with diverse others of his
profession, to preach the Christian, faith, to the English, and that they came
thither, bearing a silver cross, for their banner, and the Image of our Lord
and savior (as saint Bid says) painted in a table, and having leave of King
Edelbert to preach to his subjects, began first the exercise of Christian
Catholyk religion in the city of Canterbury in an ancient Chutch which they
found there dedicated to S. Martin, from the time that the Romans lived there,
in which Church; Lib. 1. ca. 26.
ipsi primo (says saint Bid) conue^ire Psa^l^re, orare missas facere,
praedicare and baptizare coeperunt, they first began to assemble themselves, to
sing, to pray, to say mass, to preach, and baptize, until the King being
converted they had ^eaue to buyld some Churches, and to make others of the
^emples of the Idols, which saint Gregory ordained should ^e done with casting
holy water therein, buylding altars, and placing relikes of saints, commanding
further that ^easts should be celebrated in the days of the dedication of ^he
said Churches, and in the nativity of the martyrs, Ibid. ca. 29.
whose ^elykes should be kept there; besyds that he appointed saint Augustine to
be Metropolitan of England, and sent him holy vessels, and vestiments for
altars and Priests, and relyckes of the Apostels, and martyrs, and granted him
the use of the pal, ^p. 29.
ad sola missarum solemnia agenda, only for the celebration of solemn masses,
and further gave him order to ordain 12. Bishops under himself, and to make
another Metropolitan at York, who when those parts should be converted, should
have as many under him, and be himself after saint Augustins days, dependant
only upon the sea Apostolyk, and receive the Pal from the same, ^p. 33.
furthermore saint Augustine caused King Edelbert to buyld a Church from the
ground in honor of the blessed Apostles S. Peter, and S. Paul, and a
monastery not far from Canturbury, whereof the first Abbot called Peter, was
of so holy a life that after his death, it was testified from heaven by a
continual light that appeared over his tomb. ^^b. 2. cap. 3.
Also King Edelbert caused S. Paul's Church to be buylt in London, and another
in Rochester dedicated to S. Andrew the Apostle.

Hereto may be added the exercise of the Popes authority, not only in the days
of King Edelbert, but also after, in the raygne of other Christian Kings until
the time that saint Bid ended his history.

^id. 2 cap ^.
Pope Boniface sent the Pal to Iustus; fourth Archbishop of Canturbury after
saint Augustine. Honorius the Pope sent also the Pal to Honorius that succeeded
Iustus, ^ib. 2. cap. 7. and 1^.
and to Paulinus Archbishop of York; ordayning (at the request of King Edwin
and his wife) that the longer liver of them should consecrate a successor to
the orher that should die first, to excuse so long a Journey as to Rome.

^l. 3 ca. 29.
The two Kings Oswy, and Egbert, the one of Northumberland, and the other of
kent, sent Wigard to Rome to be made Primat, when both the seas of Canturbury,
and York, were vacant; and Wigard dying there, Pope Vitalianus made Theodore a
grecian, Lib. 4. cap. 1.
primat in his steed, Wilfrid Bishop of York being twys unjustly expelled
from his Bishoprik appealed both times to Rome, Lib. 5. ca. ^0.
first to Pope Agatho, and after to Pope John, and being cleared by their
sentences was restored to his Bishoprik: and here I will ad a word or two
concerning the exceeding great zeal and devotion of the Saxon Kings to the
sea Apostolyke in those days. Lib. cap. 5.
King Oswy determined to go to Rome in Pilgrimage and had done it if death
had not prevented him. Lib. 5. cap. 7.
King Ceadwald went thither to be baptized, and dyed there.

King Hun his successor; Ibibem.
after he had raygned 37. years went thither also in Pilgrimage as many (says
saint Bid) in those days both of the layty and clergy, as well women as men,
were wont to do; King Coenred did the like, Lib. 5. cap. 20
and had in his company the son of Sigher King of the east Saxons, and both
of them entered into religion in Rome about the year of our Lord 709. not past
22. years before S. Bid ended his history, which was almost 900. years a go;
whereto may be added out of later historiographers the like examples of the
extraordinary devotion and obedience of our English Kings unto the sea
Apostolyke in ^uery age until after the conquest.

King Inas shortly after S. Bedes time about the year of our Lord 740. went to
Rome, Polid. lib. 4. hist. Angl.
and made his Kingdom tributary to the Pope, ordayning the Peter pence, the
like did also afterward Offa the King of the Mercians in the year of our
Lord.775.

Etheluolph King of England went to Rome in Pilgrimage about the year of our
Lord 847. and made that part of England which his father Egbert had conquered
tributary also to the Bishop of Rome.

King Edward being threatened with excommunication by Pope John the tenth for
that he was careless to provide the English Church of Bishops, Polid. lib. 6.
caused Pleimund the Bishop of Canterbury to make many, and after to go to
Rome to purge him self of his negligence about the year of our Lord 920.

King Edgar obtained of Pope John the 13. with license, Ibidem.
to give certain livings of secular Priests to Monks about the year of our
Lord.965.

Polid. lib 7.
Canutus King of England went to Rome in Pilgrimage about the year of our Lord
1024.

Al^ed invita S. Eduuardi.
S. Edward King of England having made a vow to go to Rome procured the same to
be commuted by Pope Leo the nynth into the buylding of a monastery of S. Peter,
he also confirmed the payment of the yearly tribute to the sea Apostolyke,
about the year of our Lord 1060. which was not past 5. years before the
conquest, after the which there were no less notable examples of this matter.

Gulielmus Neubrice^. li. ^ ca. 25. and 34.
King Henry the second who by Pope Adrian was first entitled Lord of Ireland
sent legates to Rome to crave pardon of Pope Alexander for the murder committed
by his occasion upon saint Thomas of Canterbury, where upon two Cardinals were
sent into England, before whom the King like a public penitent, and a private
person submitted himself to the Ecclesiastical discipline in a publik assembly
of the clergy and nobility.

When King Richard the first was kept prisoner by Frederick the Emperor his
mother wrote to Celestinus the Pope calling him the successor of Peter, Petrus
blesensis epist. 44.
and the Vicar of Christ, quem Dominus constituit super gentes and regno in
omni plenitudius potestatis, whom our Lord had placed over nations and
Kingdoms in all fullness of power, and willed him to use the spiritual sword
against the Emperor, as Alexander his predecessor had done against Frederick
his Father whom he did excommunicate.

^olid vergil lib. ^5.
King John being excommunicated by the Pope was not absolved before he took his
crown of from his own head, and delivered it to Pandulfus the Popes legate,
promising for himself and his heirs, that they should never receive it
afterward but from the Bishop of Rome.

I omit others of later time, seeing no man I think doubts, but that all the
successors of King John lived in the communion and obedience of the Roman
Church, paying the old yearly tribute called the Peter pe^ce, Polid. lib. 27.
until the time of King Henry the 8. her maiestyes father, who being married to
his brother Arthurs widow by dispe^sation of the sea Apostolyke, continued
many years after in the obedience thereof, and in defense of the authority of
the said sea, wrote a learned book against Luther, for the which; the honorable
title of defender of the faith was given him by Pope Leo, which title her
majesty also uses at this day, so that no man can deny that our country was
converted by S. Gregory to the Roman faith, or that it has continued therein
until K. Henry's time; except he have a brazen face and a ^eared conscience, or
else be ignorant of all antiquity.

But to return to S. Augustine, and those first two hundredth years comprysed in
the history of S. Bid, if we consider the notable miracles wherewith it
pleased. God to confirm this our Catholyke religion in those days for his
own glory, and the conversion of the panims, no man can ^out that it is the
true faith, except he be more faythlesse and incredulous then those infidels
that were converted thereby.

Saint Bid signifies that S. Augustine wrought so many miracles (whereof he
declares some) that S. Gregory wrote unto him to admonish him not to be proud
thereof, Lib. 3. ca. 2. quest. 10. 11. 12. 13.
he also declares very many famous miracles done by a cross erected by King
Oswald, Lib. 3. cap. ^.
and after by his relickes as well in Ireland and Germany, as England, and by
the relickes of saint Eartongatha daughter to the King of Kent, and her cosen
Edelburg both virgins and nuns, and of S. Edel^^eda the Queen, that dyed a
virgin in a monastery, whose ^ody was taken up whole and vncorrupt after many
years, Lib. 4. ca. 10.
^^ the discovery whereof devils were expelled, and many ^^sseasses cured. Also
he recounteth the like notable mira^^es of S. Chad, S. Cutbert, S. AEdelwald,
Lib. 5. ca. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
and saint John a Bishop which they did whiles they were yet living, lib 3.
cap. 15.
and others done by holy oil, and by the blessed sacrifice of the mass, all
which for breuities sake I omit, remitting our adversaries to the author in the
places aleaged in the margent.

OF THE FIRST CONVERSION of our country whiles it was called Britany in the
time of King Lucius, with evident proofs that our Catholyke faith was then
preached and planted there. CHAP. V.
BUT for as much as our country has been twyse converted from paganism, first
in the time of the Britains, and after in the time of the Saxons or English,
they will say perhaps that although we prove, that the second time our Catholyke
religion was planted and established there, when many errors (as they would
have the world to think) were crept into the Church, yet at the first
conversion in King Lucius days, their religion was taught and delivered to the
Britains, which some of their croniclers are not ashamed to intimat to their
readers, and namely Holinshed who (if my memory fail me not, for I have not
his book here) makes Eleutherius the Pope write a letter to King Lucius more
like a minister of England, then a Bishop of Rome.

Polid. lib. 2.
Therefore I will take a little pains to examine this point, and will make it
manifest that our Catholyke religion which saint Augustine planted amongst the
English, Platina in Eleuther Beda hist. Angl. lib. 1. cap. 4.
was delivered 400. years before to King Lucius and the Britains by Fugatius
and Damianus, or as some say Donatianus, sent into Britany by Pope Eleutherius
in the year of our Lord 182.

And although no ancient historiographer or writer (for ought I have seen) do
signify particularly, what points of religion were preached to King Lucius at
his conversion partly for that matters of so great antiquity are but very
breefly and obscurely handled, and partly because in those days (when there
was no other but our Catholyke religion universally professed, and this of the
protestants not so much as dreamt of,) it was needless to signify the points
or articles thereof, for that it could not be immagined to be any other bur the
Roman faith; yet in the discourse of the times and ages next ensewing the
conversion of King Lucius (whiles the faith which he received remained pure,
and vncorrupt) the clear light of truth does snfficiently show it self,
through the clouds of the obscure breuity wherewith the matters of those times
are treated.

To this purpose it is to be understood, Lib. 1. hist. eccles. ca. 17
that as our famous countryman S. Bid testifies, the faith preached to King
Lucius and the Britains remained in integrity and purity, until the time of the
Arrians, which was for the space of almost 200. years, and although he signify
that from that time forward, the people of Britany wear given to noueltyes,
and harkened to every new doctrine, yet it is evident in him that neither the
Arrian heresy nor yet the Pelagian afterward, took any root there, or could
infect the whole body of the Britain Church, but only troobled the peace
thereof, for a short time, in so much, that it should seem, the first was
rooted out by the industry, Athan. Apo^ log. 2. contra arrianos.
of the good Pastors and Bishops of Britany, whereof some were present at the
great council of Sardica held against the Arrians shortly after that of Nice
(in which respect S. Hilary does worthily praise the Britain Bishops, Hilari
epist. ad Epistolos etc.
for that they wholly rejected the Arrian heresy) and the later, I mean the
heresy of Pelagius, which saint Bid says the britains would nulla^enus
suscipere, in no sort receive, was suppressed by S. German, and saint Lupus,
two Bishops of France who at the request of the Britains came into Britany and
confounded the Pelagians in open disputation; whereby the people were so
^ncensed against the said heretykes that they could hardly ^old their hands
from them, and in conclusion banished those that would not yield to the true
Catholyke faith, Ibid. cap. 21
and here upon ensewed such peace and tranquillity in the britan Church, that
for a long time after (as saint Bid testifies) the faith remained there
intemerata vncorrupt, whereby it appears that after the expulsion of the
Pelagians (which was about the year of our Lord 450.) the Church of Britany
retained the same faith that it received at the first conversion, and therefore
if we find the use and practice of our religion until these times it may serve
for a testimony that the same was delivered to King Lucius.

First we read that presently after the persecution of Dioclesian wherein our
protomartyr saint Alban with some others was put to death about the year of
our Lord 286. the Christians that had lived before in woods and caves, Cap. 7
and ^.
not only repaired the Churches which the persecuters had destroyed, but also
made new in honor of the martyrs, celebrated festiual days, and buylt amongst
others a most sumptuous Church in honor of S. Alban, where many miracles were
wount to be done continually until the time of S. Bid (as he himself
witnesses,) and afterward, when the Pelagian heresy had somewhat infected the
country, saint German going thither out of France to confound the Pelagians,
Beda Eccl. hist. lib. 1. cap. 17.
at the request of the Britans themselves as I have declared before appeased a
great storm at sea, with casting therein a little water in the name of the
Trinity) which no dout was holy water) and being arrived there, he restored
sight unto a noble man's daughter applying unto her eyes certain relyckes which
he carried about him, etc. after having confuted the Pelagians, and reduced all
to the purity of faith, (as saint Bid says,) meaning thereby the faith first
preached to King Lucius he went to the toomb of S. Alban to give thanks to God
per ipsum by him (says saint Bid) that is to say by his means or meditation;
and causing the said to^be to be opened he placed very honorably therein
certain relickes of the Apostles, and diverse other martyrs, and going to the
place where the blood of the blessed martyr was shed he took away with him some
of the dust which was still bloody.

Furthermore it happened after, in the time that the Britans kept their lent a
little before the feast of the resurrection of our Lord, that they were molested
by the Picts and Saxons, whiles saint German was yet there; Ibid. ca.
and therefore they craved the help of his prayers, and direction, dispayring
altogether of their own forces, and he undertaking the conduct of them
ordained that when they should come to join battle all the army of the
Britains should cry out a loud three times Alleluya, which they did, and
therewith they put their enemies to flight, and gained a notable victory. This
being done, and the affairs of the Island both spiritual, and temporal well
composed, saint Bid says the holy Bishops had a prosperous return, partly by
their own merits, and partly by the intercession of blessed saint Alban,
whereby he gives to understand that such was their opinion according to the
great devotion they had showed before to the blessed martyr.

It is also to be gathered plainly out of S. Bid that there were monasteries
of Monks and religious men in Britany before this time, Lib. 1. ca.
for speaking of the rebellion of Constantinus against Honorius which was in
the year of our Lord 407. he says that having proclaimed himself Emperor he
made his son Constance Caesarem ex monacho, Caesar of a monk.

Here I wish thee to note, Good reader that saint Bid in his brief
introduction to his Ecclesiastical history (where he intended to treat
specially of the second conversion of our country in the time of the Saxons)
touches the 400. years before, from the time of King Lucius; so breefely,
that he passes with silence about 350. years thereof at one time and other,
noting only some things by the way, as well concerning the temporal, as spiritual
affairs, in diverse times and ages to make some conexion of his history from
the beginning.

Therefore I leave it to thy consideration what testimony and evidence we should
have found of our Catholyke religion, if he had treated those matters
particularly, and at large, ^e^ng^n the course of so few years as he runs
over, and in so few leaves, and lines of a part only of his first book, (which
is also very brief,) we find the practyse of so many points of our religion,
testified and confirmed, as buylding of Churches in the honor of martyrs, the
reverend use of saints relyckes, and great miracles done by the same, the
intercession of saints for us, and the custom to praise and give God thanks
by them; also monastical life which includes vows of religion and chastity,
the use of hollywater, the custom which in our Church is yet most frequent, of
Alleluya whereby it may be gathered that the service of the Church (out of the
which the same, no dout was then taken) was not in the vulgar tongue, finally
the keeping of lent, easter and others feasts, whereby plainly appears the
use and force of tradition in the Church of God, without the testimony of
express scripture, and all this we see was used in the Church of Britanny,
when the faith delivered to King Lucius was yet in purity, which proves
evidently, that he was converted to the ^ame Catholyke religion that saint
Augustine planted after-wards amongst the English Saxons, which we that be
Catholykes profess until this day.

THE SAME IS CONFIRMED and proved out of Gildas. CHAP. VI.
THis may easily be confirmed out of Gildas the britan surnamed the sage, who
wrote shortly after the Saxons came into Britany almost 200. years before S.
Bid, in whose treatise of the destruction of Britany, and in his reprehension
of the Ecclesiastical men of those days, it is evident enough, what religion
was professed from Lucius time until his, for first speaking of the persecution
under Dioclesian, he says that electi sacerdotes gregis domini, the chosen
Priests of our Lords flock were killed, meaning such priests as did offer
sacrifice upon the altar, for so he sufficiently interprets him self, when
he reprehendeth the negligence or the Britain Priests of his days, whom he
calls sacerdotes raro sacrificantes, ac raro puro cord inter altaria
stantes, Priests sacrifising sildome, and seldom coming to the Altar with a
pure heart, Gildas in ^ stigatio in eccles. ordinem.
and terms the Altars venerabiles aras and sacrosancta altaria, sedem
Caelestis sacrificij, the reverend and holly altars, and the seat of the
heavenly sacrifice, and calls that which is offered therein sacrosancta
Christi sacrificia, the holly sacrifices of Christ, and further gives to
understand that the hands of the Priests were consecrated at those days, as
yet they are in the Catholyke Church, when holy orders are given, whereby we
may plainly see that the Priests of our primative Church in England, and their
function (consisting principally, in offering to almighty God sacrifice upon the
Altar) is all one with ours. Furthermore treating of the martyrdom of S. Alban
and his fellows, Ibidem.
he says that y^ God had not permitted for che great sins of the Britains,
that the barbarous nations which were entered (he means the Picts and Saxons)
did deprive the People of the toombs of saint Alban, and of the other martyrs,
and of the place of their martyrdomes, the same might stryk unto them a feruor
of devotion, and divine charity, insinuating thereby the great consolation, and
spiritual benefit that the Christians were wont to receive by the visitation
of those holy places; Also he says, that before full 10. years past after that
persecution, Ibidem.
the Christians repaired the old Churches distroyed by the persecutors, and
buylt now in honor of the martyrs, and kept festiual and holy days, lastly he
plainly signifies that the Christians used in his time to make vows of
chastity and that their were monasteries wherein religious and monastical life
was exercysed, for he makes mention of an holy Abot called Amphibalus, Ibidem.
and most bitterly reprehendeth two wicked Princes Cuneglasus, and Maglocunus,
the first for marying a widow that had vowed perpetual chastity, and the other
for that being become a monk he returned to the world and married, having a
former wife then living; wherein he also gives to understand that it was not
then lawful for him post monachi votum irritum after the breach of his
monastical vow to return to his own wife, and much less to mary another.

Ibidem.
To this purpose also, it may be observed in Gildas as before I noted in saint
Bid, that until the time of the Arrians there entered no infectio^ of heresy
into Britany, and therfory having signified the sincerity and zeal of the
Christians after saint Albans death, in buylding Churches of martyrs, keeping
feastiual days and doing other works of devotion, as I declared before, he
adds, mansit haec Christi capitis membrorum consonantia suauis donec Arriana
perfidia, etc. this sweet consonance or agreement of the members of Christ the
head remained until the Arrian heresy spread her poison there; and although he
insinuat, as saint Bid also does, that afterward the people became new
fangled, and embraced other heresies (meaning no dout the Pelagian heresy
(which as I have showed before out of S. Bid was quickly extinguished there)
yet afterward he signifies plainly that neither the Arrian, nor Pelagian nor
any other heresy took root in Britany, and that the Church was clear thereof
after the coming in of the Saxons, about the time of his birth, Ibidem.
which was in the year of our Lord 594. for speaking of the time, and of the
overthrow given by Ambrosius Aurelianus to the Saxons and Picts, Polido. verg.
hist. Angl. lib. 3.
and of the great slaughter of them shortly after, at blackamore in Yorkshire
(which as Polidore supposes is called in Gildas mons Badonicus (he says that
the people having noted the punishment of God upon them for their sins, and
his mercy in giving them afterward so great victories, Gildas de excidio
Britaniae.
ob hoc reges, publici, priuati, sacerdotes, ecclesiastics suum quique ordinem
seruauerunt, for this cause (says he) the Kings, and others as well publik, as
private person^^ Priests, and ecclesiastical men did every one their duties, and
although he declare presently after that by the extreme negligence of their
Kings and governors ecclesiastical and temporal, which immediately succeeded,
great corruption was entered at the same time that he wrote, yet it is evident
enough in him that it was not corruption of faith but of manners, as pride,
ambition, dissolutio^ of life, dro^kenesse, lying, perjury, tyranny in the
Kings, simony and covetousness in the clergy, sildome sacrifices, breach of
vows of chastity, and of monastical life, profaning of altars, and such like,
for the which he threatens, and as it were prophesyeth, the utter destruction
of Britany, which shortly after followed; so that amongst other things which he
was persuaded brought the plague of God upon our country, we see he taxed
certain customs peculiar to our adversaries, and the proper fruits of their
religion tending only to the overthrow of ours, and therefore, it plainly
appears that ours was then in ure, and received detriment by those who
(though they were not protestants in profession) yet were protestants in humor
and condition, I mean profaners of Altars and holy things, breakers of vows,
of chastity, and Apostatats from religious, and monastical life; such as Luther
and many of his followers have been since.

And now to come to later times after Gildas, if we consider the relics of
Christian religion which saint Augustine found in Britany, and amongst other
things, the great monastery of Bangor, wherein were above two thousand monks,
it will be manifest that the ancient religion of the Britains was our Catholic
faith, for although in the space of a hundredth seventy and three years, that
passed from the coming in of the Saxons until their conversion, the Britain
Church was not only much decayed, but also had received some aspersion of
erroneous and evil customs, yet in faith and opinion they diffred not from S.
Augustine, Beda hist. Angl. lib. cap. 2.
insomuch that he offered to hold communion with them, if they would concur
with him in three things only, the first in the time of celebrating the feast
of easter, the second in the manner of administering the sacrament of Baptism,
and the third in preaching the faith to the Saxons; all which the monks of
Bangor refused, upon no better reason, then for that S. Augustine did not rise
to them when they came to the synod, condemning him therefore to be a proud
man, notwithstanding that he had restored a blind man to sight by his prayers
in the presence of all the Bishops and clergy of Britany, who undertook to do
the like in confirmation of their customs, but could not perform it.

Lib. 2 cap. 2.
Therefore as saint Bid reports, S. Augustine did foretell to the said Monks
of Bangor, that seeing they would not have peace with their brethren, they
should have war with their enemies, and if they would not preach unto the
English nation the way of life, they should by their hands receive revenge of
death, which after was truly fulfilled; Ibidem.
for Edelfrid a pagan King of Northumberla^d killed a thousand and two hundred
Monks of that monastery at one time by the just judgment of God (as saint
Bid says) for their obstinacy.

Thus much for this matter, whereby thou may see, good reader that saint
Augustine found in wales amongst the Britains the same religion and faith in
substance that he then preached to the English or Saxons, and which we
Catholykes still profess, which being considered, with that which I have proved
before concerning the continual practice thereof in the primative Church of
Britany, whiles the same was in purity and integrity, no man that has common
sense, can dout that the same faith was delivered by Pope Eleutherius to King
Lucius, and generally professed throughout Christendom at those days, in which
respect we find honorable mention, Tertul. li. aduersus Iudeos, Origin. in
Ezech.
and testimony of the faith of the Britains, in the Fathers both Greeks, and
Latins from the time of their conversion, as in Tertulian in K. Lucius time,
and in Origin presently after, in S. Athanasius, hom. 4. and in hom. 6. in lu^.
Athanas. 2.
and S. Hilarious in the time of the Arrians, of which two the first testifies
that the Bishops of Britany came to the council of Sardica, Apolo Hilar. sinodi
soft. h^ in Man Hiero^ marcel migret Bethle^
and the other commends the Britan Church for rejecting the Arrian heresy (as
I have noted before) also in S. Chrysostom, and saint Hierom who commends
the devotion of the Britans that came to Bethlem in pilgrimage in his days,
about the same time that the Saxons entered into Britany.

CERTAIN POINTS OF CONTROVERSY are discussed, whereby it is proved that King
Lucius received our Catholyke faith, and first of the Popes supremacy in
Ecclesiastical causes. CHAP. VII.
BUT to the end that this undoubted truth may be cleared of all dout, I will
join Issue with our adversaries, upon some two or three points now in
controversy betwyxt us, and them, and breefly prove, that the doctrine that we
teach concerning the same, was publykly held for truth throughout Christendom
in King Lucius days, and that therefore he could receive no other then the same
from the Church of Rome, and this I undertake the more willingly, for that
albeit all matters of controversy have been very learnedly and sufficiently
handled, yea and whole volumes written of them, by our English Catholykes in
the beginning of her maiestyes raygne, yet by reason of the strayt prohibition
of the said books, there are an infinite number in England, especially of the
younger sort, that never saw the same, to whom I desire to give in this
treatise at least some little taste, of the truth of our Catholyke religion, so
far as my determined breuity will permit.

First who can with any reason deny that the Popes supremacy (the confession
whereof is now made treason in England) was in King Lucius days acknowledged
generally of all men? for what moved him being so far from Rome, to seek to
receive the faith of Christ from thence but that he desired to have it from the
fountain and head? were there not Christians at the same time in England, as
there had been from the time of Joseph of Arimathia, by some of whom it is like
he was converted, ^lido. lib. 1. and. Angl.
and might have been Baptized? or if there were no Christians there that might
satisfy his devotion and desire in that behalf, was there not at the same time
very learned Bishops in France by whom he might have received satisfaction
without sending so far as to Rome? what then moved him thereto, but that he
understood that the admission of all Christ's sheep into his fold the Church,
belonged principally to the successor of S. Peter, ^an 21. ^eda hist. ^ngl. ^.
^. ca. 4.
to whom our savior particularly commended the feeding of his flock? which
saint Bid insinuates sufficiently saying that King Lucius beseeched
Eleutherius by his letters that he might be made a Christian per eius mandatum,
by his commandment.

^ector Boe^ius hist. co^. lib. 6.
Neither can there any other probable reason be given why a few years after
Donaldus King of Scots sent to Pope victor the next successor of Eleutherius to
receive of him the Christian faith, which at the same time flourished not only
in France, as before I have said, but also in England from whence he might have
had Bishops, and Priests, to instruct and baptize him and his people.

But for the more manifest proof of this point let us hear what S. Ireneus
(who flourished at the same time in France) teaches concerning the authority of
the sea Apostolic governed then by Eleutherius, from whom K. Lucius received
the faith.

^reneus lib. 3. ^ap. 3.
When we show, says he, the tradition of the greatest and most Ancient
Church, known to all men, founded and constitute at Rome, by the two most
glorious Apostles Peter, and Paul and that the same tradition received from
the said Apostles is derived even to this our time by the succession of
Bishops, we confound all those that any way either by an ouerweening of their
own wits, or by vain glory, or by blyndnesse, and evil opinion are led away
with falls conceyts; for every Church, that is to say, the saythful which are
every where must needs have recours to this Church and agree therewith propter
potentiore^ principalitatem, for the greater, or more mighty principality of
the same, wherein the tradition of the Apostles has been always conserved by
them which are every where abroad, and a little after, having declared the
succession of the Bishops of Rome from saint Peter to Eleutherius who he says
was the twelfth) he adds; by this ordination and succession, the tradition
which is in the Church from the Apostles, and the preaching of the truth is
come even to us, and hec est plenissima oste^sio and this is a most full and
evident demonstration that the faith which has been conserved in the Church
from the Apostles, until now, is that one true faith which gives life.

Thus far S. Ireneus; out of whose words may be gathered three things very
imporrant, and manifest against our adversaries; The first, the force of
tradition in the Church of God, and that the same alone being duly proved is
sufficient to convince all heretykes that teach any thing contrary thereto. The
second that the continual succession of the Bishops of Rome in one seat and
doctrine is an infalible argument of the truth. Tertul. lib prescrip.
The which also Tertulian in the same time not only observed but also
prescrybed for a rule against all heretykes in his book of Prescriptions. Ang.
cont epist. Man chaei qua^ vocat Funmenti.
To which purpose S. Augustine says, the succession of Priests from the seat of
Peter the Apostle to whom our Lord reco^mended his sheep to be fed, holds me
in the Catholyke Church, Aug. in P mo contra parte^ Do^
and in another place number the Priests, even from the very seat of Peter, and
in that order of fathers, see who succeeded one an other; that is the rock which
the proud ga^^ of hell do not overcome; Optatus Mileuitanus, Optams ^ leuita.
lib contrapa^ menio.
in like sort urges this succession of the Roman Bishops against the
Donatists, reckoning up all the Bishops from S. Peter to Siricius, with whom
he says all the world did communicate, and there-vpon concludes; therefore you,
says he, that challe^ge to your selves a holy Church, tell us the beginning of
your chair.

Thus reasoned these fathers against heretykes above 1200. years ago as also
did S. Ireneus before, in K. Lucius time, and the same say we now with no
less reason against the heretykes of our time; we show them our doctrine
conserved in a perpetual succession of Bishops, from the Apostles until this
day, we demand the like of them, and seeing they cannot show it we conclude
with S. Irenaeus that they remain confounded, and that they are to be
registered in the number of those that either by an ouerweening of their own
wits, or by vain glory, ^aeus li. 3. ^. 3.
or by blyndnes and passion are led away with falls conceits.

The third point, that I wish to be noted in the words of S. Irenaeus, is the
supreme dignity of the Roman Church above all other, seeing that he cauleth it
the greatest and most ancient (not in respect of time, for the Churches of
Jerusalem and Antioch were before it) but for authority and therefore urges it
as a matter of necessity, and duty, ^naeus ^dem.
that all other Churches whatsoever and all faithful people throughout the
world ought to have recours thereto, and agree therewith. propter potentiore^
principalitate^ for the greater and more powreful principality, and authority
thereof, which authority is founded upon no other ground then upon the
institution of our Savior himself who gave the government of his Church to S.
Peter the Apostle, not only for him self but also for his successors, which. I
will prove hear, with as convenient breuity, as the importance of the matter
will permit.

THAT OUR SAVIOVR made S. Peter supreme head of his Church. CHAP. VIII.
THE supreme authority of S. Peter over the Church of God, is to be proved
directly out of the holy scriptures, by many places, and arguments, but 3. shall
suffice for breuityes sake.

The first place is in S. Matthew where our savior promised to S. Peter to
buyld his Church upon him, Math. 16.
saying Tu es Petrus and super hanc Petram adificabo Ecclesiam meam, that is to
say thou art Peter, or a rock, and upon this rock I will buyld my Church,
signifying by this allegory that he made him the foundation or head of his
Church; for the head is to the body, and the governor to the commonwealth, as
the foundation is to the buylding, that is to say the principal part, the stay,
strength and assurance thereof; and this appears more plainly in the Siriac
tongue in which saint Matthew wrote his gospel, where there is no difference
betwyxt Petrus and Petra, Peter and a rook. For in steed of thou art Peter,
etc. the Siriac has, thou art a rock, and upon this rock I will buyld my
Church.

For this cause (as Ciril lib. cap. 2. loan.
S. Ciril, S. Chrisost. i cap. 16. mat.
Chrysostom, S. Hilar. in c 16. mat. leo. epist. 89. ad epistolos.
Hilary and others do note) the name of S. Peter being first Simon was changed
by our Savior who said unto him tu vocaberis cepha^, thou shall be called
Cephas, which the Evangelist expounds saying, quod interpretatur (...), which
is interpreted a rock, or stone, Viennensis eccles. Ambros. sermon ^ obitu
Theodosij in fi^
for so signifies (...) in the greek; and therefore Cirillus Bishop of
Alexandria says upon those words, now our savior Christ fortelleth that his
name shall be no more Simon, but (...) that is to say a rock, signifieng aptly by
the very word it self, that he would buyld his Church upon him as upon a most
sure rock and stone, whereto S. Hilary agrees expounding the same words and
speaking to S. Peter thus O happy foundation, of the Church by imposition, of
thy new name, in this respect S. Peter is called in the greek text sometimes
(...) by making a greek word of the Siriac; and sometimes (...) because they
are synonima, and do both of them signify a rock.

Math. 16.
Therefore I cannot omit to discover unto thee here (good reader) a subtle shift
of our adversaries in translating those words of our savior, Tu es Petrus and
super banc Petram, for although they censure, and control, all the
translations that the Catholyke Church uses, and profess to translate the
scriptures immediately out of the hebrew, yet in translating this place, they
follow the latin, because the hebrew is far more clear against them in this
controversy for the better understanding whereof, it is to be considered that
all the ambiguity and dout therein ryseth of the difference that may be noted in
the greek, Latin and English translations, not only of them all from the
Siriac or Hebrew, but also of one from another; for that every translator
observing the dialect or propriety of his own tongue, has some variety from
the rest, and the English most of all; for although in the greek and Latin and
all other languages derived of them, the name of Peter and a rock or stone is
either all one (as (...) in the greek) or else have great affinity and a
manifest allusion the one to the other, (as in Latin Petrus and Petra, in
Italian Pietro and Pietra in the Spanish Pedro and Piedra, in the portugues
Pedro and Pedra, and in the french, Pierre for both, (though there be difference
in the gender) yet in our English tongue, Peter neither signifies a rock nor a
stone, neither yet has any alusion, nor affinity therewith, in which respect
our English translation much less expresses the force and true sense of our
saviors words in the hebrew, then either the greek or the Latin; of both
which I will treat a little for the better explication of this question, and
first of the greek.

Albeit (...) in greek is more commonly used for a rock then (...) yet because
(...) is of the masculine gender, and has also the same signification, yt
seemed more fit to be applied to the name of a man then (...), whereupon yt
followed that when not only saint Peter was commonly cauled (...) of the
greeks, (to express thereby in their language the Syriac word Cephas) but
also many others had taken unto them that name for the honor they bore to S.
Peter, the word (...) came to have two significations, the one a rock or stone,
and the other the name of a man which we call Peter, and therefore he that
translated S. Mathewes gospel into the greek out of the Siriac or hebrew, used
both the words (...) and (...) in translating, thou art a rock and upon this
rok I will buyld my Church; for in the first place he has (...), and in the
second (...) to denote in the first, as well the true signification of Cephas,
that is to say a rock, as also the name by the which S. Peter was best known
to the greeks, and to express in the later the allegory of a rock, according
to the very words of our savior, lest perhaps otherwise the readers attending
more to the name, th^n to the signification thereof, should not perceive the
force of our saviors allegory, who to signify the strength and stabilitie of
his Church gave the name of a rock to saint Peter, upon whom he meant to
buyld the same, and therefore, I say, the greek translator elegantly uses both
(...) and (...), explicating the first by the later, and expressing the
allegory in both.

And as for the Latin translation it is manifest that it follows the greek,
and not the hebrew, nor Siriac, and that therefore, for (...) it has Petrus,
partly for the allusion that Petrus has both to (...) in greek and also to
Petra in Latin (both which signify a rock) and partly for that, from the time
that saint Peter was known by the name of (...) to the Romans, Petrus (which
is derived of (...), by turning os into us, to make it a Latin word) was no
less used for his name and other men's amongst them then (...) amongst the
greeks. And although now in common use Petrus does signify nothing else but
Peter, in which respect it may seem that the Latin translator rather
expresses the bare name of a man, then the true sense or signification of
(...) or Cephas nevertheless the circumstances being considered, yt is evident
that Petrus or Peter in the scripture, does not only signify the name of a man,
but also a rock.

To which purpose there is to be noted a great difference in Petrus, when it is
spoken of the Apostle S. Peter, and when it is spoken of any other man; as for
example, Cook is a name now common to many of good cauling, though perhaps at
first it grew to be a name, from some one that by reason of his office was
commonly cauled Cook, and therefore though now in such as have no such office,
yt signifies nothing but a bare name, yet in him that was first cauled so, it
signified rather his office then his name; and in like manner, though Petrus
now have no other signification but the proper name of a man, as Thomas or John
and the like, yet in S. Peter the Apostle, who was the first that was cauled
so, it signified the office and quality, which Christ gave him when he made him
a rock to buyld his Church upon, and cauled him Cephas to signify the same; the
which word Cephas is interpreted Petrus, in our Latin translation and Peter in
English for where as the Evangelist himself expounds Cephas by the word
(...) in greek saying, Joan. 1.
quod interpretatur Petus that is to say which is interpreted a rock the Latin
translator says, quod interpretatur Petrus which is interpreted Peter meaning
thereby also a rock, or a man that metaphorically was a rock, Matthew. 16.
for other wise he gives not the true sense of Cephas, nor of (...).

Again in this sentence tu es Petrus and super hanc Petram, thou art Peter and
upon this rock, etc. these words super hanc Petram do plainly expound Petrus to
signify a rock; for that the pronoun this can not have so proper relation to
any other word, as to the next antecedent, which is Petrus, so that the sense
must needs be thus, Math. 16.
thou art a rock, and upon this rock I will buyld my Church.

Here also may be considered the correspondence that the words of our savior
to S. Peter, have with S. Peter's words to him, for when our savior asked his
Apostles, quem me esse dicitis, who say you that I am, he asked not what they
called his name, but what they said was his quality, and dignity; and therefore
saint Peter answered not, thou art Jesus, (which was the name that was given
him at his circumsision) but, thou art Messiah, that is to say, the anointed,
or as we commonly say, Christ, the son of the living God; which our savior
recompensed; not by telling him his name, which was Simon, but by giving him
another name, and such a one as signified the office, quality and dignity
that he bestowed upon him; and therefore he said unto him, thou art Cephas, or
Petrus, that is to say, a rock or Peter, and upon this rock I will buyld my
Church, which saint Leo, expressly notes saying in the person of Christ to S.
Peter thus, Leo Sermon. in anniuer pontificat ^
as my father has made known unto thee my divinity even so I make known to
thee thy excellency, that thou art Peter that is to say a rock, etc. and S.
Hierome expounding the same words of our savior and speaking also in his
person, says thus, Hieron. in cap. 16. Matthew.
because thou Simon have said to me thou art Christ the son of God, I also
say to thee, not with a vain or Idle speech, that has no operation or
effect, but quia meum dixisse fecisse est, because my saying is a doing, or a
making, therefore I say unto thee thou art Peter (or a rock) and upon this rock
I will buyld my Church, thus far S. Hierom, signifieng that Christ both made
him a rock, and cauled him a rock; which yet he declares more plainly in that
which he adds immediately, as Christ, says he, being himself the light
granted to his disciples that they should be cauled the light of the world, ita
Simoni qui credebat in Pertam Christum, petri largitus est nomen, so to Simon
who believed in Christ the rock, he gave the name of a rock (for if we expound
not Petri, so, the similitude is to no purpose and therefore it follows
immediately,) and according to the metaphor of a rock it is truly said to him, I
will buyld my Church upon thee here you see S. Hierome understands Petrum and
Petram that is to say Peter and a rock to be all one; and so does S. Ambrose
expounding tu es Petrus, Ambros. Ser. 2. de sanct.
thou art Peter; he is cauled (says he) a rock, because he first laid the
foundation of faith amongst the gentiles, and like an immovable stone, does
hold up or susteyn the frame and weight of the whole Christian woork.

Basil. in homil. de pae^ite^.
This may be confirmed out of saint Basil who says, Petrus dixerat tu es filius
deiviui and vicissim audierat se esse Petram, Peter said thou art the son of
God, and heard again, that he him self was a rock, which according to our
Latin and English translation of the scripture, is not true, if Petrus and
Peter do not signify a rock, and thus we see that Petrus being spoken in the
scriptures of S. Peter, and especially in those words of our savior, Tu es
Petrus, does signify a rock, no less then (...) in the greek or cepha in the
Hebrew, which in our Latin translation is interpreted Petrus, and in our
English Peter. In this respect Tertulian in K. Lucius time cauleth S. Peter
aedificandae ecclesiae Petram, the rock where upon the Church was to be buylt,
Tertul. lib. de praescrip.
and Origin in the same age (for he was borne about the time of King Lucius his
conversion or within five or six years after) terms him magnu^ illud
ecclesiae fundamentum and Petram solidissimam super quam Christus fundauit
Ecclesiam, Origin. homil. S. in Exodum.
that is to say, the great foundation of the Church, and the most solid or
steadfast rock whereupon Christ founded his Church, and S. Cypria^ (who
flourished also within 40. or 50. years after the conversion of K. Lucius)
having rehearsed these words of our savior, thou art Peter, Cyprian. lib. de
vnita Ecclesiae.
etc. concludes thus super illum vnum adificat ecclesiam suam, and ills
pascendas mandat oue^ suas that is to say, upon him beiug one he buyldeth his
Church, and to him he commends his sheep to be fed, and after declaring the
cause thereof, and the reason why our savior made him cheese, or head of his
Apostles, (though they were otherwise equal with him in honor and power of the
Apostleship, yet says he, Cyp^^a. Ibid.
to manifest unity he co^stituted one chair, and so disposed by his authority
that unity should have beginning from one, and a little after Primatus Petro
datur vt vna Ecclesia Christ's, and Cathedra vna monstretur, the supremacy is
given to Peter, that the Church of Christ may be showed to be one and one
chair, whereby he signifies that our savior to conserve unity, as well amongst
his Apostles, as also in his whole Church, and to avoid the occasion of
schism, which ordinarily ryseth of plurality of heads, ordained and appointed
one head over all, to wit S. Peter, Optat. lib. 2. contra Parmenio.
the which reason is also observed by Optatus Miliuitanus, and other most
learned, and ancient fathers, who acknowledge nevertheless an equality of
Apostolical authority, in all the Apostles; which I note here the rather for
that our adversaries are wont to object the same against the supremacy of S.
Peter, as though the one did contradict or overthrow the other, whereas they
may learn of saint Hierome, Hieron. co^tra Iouinia^
that although all the Apostles received the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven,
yea and that the strength of the Church was established upon them, equaly that
is to say, as well upon one of them, as upon an other, though not in like degree
upon every one, yet says he, one was chosen amongst twelve to the end that a
head being appointed all occasion of schism may be taken away, and S. Leo the
great says, Leo epist ^ 4. ad Anast^ cap. 11.
amongst the most blessed Apostles, there was, in similitudine honoris,
discretio quaedam potestatis, a certain distinction or difference of power, in
the lykenes or equality of honor, and although the election of them all, was
a like, yet it was granted to one vt caeteris praemineret, that is to say,
that he should have authority over the rest, Epist. 8. 9. 2^ Episc. vie^.
whereof he yeildeth a reason, in an other place, to the end, says he, that
from him (he means S. Peter) as from a certain head our Lord might power his
gifts upon the whole body; and that whosoever should be so bold as to depart
from the solidity of Peter, he might understand him self to be no way partaker
of the divine mystery upon these reasons, I say and upon the warrant of our
saviors own words the most learned fathers of the Church, both Greeks, and
Latins do acknowledge, the same to be buylt upon S. Peter, and consequently
teach him to be head of the Church, as of the Greeks, Origin, Origin. in c 6.
ad Roma Athan. epist ad felicem. Epiph in A^corato Basil lib. 2. in eu nom.
Greg.
S. Athanasius, S. Epiphanius, S. Basil surnamed the great, S. Gregorius
Nazianzen, S. Cirillus, S. Chrysostom, Psellus alleged by Theodoretus, and
Theophilactus, and of the Latins S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, Nazian. in pratio,
demo deratione ^eruan. Ciril. lib 2 ca. 2. in ^o. Chrisost. hom. 55 in Matthew
apud Theodore in cantica.
Maximus, S. Leo the great, S. Hilary, and to omit diverse others the great
general council of Chalcedon held by 630. Fathers Latins, and Greeks above
1100. years ago, in which council S. Peter is cauled Petra and crepido
Ecclesiae the rock and top of the Church.

Yet I think no man can be so simple as to ymagin that these Fathers affirming
the Church to be buylt upon S. Peter, Theophil in cap. 22. Luc. Ambros. Sermon 47.
denied our savior Christ to be the first, and principal foundation thereof; of
whom the blessed Apostle worthily says, Aug. in Psalm. contra par. donati
Maxi. Sermon. 1.
that no man can lay any other foundation, then that which is laid already;
Jesus Christ; which place, our adversaries are wont to object against this our
Catholyk doctrine; whereas they may learn not only in the Fathers, Council.
Chalced.
but also in the scriptures themselves that there are diverse foundations of the
Church, 1. Cor. 3.
though some be more principal then other, and our savior Christ the first and
chief groundwork of the whole buylding; as also in a Kingdom, or commonwealth, there are diverse heads, though subordinate one to an other, and all
subject to one head, all which may be called foundations in the polityke
buylding, because the same leans and rests upon them, and is sustained by
them, though not by all alyke or in equal degree. To this purpose we read in
the Apocalipse that the walls of the city, Apo. ca. 22.
that is to say the Church, are said to have twelve foundations, and in them
the names of the 12. Apostles of the lamb; 2. Ephesians. 19.
and again in saint Paul to the Ephesians, you are, says he, Citizens of
saints, and domesticals of God, buylt upon the fou^dations of the Apostles, and
Prophets.

Aug. in Psalm. 16.
Therefore S. Augustyn says that our savior may as well be cauled fundamentum,
fundamentorum, the foundation of foundations, a Pastor Pastoru^, and Sanstus
Sanctoru^, the shepherd of sheperds, or holly of hollies; the reason whereof S.
Basil gives notably for the explication of this matter. Though Peter, says
he, be a rock, yet he is not a rock as Christ is, for Christ is the true
immovable rock of himself, Peter is immovable by Christ the rock, for Jesus
does communicate and imparte his dignityes, Basili. ho. d Paenit.
not depriving himself of them, but retaining them himself, and yet bestowing
them upon others; he is the light, and yet he says you are the light he is the
Priest and yet he makes Priests, he is the rock, and made a rock, thus far
saint Basil. Leo Sermon in anniuet pontifican sui.
The same teaches S. Leo very elegantly explicating the words of our savior.
Tu es Petrus, and speaking in our saviors person thus. Thou art Peter, that is
to say, although I am the inviolable rock, the corner stone which unites both
syds of the buylding, and the foundation, besyds the which no man can lay any
other, yet thou art also a rock, because thou art consolidat and hardened by my
strength, to the end that those things which are proper unto me by my own
power, may be to the common with me by participation.

Hereby it appears that although our savior Christ be the chief and
principal foundation, that is to say the head of his church, yet by buylding
the same upon S. Peter, he made him also the foundation or head thereof, next
after himself, and as there are diverse other heads under S. Peter, who in
respect of their subjects may be truly cauled, and are heads, and yet in
respect of S. Peter are subjects, even so, S. Peter, in respect of all the
whole church, may properly be cauled, and truly is the head thereof, though he
be subordinat and subject to Christ, as all the rest are both to Christ and
him; and therefore S. Leo in the place aforesaid, says that there are in the
people of God many priests, and many Pastors, Leo. Ibid.
all whom Peter does properly govern though Christ do principally govern
therein.

Thus much for the first proof wherein I have been more large, then I
determined, and therefore I will be breefer in the other two.

The second place whereupon I ground the supremacy of S. Peter, is the words of
our savior following the former in S. Matthew videlicet. Matthew. 1.
I will geeue thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou
shall bynd upon earth, it shall be bound also in heaven, and whatsoever thou
shall loose upon earth, it shall be loosed also in heaven; By the keys is
signified preheminent power, and authority, whereupon grew the common custume
of delivering to princes the keys of towns, and fortresses, when the people
therein yield, and submit themselves to their absolute will, and power; and in
the scriptures, the word clauis that is to say, a key is often used in the
same sense; as in the Apocalipse, to signify the preheminent authority of our
savior it is said of him, ^pocal. 3. ^by. 2^.
habet clauens David, he has the key of David, and the Prophet Isayas speaking
of the supreme ecclesiastical power of a high Priest in the old law, I will
give, says he, the key of David upon his shoulder; and therefore although some
of the doctors say sometimes, that all the Apostles received the keys, (having
respect to some effects thereof) yet it is manifest that they received not the
same in such ample manner, and with such prerogative as S. Peter, to which
purpose it is to be noted, that albeit our savior gave to all his Apostles,
authority to remit and retain sins, yet he made no mention of giving the
keys to any but to S. Peter, in which respect, Optatus Mileuitanus says,
^ptat. lib. 1. ^ontra par^en.
solus Petrus claues accepit, only Peter received the keys; and Origin upon
the same words of our savior does note, ^rigen. tract. in Matthew.
that because it behooved that P. Seter should have aliquid maius some what more
then the other Apostles, therefore Christ said unto him, I will give thee the
keys of the kingdom of heaven, and Origin adds further, that there was no
small difference betwyxt the Apostles commission to bynd and loose, and the
commission of S. Peter which he affirms to be more ample, because (says he)
non erant in tanta perfectione sicut Petrus, they were not in such perfection
as Peter, and therefore S. Leo says, that the authority or power to bynd and
loose, Leo epist. 29. ^d Episcopos ^^ea^en.
was given Petro prae caeteris to Peter above the rest of the Apostles; and the
reason is, for that he being their head, and they subordinat to him, he
received the same for him self and them, and they held it as from him, and
under him, though they had it also, by Christ's commission as well as he which
S. Augustine teaches clearly, Aug. tract. 24. in euan^el. Joan.
when he says, that the keys of the kingdom of heaven were given to S.
Peter, because he represented the whole church, of which representatio^ he
yeildeth the reason adding immediately, Propter apostolatus sui primatum, or as
he says in an other place, propter primatum quem in discipulis habuit, by
reason of the supremacy he had over the rest of the Apostles giving to
understand thereby, that the keys being given to S. Peter as head of the
Apostles, and consequently as head of the Church, they were given also to the
Apostles, and to the whole Church, for what is given to the king as king, the
same is given to the common wealth, and from him or by him, as head thereof, is
communicated, and imparted to the whole body. For this cause S. Chrysostom
treating of the promis that our savior made to S. Peter to buyld his Church
upon him, Chrisost. ^o 55. in Matthew.
and to give him the keys of the kingdom of heaven, affirms that he made
him head or gouuernour of the whole world. Thus much for the second proof.

The third, and last shall be, the commission and charge that our savior gave
particularly to S. Peter to feed his sheep, whereby he made him general Pastor
over his whole flock, whereof Eusebius Emissenus says thus, Euse. Emissi hom.
de natiuit. Ioann^ euangel.
first Christ committed unto him his lambs, and then his sheep, because he made
him not only a pastor or shepherd, but also the pastor of Pastors; Therefore
Peter feeds the lambs, and he feeds the sheep, he feeds the young ones,
and their dammes, he governs the subjects, and their prelates, so that he is
Pastor of all; for besides lambs and sheep there is nothing in the Church.

This is more evident in the Greek wherein the gospel of S. Ihon was written,
then in our latin translation, for where as we have 3. times pasce that is to
say feed, the greek has in the second place (...) which does not only signify
to feed, but also to govern and rule whereby the Evangelist signified that
Christ gave to S. Peter commission, not only to feed his flock with preaching
and teaching, but also to exercise all pastoral authority over them, that is to
say to rule and govern them, in which sense the Greek word (...) is often used
in the holy Scriptures, Matthew. 2.
as in S. Matthew and Micheas the Prophet, Mich. 5.
where it is said of Bethlem; there shall come forth of thee a caeptayne that
shall govern my people Israel, and in the Apocalipse, Apocal. 19.
he shall rule them in an iron rod, and again in the Psalm, Psalm. 2.
thou shall govern or rule them in a rod of iron, in which places as also in
diverse others of the scripture to like purpose, Isay. 44.
the greek has (...) and (...) and in the same sense our lord says in the
Prophet that the great Monark Cirus should be his Pastor because he should
govern and rule his people, and Homer oftentimes cauleth king Agamemnon (...)
the king or Pastor of this people (for the word (...) signifies both) and
therefore S. Augustine expounding those words feed my sheep, Aug. in cap. 21.
Joan.
says that Christ recommended his sheep to S. Peter pascendas, id est
docendas regendasque, to be fed, that is to say to be taught and governed;
Theophil in ca. 21. Joan.
Theophilactus also upon the same place witnesses that Christ gave to S. Peter
praesecturam ouium totius mundi, the government of the sheep of the whole
world; Chrisost. lib. ^. de sacerdotio.
and S. Chrysostom treating of those words of our savior says, that he would
have S. Peter to be endewed with authority, and far to excel the other
Apostles, and again expounding the same words otherwhere, he says that Christ
spoke unto him only, Hom. 8.7. in Joan.
because he was the mouth and head of the Apostles, and committed unto him
curam fratrum suorum, the charge of his brethren, and a little after; Hom. 1. de
paenit.
that Christ gave him the charge of the whole world, which he also affirms in
an other place of the universal Church, saying, that the supremacy and
government of the Church throughout the whole world was given him by Christ.

I will conclude with S. Leo, whereas, says he, the power of bynding and
loosing was given to Peter above the rest of the Apostles; Leo Episc. ^9 ad
Episcopos viennens.
the care and charge of feeding the sheep of Christ was more specially
committed to him; to whom whosoever shall thinck the principality or supremacy
is to be denied, he cannot by any means diminish his dignity, but being puffed
up with the spirit of his own pride, he casts him self headlong to hell.

Thus thou see, Hilar: in 16 Matthew
good reader, that our doctrine of the supremacy of S. Peter, is no nouelty of
our invention, but the uniform and constant opinion, Aug. trac^ 56. in Ioa^
of the most learned and ancient Fathers of the Church grounded upon the
scriptures, Eusebius lib hist. cap. ^
in which respect we find in all the said ancient Docctors most eminent and
excellent tytles of superiority, Epipha. h^^retic. 51.
and praerogatiue attributed to S. Peter, who in S. Hilary is cauled the
blessed porter of heaven, Ciril. lib ^ in lo ca. 6.
in S. Augustine the first or cheef of the Apostles in Eusebius the greatest of
the Apostles, and master of the warfare of God, in Epiphanius the captayn of
the Disciples, in S. Ciril Prince and head of the Apostles, Ambros i^ ca.
vltimus Lucae.
in S. Ambrose the Vicar that Christ left us of his love, and to omit others
for breuityes sake, in S. Chrysostom, Chrisost. ^ 17. in Joan
the top or head of the congregation of the Apostles, Hom. 9. de paenite
an vnconsumable rock, the immovable top of the buylding, and lastly Homil. 55
Matthew. and ^7. in Joan
the pastor and head of the Church.

THAT THE SVCCESSORS OF S. Peeter, to wit, the Bishops of Rome, succeed him in
the supremacy of the Church. CHAP. IX.
AND for as much as it is evident that our savior Christ gave not this
authority to S. Peeter for his own particular benefit, but for the general
good of his Church, nor for his own days only, but during the time of the
Church milita^t, to the end, that so long as their should be any sheep in his
fold, so long there should be an universal Pastor to feed and govern them, and
that his Church which is a visible body, might have continually a visible
head, no less now in the new law, the^ heretofore in the old, which was a
figure of the new, and had a continual succession of Bishops from Aaron,
therefore I say, all the ancient fathers worthily acknowledged this our saviors
institution, and this authority of an universal Pastor, not only in S. Peter but
also in his successors, Chrisost li. 2. ^e sacerd.
where upon S. Chrysostom says that Christ committed the care of his sheep,
tum Pe^ro, tum Petri successorebus both to Peeter, and to Peeters successors,
Epist. ad Eu^^ch.
and Petrus Bishop of Rauena in his epistle to Eutyches, blessed Peeter says
he, ^eo mag. ser. in anni. ^ssum.
lives and gouerns still in his own seat, and Leo magnus affirms that Peeter
continues, and lives, in his successors, Council. chal^ed. act.
and therefore the great council of Chalcedon abouesayd having heard the epistle
of the said Leo condemning the heresy of Eutyches said Petrus per Leonem
locutus est, Peter has spoken by the mouth of Leo.

Cypri epist. ^5.
In this respect also the blessed martyr S. Cyprian (who as I said before wrote
soon after the conversion of K. Lucius) cauleth the Roman Church Cathedra^
Petri, ecclesiam principale^, vnde vnuas sacerdotaelis exorta est, the chair
of Peeter, the principal or cheef Church from whence springs all Priestly
unity, signifieng thereby that as the unity of the natural body consists in
that diverse members being combyned under one head, do all receive from the same
the influence of one life, so also the unity of the mistical body of Christ
consists, in that diverse Churches being conjoined, under one head, which is
the Roman Church, or chair of Peter, do all receive from the same the
influence of one spirit and doctrine which he declares plainly in his book of
the unity of the Church, where he says, eue^ as there are many beams of the
Sun, and one light, many bows of one tree, and yet one strength founded in
one root and many brooks flowing from one fountain, and a unity thereof
conserved in the spring, even so the Church of our Lord, casting forth her
light every where stretches her beams, through out the world and yet the
light is one, she extends her bows over the whole earth, and spreads her
flowing rivers far and near, and yet there is one head, one beginning, and
one fruitful, and plentiful mother. Thus far this famous martyr who speaking
also other where of Peter's chair, declares the miserable state of those that
are divided and separated from the same, which I wish our adversaries
diligently to note, there is says he one God, one Christ, one Church, one
chair founded upon Peeter by our Lords words, an other Altar cannot be
erected nor a new priesthood ordained whosoever gathers any where else
scattreth and it is counterfeyt, wicked, and sacrilegious, whatsoever humain
fury does institute, and ordain to violate the ordenance of God, Cypria. li
vni^. eccl^
and again to the same purpose, he which holds not says he this unity of
the Church does he believe that he holds the faith of the church? he which
forsakes the chair of Peeter where upon the church was founded, can he hope
to be in the church? Finally this blessed martyr writting to S. Cornelius the
Pope, Epist. ad ^ ne^. 45.
calls the Roman Church Marricem, and radicem catholicae Ecclesiae, the
mother and root, of the Catholyke Church, Ibidem.
which he wishes all men to acknowledge and hold most firmly, and transferring
the same presently after to the person of Cornelius, he says that he would
have all his colleagues retain and hold steadfastly his communion, that is as
much to say, says he, as to hold the unity, and charity of the Catholyke
church, giving to understand that he which does not communicate with the bishop
of Rome, the chair of Peter, the fountain of unity, the root and mother of
the Catholyke Church he is not a member of the same, nor gathers with Christ
but scattreth.

The very same in substance the famous Doctor S. Hierom teaches as well of S.
Peeter, Hieron. ad uersus Iouinia.
as of his chair, and successors; of S. Peeter he says; that he was therefore
chosen of our savior, one only amongst twelve, that a head being appointed all
occasions of schism and division might be taken away: Epist. 58. Damasum
and of his chair, and successors, he says, to S. Damasus the Pope, qui
cathedrae Petri iungitur, meus est, he which is joined to the chair of Peter,
he is mine, and again to him in an other Epistle, Epist. 57. ad ^undem.
I, says he, following no cheef but Christ am lincked in communion with thy
beatitude, that is to say with the chair of Peter, upon that rock the Church
was buylt, whosoever eats the lamb out of this house is profane, if any man
be not in the ark of Noah he shall perish in the flud, and a little after, I know
not Vitalis, I refuse Meletius, I know not Paulinus, whosoever does not gather
with thee scattreth, he which is not of Christ is of Antichrist, thus far S.
Hierome of the supremacy of Peeters chair, and particularly of Pope Damasus,
of whom S. Ambrose in the same time acknowledged no less; Ambro. in 1. ^ist.
ad Ti^oth. ca. 3.
saying, Ecclesia domus De^ dicitur cuius rector hod^e est Damasus, the Church
is cauled the house of God, the governor whereof at this day is Damasus, with
these all other Doctors of the Church; Greeks and Latins agree, concerning
the supremacy of the bishops of Rome; as Epiph. haetic 6^.
Epiphanius, Athan. 2. ^polog. and in ^pist ad ^e^or.
Athanasius, Basilius ^pist. 52. ad ^thanas.
Basilius, Greg. Naz. ^^ carmine ^evita sua.
Gregorius Nazianzenus, Chris. epist ^ and 2. ad Inocentium.
Chrysostomus, Ciril. epist. ^o ad nestor. and epist. 11. ad ^^er. and pop.
constant. and epist. 18. ad ^eleslinum.
Cyrillus, Theodor. in epist. ad leon.
Theodoretus, Sozom. li. 3 ^^ist. ca. 7.
Sozomenus, Optat. lib. 2. cont. parin.
Optatus, Ambros. de ^obitu satiri.
Ambrosius, Aug. epist. 162. and 92 ad ^n.
Augustinus, Pros. lib. de ^ingratis.
Prosper, Vict lib 2. de peruand.
Victor Vticensis, Vincen. in suo comme^t.
Vincentius Lirinensis, and Cassiodo. li. ^1. Epist. 2 ad Joan. Papam. Council.
chal. act. 3. Epist. council. chalced ad Leonem. Lib. 3. cap. 3.
Cassiodorus, all which did write above 1000. years ago and plainly acknowledged
the supremacy of the bishop of Rome as appears in the places aleaged in the
margent, whereto I remit our adversaries; to avoid prolixitie, concluding with
the great council of Chalcedon abouesayd, wherein Pope Leo was cauled universal
Bishop, diverse times, besyds that in an epistle written to him by the whole
council it is plainly signified that the Vineyard of our Lord that is to say
the Church; was committed to his charge and custody.

To return therefore to S. Ireneus in the time of King Lucius thou see good
reader how true is that, which he says of the necessity and obligation that
all faithful people have to agree with the Roman Church, propter potentiore^
principalitatem, for the mightier, or more powerful principality thereof, that
is to say, for the supreme dignity it has over all other churches, as the
mother over her children, the head over the body, and the spring and root of
unity.

THAT THE BISHOPS OF Rome exercysed supreme authority and jurisdiction in the
time of king Lucius. CHAP. X.
NOW then let us consider how the bishops of Rome did exercise this their
authority before, and in the time of K. Lucius, and near unto the same, the
which may appear partly by the appellatio^s out of all parts to the sea
Apostolyke, and the restitution, or deposition of bishops by the said sea, and
partly by the decrees made by the same for the whole Church, and the censures
laid upon such as would not receive and obey them.

We read in Tertulian (who lived in king Lucius time) that Montanus Prisca and
Maximilla falls prophets in Phrigia, Epiph. haer^ 42.
being excomunicat and expelled by their bishops, came to Rome to be restored
by Pope Victor, Tertulian. ^ aduersus Praxeam.
whom they had almost circumuented, having obtained of him letters to the
churches of Asia for their restitution, which letters nevertheless Pope Victor
revoked by the advice of Praxeas, who discovered to him their treachery; whereof
Tertulian complayneth bitterly, being then become an obstinate Montanist,
saying that otherwise Pope Victor had restored Mo^tanus, and given peace to the
churches of Asia, lo then how great was the authority of the bishops of Rome
in foreign and remote parts, by the testimony of Tertulian who was then an
heretyke and a great enemy to the Roman Church.

S. Cyprian about 250. years after Christ testifyeth that Fortunatus, Cipr.
lib. 1. epist. 3.
and Felix being deposed in Afrike by him; appealed to Pope Cornelius, and that
Basilides in like manner, Cipr. lib. ^. epistol. 4.
being deposed in Spain appealed to Pope Steven who suceeded Cornelius, and
although S. Cyprian show that Basilides being justly condemned did unjustly
appeal and deceive the Pope by falls suggestion and that therefore his
appellation could not avail him, yet he confesses that the Pope received the
appellation, wherein he says he was not to be blamed, but Basilides for
deceauing him, so that we see the custom of appealing to the bishop of Rome
out of al parts, is most ancient, whereof I will also allege some other
examples of later times, though above 1000. years ago.

^. Theodor. ^^ist. Eccles. lib. 7. cap. 4.
Athanasius being deposed by the Arrians in Greece, appealed unto Julius the
first; bishop of Rome, and by him was restored 1300. years ago and the
ecclesiastical histories do witness, that not only he, but also Paulus bishop
of Constantinople, Marcellus bishop of Ancira, and As^lepa bishop of Gaza, and
Lucianus of Hadrianopolis were all at Rome at one time iniustly expelled from
their bishoprikes, and that Pope Julius discussing the crimes objected to every
one of them, Tripart hist. lib 4. cap. 15.
tanquam omnium curam gerens propter propriae sedis dignitatem, as one that had
care of them all for the dignity of his own sea, restored every one of them to
their Churches, and wrote to the Bishops of the east blaming them for the wrong
they had done them, and threatening them that he would not suffer it, if they
proceeded to do the like hereafter.

Epist Joan. Chrisost. ad Innocen.
S. Chrysostom bishop of Constantinople, appealed to Pope Innocentius the
first, and Flauianus bishop of the same city, Liberatus in breuiario. cap. 12.
and Theodoretus bishop of Cyrus appealed in the same age, to Pope Leo, who
restored Theodoretus as testifies the great general council of Calcedon, Theod
epist. ad Leonem.
saying restituit ei Episcopatum Sinus. Archiepiscopus Leo. The most holy
Archbishop Leo, Greg. lib. 2. cap. 6.
restored to him his bishoprik. And S. Gregory the great bishop of Rome, did
excomunicate a bishop of Greece called John for that he had presumed to Judge
an other bishop that had appealed to the sea Apostolyke.

Council. Sa^dicen. can. 4. and 7.
Lastly this custom of appealing to the Bishop of Rome was confirmed by two
several cannons, in the second great general council held at Sardica, in the
time of Athanasius the great, whereat were present some bishops of Britany, and
this shall suffice for the appellatio^ of bishops to Rome, and their restitution.

Now to speak a word or two of the deposition of Bishops we find an evident
example thereof, within 40. or 50. years after the conversion of K. Lucius, for
S. Cyprian wrote to Steven the Pope to desire him to excomunicat and depose
Marcian the Bishop of Arles in France, and to substitute an other in his place
by virtue of his letters to the people there, Cypri lib 3. epist. 13.
and further desired him to aduertyse him who should succeed him, that he and
the Bishops of Africa might know to whom to direct their letters, so that we
see the authority and custom in the Church of Rome to depose foreign Bishops,
is no new thing, nor a jurisdiction usurped in later times by favor of
Christian Emperors, seeing in the great persecutions in the primitive Church,
when none were more persecuted by the Emperors, then the Popes them selves,
(who until this time were almost all martired) they exercysed this authority,
as their successors have done ever since, indifferently without exception upon
all Bishops whosoever, yea upon the 4. principal patriarchs of Constantinople
Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem, in so much that Nicolaus the first Pope of
that name writing to Michael Emperor of Constantinople about a 1000. Nicol.
epist. ad Michael.
years ago reckons 8. Patriarchs of that Church deposed by Bishops of Rome
before his time, Theodoretus lib 5. hist. cap. 23.
and Flauianus Patriarch of Antioch was deposed by Pope Damasus 1200. years
ago and although the Emperor Theodosius labored to restore him yet he
commanded him to go to Rome to answer for him self, and both S. Chrysostom
Bishop of Constantinople, Socrat. lib. 5. hist. cap. 15. Sozomen li. 8. cap. 3.
and also Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria were intercessors for him to the
Pope; to conclude; he could not hold his Bishoprik in peace, until the Pope
being pacified, Theodor. lib. 5. cap. 2^.
was content therewith, and promised to receive his legates, and therefore
Flauianus presently sent him many Bishops, and some of the cheef of the Clergy
of Antioch. Tomo 2. con^cil. in actis Syati.
Also Pope Sixtus the 3. deposed Polichronius Bishop of Jerusalem.

I omit later examples whereof there are many, to say somewhat of the general
decrees of Popes made before, or in the days of K. Lucius.

Tertulia lib. de pudici^ia.
We read in Tertullian (who as I said before flourished in King Lucius time)
that the Bishops of Rome made decrees against the heresies of Montanus and his
followers, and although Tertulian was then an egregious Montanist himself, and
an enemy to the Roman Church (which had condemned his heresies) nevertheless
in that which he writes against one of the said edicts, he sufficiently
shows what was the authority of the Bishops of Rome in those days, recyting
the edict in this manner, Pontifex Maximus, Episcopus Episcoporum dicit, etc.
that is to say, the cheef or greatest Bishop, the Bishop of Bishops does say,
etc. whereby it appears what was the title of the Bishop of Rome at those
days, for although it should be true, that Tertulian being then an heretyk and
condemned by the Bishop of Rome, used those words of Pontifex Maximus,
Episcopus Episcoporum, ironice, yet is it manifest, that he did it either for
that such were the tytles of the edict, (which was most probable,) or else,
because he was generally so called at that time, by all those that held
communion with him.

Platina in vita pij. de consecra. distict. 3. ca. 21. ^amp; li. 1. council.
But before this time; Pius the first Pope of that name about 160. years after
Christ made an edict about the keeping of Easter which was after confirmed by
Pope Victor, and the Churches of Asia were excomunicated by him for not
receiving the same.

But to the end good reader thou may the better understand how this matter
passed, and evidently see the supreme authority of the Bishops of Rome in those
days, it is to be considered; that there having been from the time of the
Apostles a different manner of keeping Easter in the Church of Rome, and the
Churches of the lesser Asia (the Romans keeping it always upon the sunday,
according to the tradition of the Apostles, S. Peter, and saint Paul; and they
of Asia observing the time and custom of the Jews, pretending the example and
tradition of S. John the Evangelist) Pius the first of that name, Bishop of
Rome, desyring to reduce all the Church to uniformity, made a decree that the
feast of Easter should be celebrated only upon sunday, but for that the
Churches of Asia made great dificulty to leave their tradition, as well Pius, as
Anicetus, Soter, and Eleutherius forbore, Eusebius lib. 5 cap. 24.
(for peace and quietness sake) to compel them by Ecclesiastical censures to
the observation thereof; but afterward Victor who succeeded Eleutherius, noting
that not only those which inclyned to keep the ceremonies of the old law, were
much confirmed thereby in their opinion, but also some in Rome namely one
Blastus sought to introduce that custom there, Tertul de praescrip. ca^ 53.
^amp; Eusebius hist. eccles. lib. 5. cap. 14.
and Iudaysme withal, cauled a council of the Bishops of Italy near
adjoining, and not only caused other councels to be assembled in France, but
also directed his commandments to the Bishops of the east, to do the like
namely to Theophilus Bishop of Caesarea, as that S. Bid reports in these
words, victor the Pope Bishop of the city of Rome dixerit authoritatem, Beda.
de AEquinoct. vernali.
that is to say directed a commandment to Theophilus, Bishop of Caesarea and
Palaestina that it should be determined how the easter should be celebrated
there, where our Lord the savior of the world conuersed. Therefore perceptae
qutoritate, the authority or commandment being received, Theophilus assembled
Bishops not only out of his own province but also out of diverse other
cuntryes, and when they were come together in great numbers. Theophilus,
protulit autoritatem ad se missam Papae Victoris, Theophilus showed the
authority or commaundment that Pope Victor had sent him, and declared quid sibi
operis fuisset iniunctum, what was enjoined him to do, etc. herein by the way I
wish to be noted how the Bishop of Rome in those days (that is to say in the
time of Lucius) exercised his authority in calling of councels, both of the
Bishops of the Latin or west Church, and also of the east, seeing Theophilus
Bishop of Palaestina assembled the prelates not only of his own province, but
also of diverse other by virtue of the commission given him by Pope Victor.

But to proceed, yt being determined by all those councils that the feast of
Easter should be kept on the sunday according to the custom of the Roman
Church, Eusebius. lib. 5. ^ist cap. 24.
Victor the Pope renewed the decree of Pius his predecessor and denounced
excomunication against all the Churches of Asia that would not conform
themselves thereto, which though some holy and learned Bishops, and amongst
other Irenaeus thought to be rigorously done, and not with such consideration,
as it seemed to them the peace of the Church required, yet none of them, nor
any of the schismatykes themselves, took any exception to his authority, as
though he had done more then he might do, which no dout they would have done
if he had exceeded the limits of his power therefore Eusebius says, Eusebius. Ibid.
that Irenaeus did admonish him that he would not cut of from the body of the
whole Church, so many Churches for observing a tradition used amongst them
according to an old custom, and Nicephorus, ^ucepho. lib. ^. cap. 38.
testifies that they advised him vt benignius statueret, that should determine
thereof with more benignity and myldnes, wherein we see Pope Victors authority,
and power to excommunicat all other Bishops; sufficiently acknowledged, though
there was question of the justness of the cause, and conueniency of the fact
nevertheless yt appeared afterward by the determination of the whole Church
of God, yea and of the greatest part of the Asian Churches themselves, that
Victor had reason in that which he did; for as Nicephorus testifies, not only
Asia did at length yield therein, Lib. 4. cap. 39.
but also vbique terrarum in orb decretum est, it was decreed through out the
world that the feast of Easter should be celebrated upon the sunday, Niceph.
Ibid.
in so much that those which would not yield thereto were held for heretykes,
and cauled quarta decimani for so they are accounted and termed by Nicephorus
saint Augustine, Aug. haer. 29. Epiph. haec. 50. council.
Epiphanius Philastrius and the councels of Antioch and Laodicea; Antioch. cap.
^. Laodicena^ cap 7.
and to conclude this point, yt shall not be impertinent to the matter in hand,
to consider how this controversy about the keeping of easter, Philastri Catalog
haere.
ended many years after in England, betwyxt the English Bishops mayntayning
the custom of Rome, and the Scottish that were Schismatykes and observed the
custom of Asia which venerable Bede recounteth, saying; Beda. in ^ Eccles. ^
lib. 3. ca^
that Bishop Colman, with his Scottish elergy, being assembled in
Northumberland, with Agilbert Bishop of the east Saxons, and his Priests
Wilfred and Agathon in the presence of King Oswy, after long debating the
matter on both sides, Wilfred answered to Colman (who relied upon the authority
of Anatholius, and Columba his predecessors) although, quoth he, Columba was a
holy man, yet could he not be perferred before Peter the most blessed Prince of
the Apostles, to whom our Lord said, Matthew. 1^
thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will buyld my Church, and hell gates shall
not prevail against it, and to thee I will give the Keys of the Kingdom of
heaven, when Wilfrid had said this; King Oswy, who had been brought up by the
Scots, and infected with their schism, asked Colman wheather he could prove
that so great authority was given to Columba, and Colman answered no, and do you
on both syds, says the King, grant without controversy, that this was said
principally to Peter, and that the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven were given
him by our Lord, and both parts answered yea; nay then, quoth the King merrily,
I assure you, I will not in any thing contradict that porter, but as far as my
knowledge and power shall extend, I will obey his commaundments least perhaps,
when I shall come to heaven, and have him my enemy that keeps the keys, no
man will open me the gates; The King having said thus all that were present both
little and great (says saint Bid) allowed thereof, and yielded to receive the
Catholyke custom of keeping Easter on the sunday. Thus we see this great
controversy ended also in England near a thousand years ago, by the authority
of the sea Apostolyke, so that to return to Pope Victor, we may truly say he
had the victory, or rather that saint Peeter by him, and his successors
vanquished all such as opposed themselves to this tradition of the Roman
Church.

Seeing then in the time of K. Lucius, the Bishops of Rome both claymed and
exercised supreme authority over all other Bishops, making general edicts,
condemning heretykes, deposing and restoring Bishops, cauling counsels, and
excommunicating whole provinces and countries, I appeal to thee gentle reader,
whether he was not then generally held for supreme head of the Church, and
whether it is lykly, that when Eleutherius the Pope made King Lucius a
Christian, he made him a protestant, that is to say, an enemy to the sea
Apostolyk, a persecuter of Priests, and of all such as defend the dignity, and
authority, of saint Peeter his predecessor, from whom he claymed, and held the
supremacy, of the Church, which now all protestants deny to his successors.

And again, seeing I have proved that the authority of the sea Apostolyke is
not grounded upon any humain tradition but upon the institution of our savior
himself, who left his flock and sheep to saint Peeter to be fed, and buylt his
Church upon him, Joan. 21.
as upon a sure rock, promising that hell gates should not prevail against it,
Matthew. 16.
ordayning for the avoiding of Schism and division one head, from the which
the diverse and manyfold members of his Church might receive the influence of
one doctrine and spirit, what shall we say of them, that are not of this fold,
that do not communicate with this head, that are not planted upon this root of
unity, nor buylt upon this rock; that against the chair of Peeter set up a
chair of pestilence, can they be the sheep of Christ, or members of his
mistical body? or receive the influence of his spirit? it is no marvel, if they
be carried away with every blast of new doctrine, torn and rent with every
schism, and cast at length upon the rocks of heresy or atheism; have we not
then sufficient reason to give lands, lives, or what honor, pleasure, or
comodity soever the world yeildeth, rather then to be driven from this safe
harbor of truth, and ancor of unity, into the seas of schism and heresy, to
the assured shipwreck of our souls? and when we spend our blood for this
cause, do we not die for religion, yea for a most important point of religion,
though it be made treason? whereof we may truly say with the blessed martyr
Sir Thomas More thet it is a treason without sin, for the which a man may be
hanged and have no harm, die and live for ever, seem to some a traitor; and be
a glorious martyr.

THE MATTER OF HOLY Images is debated, and the use thereof proved to have been in
the Church of God ever since our Saviors time. CHAP. XI.
BUT let us examine a point or two more of religion wherein our adversaries
dissent from us, that we may see wheather K. Lucius were more like to learn
their doctrine concerning the same or ours, and for that they think they have a
marvelous advantage of us in the matter of Images, and relykes of saints,
wherein they charge us with flat Idolatry, and breach of the commaundment of
God, I will say somewhat thereof.

And first I cannot but marvel at their grosnesse, Orige. hom. 8. in Exodu^.
Theodoret. quaest. 38. in Exodum.
that cannot distinguish betwiyt an Idol and an Image, whereof they may learn
the difference in Origin and Theodoretus, expou^ding these words of the
co^maundme^t, non facies tibi Idolu^, thou shall not make to thy self any ^dol,
Exodus 20.
(for the septuaginta whose translation they follow, for sculptile have (...),
that is to say an Idol) whereupon they say, that an Idol is a falls similitude
representing a thing which is not, and that a similitude, or Image, is a
representation of ae thing which truly is, to which purpose also S. Paul
says, Idolum nihil est in mundo, an Idol is nothing in the world Leuit. 19.
26. Number 23. (...) 6.
, for that Idols represent no truth, but mere fictions vanities, and lies, and
therefore ar cauled in the Hebrew text of the holy scriptures Elilun and Au^nim
whereon it follows, that all Images or other creatures held or adored for
Gods, which they neither are, nor yet possibly can be, are truly and properly
Idols, whereas other Images, that represent a truth can not so be cauled, and
this difference is evident in the holy scriptures, which never atribute the
name of Idol to the true Image of any thing, but to the false gods of the
gentiles, and uses the name of Image, for the similitud of that, which is truly
the thing that it is thought to be, or has the true proprietyes that by the
Image are represented, and so Christ is cauled the Image of his father, Bap. 7.
Colossen. 1. Hebr. 1.
and Solomon is said to have made in the temple Images of Lions, Oxen, Flowers,
yea and of the Cherubins, who (though they were Angels and Spirits) were
nevertheless pourtrayed like men, ^. Reg. 7.
(to express the form, wherein they appeared to Moses on the mountain) and
with wings to show the celerity of their motion, Conc. Nicae. ^. Act 4.
so that the representation made thereby, was true, as of a true apparition, and
a true propriety in the Angelical nature;

Hereupon it follows, that Images which are not honored for Gods, but ordained
for the honor of Christ, and his saints (who are truly that which they are
represented to be) are no Idols, and therefore our adversaries are either very
ignorant, or malicious, when they confound these words in such sort as to call
Images Idols, and to translate Idolum in the scripture an Image as they
commonly do very absurdly, and sometimes ridiculously, as in S. Paul where he
speaks of covetousness saying, it is (...), that is to say, Idolatry, or the
service of Idols, and in an other place; that the covetous man is (...),
Colossen. 3. Ephesians. 5.
an Idolater or a woorshipper of Idols (meaning thereby that covetous men make
their money, and their riches their Gods) they translate it, covetousness is the
service of Images, and the covetous man is a woorshipper of Images, as though
there were no other Idolatry, but that which may be do^ne to Images, or that
Image and Idol were all one, or that it could be said with any propriety, or
reason, that a covetous man makes his money an Image, as it may be properly
said, that he makes it an Idol, because he makes yt his God, which yt neither
is, nor can be, in which respect it may well be cauled an Idol.

Furdermore they bewray in themselves either great simplicity or peruers
malice, in that they permit no honor nor reverence to be done to the Image of
Christ, and his saints; for does not reason and common experience teach us that
the honor or reverence done to the Image passes from thence to the
Prototipon, Basil. lib. de spiritu sanct^ ca. 18. and Au^ lib. 3. de doc^
Christiana. cap. 9.
that is to say, to the thing or person it represents? he which crowns
(says S. Ambrose) the image of the emperor, crowns the Emperor, and he
which contemnes his image seems to do injury to his person; Ambro sermon 10. in
Psalm. 11
when the people of Antiochia cast down the image of the Empresle, wife to
Theodosius the Emperor, Theodore. li. 5. hist. cap. 15
he took it for so great an affront to her and him self, that he had like to
have destroyed the whole city in revenge thereof; Chrisost. orati. 2. and 3.
ad popu. Antio.
and S. Chrysostom complayneth grievously of the indignity done to the
Emperor therein. The like was judged in England of the violence do^ne by Hacket
to the Queens picture, which was justly held for a disloyal act against her
Magestyes person: And who knows not that he which stands bare headed in the
presence chamber before the Queens chair and cloth of state does honor the
Queen therein.

Also it was the custom in times past to adore the images of the Roman
Emperors, which the Christians refused not to do, in which respect Julian the
Apostata, thinking either to draw them to adore his false Gods, or else to have
some pretense to punish them for contempt of his person, placed his own image
amongst the images of false Gods, Gregor. N^^ orat. 1 in Iu Item Paulus
Diaconus in vita Iuliann^
(as I have noted in my Apology upon an other occasion) whereupon S. Gregory
Nazianzen says, that the simple Christians who did not fall into account of the
deceat, were to be excused of ignorance, for that they thought they adored no
more but the Emperors image; if therefore it be lawful to adore the image of an
Emperor or earthly king for that he is the image of almighty God, I mean, if
it be lawful to adore the image of Gods image, how much more is it lawful to
do reverence to the image of God him self, I mean of Christ God and man?

And sure I am that many in England which will not have, nor reverence; the
image of our savior for fear of committing idolatry, will make no bones at
all, to keep some picture or remembrance of their Maistres to kiss it, and to
use other tokens of affection and respect toward it, to show thereby their good
will to her.

And how many are there in England that condemn catholykes for keeping images
and pictures to move them to devotion, and yet make no scruple to keep
lascivious pictures to provoke themselves to lust? whereby they might see by
their own experience, if they were not wilfully blind, what is the effect of
good and devout pictures in well disposed mynds, and what it would be in
themselves if they were as spiritual, and feruerous in the love of God, as they
are carnal and fyry in sensual appetyt; for who douteth that devout
representatio^s do as easily move pious and godly minds to holy cogitations,
and affections, as lascivious objects do kindle carnal mynds to concupiscence
and lust? and therefore S. Gregory Nissen says, Greg. Niss. in orat de deitate
filij and spiritus Sa^cti. allega. in council.
that he never beheld the picture of Abraham sacrifising his son Isaac, but
he was moved to tears, and yet it is likely that he had often read the story
thereof, without any such effect, as Basilius bishop of Ancyra noted very well in
the 7. general council of Nice, Council. Nicen. 2.
when the same was aleaged there out of S. Gregory above 800. years ago,
wherevpo^ Theodorus bishop of Catane also inferred, Ibidem.
in the same council, that much more may the story of our saviors passion
represented by picture work the like effect in devout persons that behold the
same. Whereof I think good to declare here a manifest example of my own
knowledge.

It cha^ced in the house of a Catholyke where. I was, that a young maid of 15.
or 16. years of age, (who had been always brought up amongsts protesta^tes)
coming thither, and seeing a picture of Christ crusified demanded whose
picture it was, and being told that it was the picture of our savior Christ,
whereby she might see what he suffered for us, she was moved with such compassion
that after she had steadfastly beheld it a while, she burst out first into
sighs, and after into tears, saying that she had often heard of it, but
never seen it before, adding further our Lord help us if he suffered all this
for us.

Whereby it may appear, how true is that, which saint Gregory the great says
of Images, to wit, Greg. lib. ^ epist. ad Serenum epis^ copum Masili. epis. 9.
that they are the books of the ignorant, who are many times more moved with
pictures, then with preaching, and understand that which is taught the^ much
better, when it is by Images or pictures represented to their eyes; for as the
Poet says.

Segnius irritant animos immissa per auros Horat. de a^ poetica.

Quam quae sunt oculis commissa fidelibus.
That is to say; those things that are conceived by hearing do less move the
mynds of men, then such things as are committed to the sight.

This the devil knows so well, as to hinder the same and all other good
effects of holy Images, and devour pictures, yea and to exterminat, as much as
in him lies, all external monuments, and memories of the life and passion of
our savior, and his saints, and so by degrees to root out all Christian
religion, he has stirred up in all ages his instruments and servants to make
war against holy Images under color of zeal to Gods honor and glory.

To this purpose it may be noted, that the first and cheef impugners of the
lawful use of Images, for some hundredth years together, were either Jews, or
magicians or manifest heretics, or otherwise know in for most wicked men.
^ceph li. 16. p. 27.
The first whereof was a per^^^ (...) about 500. years after Christ, whom (...)
cauleth the servant of Satan, saying that he made himself a Bishop, before he
was baptized, and that he was the first that taught that the Image of Christ,
and of his saints ought not to be woorshiped, and almost 200. years after, in
the year of our Lord 676. the Jews impugned the use of Images in their Talmud;
Con. Nicen. ^. act. 5.
and about the year of our Lord 700. a Jew persuaded a Mohammedan King in Arabia
to burn all the Images in the Churches of the Christians, and shortly after
Leo Isaurus the Emperor did the like by persuasion of a Jew, Cedren Zo^aras,
Nicet. ^n vita leon. ^sau.
whose example his son Leo Copronimus followed, being a magician, and a
nestorian heretyk, and about the year 800. Leo Armenius the Emperor and his
successors Michael Balbus and Theophilus, ^idem in vitis ^^orum Imperat.
(all three most wicked men, and the last addicted both to iudaisme, and
necromancy) made a new war against Images, which the wyclefists also did 500.
years after, and now of late the Lutherans, and Caluinists; whereas all those
that defended the use of Images against Leo, and those other Emperors, were
most holy, and learned men, as Gregorius and Hadrianus Bishops of Rome in those
days, and Germanus, and Tharasius Bishops of Constantinople, S. John Damascen,
Methodius, Leontius, Jonas Aurelianensis, Paulus Diaconus, and diverse others,
all of them men of singular learning, and virtue, by the testimony of all
autors, both Greeks and Latins.

THE COMMANDMENT OF God touching images explicated, and the practice of the
Church declared. CHAP. XII.
BUT our adversaries object against us the commandment of God, Exodus 20.
to wit, thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor any similitude
of any thing, etc. whereto I answer if they take the bare letter without the
true sense and circumstances, no man may make any Image whatsoever, nor so much
as any lyknesse of any thing in heaven or earth, but if we consider the
circumstances, the end, and reason of the commandment, it makes nothing at
all against us, for it is manifest that the scope, and end thereof is only to
forbid Idolatry and the making of Idols, that is to say such Images only as are
made with intent to adore them for Gods, and therefore (as Tertulian notes
expressly,) it presently follows, Tertul. lib. ^ contra Marcionem.
non adorabis ea neque coals; thou shall not adore, nor worship them, which yet
appears more plainly in Leuiticus, where the same prohibition being renewed,
the intent or end is expressly added, Leuit. 26.
ad adorandum according to the Septuaginta or as S. Hierome translateth it vt
adoretis that is to say, to the end to do godly honor thereto; so that, where
that end or intent is not, the making or use of an Image, is not forbidden for
that it is no Idol; and therefore the Septuaginta in steed of Sculptile have
Idolum. for that a graue^ Image is not to be understood to be forbidden, by
that commandment, but when it is an Idol; which interpretation of the
Septuaginta, both Origin, and Theodoret do follow in that place, as I have
noted before; besides that, almighty God commanded afterward, the brazen
Serpent to be set up in the wilderness, Number 21.
and also Cherubins in the temple, Exodus 25.
where the Jews were wount to adore; the which had been contrary to his own
commandment, if he had absolutely forbidden the making of Images, or having
them in temples and Churches; yea and we may plainly gather out of saint
Hierome, that there was woorship and reverence done to the Cherubins, for he
says, ^eron epist. ^ marcella^.
that the Sancta Sanctorum was woorshiped of the Jews, because the Cherubins,
and the Arc, and the Manna were there; ^ug. lib. 3 de ^octri. christ. cap. 9.
to which purpose saint Austugin gives a general rule in his book of Christian
doctrine, saying that all profitable signs, instituted by almighty God, ought
to be reverenced and woorshipped, for that the honor done to them does pass
to that which they represent; ^ug. lib. 3. de ^rinit. ca. 10.
and in his book of the blessed Trinity speaking of signs that being dedicated
to some religious use deserve veneratio^, he puts for example the brazen
Serpent set up in the wilderness, which nevertheless was afterward worthily
destroyed by K. Ezechias, Reg. 1^.
when the Jews committed Idolatry thereto, and who douteth but that the holy
scriptures, and holy vessels or any other thing dedicated to the service of
God, is to be used with reverence and respect, and that God is honored thereby?
So that neither the making of Images, ordained for Gods honor and service, nor
yet the reverend use thereof, was forbidden by that comandeme^t, but only the
abuse, which was Idolatry, Lib. 2. con^ra Marcio.
and therefore our adversaries do shamefully abuse the people, and impudently
belly us, when they say we make Idols of the Images of Christ, and his saints;
and show themselves very gross in that they seek to abolish altogether the
use of Images, or pictures, because some abuse perhaps is, or may be incident
thereto, for there is nothing in the world so necessary, so excelent, or holy,
but if it be used, it is or may be abused, the remedy whereof, is not to take
away wholly the use of the thing, but to correct the abuse, as; not to forbid
wine to all men, because some are drunk therewith, but to teach drunkards to use
it with moderation, and hereof the Church has such care in the matter of
Images, that the people are sufficiently instructed of the use thereof by their
curats, pastors and preachers, in so much that no Catholyke man, nor yet any
child I dare say, that has but learned his Catechism is ignorant that the
image of Christ, is no more Christ himself then the Image of the Queen, is
the Queen, and that the honor done thereto, rests not in the Image, but
redoundeth to Christ who is represented thereby, and therefore is no more
Idolatry, then the reverence done to the Queens picture or cloth of estate is
treason.

To come then to the practyse of the Church, the use of images was not only
allowed, but also ordained by a cannon of the Apostles, wherein they decreed that
the image of our Savior Jesus Christ God and man, and of his saints, should be
made by the hands of men and erected against Idols, and Jews for the confusion
of both;

So far were they from thinking the use of Images, Sinod. Nice. 2. act. 1.
to be Idolatry, that they ordained the same, for confusion and overthrow of
Idols, and Idolaters, and it is not to be douted, that the Apostles made such a
decree for the use of Images, Basil. epist. ad Julian in acti^. 2. Nicce.
co^cilij act. 2.
seeing the seventh general council of Nice makes mention thereof, relying upon
the authority of saint Basil, affirming that it was ordained by the Apostles
that Images should be erected and honored; Vide Turrianum canonibus
apostolicis. cap. 25.
besyds that Pamphilus the martyr does testify, that he found in Origens
library the decrees of the Apostles made at Antioch, amongst the which; is
this; the which may also be confirmed by the use and practyse of the Church
of God, since the time of Christ, and his Apostles.

We read that Nicodemus that came to Christ by night made an Image of him
crucified, Athanasius lib. de passione Imaginis domini
and that before his death he gave it to Gamaliel who delivered it to James
bishop of Jerusalem, and he to Simeon, and Simeon to Zacheus, and Zacheus to
his successors, and that so it passed from one to an other, until the
Christians were forced to remove from thence to Beritus a city of Siria where
afterward the Jews finding it, used it most opprobriously, and pierced it
with a lance, Idem. Ibib.
out of the which issued great abundance of blood that did many miracles, and
this was so notorious, that the blood was sent to diverse parts, and a feast
celebrated in Greece in memory thereof in the month of November; this story was
read in the second council of Nice, and approved by 350. bishops above 800.
years ago. Eusebius lib. 7. hist ca 14.
Eusebius witnesses that the woman which was cured by our savior of a flux of
blood, did set up in the city of Caesarea in memory of the benefit, a brazen
Image of our Savior, and that there grew an herb at the foot thereof, which
when it once touched the hem of his garment, had the virtue to cure all
disseases, Ibidem.
and this Image Eusebius says he saw himself in his time, Sozomen. li. 5 hist
ca. 20.
and the ecclesiastical histories written after, do signify that it remained
there until Julian the Apostata caused it to be taken down, and his own Image
to be set up in the place, which was shrotly after overthrown, and burnt with
fire from heaven, wherein it is to be noted, that almighty God did not only
confirm the use of Images by the continual miracles of the herb, but also in
destroying the Image of Julian, Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 14.
set up in the place of his, showed his indignation toward all such as
contemn his Image, or do any injury thereto. Eusebius also says that he had
seen ancient Images of S. Peter, and saint Paul kept by the Christians in his
time. Lib. 4. hist. cap. 26.
Euagrius, Lib. 2. hist. cap. 7.
Nicephorus, and Lib. 4 de fide orthod. cap. 17.
S. John Damascen do declare, that amongst other ancient monuments of the City
of Edessa, therwas a long time kept a true portrait of our savior Christ which
he himself sent to Abgarus king of that city; and Leo a reader of
Constantinople affirmed before the whole council of Nice aforesaid, that he had
seen it, and Euagrius, and Theophanes recount great miracles done thereby, In
menologio graeco^um.
in so much that the Greeks celebrated a solemn feast thereof in September, as
appears in the menologio, or calendar of the Greeks; Lib 2. hist. cap. 43.
lib. 6 cap 16. lib. 14 cap. 2.
Nicephorus also says, that the holy Evangelist S. Luke did draw the true
pourtraicts of our blessed Lady, and the Apostle S. Peter, which was kept at
Constantinople in the time of Theodosius the Emperor, Tertullian makes
mention of the picture of our savior in the form of the good shepherd
carrying a sheep upon his back, Tertul li. d^ pudicitia.
ordinarily painted upon the chalices that were used in the Church in his
time, which was in the raygne of king Lucius, so that there is no dout but the
use of Images, and pictures has been received in the Church of God, ever since
the Apostels time, although by reason of the great persecutions under the Pagan
Emperors they could neither be so frequent, Damasus in pontisical^ de sancto
Siluestro.
nor publyk as after they began to be in the time of Constantine the great;
who buylding gorgious temples adorned the same, not only with the sign of the
cross, but also with the Images of our savior, and of the twelve Apostels, of
Angels, and of S. John Baptist.

S. Augustine notes that the paynims might see our savior Christ painted with
S. Peter and S. Paul in many places. De consensu euang. lib. ^^ cap. 10.
S. Hierome commends the feruor and devotion of Paula, Hieron. in epitaph
paulae. Chrisost in Liturgia.
that went up the mountain of Caluary, and prostrayting her self before the
Cross, adored it as though she had seen our savior hanging thereon, S.
Chrysostom in his liturgy, which Erasmus translated, signifies that the
priest going forth with the gospel in his hand, and a candel carried before him
used to bow down his head, to do reverence to an Image of Christ.

S. Basil, Basil. in S. Barlaam.
S. Gregory Nissen, Euodius, Prudentius, and S. Paulinus do make honorable
mention of the Images of S. Barlaam, S. Theodorus, S. Steeuen, S. Cassian, S.
Martin in Churches in their time, Greg. Nis. orat. in Theodorum.
which was 1200. years ago: and if good reader, Euodius dimiraculis S. Stepha.
pruden. in him. Pauli Epist. 12. ad seuerum.
I should allege the testimonies of all the fathers, that from the time of
Constantine did witness, and approve the publyk use of Images in the Church, I
should write a whole volume of this matter, and therefore it may suffyse the to
understand that although some ancient Fathers as S. Ireneus, Irenae lib. 1.
cap. 24.
Epiphanius and S. Augustine do reprove somtymes the abuse of some Images,
Epipha. haer. 27.
as that the heretykes called Gnostici, and others of the sect of Simon placed
the images of Christ, August. act. quoduul^. haer 7.
and of S. Peter, and S. Paul with other of Pithagoras, Homer, Aristotle,
Helen, Minerua, and such like, and adored them as Gods with sacrifices, and
incense after the manner of the gentiles, yet they never disalowed the lawful
use thereof, and therefore those, that have at any time rejected the ^ame have been always noted, and abhorred of all as heretykes, ^oa^. Damasc. ^le haeres.
in ^ine.
and called Iconomachi, or Iconoclastae, against whom was assembled 800. years
ago the seventh great general Council at Nice where they were condemned for
heretykes, Syno. Nicaen. ^. act 5. in fi^e.
and woors then Samaritans; by 350. Bishops.

OF THE RELICS of Saints. CHAP. XIII.
Marc. 6.
NOW to say somewhat of holy relics; There is no dout but the use thereof
proceeded of the examples in H. Scripture of the great miracles do^ne by the
touching of Christ's garment by the handkerchef and gyrdle of S. Paul, Act. 16.
by the shadow of S. Peter, and in the old Testament by the body of Elizeus,
Act. 5.
wherewith a dead man was revived, ^. Regum. 13.
by all which the first Christians were ^nduced to reverence and honor every
thing that pertayned to the servants of God, and to expect consolation thereby,
wherefore when S. Peter, and S. Paul suffered at Rome, Gregor. lib. 3. ep. 30.
the Christians of the east, came thither, to have their relycks as belonging
to them by right, for that they were their cuntrymen, when S. Ignatius, who was
third bishop of Antioch after S. Peter was martyred at Rome, Chrysostom. sermon. de
S. Ignatio, to. 5.
the Christians carried his relickes with great solemnity to Antioch, and as S.
Chrysostom testifies many miracles were done by the same. At the martyrdom
of S. Policarp bishop of Smyrna who also lived in the Apostles time, and was
put to death not above 12. years before king Lucius received the says) the
Christians of his diocese that were present, gathered up his relikes, and used
them with great reverence, as they themselves witnessed in an epistle which
Eusebius recyteth at large, Eusebius. lib. hist. cap. 1.
wherein amongst other things they say thus. Afterward having gathered out of
the ashes his bones more worthy then precious stones, and more pure then gold,
we placed them in a place seemly, and fit for them, where assembling our
selves sometimes, we may by the help of our Lord, celebrat the day of his
martyrdom, as of his nativity, with great joy and exultation, thus far the
Christians of the Church of. Smyrna S. Cipria^, Ep. 34.
besides the yearly celebration of martyrs feasts, makes often mention of
oblations, and sacrifices offered in memory of them, so does also Tertullian, so
that by these testimonies it appears, that in the time not only of King
Lucius but also of the Apostles, and their Disciples the relikes of Gods
servants were kept, and highly honored, and feasts of their martyrdom
celebrated, under title of their natiuityes, as still it is used in our Cathol.
Church, and no marvel, seeing the Christians at that time used to creep and
kiss their chains, whiles they were yet living in prison, Lib. ad ^^orem.
as Tertullian witnesses, and if we consider the uniform consent of all
fathers in all ages, concerning this point, we may well wounder at the malice
of our adversaries that do deny it, especially seeing in the primative Church it
was so evident that the very paynims knew it, and therefore were wont to cast
the ashes, and bones of the martyrs into rivers, or otherwise to make them a
way, to the end the Christians should not recover them, Eunap. i^ ^^^ta philoso.
and Eunapius Sardianus of Alexandria a paynim writteth that the Christians in
his time honored their martyrs being dead, kneeling and prostrating them selves
before their tombs, and making them their Ambassadors to deliver their prayers
to God.

But to return to the fathers of the Church, De ciuit. De lib. 22. cap. ^
S. Augustine to confound the gentiles reherseth many miracles done by the very
flowers that had but only touched the rehearies where the relickes of saints
were kept S. Gregory Nissen says that the Christians that came to the tombs of
saints, Greg. Niss. ^ra^. in laude^ ^agni. Theo ^ori.
did take it for a great favor that they might be suffered to carry away some of
the dust that was about the same. S. Augustine also tells that the son of
one Irenaus was restored to life, Aug de ci^i^. Dei. li. 22 cap. ^.
being anointed only with the oil of a lamp that did hang before the tomb of a
martyr; in like manner Theodoret, Theodor i^ hist. Sanct. Patrum. c. 22. in
Iacobo. Venantius For u^ in vita S. Marrini, lib. 4.
Venantius, Fortunatus, and Paulus Diaconus, Paulus Diaco. de gest. longob.
lib. 2 cap 9.
recount wonderful miracles done by the oil of lamps that burned by martyrs
tombs, yea Gregor. Nazianz. in Julian. orat. 1.
S. Gregory Nazianzen says of his own knowledge, that not only a little dust,
or bone of the martyrs but also the very remembrance of them supplyeth
sometimes the want of their whole bodies, and concludes with this exclamation,
O rem predigiosam, salutem assort sola recordatio, o prodigious thing the only
remembrance of them gives health, and in his oration in praise of S. Ciprian
he calls to witness many that knew by their own trial, and experience, what
great virtue and power was in this very dust and ashes to expel devils to cure
diseases, and for the foreknowing of things to come; Ambr. sermon. 91. de sanctis
Nazario and ce^so.
S. Ambrose asks why faithful men should not honor relickes of saints, which
the very devils reverence, and fear, Ambros. ep. 85. de inuct. corporum Sanct.
who also signifies that he had a revelation from almighty God of the place
where the bodies of S. Ceruas, Ceruasij and Proresij ad ^o^orem.
and Protase were buried in Millan, wher-vpon he took them up with great
solemnity, as S. Augstin also witnesses, August. lib. con^e^^io. 9. cap. 7.
who was present, and reports a great miracle of a blind man that recovered
his sight at the same time, and devils expeld by the merits of those blessed
martyrs.

Chrysostom. in demonstra. quod Christus fi^ Deus.
S. Chrysostom proves against the Painims, by the honor done to saints
relics, that Christ is God, to whose power and omnipotency he says, it is to
be ascrybed, that his disciples, and servants (who whiles they were living did
seem most contemtible) became after they were dead more venerable then Kings,
in so much that at Rome and Constantinople Kings and praesidents (says he)
run to the tomb of a fisher, and take it for a great favor that their
bodies may be buried, not hard by the Apostles bodies, but without the circuit
of their tombs, and be made as it were porters of Fishermen. Furthermore in his
book against the gentiles, where he discourses at large of the life and death
of S. Babilas the martyr he signifies that his body being placed in the
suburbs of Antioch near to a temple where there was an Oracle of Apollo, it
put the devil to silence, and when Julian the Apostata thought by the remove of
it to remedy the same, the Temple, and Idol were presently after destroyed
with fire from heaven, wherewith as saint Chrysostom testifies Julian and all
the gentiles were wounderfully confounded; and so may our heretykes be in like
manner, seeing that they not only impugn with them this evident argument of the
divinity of Christ, but also hold that for Idolatry which maistreth the devil,
overthrows Idols and confounds Idolaters.

I omit infinite others for breuities sake, Hieron. aduer. vigila^
and conclude with saint Hierome who declares the custom of the whole Church
of God both in his time, and long before, thereby to confute Vigilantius the
heretyke that taught the same doctrine in this behalf that our heretykes teach
at this day; whosoever says he adored martyrs? who ever taught men to be God?
yt greueth vigilantius to see the relickes of martyrs covered with costly and
precious veyles belyke Constantin the Emperor committed sacrilege when he
translated, to Constantinople the holly relyckes of saint Andrew, S. Luke, S.
Timothe, whera^ the devils roar, and now also Arcadius, the Emperor belyke
commits sacrilege who after so long time has translated the bones of
Samuel the Prophet into Thratia, and all the Bishops that carried the ashes lay
in silk, and in a vessel of gold are to be condemned for fools and
sacrilegious persons, yea then the faithful people of all Churches are fools
also for going to receive the same, with no less Joy then if they had serve
the Prophet alive, in so much that from Palestina to Calcedon there was all the
way (...) of people that with one voice sounded forth the praise of Christ,
lastly so shall we say that the Bishop of Rome does il when he offreth
sacrifice to our Lord over S. Peter, and saint Paul's venerable bones (as we
term them though thou caulest them v^le dust) and when he takes their tombs
for the altars of Christ; lo here (good reader) the use of Images and relykes,
and the honor due to them approved by the Fathers of all ages, confirmed by the
custom of all Christian nations, ratyfied by miracles, acknowledged by
infidels, and Paynims, confessed by devils, and yet denied and deryded by the
heretyks of this time, are they not then more obstinat and malicious then
heathens, yea then devils themselves?

THAT OUR DOCTRINE concerning the sacrifice of the Mass was generally received,
and believed, in the time of king Lucius, and first that it was foretold and
prophesied by Malachias. CHAP. XIIII.
BUT I will pass to an other importa^t point, I mean the sacrifice of the
Mass, to see whether our doctrine concerning the same or theirs was delivered
by our savior to the Apostles and taught in king Lucius time or no.

The sacrifice of the Mass consisting in the oblation of the blessed body and
blood of our savior Jesus Christ, was prophesyed by Malachias, praefigured by
the sacrifice of Melchifedeth, instituted and offered by our savior at his last
supper, delivered by him to his Apostles, practysed by them and by the Church
of God ever since.

Malach. 1.
Malachias the Prophet foretelling the reiection of the Jews, and the election
of the gentiles, signifies withal the translation of the Jews law and
priesthood into a new law, and a new priesthood, and compares or rather
opposes the priests of the one, to the priests of the other, sacrifice to
sacrifice, place to place, altar to altar, and a poluted bread which they were
wo^t to offer only in Jerusalem, to a clean oblatio^ which should be offered
to God amongst the Gentiles every where throughout the whole world, saying to
the priests of the Jews in the person of God, that seeing they dispysed his
name, and offered upon his altars a polluted bread, and blind and lame
sacrifices, non est mihi voluntas in vobis, etc. says he, Malach c^
my will is no longer to be served of you, neither will I accept any more
sacrifice at your hands, for my name is great amongst the Gentiles even from the
east to the west, and there is a clean oblation offered to my name in every
place, etc. Thus far the Prophet, who cannot be understood to speak of any
other sacrifice then of the Mass, which being nothing else but the oblation of
the blessed body and blood of our savior Jesus Christ in form of bread and
wine, is a most pure and clean oblation, and cannot be polluted by the
wickedness of the priests, as the bread offered in the old law was wont to be; to
which purpose it may be noted that the Prophet speaking of diverse kinds of
sacrifices, some consisting of beasts or catel (which he signified by the words
blind and lame) and other in bread, he attributes the word polluted or defiled
to the bread only, not without mystery, to oppose thereto the clean sacrifice
of the gentiles in form of bread, cauling it a clean oblation, and putting the
special force of the antithesis betwyxt the figure, and the verity, Hieron. in
Malach. 1. Hieron. ^^
for that the show bread or bread of proposition being as S. Hierome says the
bread which the priests polluted) was a proper figure of the holy eucharist, as
he also testifyeth.

Furdermore this sacrifice cannot be understood of the sacrifice of our savior
upon the cross, which was offered only once, and in one place, and not amongst
the gentiles; neither yet of spiritual sacrifices, as of thanks giving, prayer,
fasting, and other good works, which are improperly cauled sacrifices, and
therefore it is to be noted that whenever this word sacrifyce is improperly
taken in the scripture some other word is always joined thereto, to signify
the same, as h^stiae laudis, saecrificium iustitiae. Saecrificium cordis
contriti, the host or sacrifice of praise, the sacrifice of justice, the
sacrifice of ae contrit heart, ^salm. 115. ^salm 4. ^^^lm. 50.
and on the other side whenever it is alone without any word adjoined, to
restrain or diminish the sense (as it is in this prophesy) it signifies a
true and proper sacrifice;

This difference may well be noted, where it is said, miscricordiam volui, non
sacrificium, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, and again obedientiae est
melior quam victima, obedience is better then sacrifice, ^se^. 6. ^. Reg. 11.
in which sentences sacrifyce properly taken, is opposed to mercy and
obedience, which also may improperly be cauled sacrifices, as well as thanks
giving, praise of God or any other good work whatsoever.

Again the prophet speaks here of a sacrifice or oblation which should be
but one, cauling it a clean oblation, but the spiritual sacrifices are as many
as there are good works of the faithful.

Also he speaks of a sacrifice proper to the new law, and to the gentiles, and
such a one as should succeed the sacrifices of the Jews, and be offered in
steed thereof; but spiritual sacrifices have been in all times, and common both
to Jews and gentiles;

But howsoever other men may understand this prophesy our adversaries cannot
with any reason expound it, of the good woorks of Christians, seeing they teach
that the best works of the iustest men are polluted, and unclean, sinful and
damnable, which therefore cannot, according to their doctrine, be that sacrifice
which almighty God himself cauled by the mouth of his prophet, a clean
oblation.

Lastly the most learned and ancient fathers of the Church do uniformly
expound this prophesy of the sacrifice of the mass; as S. Justin the learned
Philosopher and famous martyr, within 150. years after Christ, says that,
^usti^. In dia^o. cum Tri^h^.
of the sacrifices of the gentiles that are offered in every place, videlicet,
the bread and cup of the Eucharist, Malach^^ the Prophet even then spoke and
foretold that we should glorify his name thereby.

Ireneus also having declared in what manner our savior did institute the
blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist at his last supper, Iraenae lib. cap 32. ^t
c. ^^. and 3.
and that the Church receiving the same of the Apostles offreth it to God
throughout the world, adds, de quo and in duodecim prophetis Malachias sic
praesignificauit non est mihi voluntas in vobis, etc. that is to say, whereof
Malachias one of the twelve prophets did signify before hand, speaking to the
Jews in this manner, my will is no longer to be served by you, etc.

S. Chrysostom having alleged the same Prophesy concludes. Chrysostom. hom. in
p^ 95.
Behold, says he, how clearly and plainly he has interpreted the mistical
table, which is the unbloody host.

He that lists to see more testimonies of the fathers let him read Tertulian,
Tertul. l^. ^ contra ^^tion in ^ine. Cypria. lib. contra ^^d^os, cap. Hiero^.
in Zachai. cap. ^. Aug. lib. 1. contra aduersas. leg and prophet cap. 2. Ciril.
li. de adorat. Eusebius. lib. 1. de preparat. euangel. Theodoret super. Malach. 1.
Damascen. lib. 4. de ^rt hodo^^ ^^d^.
S. Ciprian, S. Hierome, S. Augustine, S. Ci^il, Eusebius, Theodoretus, and S.
Ihon Damascen in the places alleged in the margent.

THAT NOT ONLY THE SACRIFICE of Melchisedech but also the sacrifices of the old
law, were figures of the sacrifice of the mass and are changed into the same,
and by the way is declared the necessity of sacrifice, as well for commonwealth,
as for religion. CHAP. XV.
NOw to speak of the sacrifice of Melchisedech I think our adversaries will not
deny that our savior was and is a Priest according to the order of
Melchisedech, and that he shall be so for ever as the Prophet David testifies of
him, saying, tu es sacerdos in eternu^ secundum ordinem Melchisedech, thou art
a Priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedech, the which saint Paul
also shows amply in his epistle to the Hebrews; the which being granted, two
things do evidently follow thereon.

The first is, that for as much as priesthood and sacrifice ar correlatiues,
and cannot be the one without the other; in which respect saint Paul says
that a Priest or Bishop is ordained vt offer at dona and sacrificiae, to offer
gifts and sacrifices, Hebr^^ 5. and ^.
and again that our savior being a Priest must needs have somewhat to offer,
and seeing his sacrifice upon the cross was offered by him but once, neither can
ever be reiterat in that manner, and therefore cannot be that continual
sacrifice which must needs correspond to his eternal priesthood, and be
continually offered in his Church, I conclude that besides his sacrifice upon
the cross, he did institut and leave behind him some other, to be offered
daily, not only for remission of daily sins, but also for a most divine act
of religion whereby all faithful people may daily do to almighty God the due
worship and service they owe him, the which kind of worship by publik
sacrifice, was not only used in the law of Moses, but also in the law of
nature, and is so due to God from man, and proceeds so ^^rinsecally from the
very grounds and principles of nature it self, that their can be no perfect
religion nor good commonwealth without it.

For as for religion whereas the special office and end thereof is to
acknowledge by external acts the service and subjection we owe to our Lord and
creator, and the dominion he has over us, it is manifest that no external act
of religion does so fully and conveniently express and signify the same as
sacrifice, whereby we gratefully offer to almighty God his own creatures, not
only rendering him part of his own gifts, and yiedling him thanks therefore,
but also destroying them in his honor, to testify as well that he is souuerayn
Lord of life and death, as that we hold our being and all we have of him, and
depend wholly of his will and providence, yea and that we owe our own life to
him in sacrifice and do as it were redeem the same with the death or
destruction of an other creature; in signification whereof, Eusebius. de praep. eua
lib. 1. cap.
he which in the old law did present to the priest any beast to be sacrifised,
did hold him by the head, whereon the priest did also lay his hands, to show
that it was offered as a price pro capite, for the head or life of him, that
made the oblation.

Therefore for as much as this kind of worship is the greatest and most proper
testimony we can externaly yield, of vassellage and servitude to our creator,
it cannot without prejudice of his right be communicated to any creature
whatsoever, in which respect it is caused by the deuynes latria as due to God
alone and for that cause not only the devil (that seeks to rob almighty God
of his glory) but also such men as have made themselves to be held for Gods,
traue ever affected this kind of woorship as the highest and most due to
divinity. Aug. li. eo^ aduersat. gis.
Seeing then sacrifice is most essential to religion, and a most proper and
principal act thereof, it follows that there can be no perfect religion
without priesthood and sacrifice for which cause S. Paul speaking of the
translation of the law makes it to depend wholly upon the translation of the
priesthood, saying that the priesthood being translated there must needs be
withal, a translation of the law. ^eb^. 7. ^aniel ca. 3.
And Daniel the Prophet describing the religion of the Jews fallen to
desolation, said; that they had neither sacrifice, oblation nor incence amongst
them.

And now to speak a word or two, by the way, of commonwealth, where as nothing
is more natural to mankind then the same (to the which all men are by a general
instinct of nature so inclyned, that there was never found any people so
barbarous but they lived in society) it is to be noted, that it has never ben
read nor heard of that any commonwealth has been without sacrifice, whereupon
Plutarch says, that though a man may happily find some cittyes without walls,
Plutarch ad^ers Colore^ ^picureum.
without scooles, without learning, without theaters, without money, yet no man
ever saw city without temples wherein sacrifice might be offered to God; And
Aristotle speaking of things precisely necessary for commonwealth, ordeyneth
that special care be had of sacrifice to the Gods. Arist lib. 7. polity.
Whereof two reasons may be given, the one for that nothing is more truly
political, nor tends more directly to the establishment of commonwealth then
publik sacrifice, whereby not only a league of frindship and civil unity is made
amongst men by the participation and communion of the thing that is sacrifised,
but also their passes, as it were, a covenant betwyxt God and them, whereby
they become his particular people, and he their God and protector, without
whose particular providence and protection no commonwealth can either prosper
or stand. The other reason is for that sacrifice being as before I have
declared most necessary to religion, is consequently necessary for commonwealth, whereof the true and natural end is religion, God having ordained man and
all humain things, principally for his own service and therefore the very
heathen Philosophers, namely Plato and all his followers, make the end of
commonwealth to be nothing else but a religious wisdom, Plato. Plotinus.
Iamblicus. Aristot. Polit. lib. 7. Ethie. lib. cap. 8. and li ^. ca. 14. and 1
Aristot. li. polity. Plaro. Plutarc. in vitis Rom nu^ae. and Tulli holi^ Idem
in p^ blem.
consisting in the knowledge, ^oue and service of God; and Aristotle places it
in contemplation of divine things, whereto he also specially requires the
knowledge, love, and service of God, which is nothing else but religion; in
which respect he gives the cheef preeminence and dignity amongst the
magistrates to priests, whose special function and office is to offer sacrifice.
The which is also confirmed by the custom of all good common welths, as the
ancient kingdoms of the Egyptians, and Romans, wherein the kings themselves
were priests, and offered sacrifice; as also the chief magistrates amongst the
Gretians were wont to do, and in the commonwealth of the Romans after the
suppression of their kings, yea and when they flourished most, Valerius li ca.
1. Luci flo^us in epito. lib. ^. Cicero. or^tio. pro domo (...).
the office of priests was so preeminent, that the chief bishops commanded and
controled the consuls, and as Cicero says, praefuerunt tum religionibus
deorum, tum summae reip. that is to say, had the chief authority not only in
matters concerning religion but also in the commonwealth.

Seeing then religion is naturally the end of commonwealth, and sacrifice a
most necessary and principal act of religion, it follows that sacrifice is no
less natural and essential to commonwealth then to Religion.

But to leave the consideration of commonwealth apart, and to conclude with
religion and sacrifice, I say that for as much as they are both most natural to
man, and that the works and effects of grace do not overthrow, but nobilitate
and perfect the good inclinations and works of nature, yt must needs follow
that our savior by the law of grace, did no more deprive man of public
sacrifice then of religion, but that as he left him a most perfect and divine
Religion, far excelling that which he had before either in the law of nature;
or in the law of Moses, so he left him also a most divine sacrifice, whereby he
might daily pay the tribute of nature in a far more excellent manner then he
did in either of the former states.

This is no less p^ainly, then learnedly taught by saint Clement, S. Peter's
disciple and successor, who in his book of Apostolical constitutions declaring
that our Savior did not by the law of grace abrogate the law of nature, nor
take away so much as any natural inclination in man, but^ confirm and perfect
the first, and moderate the later, he shows withal, what was fulfilled and
what was changed in the law of Moses, and amongst other things that he says
were changed, he names baptism priesthood and sacrifice, saying that in steed
of daily baptismes our savior ordained only one, and for bloody sacrifice he
instituted rationale in cruentum, and misticum sacrificium quod in mortem
domini per symbola corporie and sanguinis sui celebratur, Clemen. Apostolica^um
con^itut. lib. 6. cap. 2. 3.
that is to say a reasonable unbloody and mistical sacrifice, the which is
celebrated by the sacraments or signs of his body and blood in representation
of his death; Thus faith saint Clement of the proper sacrifice of the new law,
that is to say the mass, as it is evident by his own words; ^renaeu^ li. 4.
cap. 34.
which saint Ireneus confirms, signifying that as there were oblations in the
old law, so there are oblations in the new law, and sacrificia in populo,
sacrificia in Ecclesia, sacrifices amongst the people of the Jews, and
sacrifices in the Church, in so much that he teaches; that sacrifices were
not rejected by mutatio^ of the law, but changed: whereto he adds also this
difference, that ^acrifice is now offered by us, not as it was by the Jews,
that is to say as by bond men, but by free men, because our savior has
delivered us from the bondage of the law, and thus says this ancient father of
the sacrifice of the holy eucharist or mass, which a little before he cauleth
the new oblation of the new testament applying thereto the prophesy of Malachy,
as I have noted in the last chapter.

To this purpose it is also to be noted that the most ancient and learned
fathers do teach that the sacrifices of the old law (as well bloody as
unbloody) were figures of this sacrifice, the which they affirm not only of
the H^eron. ^^ ca. ^. M^lae^
bread of proposition, and the flower which was offre^ for them that were
cleansed from leprosy, but also of the sacrifice of the Paschal lamb; Justin.
in dial.
and saint Augustine teaches expressly that all the sacrifices of the old law
were no less figures of this sacrifice of the Church, Origin in in 26. Mat.
Tertul lib 4 contra Marcion Cipria. lib. de unit. ecclesiae An^ bros. in 1. ^^
Luc.
then of the sacrifice of of the cross, ^aying that singular sacrifl^sum etc.
the singular or most excolle^t sacrifice, which spiritual Israel that is to
say, the Church, does offer every where according to the order of
Melchisedech, was signified by the shadows of sacrifices wherein the people of
the Jews did serve, Aug lib. 1. contra aduersat. leg. and prophet. cap 18. and
19.
and again in the same place, he says that omnia genera priorant
sacrificiorum, all kinds of former sacrifices, were shadows of the sacrifice
of the Church. Whereof the reason may be gathered out of him self; to wit
because this sacrifice of the Church is the self same, that was offered upon
the cross, that is to say, our savior him self, whom all the sacrifices of
the old law did properly prefigure; August. de baptismo co^tra Donatistas lib.
3. cap. 19.
the which reason S. August. seems himself to yield, saying that our savior
sent those whom he healed of their leprosy to the Priests of the old law to
offer sacrifice, because the sacrifice which was to be celebrated in the
Church, in steed of all the sacrifices of the old law, was not then
instituted, and giving as it were, a further reason thereof, he says, qi^a
illis-omnibus ipse praenunsciabatur, because he him self was fore showed or
signified by them all as though he should say, that for as much as our savior
who was prefigured by all the sacrifices of the old law, was to be offered in
the sacrifice of the Church, or new law, therefore the said sacrifice of the
Church was also prefigured by all those former sacrifices, and to be offered in
steed of them; which other where he teaches expressly in these words the
table (says he) which the priest of the new testament, August. de ciuit.
Deilib 17. cap 20.
that is to say our savior Christ does exhibit is of his own body and blood^
for that is the sacrifice, which succeeds all the sacrifices of the old law,
that were offered in shadow or figure of that which was to come, and a little
after; in steed of all those sacrifices his (...) is offered, and ministered to
the comm^^nants, thus far saint Augustine, Leo. Mag. (...) ^ de passione
to whom I will ad two or thre^ other of the most famous fathers of the
church S. Leo surnamed the great, says, now that the varietyes of carnal and
fleshly sacrifices d^ cease, thy body and blood, o Lord, does supply, for all
the differences of hosts and sacrifices in the old law; And S. Chrysostom
having mentioned particulerly the many and diverse sacrifices of the old law,
adds, Chrisost. ho. in Psalm. ^^.
all which the grace of the new testament does comprehend in one sacrifice
ordeyning one, and the same a true host; in which words saint Chrysostom
means the sacrifice of the Eucharist, which he cauleth a little before the
mistical table a pure and unbloody host, a heavenly and most reverend sacrifice
which also he confirms other where saying that Christ did change the
sacrifices of the old law, and in steed thereof commanded himself to be
offered, Chrisost. ho. ^4. iu 10 cap. ^. ad Cor.
in the eucharist. Lastly S. Cyprian speaking of the flesh of our savior left
to his Church for a sacrifice, Cyprian. de c^na Domini.
says, that it was so to be prepared that it might continually be offered,
least if it were consumed (as other flesh is, that is bought in the market and
eaten) it could not suffice for all the christian world to serve them for an
host or sacrifice of christian religion in so much that he affirms that if it
were consumed, it seemed there could be no more religion signifying thereby not
only the necessary concurrence of religion and sacrifice, whereof I have spoken
before, but also that the sacrifice of the mass is the proper sacrifice of the
new testament, and that the eternity of the said testament depends upon the
eternity of this sacrifice, which is the first point that (as I undertook to
prove,) does necessarily follow of the eternal priesthood of Christ according
to the order of Melchisedech.

The second point which I gather of Christ's Priesthood is, that seeing he
fulfilled the figures of all the bloody sacrifices offered by the Priests of the
order of Aaron (of which order he himself was not) it were absurd to say, that
he fulfilled not the special and proper sacrifice of Melchisedech of whose
order he was.

(...). 14.
The proper sacrifice of Melchisedech consisted in bread and wine as it
appears in genesis; where it is said that when Melchisedech went to meet
Abraham protulit (or as saint Cyprian also reads it) obtulit pane^ and vinum
he brought forth or offered bread and wine, Ciprian. li. ^ epist. ^. ad Cecilium.
and to show that reason thereof it follows immediately, ^rat cum sa^erdot Dei
altissimi for he was the Priest of the highest God, whereby it is signified that
bread and wine were the proper objects wherein he exercised his priestly
function and the only matter of his sacrifice.

But for as much as the understanding of this scripture, is much controuersed
betwyxt us and our adversaries, who deny that Melchisedechs sacrifice consisted
of bread and wine, (which they say he brought forth only to relieve Abraham,
and his company, and not to offer to God in sacrifice) I remit me to the
opinion or rather to the uniform consent of the most ancient and learned
fathers of the Church, who do not only understand this scripture as we do,
but also teach that Christ fulfilled this figure of Malchisedechs sacrifice; at
his last super.

Clemens Alexandrinus does signify that Melchisedech did with some particular
ceremonies consecrat, Clem. Ale^^. lib. 4. Str^mat.
or dedicat the bread and wine which he gave to Abraham; for he says that he
gave him panem and vinum, sanctificatum nutrimentu in typum eucha^istis, a
s^^ctified or consecrated meat, in figur^ of the eucharist.

S. Cyprian says, Ciprian. ^^a^ epist. ^. ^^ caeci^^^^.
we see the Sacrament or mystery of our Lords sacrifice praefigured in the
priesthood of Melchisedech as the de^^^^ scripture testifies saying,
Melchisedech King of Salem brought forth bread and wine, for he was the Priest
of the highest God, and blessed Abraham, and a little after, he says, that our
saviors order of Priesthood was derived of Melchisedechs sacrifice, for that
our savior offered sacrifice to God his Father, and offered the same that
Melchisedech offered, to wit bread and wine, that is to say his body and blood.

S. Augustine speaking of the oblation of Melchisedech when he went to meet
Abraham. There appeared first says he, the sacrifice that now is offered to God
by Christians throughout the world. Aug. de ciuit. dei lib. ^6 ca 22.


Hieron epist. ^d Marcel^a ^de ad Euagri. epist 12^. Hipolitus. Ireneus.
Eusebius Caesari. Eusebius Emissen. Apolli^arius Eustathius
S. Hierome to Marcella says thou shall find in genesis Melchisedeth King of
Salem who even then offered bread and wine in figure of Christ, and did dedicate
the mystery of Christians consisting in the body and blood of our savior. Thus
says S. Hierome who reaches also the same expressly in his epistle to
Euagrius, confirming it with the testimony and authority of Hipolitus the
ancient martyr, Ireneus, Eusebius Caesariensis, Eusebius Emissenus,
Apollinarius, and Eustathius Bishops of Antioch. Theodoret. in Psalm. 109.


Eusebius. li. 5. de demonst. ca. 3. Ambros. li. 5. de sacram. and de ijs qui
mister. initian cap. ^. Hieron. in Matthew. cap. 26. and in qu. sup. Genes. Aug.
in Psalm. ^3. and lib. 17. de ciuit dei ca. 6. Chris. hom. 35. and 36. in Genes.
Primasius. Athanas. Photius Oecumen. super. cap. 5. ad Haebrae. Damascu^. lib.
4. de o^^i^^. cap. 14 Arnob. and Cassi^do in Psalm. 109.
Theodoret ^^ declares evidently that Melchisedech brought fourth bread and
wine both to God for sacrifice and also to Abraham, for that he fore saw in
Abraham's seed, that is to say in Christ, a true pattern or example of his
priesthood, and further he says that Christ fulfilling the figure began to
exercise the function of the priesthood of Melchisedech in his last supper, and
if I should allege all the places of the Fathers that confirm the same I
should be too taedious, and therefore I (...) those that desire to see more, to
these that follow, vz. Eusebius, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Aug. S. Chrysostom
Primasius, S. Athanasius, Photius Oecumenius, S. John Damascen, Arnobius, and
Cassiodorus, and to the most of those that have written upon the 109 Psalm.

THAT OUR SAVIOVR Christ instituted and offered at his last super the sacrifice
of his blessed body, and blood, proved by his own words, and by the
expositions of the Fathers, with a declaration how he is sacrificed in the
mass, and lastly that he gave commission and power to his disciples, to offer
his body and blood in sacrifice, that is to say, to say mass. CHAP. XVI.
IT appears by the premises that the sacrifice of the Church that is to say
the mass was prophesied and foretold by the Prophet Malachias, and prefigured
not only by the sacrifice of Melchisedech consisting in bread and wine, but
also by all the sacrifices of the old law, yea and that our savior at his last
super did exercise his Priestly function according to the order of Melchisedech
in instituting and offering the same when he sacrifised his blessed body and
blood in forms of bread and wine, which I will confirm in this chapter by the
words of our savior himself which he used in the institution and oblation
thereof, saying; this is my body which is given for you, and this is my blood
which is or shall be shed for you, etc. Luc. 22. Matthew. 26.


Wherein it is to be noted, that not only the liturgies of the Apostles and of
saint Basil, saint Chrysostom, Liturgia ^a cobi. Clem lib 8. constable cap 17.
and saint Ambrose (which last is still used in Milan ever since S. Ambrose his
time) but also saint Paul, Liturgiae Basilij Chrisost. and Ambros.
and all the 3. evangelists that report the words of our savior, do as well in
the Greek text, as in the Siriac and Caldie, speak all in the present te^se,
saying datur, fra^gitur traditur, fu^ditur pro v^bis and in remissione^
peccatoru^, 1. Cor. 11 Matthew. 26.
that is to say, is given, broken, delivered, and shed, for you, and for the
remission of sins, Mar. 14. Luc. 2^
signifiing that the same was then presently done in that unbloody sacrifice,
and not that it should be do^ne only afterward in the sacrifice upon the
cross, though if we have also respect thereto, yea and to the sacrifice of the
mass daily to be offered in the Church, it might truly be spoken in the future
tense as our Latin translation of saint Luke has of the chalice effundetur it
shall be shed, though before speaking of the body it has datur, it is given,
where it is also further to be noted, that in the Greek text of saint Luke,
Luc. 22.
this word effunditur or or rather effusum est, is shed, has plain relation
to the blood in the chalice, and not to the blood that was to be shed on the
cross for that the word (...) which sinifieth effusum is spoken of (...) that
is to say the cup, and therefore the text is (...) that is to say, this is the
cup, the new testament in my blood which cup is shed for you, whereby the figure
of metonomia, the cup is used for the blood in the cup, whereto S. Augustine
alludeth speaking of the effusion of our saviors blood upon the altar; the
body of our Lord says he is offered upon the altar, and therefore the innocents
that were killed do woorthely demand revenge of their blood under the altar,
vbi sanguis Christi effunditur pro peccatoribus, where the blood of Christ is
shed for sinners. Aug. sermon. 4. de innocent.


1. Cor. 11.
The like may also be noted of our saviors words concerning his body, as S.
Paul reports them in the Greek; in which tongue he wrote, where, in steed
of this is my body which shall be given for you (as we have it in the Latin) we
read this is my body (...) which is broken for you, Chrisost. hom. 1. Cor. 11.
which saint Chrysostom expounding of our saviors body in the Sacrament
says, he is broken for all a like, and is made a body for all a like; and
further declares plainly in an other place, Idem hom. in 1 Cor. 10
that this cannot be understood of his body on the cross; for expounding these
words of S. Paul in the chapter before^ vz. panis quem f^anginius, the bread
which we break^, he says: this we may see fulfilled in the eucharist, and
not on the cross, but the contrary, for it was said, a bone of him shall not
be broken, but that which he suffered not upon the cross, he suffers for thee
in the oblation, and is content to be broken that he may fill all men. Thus
far saint Chrysostom who is not so grossly to be understood, as though he
should mean that our saviors bones which were not broken on the cross, are
broken in the eucharist, with the hurt and grief of his person, but that his
exceeding bounty toward man is such, that he is content, not only to take upon
him a sacramental form of bread, but also to be handled, broken, and eaten to
the end he may be distributed and made meat to feed and fill all men, yet so
nevertheless that though it may be said as S. Chrysostom says, that he
suffers fraction or breaking in the Sacrament when it is broken (by reason of
his real and true presence therein) yet he suffers it without hurt or division
of his person, by reason of his impassibilitie and omnipotency, being whole and
perfect in every part thereof though it be divided and broken into never so many.

This is the meaning of this learned Father, who notably confirms thereby our
doctrine, not only concerning the verity of Christ's body in the sacrament, but
also concerning our saviors sacrifice thereof at his last super, seeing his
exposition of our saviors words admits no relation to his sacrifice upon
the cross, whereupon it follows that his body, which as he said him self was
given and broken for his Disciples, and his blood which he said was shed for
many, and for remission of sins, was then presently given and shed by him,
that is to say offered by him in sacrifice.

This is notably confirmed by an other circumstance that is to be considered in
the words of our Savior concerning the promulgatio^ of his new law or
manifestation of his new testament in the institution of the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, for as the old testament was dedicated by the blood of a sacrifice,
not to come but then offered to God when it was promulgat (with the which blood
Moses sprinkled the people, Exodus 24.
saying this is the blood of the testament that God has sent unto you) so the
new Testament was also dedicated by the blood of a sacrifice, Hebrae. ^.
not to be offered only after-wards upon the cross but then also presently
offered by our savior, who therefore alluded evidently to the dedication of the
old law, Math. 26.
and to the very words of Moses, saying this is my blood of the new
Testament; sanctifying his Church far more inwardly and effectually with the
blood of his own sacrifised body; when he gave it to his Apostoles to drink,
then Moses sanctified the people of the Jews when he sprinkled them
exteriorly with the blood of a sacrificed beast, and therefore saint Ireneus
calls the Sacrament of the Eucharist nouam oblationem noui Testamenti^ the
new oblation of the new Testament, ^reneus li. ^p 32.
and S. Augustine cauleth it Sacrificium noui Testamenti, the sacrifice of the
new Testament, ^ug contra ^ustum lib. ^. cap. 21.
and in an other place defyneth it to be a ryte or ceremony commanded by
almighty God in the manifestation of the new Testament, pertaining to the
wourship which is due to God alone and called latria, quo sibi sacrificari
precepit, with which ryte or ceremony he commanded sacrifice to be done to him
self, ^ug. epist. ad ^onorat.
and S. Chrysostom expounding these words of our savior in saint Paul. Hic
calix nouum Testamentum est in sanguine meo, this cup is the new Testament in
my blood, Chrisost. ^om. 27. in ^ Cor. 11.
compares evidently the cup of the old Testament with the cup of the new,
blood with blood, and sacrifice with sacrifice, saying the cup of the old
Testament was certain licors, and the blood of brute beasts, for after they
had sacrificed in the old law, they took the blood in a cup and offered it, and
therefore because Christ in steed of the blood of brute beasts introduced or
brought in his own blood, he renewed the memory of the old sacrifice, etc.

Thus far S. Chrysostom of the words of our savior; and then prosecuting the
interpretation of S. Paul's discourse thereupon, he adds that Saint Paul
represented to the Corinthians our saviors actio^ at his super to the end they
might be so affected, as though they where sitting at the same table with him
and ab ipso Christ^ ac^^pientes hoe sacrificium, and as though they received
this sacrifice of Christ himself, declaring evidently that the sacrifice where
with our savior did dedicat his testament according to the figure in the old
law, was not only offered one the cross but also at his super; whereof the
reason is evident; for at his supper he was a publik person, a master of a
family, free and at his own liberty to make and publish his laws, to assemble
his friends, and witnesses of his will, and those whom he meant to make his
heirs, his vicars, and substituts; all which he did; Haebr. 9.
whereas upon the cross, he represented no publik person, no master of a
family, no law maker, nor so much as a free man, but seemed the most abject and
miserable man in the world, forsaken of all men, and therefore S. Paul
teaches not that he did make, institut or publish his Testament upon the
cross, but that he confirmed it there by his death, and that from thens
forward it took effect, as men ar wont before they dye to make their
Testaments, which when they are dead begin to be of force.

And for the further explication of this question it is to be considered, that
although the sacrifice of the Cross was a most absolute and perfect
co^summation of all sacrifices whatsoever, and a full redemption and
satisfaction for the sins of the world, yet nevertheless it cannot be said
properly to have distinguished the old testament from the new, for that it was
as I may term it, a certain common and transcendent good; indifferent to
both states and testaments, whereto all sacrifices as well of the law of nature
and the law of Moses, had a relation, as now also the sacrifice of the Church
has in the law of grace, yet with this difference, as S. Augustine notes, Aug
lib. 20. contra faust^ ca. 21 and de fide ad Petrum cap. 19.
that the sacrifice of the cross was prefigured and promised to come by the
many and sundry sacrifices of the old law, and now is represented as past, by
our one and only sacrifice of the new law; which sacrifice, though it be the
same that our savior offered at his last supper, yet it has a different
respect to the sacrifice of the cross, for that ours represents the same as
already past, and our saviors sacrifice in his last supper, going before the
other upon the cross, did not only represent the same to come, but also was as
it were a preamble thereto, where in as venerable Bede our cuntryman says, he
began by passion, Bid. Rupert lib. 2. ^n Exodum.
for that, as Rupertus affirms, in angustia passionis agonizans, being
already in the Agony and anguish of his passion, he offered himself with his
own hands to God his father, and as Isichius testifies, Isichius in Leuit.
cap. 4.
preventing his enemies, first sacrifised himself in his mististical supper,
and after on the Cross, whereof S. Leo also says, Leo sermo. 7. de passione.
that he prevented his death by a voluntary oblation of himself in the
Sacrament, and S. Gregorius Nissenus explicating this matter diuinly, Greg.
Nissen. ora^. 4 de resurrectione.
says thus: Remember says he the words of our Lord to wit, no man shall take
my life from me, but I my self will give it, etc. For he which does give al
things of his own power and authority does not expect necessity by treason,
nor the violent fury of the Jews, nor the unjust judgment of Pilat, that
their wickedness, and malice should be the beginning of our salvation, but by a
secret and ineffable manner of sacrifice, he does preoccupat or prevent the
violence of men by his own disposition offering himself an oblation or
sacrifice for us; being both the priest and the lamb which takes away the
sins of the world. But perhaps thou will say unto me when chanced this? even
then when he gave to his familiar friends his body to be eaten, and his blood
to be drunk; for a man cannot eat the sheep, but the slaughter must go before,
Therefore when he gave his body to his disciples to be eaten he did plainly
demonstrat and show, that the lamb was already immolated and sacrificed for the
body of the host whiles it is living is not fit to be eaten. Thus far this
famous Grecian, brother to saint Basil, whose doctrine concerning the sacrifice
of our saviors body before it be eaten, is most consonant to our saviors own
words, not only when he instituted the holy eucharist (whereof I have spoken
already) but also before, when he promised it, for that when soever he spoke
thereof, he represented the same to the understanding of the hearers, as a body
sacrificed and dead, not speaking of his whole person, or of himself as
living, but of his flesh, of his body, of his blood, Joan 6.
as, my flesh is truly meat, and my blood is truly drink, and the bread which.
I will give is my flesh, this is my body, this is my blood, Matthew.
or if he spoke of himself, or of his person, it was with an addition to show
that he was to be eaten, as when he said he which eats me lives for me, Joan
6.
which kind of speech made some of his disciples forsake him, say^ng it was
durus sermo, ae hard speech, conceauing thereby that they were to eat him
dead, as other flesh bought in the shambles, whereas he spoke in that manner to
signify that he should be sacrificed before he should be eaten, and therefore he
ever spoke of himself, as already killed and dead, for that no creature whiles
he is living, is in case to be eaten, Greg. Nissen orat. 1. de resurrect.
as S. Gregory Nissen does note very well, in the place before alleged, in
which respect Paschasius also says, Paschas li. d^ corpore and langui Domini
cap. 1^.
that our Lord is killed to the end we may eat him, and Isichius; that Christ
killed himself when he supped with his disciples, not because he is truly
killed, Isichi. lib. 2. in leuit. ca. ^
or does truly die; but because he dies mistically, that is to say, for that
his death is mistically and truly represented, by the separation of his blood
from his body under several and diverse forms of bread and wine; for although
by reason of his immortality, and impassibilytie he cannot die, neither yet be
so divided, but that he remains whole under both kynds, yet; for as much as
the form of wine rather represents his blood, then his body, and the form
of bread, rather his body, the^ his blood (according to the very words of our
savior, saying of the one kind, this is my body, and of the other, this is my
blood) it follows I say, that by reason of this separation, wrought by the
force of the words of consecration he is exhibited in the Sacrament as dead,
and so dies in mystery, as well to represent his death upon the cross, as also
to offer himself in sacrifice to his father, for the which it is not of
necessity that he truly and realy die, but it suffiseth that he die in some sort,
that is to say mistically, for although all living creatures that are
sacrificed are offered to God with the loss of their lives, and so are made
true sacrifices, yet in such other creatures, as are not subject to death, it
suffices that they be offered to almighty God, and receive withal some notable
mutation, or change, to make the action to be sacrifical, and different from a
simple oblation, for when any thing is offered to God, and remains still in his
own kind, form, and nature, it is called an oblation, and so the first
fruits, the tithes, the first begotten, or borne, of living creatures, yea and
religious persons, as leuits, and others in the old law were only offered to
God, for that they were no way changed, whereas al things sacrifysed were either
wholly destroyed or consumed by sword, or fire, or else at least received by the
actio^ of the priest, some notable mutation.

Therefore seeing our savior being now eternal, immortal, and impassible is not
subject to death, nor to any destruction or mutation by loss of his life, it
suffices to make him a true sacrifice that he be offered to God with such
mutation or change, as may stand with his present state, and condition; as we
see he is offered in this sacrifice, wherein, the self same body that was borne
of the blessed virgin Mary, and is now in heaven glorified with the proper
form and lineaments of a natural body, is by the omnipotency of our saviors
words pronounced by the priest, represented upon the altar as dead, and in
forms of bread and wine, his body to be handled, broken, eaten, and his blood
to be drunk, or shed, as the body or blood of any other living creature that
is killed in sacrifice, whereby he is also in some sort consumed, for that his
body being eaten and his blood drunk he loses the form, and peculiar manner
of being that he has in the sacrament; which being deuynes caul Sacramental:
in respect of all which admirable mutations, Aug. in praefar. Psalm. 33. ^ lib.
Regum cap. 21.
S. Augustine does notably and truly apply to our savior in this sacrifice the
history of King David, when he changed his countenance (as the scripture says)
before Abimelech or king Achis (for they are both one) which he says, was
verifyed in our savior Christ, when he changed his countenance in the
priesthood, and sacrifice of Melchisedech giving his body and blood to be eaten
and dronk.

There was, says he, a sacrifice of the Jews in beasts, according to the
order of Aaron, and that in mystery, and there was not then the sacrifice of
the body and blood of our Lord, which the faithful know, and is dispersed
throughout the world, and a little after showing how Melchisedech brought forth
bread and wine when he blessed Abraham, he teaches that it was a figure of
this sacrifice, and then prosecuting the history how David being taken for a
mad man, went from Abimelech (which signifies regnum Patris, that is to say,
as he expounds it, the people of the Jews,) he applies also the same to our
Savior, saying that when he told the Jews that his flesh was meat, and his
blood drink, they took him for a mad man, and abandoned him, whereupon he also
forsook them, and changing his countenance in the sacrifice of Melchisedech,
(that is to say, leaving all the sacrifices of the order of Aaron, and as it
were disguysing himself under the forms of bread and wine, which was the
sacrifice of Melchisedech) he passed from the Jews to the Gentiles.

This is the effect of S. Augustinus discourse in that place concerning the
mutation or change incident to our Saviors person in the sacrament of the
Eucharist, and requisite to the sacrifice whereof I treat, whereby it has the
nature of a true sacrifice, as I have declared before, which being considered,
with the circumstances of our saviors own words, as well in the promise as in
the institution thereof, all signifying that his flesh, his body, and his blood
was to be eaten and dronk, as of a creature killed in sacrifice, yea and that
the same was then presently given or offered by him to his Father for his
disciples (who represented the whole Church) and for remission of sins;
besyds his manifest allusion to the promulgation of the old Testament,
dedicated with the blood of a present sacrifice, and lastly the consent of the
learned Fathers of the Church confirming our Gatholyke doctrine in this
behalf, no reasonable man can dout but that our Savior at his last super did
ordeyn the Sacrament of the Eucharist to serve us not only for a food and
spiritual meat, but also for a sacrifice offering the fame himself first to
his Father, and then giving commission and power to his Disciples to do that
which he did, to wit to offer and sacrifice the same, ^e ^2. Cor. 11.
saying hoc facite in n^eam commemoratione^, that is to say, do, make, or
sacrifice this in remembrance of me, for this word facite as well in the Syriac
Hebrew and Greek as in the Laryn, signifies to sacrifice, no less then to do
or make as in Leuiticus, Leuit. 15.
faciet vnum pro peccate, he shall sacrifice one (of the turtle doves) for
remission of sin, and in the book of Kings, faciam bovem alterum, I will
sacrifice the other ox, Reg. 15. ^euit 9 14. ^. 24. n. 6.8. ^. 28 3. Reg.
^ezechi. 46. ^seae. 2.
and the like may be seen in diverse other places of the holy scriptures, where
the Hebrew and Greek word which does properly signify facere must needs be
understood to do sacrifice, in which sense fac^re is also used amongst the
Latins, ^irgil. in Pa^mone ^clo. 3.
as cum faciam vttulapro frugthus, etc. when I shall sacrifice a calfe for my
corn, etc, also in Plautus, faciam tib^ fideliam mulsiplenam, I will sacrifice
unto the a po^ful of sweet wine, and again in Cicero. Iunoni omnes consules
facere necesse est, all the consuls must needs sacrifice, to June. ^iaut. in
assi^aria Cicero. ^ro Murena
But howsoever it is, it little imports for the matter in question whether
faecere do properly signify to sacrifice or no seeing it is evident that all the
doctors of the Church do understand that Christ commanding his Apostles to do
that which he did, commanded them to sacrifice, ^ioays ce^esialticae dierarch
c. 5.
S. Denis who was converted by S. Paul at Athens; declaring the practice of the
Church in his time, faith that the Bishop in the time of the holy mysteries,
excuses himself to almighty God, for that he is so bold to sacrifice the host
that gives health or salvation, aleadging for his excuse our Saviors
commandment to wit, hoc facite, do this in my remembrance.

Clemens lib. ^. consticutio cap. 10.
S. Clement in his Apostolical constitutions speaking to Priests in the name of
the Apostles, faith, suscitato Domino offerte saecrificium vestrum de quo vobis
praecepit per nos, hae facite in meam commemorationem, on easter day, when, our
Lord is risen, offer your sacrifice, as he commanded you by us, saying, do
this in my remembrance.

Martialis who also conuersed with the Apostles, says that the Christians
offered the body and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ to life everlasting,
Martial. ^ Burdegal
because he commanded them to do it in remembrance of him.

Justin the Philosopher, Justin. i^ dialog. cu Tripho.
and Martyr within 140. years after Christ says, that God, who receives
sacrifice at the hands of none but of Priests, did foretell by his Prophet, that
those sacrifices should be grateful to him which Jesus Christ commanded to be
offered in the Eucharist.

S. Cyprian says; Cyprian. epist. 63. a Caecilium
our Lord and God Jesus Christ, is the chief Priest, and offered first
sacrifice to God the Father and commanded that the same should be done in his
remembrance S. Chrysostom teaching that the sacrifice which is daily offered in
the Church, Chris he 17. in epis Hebrae.
is always one and the self same sacrifice, be it offered never so often, adds,
Aug. lib. contra fa cap. 23. A^ bros. in c epist. ad brae. Prim fius in ca ad
Hebra Isidor lib. vocatio ^ tium. cap. Hayme in ^. epist. a^ Hebea.
that which we do, is done in remembrance of that which was done by our
Savior, far he said, do this in remembrance of me. I omit for breuityes sake,
S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, Primasius Bishop of vtica, S. Isidore, Haymo and
diverse others that testify in like manner, that our Savior, saying to his
Apostles do this, gave them commission and power to sacrifice, and thus much
for the institution of the mass by our Savior.

THAT THE APOSTLES practysed the commission given them by our Saviors
sacrificing or saying Mass themselves, and leaving the use and practyse
thereof unto the Church, and that the ancient Fathers not only in King Lucius
time, but also for the first 500. years after Christ, teach it to be a true
sacrifice, and propitiatory for the living and for the dead. CHAP. XVII.
NOW then to speak breefly of the practyse of the Apostles, and of Gods
Church ever since, It being manifest by that which I have said already, that
our Savior himself did not only institute and offer the sacrifice of his
body, and blood at his last super, but also gave commission and power to his
disciples to do that, which he did, it cannot be douted, but that they executed
this power and commission, and did not only consecrate and make the body of our
savior, as he did, but also sacrificed the same.

Therefore whereas we read in the Acts of the Apostles that they used to
assemble themselves together ad frangendum panem, to break bread, Actor. 30.
it is doutles to be understood, that they offered this sacrifice inform of
bread, according to the commission and co^maundme^t of our Savior, and that
the same was the public ministry wherein the scripture says they were
occupied, when they were commanded by the holy ghost to segregat Paul and
Barnabas, Actor. 13.
whereof it is said, ministra^tibus illis Domino and ieiunantibus, etc. whiles
they were ministering to our Lord and fasting etc. which being in the Greek
(...) does signify the ministry of sacrifice, in which sense (...), and (...)
are taken in the scripture when they are used absolutely, and spoken of any
publyke and holy ministry whereof we have examples as well in the epistieto the
Hebrews in diverse places, Epist. ad h brae. 8.9.10.
as also in the gospel of S. Luke, author of the Acts of the Apostles, who
speaking of Zacharias the priest, and of his ministry or office, which was to
offer sacrifice calls it (...) and therefore Erasinus (of whose judgment in
like cases our adversaries are wont to make no sma^e account) had great reason
to translate the foresaid words (...), etc. sacrifican^bus illu Domino, etc.
as they were sacrifycing to our Lord, etc. and so common was this sense and
understanding of (...) for sacrifice that the grecians have no other proper
word for the sacrifice of the Mass.

Furdermore that the ministry of the Apostles in breaking bread, 1. Cor. 10.
was a sacrifice, it appears euidetly by S. Paul, who to withdraw the
Corinthians from sacrificing to Idols, did represent unto them the sacrifice
which he and the Apostles did use to offer in the breaking of bread, making a
plain antithesis betwyxt the one sacrifice and the other, and comparing the
bread which they brake as well with the lawful sacrifices of the Jews, as also
with the unlawful sacrifices of the gentiles. Of the first he says. Behold
Israel according to the flesh are not those which eat of the sacrifices
partakers of the Altar? 1. Cor. 10.
and again speaking of the other, fly, says he, from the woorship, that is
to say, the sacrifices of Idols, and yiedling a reason, thereof, the cup, says
he, which we bless, is it not a communication of the blood of our Lord; and
the bread which we break, is it not a participation of our Lords body, and
after more plainly; those things which the gentiles do sacrifice, they sacrifice
to devils, and not to God, I would not have you to be partakers with devils, you
cannot drink the cup of our Lord, and the cup of devils, you can not be
partakers of the table of our Lord, and the table of devils, etc. Thus far
the Apostle who as you see evidently compares or rather opposes cup to cup,
table to table, Altar to Altar, sacrifice to sacrifice, and therefore saint
Ambrose understands in this place the table of our Lord to be the Altar,
faying, Ambros in 1. ad. cor. 1.
he which is partaker of the table of Devils, mensae Domini id est altari
obstrepit, does oppose himself against the table of our Lord, that is to say
the Altar, and saint ^ilary expounds it to be mensam sacrifictorum the table
of sacrifices. ^ilar. in psalm. ^^.
Also S. Chrysostom upon these words Calix beuedictionis the cup of blessing,
and the rest that follows in the text, says in the person of Christ,
Chrisost ho. 24 in 10. cap. 2. epist. ad Cor.
if thou desire blood, says be, do not sprinkle the Altar of Idols with the
blood of brute beasts, but my altar with my blood, S. Augustine in like sort
interprets this place of the sacrifice of the Church, saying that S. Paul
teaches the Corinthians, Aug. lib. contra aduers. Leg. and Prophet.
ad qoud sacrificu^ debeant pertimere, to what sacrifice they ought to belong,
and Haymo, who wrote about 800. years ago, says that calix benedictionis, the
cup of blessing, which S. Paul speaks of, Maymo in epist. ad Corinth.
is that cup which is blessed a sacerdo^ibus in Altars, of priests in the
Altar, so that if we consider the circumstances of S. Paul's words with the
interpretation of these learned Fathers, it can not be denied, but that he and
the other Apostles in the ceremony of breaking bread, did not only administer
the Sacrament of the eucharist to the people (as our adversaries would have it)
but also offer sacrifice. Which may sufficiently be confirmed, as well by the
liturgy or mass of S. James the Apostle, yet extant, agreeing with ours for as
much as concerns the substance of the sacrifice, as also by a constitution of
the Apostles mentioned by S. Clement, saint Peter's disciple; wherein; Clem. lib
2. constit. ca 63.
they decreed, that nothing should be offered super Altar, upon the Altar, more
then our Lord had commanded: and speaking further in the same decree of the
sunday he signifies that they exercysed that day, 3. several acts of religion,
that is to say euangelij praedictionem^ oblationem sacrificij, and sacricibs
dispensationem; the preaching of the gospel, oblation of sacrifice, and the
distribution of the holy meat, that is to say the holy eucharist; whereby it is
evident that the publyke ministry of the Apostles, consisted not only in
preaching and ministering the Sacrament of the eucharist, but also in oblation
of sacrifice; here to I may ad the testimony of saint Andrew the Apostle. Who
being urged by Egeas the proconsul to sacrifice to the false God, Epist.
^^c^is^ae Achai.
answered that he sacrificed daily and distributed to the people, the flesh of
the immaculat lamb, as witnesses the Epistle of the churches of Achaia
declaring the story of his passion; besyds that Epiphanius a most ancient
Father of the Church does testify that all the Apostles did sacrifice,
Epiphanius h^ res. 79.
who writing against the sect of heretykes called Colliridians and reprehending
them woorthely for having certain women priests that offered sacrifice to our
lady (which could not be offered to any but to God alone) says, it was never
heard of since the world began that any woman did sacrifice, neither our
first mother Eua, nor any of the holy women in the old Testament, no nor the
virgin Mary her self, nor the 4. daughters of Philip the deacon though they
were prophetesses, and then, having named Zacharias father to saint John for
one that offered sacrifice in the old law, he adds, that all the 12. Apostles
(whom he names particulerly) did sacrifice; whereof it were a sufficient
argument, though there were no other, that those Fathers who partly lived with
them and received of them the Christian faith, and partly succeeded them
immediately, do signify not only the use of the sacrifice in the Church in
their time, but also their constant and most reverend opinion thereof, as it
may appear sufficiently by that which I have already aleadged out of S.
Clement, S. Denis, S. Martial, S. Justin, and S. Ireneus, Clemes. li. ^.
constit. c. 20. Dionisius Ecclesiae Hiecarch cap. 3. Martial. epist. ad
Burdegal. Justin. Dial. cum Trioho. Ireneus. li 4. aduers haeres. ca. 32. etc
3^.
all which do uniformly teach that Christ delivered this sacrifice to his
Apostles, and the last of them to wit S. Ireneus scholar to S. Policarp who was
scholar to S. John the Evangelist, says, that the Church receining it of the
Apostels did offer it throughout the world, in his time, which as I have said
before was in the time of K. Lucius and therefore I shall not need to enlarge my
self further in this matter to produce the testimonies of the later fathers
partly because I have already accomplished my principal intention in this
treatise, which is to prove that king Lucius could receive from the Church of
Rome, no other but our Gatholyke Roman faith as well in this point of the
sacrifice of the Mass as in all other which we profess, and partly because
in handling and explicating the prophecies, and figures of the old testament,
and the actions and words of our Savior, and of his Apostles concerning the
institution use and practyse of this sacrifice, I have already aleadged so many
plain and evident testimonies of the fathers, that it is needles to aleadge
any more. Seeing it is most manifest thereby that all those of the first 500.
years both taught our doctrine in this point, and understood the scriptures
concerning the same as we do, and that they speak not of this sacrifice (as
our adversaries will needs understand them) as of an improper sacrifice, but in
such sort, that they evidently show their opinions, of the propriety, verity,
and excellent dignity thereof: and therefore in S. Denis scholar to S. Paul; it
is called; (...), which Budaeus translateth sacrificium sacrificiorum, the
sacrifice of sacrifices. In S. Cyprian, Cyprian epist lib. 2. epist. 3. vel
epist. 63 ad Caecil.
verum and plenum sacrificium, a tiue and full sacrifice, which he says, the
priest does offer in the person of Christ to God the Father. In S. Chrysostom,
Chrisost. ho. ^o. ad popul. and ho. in psalm 95.
sacrificium tremendum and horror is plenum caleste summeque venerandum
sacrificium, a dreadful sacrifice and full of horror, a heavenly and most
reverend sacrifice. In S. Augustine, Aug. lib. 10. de ciuit. cap. 20. and iib.
de spiritum and liters ca. 11.
singular summum and verissimum sacrificium, cui omnia falsa sacrificia
cesserunt, the singular, and the most highest, and most true sacrifice, whereto
all the salse sacrifices of the gentiles have given place. In Eusebius,
sacrificium Deo plenum, a sacrifice full of God. In S. John Damascen tremendum,
vitale sacrificium, a dreadful sacrifice and giving life. In Theodoretus,
sacrificationem agni deminies, the sacrificing of the lamb of God, and in the
first general council of Nice held by above 300. Fathers, In ^omo council lib.
3. de constir. Nicaen. conc. constit 6.
situm in sacra mensa agnum illum Dei tollentem peccata mundi, incruente a
sacerdotibus in molatum, the lamb of God placed upon the holy table, the which
lamb takes away the sumes of the world, and is vnbloodily sacrificed by the
priests, whereto may justly be added the doctrine of all the Fathers, that this
sacrifice is propitiatory for the living, and for the dead, grounded no dout
upon the words of our savior himself in his first institution, and oblation
thereof, when he said to his Apostles representing the whole Church this is my
body which is given pro vobis for you, that is to say, for remission of your
sins and more plainly, in oblation of the cup, this is my blood which is shed
pro vobis, Matthew ca.
or as saint Math. says pro multis in remissione^ peccatorum, for you and for
many to the remission of sins for this cause saint James the Apostle in his
liturgy says offermius ^^bi we offer to thee o Lord the unbloody sacrifice
for our sins, and the ignorance of the people, Martial ad Burdegale
and saint Martial the most ancient martyr who as I have said lived with the
Apostles, affirms that by the remedy of this sacrifice life is to be given
us, and death to be eschewed, Dionis. lib Ecclesiast Hierar. ca^ S. Athanas
allegat. a ^ malce^oserm. profunctis.
and S. Denis a foresaid cauleth it salutarem bostiam, the host or sacrifice
that gives health or salvation, S. Athanasius says that the oblation of the
unbloody host is propitiatio, a propitiation or remission of sins. Origin
cauleth it the only commemoration which makes God mercyful to men. Origin ho
13. in Leui Cyprian d coem. Dom


S. Cyprian terms it medicamentum and holocaustum ad sanandas infirmitates,
and purgandas iniquitates, a medicin and burnt sacrifice for the healing of
infirmityes and the purging of sins.

S. Ambrose speaking of the Eucharist says that Christ offreth him self
therein quasi sacerdos, vt peccata nostra dimittat, Ambros. li de offic. c 41
as a priest that he may forgive our sins.

S. Augustine considering that all the sacrifices of the old law were figures of
this sacrifice, August. i^ Leuit qu.
(as he often affirms,) and that amongst infinite others, there were some that
were called hostiae pro peccato, sacrifices for remission of sin. By the
sacrifices says he, that were offered for sins, this one of ours, is
signified wherein is true remission of sin, Iacobus in sua liturg.
and to ad somewhat more hereto concerning the custom of Gods Church to offer
this sacrifice also as propitiatory for the dead S. James the Apostle in his
liturgy prays to almighty God that the sacrifice may be acceptable unto him
for remission of the peoples sins and for the repose of the souls of the
dead, Clement. constable. Ap^ lib, 6.
also saint Clement reaches for a constitution of the Apostles to offer the
holy Eucharist in Churches, ^tis. hom. ^ epist. ad lip. Item ^ 41 in st. 1. ad
rinth. ^m hom. ad ^ popul ^tioch ^eg nissen ^egatus a ^n Damas^o in oca^ne pro
de^^ctis.
and Churchyards for the dead. S. Chrysostom also often affirms it for a
decree of the Apostles to offer sacrifice for the dead, saying; it was not
rashly decreed by the Apostles that in the most dreadful mysteries there should
be commemoration made of the dead, for when the people, and clergy stand with
their hands listed up to heaven, and the reverend sacrifice set upon the Altar,
how is it possible that praying for them, we should not pacify the wrath of
God toward them. S. Gregory Nissen in like manner proves the vtility and
profit thereof, by the authority of the Disciples of Christ that taught and
delivered the custom to the Church as witneseth saint John Damascen, ^n.
Damas^o in ora^ne pro de^ctis.
who affirming it to be an Apostical tradition, confirms the same with the
testimonies of S. Athanasius, and saint Gregory Nissen.

Tertulli li. de ^stita.
Tertullian often makes mention of oblations offered for the dead yearly in
their anniuersaries, aleadging it amongst diverse other for an ancient custom,
^em lib. de ^onogam. li. ^e corona ^ilitis.
and unwritten tradition of the Church.

Cypri. epist. ^.
S. Cyprian also mentions a constitution made before his time that for such as
make Priests their executors or tutors to their Children, no oblation or
sacrifice should be offered after their death, which statute he ordained should
be executed upon one called victor that had offended against the same.

Sateth. 5. ^mistago.
S. Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem, having spoken of other parts of the sacrifice of
the mass, says; then we pray for all those that are dead, believing that
their souls, for whom the prayer of the dreadful sacrifice is offered receive
very great help thereby.

Aug. de ver^is Aposto^is sermon. 32. ^etlec^dum ^lios 34.
S. Augustine says that according to the tradition of the ancient fathers the
whole Church uses to pray, and offer the sacrifice of the blessed body and
blood of Christ for those that are dead, and that it is not to be douted but
that they are helped thereby, Cap. 12.
and in his book of confessions he signifies, that the sacrifice of our
redemption, that is to say the blessed body and blood of our Savior was offered
for his mothers soul when she was dead.

S. Gregory the great to declare the excellent effect of the sacrifice of the
mass, Homil. 37 in euange
offered for the dead, tells of one that being taken prisoner in the war,
and thought to be dead was delivered on certain days of the week of his
chains, and fetters, which fell from him so often as his wife caused the
sacrifice of the mass to be offered for his soul, and of this S. Gregory
takes witness of many of his auditors whom (as he says) he presumed did know
the same.

The like also in every respect recounteth venerable Bede our countryman in the
story of England (which he wrote about 800. years ago) of one Imma servant to
King Elbum, Beda Ecel hist. Angl. 4. cap. 22.
which Imma being prisoner in the hands of his enemies and chayned, could not
be tied so fast, but that his chains fell of once a day, at a certain hour,
when his brother, called Iunna an Abbot, said mass for him, thinking he had been slain, and this says saint Bid he thought good to put into his history,
for that he took it for most certain, having understood it of credible persons
that had heard the party tell it to whom yt happened.

To conclude; this custom of offering the blessed sacrifice of the mass for
the dead, was inuyolably kept in the Church of God, even from the Apostle time
without contradition, until Aerius an Arrian heretyke impugned the same and all
prayer for the dead about 360. years after Christ, Aug. haer. ^. Epipha. ^ae 75.
for the which he is put in the Catologue of heretykes by saint Augustine, and
S. Epiphanius, as our adversaries deserve also to be for teaching and defending
the same haeresy.

AN ANSWER TO THE objections of our adversaries out of S. Paul's epistle to
the Hebrews, with a declaration that the heretykes of this time, who abolish
the sacrifice of the Mass, have not the new Testament of Christ, and that they
are most pernicious enemies to humain kind. CHAP. XVIII.
BUT now our adversaries against us, or rather against these express
scriptures and Fathers, object some texts and arguments of S. Paul to the
Hebrews, by the which he conuinceth the ignorance, and error of the Jews who
conceived that their was no other redemption then that which was obtained by
their sacrifices of beasts or of fruits of the earth, ^ug. lib. 3. de ^octri.
Christ ^. 5. and 6.
obseruantes, says S. Augustine, signa pro rebus ipsis nescientes quo
referrentur, taking the figures or signs of things, for the things themselves
not knowing whither they were to be referred, and therefore S. Paul proves that
this absolut perfection which they ascrybed to their sacrifices, could not be
found in the priesthood and sacrifices according to the order of Aaron but in
the sacrifice and priesthood according to the order of Melchisedech, which he
declares by evident arguments grounded upon the unity and excellency as well of
the priest, and host or sacrifice, as of the act of oblation, showing the
infirmity of the priests by their mortality, plurality and continual necessity
to offer daily, first for their own sins, and after for other men's,
whereas in the other of Melchisedech, he says, there was a priest, that is to
say our Savior Christ, who had an eternal priesthood, and therefore needed no
successor, and being unpolluted and without sin had no need to offer
sacrifice for himself, and so was more fit and worthy to obtain pardon for
the sins of the people; and as for the hosts or sacrifices he shows also
the infirmity thereof, for that they were but only of brute beasts, and in that
respect could not be of that infinite value, that was requisite for an absolute
and general redemption, whereas the sacrifice in the priesthood of Melchisedech
was of infinite price, being the body of our Savior offered voluntarily by
himself, who was both the sacrifice, and the priest. Lastly he proves also
the insufficiency of the sacrifices, Cap. 2.
by the continual and daily oblation thereof, for that says he, if they could
have made perfect such as offered them, cessassent offerri, there would have been
an end of offering them, for vbi est peccatorum remissio, i am no^ est oblatio
propeccatis, where there is remission of sins, there needs no oblation for
sin. But our Savior by his sacrifice upon the cross, vnica oblatione
consummauit in aeternum sanctificatos, Cap. 7.
did consummat or make perfect for ever, all those that are sanctified with one
only oblation, for otherwise, says he, he must have suffered oftentimes, which
as well for the excellent dignity of the priest, as for the infinite value of the
host, was needles.

Thus argued S. Paul against the Jews, which our adversaries do absurdly
wrest against the sacrifice of the Mass, saying that the same is wholly
overthrown by the same arguments, not only in respect of the multitude of our
priests, but also for our daily oblations, and because we attribut remission
of sin thereto, which they say, S. Paul ascribes only to the sacrifice of
the cross. For the full answer and satisfaction of this cauil, it is to be
understood, first that S. Paul does not impugn by these arguments any
sacrifice whatsoever, but only the sacrifices of the the priesthood of Aaron,
neither yet he impugneth those in such sense that he denies them to be true
sacrifices, but only proves by the infirmity thereof, and of the priests that
offered them, that they could not suffice for the perfect sanctification, and
justification of man, nor for the general redemption of the world, to which
purpose he says of the priesthood of Aaron, if there were, says he, Heb. cap.
7.
consumation or perfection by the leuitical priesthood, what needed there to
rise a p^iest according to the order of Melchisedech, and again, the law could
bring nothing to perfection, but was an introduction to a better hope, etc.
Ibidem.
and speaking of the sacrifice of our Savior upon the cross, Hebr. ca 9.
he says that he entered once into the holyes, having sound aeternal
redemption, not by the blood or goats or calves, but by this own blood, Hebr.
10.
and again with one oblation he did consummat for ever all those that are
sanctified; by all which he gives to understand that where as mankind was by
the fa^le or our Father Adam made a bondsman and slave of sin, and subject to
the penalty of eternal damnation he therefore needed some effectual means as
well to redeem, and free him from this penalty, as also to clear him from
sin, to sanctify him and justify him (all which he comprehends in the word
consummation) and this I say, he shows, could not be performed by the blood
of goats and calves, but by the blood of a sacrifice of infinite price and
value, that is to say of Jesus Christ God and man, who therefore he says, not
only purchased for man everlasting redemption from damnation, but also did
consummat or make perfect for ever all those that that are sanctified, that is
to say he purchased perfection of grace, sanctification and justification, for
all those that ever were just from the beginning of the world; or ever shall be
to the end thereof, and therefore what benefit soever any of the faithful
received in this kind either by any sacrifice or by any good work in the law
of nature, or in the law of Moses S. Paul attributes the same to the merit
of Christ's sacrifice upon the cross, for that none were ever justified before
Christ, but perfidem futurae passionis, sicut nos per fidem praeteritae, by the
faith, says saint Augustine, Aug. li. confessio. 10. cap. 43.
of his passion to come as we are justified by the faith of his passion past,
in which respect the scripture says agnus occisus est ab origin mu^di, the
la^be was killed from the beginning of the world, Apoc. 13.
that is to say, the death of the lamb, which was Christ, has always had his
operation and effect from the beginning of the woorld: so that S. Paul's
doctrine is no other but that the redemption, justification, and salvation of
man, cannot be ascribed to the merit of any sacrifice or of all the sacrifices
of the old law, but to the merit of the sacrifice of our Savior upon the
cross, once offered for all, to the which all other sacrifices have relation,
it being absolute of it self, and depending of no other.

But what proves this against the Catholyks concerning the sacrifice of the
mass? does it prove that it is no sacrifice? or that it is not propitiatory
for sin? nothing less; for if the sacrifices of the priesthood according to
the order of Aaron, representing the sacrifice of the cross, were true
sacrifices, though they were but of brute beasts, why may not our sacrifice
according to the order of Melchisedech be also a true sacrifice? being not only
a far more excellent representation, of the sacri^ce of the cross then the
others were, but also the very same in substance, to wit, the blessed body of
our Savior himself, and therefore of infinite price, and value, though
nevertheless it was not ordained for the redemption of the world, (as was the
bloody oblation of the same body upon the cross,) but for an unbloody
representation of that bloody sacrifice, yea and for a particular application,
of the benefit thereof, to all those that should worthily offer it or
participat of it.

For it is to be considered that the sacrifice of the cross was as S. Augustine
calls it a general cup, Aug. se^ prosper. in libel atric. falso imposi ar^ic.
1.
or universal medicin, proposed to all the world in common, but not applied to
any in particular, the application whereof was left by almighty God to such
other means as it pleased him to ordain for that purpose, no les now in the
new law, then he did before in the old, as we see by effect not only in this
sacrifice, but also in the sacraments of baptism and penance, in faith,
prayer, fasting, alms, and other good woorks, all which are means to apply
the fruits of our Saviors passion unto us (as our adversaries do not deny of
there special faith, without the which they do not think that the passion of
Christ is beneficial to any,) for otherwise it would follow, that all men
should be saved a like, because Christ dyed for all a like.

If therefore there be sacraments, and other means to apply the fruit of our
saviors passion unto us, without prejudice to the honor thereof, why may there
not be also a sacrifice to that end, especially such a sacrifice as this, which
as I have said is not only a most lively representation of the other upon the
cross, but also the very same in substance, though different in the manner of
the oblation; and again seeing the fruit of our Saviors sacrifice upon the
cross has had his course, effect, and operation from the beginning of the
world, as I signified before and yet nevertheless there was both in the law of
nature and in the law of Moses hostiae pro peccato, sacrifice for sin. Why
may there not now also be a sacrifice for remission of sins, especially seeing
our daily sins, do no less require now a daily remission then did the sins
of those that were under the law of Moses.

This saint Paul seems to insinuate sufficiently in those very words which
our adversaries do most urge against this point, to wit, Hebr. cap. ^.
where there is, remission of sins there no oblation or sacrifice for sin is
needful, where upon I say it follows, that where there is not remission of
sin, there needs sacrifice for sin.

Therefore to answer our adversaries, and to explicat this text I say that S.
Paul speaks of such remission of sin, as was purchased for mankind in
general by the general redemption of all, and not of the particular application
thereof to any, and therefore in that sense he says, that the general ransom
for sin being paid, and remission thereof being in general procured by the
sacrifice of the cross, it were needles that either the same or any such
general sacrifice, should be offered again; But seeing the particular
application thereof is needful for the remission of sin, no less now, then it
was in the old law, yt follows that some sacrifice is now as needful as then
it was, where upon Primasius S. Augustins scoller expounding this same epistle
of saint Paul to the Hebrews, says; Primatius epist. ad Haebrae.
our Priests do offer sacrifice daily because we need daily to be cleansed, and
for as much as Christ cannot die, he therefore gave us the Sacrament of his body
and blood^ to the end that as his passion was the redemption and salvation of
the world that is to say of all men in general, so also this oblation may be a
redemption and clensing to all those that offer it in verity, thus says he;
giving to understand that the benefit of our redemption and remission of sin
purchased for all men in general by the sacrifice of the cross, is by this
other sacrifice particulerly applied to every one that woorthely offreth the
same, so that the daily iteratio^ thereof is no less needful, then conform to
the doctrine of S. Paul, who denies not the sacrifices of the old law to be
true sacrifices because they were daily offered, but to be, as I may term it,
that redemptory and absolut sacrifice, which was to be offered but once;
wherevpo^ it follows that the objections of our adversaries out of S. Paul
as well concerning the multiplicity and succession of our Priests, as the
multitude and iteration of masses, are most absurd and frivolous, for though
we should grant it to be true (as it is most falls) that either we have such
a succession or multiplicity of Priests or such variety of hosts and sacrifices
in our mass as was in the old law, yet S. Paul's argument would prove no more
against us, then it did against the Jews, I mean it would not follow thereon,
than the mass is no sacrifice, no more then it follows of the same argument,
that the sacrifices of the Jews were not true sacrifices, which S. Paul never
denied, but it would follow that the mass should not be that absolut and
independent sacrifice which was to redeem the woorld, the which we deny not
and therefore this their objection out of saint Paul proves nothing but their
own blyndnes, or malice that do not or will not understand either him, or us,
in this matter.

But to satisfy this point more fully, it is to be considered that the
multitude of our Priests does no more contradict the unity of Christ's
priesthood, then the multitude of Doctors and Pastors in the Church, (by
whom he feeds and teaches the same) does contradict the unity of his
Pastoral office and dignity, Corinth. p. 5.
In which respect saint Paul says pro Christo legatione fungimur tanquam Deo
exhortante per nos, that is to say we are Ambassadors or delegats of Christ;
for God, as it were does exhort by us.

To which purpose it is to be understood, that our Priests are not absolute of
themselves, and indepe^dant, as were the Priests in the old law, who succeeded
one an other in equal power and dignity, (I mean the high Priests of whom
only S. Paul speaks) for though Aaron was the first, yet every successor of
his was as absolute as he, and not depe^dant of him, in which sense saint Paul
calls them many, because being every one an absolute head of himself,
succeding one an other, they grew in time, to a great multitude of heads to
whom he therefore opposes the unity of Melchisedechs priesthood consisting in
the one and only person of Christ, whose substitutes and ministers our Priests
are (and not his successors) offering sacrifice, and executing their function in
his name and as S. Cyprian says vice illius, ^s his Vicars. Cypri. epist. 63.
ad caeci^lium.
And although Christ as head, cheef^ Priest, and general Pastor of his Church,
does concurr^ particularly with his members and ministers in the execution of
their Priestly and Pastoral charge, yet he does it in nothing so particularly
and properly as in this sacrifice by reason of his true and real presence
therein, being not only offered by the Priest but also voluntarily offering
himself to his Father, offertur and ^ome, Ambros. li. 1. de officijs. ca. 4^.
says saint Ambros, (...) recipiens passionem, and offers se ipse quasi
sacerdos, he is offered as man and as receiving or (...) his passion^ and he
offreth himself as Priest, in which respect he is both Priest and sacrifice
as well now on the altar, as he was in his passion upon the cross, though for
our greater comfort he uses also therein the interuention and ministry of
Priests, who being nothing else but his instruments, and exercysing all one
Priestly function, under him their head, do all pertayne to that one aeternal
Priesthood of Christ according to the order of Melchisedech, which as
Lactantius says, must of necessity be in the Church. Jesus Christ says he,
Lactant lib 4 iustit. c^
being a Priest did make for himself a great aeternal temple, that is to say
the Church, in quo templo aeternum sacerdotium habeat necesse est s^cundum
ordinem Melchisedech, in which temple he must needs have an aeternal
Priesthood according to the order of Melchisedech, so that the unity of
Christ's priesthood is not impeached by the multitude of his ministers, no more
then the unity of a Kings monarchy by the multitude of his inferior officers
by whom he governs.

And as for the multitude of masses which our adversaries carp at, as rejected
by S. Paul the Fathers of the Church shall answer for us, S. Chrysostom
expou^ding this epistle of S. Paul answers this very same objection that our
adversaries make against us; Christ. ho 1 in epist ad Hebrae.
This sacrifice says he is an example of that sacrifice upon the cross, for
we always offer the very self same thing, not now one lamb and another to
morrow, but the very same; therefore this is one sacrifice; for otherwise
because it is offered in many places, there should be many Christ's, thus far
saint Chrysostom.

The very same argument and reason, and the very like words uses saint
Ambrose to prove the unity of this sacrifice and concludes, Ambros. in
epistol. ad Haebrae.
non enim aliud sacrificium, sicut pontifex veteris legis sed idipsum semper
offerimus, we offer not an other or different sacrifice as did the Bishop of
the old law, but we always offer the self same. Also Primasius, the divinity
says he, of the son of God, which is every where, does cause that they be
not many sacrifices but one, though they be offered by many, Primatius ^ 9. ad
Haebr^
and it causes in like manner that it is that body which was conceived in the
virgins womb and not many bodies, as also that it is but one sacrifice, and
not diverse, as were the sacrifices of the Jews, Thus says he.

We read the very same in substance, in Theopila^^us, O^cumenius Sedulius,
Haymo and others that have written upon saint Paul's epistle to the Hebrews,
^heophil^^ ^ecumen. edulius ^aymo, in c. ^ epist. ad ^ebrae.
of whom the meanest may in any indifferent man's judgment, counteruayl all
the sectaryes of this time, who framing new fantasies of their own brains, or
reviving old heresies, are forced for the mayntenance thereof to wring and wrest
the holy scriptures from the meaning of the holy ghost to their private sense,
and to condemn the judgment of all the ancient ^athers of the Church; who
living in such times as these matters were not in controversy, can not be
suspected of parciality, and much less of ignorance of the scriptures, seeing
their learned commentaries and expositions thereof give sufficient testimony of
their continual trauails and labors therein, besides that their most virtuous
lives led in continual prayer, pance and religious discipline (for the which
the Christian world admireth, and honoreth them as great servants of God and
saints,) is a sufficient argument, that God rather assisted them with his
spirit in the understanding of the scripture, then Martin Luther, Zwinglius,
Beza, Calvin and such other flagitious, and wicked apostatats, whose vicious
and lewd lives (whereof the world is yet a witness) do manifestly declare, with
what kind of spirit, they were possessed.

Therefore he that would leave the general consent of all the ancient fathers,
to follow the fantastical or rather phrenetical opinions of these new fangled
fellows, deserves to be deceived, and can have no excuse of wilful blyndnes
either before God or the world.

But now to conclude this question concerning the sacrifice of the Mass I draw
out of all the premises 4. conclusions.

The first is that, which at the first I undertook to prove, to wit, that the
oblation of the blessed body and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ (which we
caul the Mass) is the proper sacrifice of the new testament, prophesied by
Malachias, prefigured by the sacrifice of Melchisedech, promised, instituted
and offered, by our Savior, practiced by his Apostles, and by the Church ever
since.

The second is, that it is propitiatory not only for the living but also for
the dead.

The third, that the heretykes of this time that contradict and abolish the
same, hold not the law of the new Testament instituted by Christ, seeing they
have not the proper priesthood and sacrifice thereof, without the which the said
law and Testament cannot be, S. Paul teaching such a necessary concurrence of
the one with the other, that he affirms, that the priesthood being translated
the law must also of necessity be translated as I have showed before, Hebr. 7.
therefore seeing they have not this priesthood and sacrifice, it followith they
have not the law and Testament of Christ, which can not be without the same.

The fourth point that follows of the premises, is that they are most
pernicious enemies of humainkind, seeing they labor to deprive us, of the most
souerain remedy that God of his infinite goodness has left us for the reparation
of our daily wracks by sin, and for the consolation both of the quick and the
dead; for which cause the old Christians in the persecutions under Dioclesian,
being persecuted for hearing mass, as we are now (as I have showed in the
beginning of this treatise) answered the tyrants that the mass was spes salus
que Christiantum, the hope and health, or salvation of Christians, Baron^an.
303. Suriu^ 11. Februa^
and that therefore they could not forgo it, the reason whereof I have declared
before, to wit, for that thereby are aplyed unto us the fruits of our Saviors
passion which is not only represented, but also daily renewed in the sacrifice
of the mass as witnesses saint Gregory; so often, says he, Greg. h^^ 37. in
eua^g
as we offer the host of his passion, so often we renew his passion, and as
saint Cyprian says, passio Domini est sacrificium quod offerimus, the
sacrifice which we offer is the passion of our Lord, Lastly; Epist. 63. ^^
caecilium.
Martialis the most ancient martyr and Disciple of Christ says, Epist. ad B^
degalouses
that which the Jews did sacrifice upon the Altar of the cross, we do
propose on the sanctified altar for our salvation, knowing that by that only
remedy life is to be given us, and death to be eschewed, thus far the blessed
martyr. This remedy I say the heretykes of these our days do seek by their
pestilent doctrine to take from us, yea and do in deed depryue us of it in our
country, not only by their doctrine, but also by rigorous and violent laws,
resembling therein as well the old persecutors of Gods Church that did the like,
as also Antichrist that is to come, Dan. 9.
who as Daniel the Prophet fortelleth shall take a way judge sacrificium, the
continual sacrifice of the Church, which is the sacrifice of the mass) and
the ancient Bishop and martyr Hypolitus does testify in his book of the
consummation of the world, that in the time of Antichrist, Hipol in orat. de
consum. mundi.
Churches shall be like cottages, and that the precious body and blood of Christ
shall not be in those days, the liturgy shall be taken a way, the singing of the
Psalms shall cease and the reading of the scripture shall not be heard, thus
far saint Hipolitus, that wrote within 250. years after Christ.

Seeing then the Caluinists, and Lutherans abolish the sacrifice of the mass,
yea and bring christian religion to a very desolation and ruin, overthrowing
altars, churches, monasteries, images, relickes of saints, the sign of the
cross, sacraments, ceremonies and all external memories, and monuments of
christianity, and in steed of the blessed body and blood of our savior, bring
into the church nothing but a bare sign thereof, what else are they but true
figures, or the forerunners of Antichrist, Danielle c. 9
that shall set up the abomination of desolation in the temple of God, as says
the Prophet, that is to say, shall bring an abominable desolation upon the
Church and true religion of Christ?

OUR DOCTRINE OF THE merits of works and Justification, is proved and cleared,
from the slanders of our adversaries, commonly publyshed in their Sermons, and
lately insinuated in a book set forth, concerning the conviction of my Lord of
Essex. CAP. XIX.
FOR as much as my intention in this treatise was to detect and confute,
certain slanderous lies of our adversaries, spread abroad against us in some of
their late books and lybels, no less touching matter of religion, then matter
of state, I can not forbear to discover unto thee here good reader, their
notable impudency in charging us to be enemies of the Passion of Christ, and to
euacuate the merits thereof, by ascribing our salvation to our own works,
which they are wount to publish in their sermons, and common table talk, and
have of late insinuated in a pamphlet concerning the conviction of my Lord of
Essex, wherein treating of Sir Christofer Blunt, that he protested to die a
Catholyke, some foolish minister (I think) foysted in an aparenthesis,
signifying that he dyed not such a Catholyk, but that he hoped to be saved by
the merits of Christ's passion, not ascribing his salvation to his own works;
as though other Catholykes that teach merits of works, did not hope to be
saved by the passion of Christ, wherein I know not whether I should wounder more
at their ignorance, or their malice; their ignorance if they know not what we
hold, and their malice if they know it, and yet slander us.

For who knows not, that we acknowledge the blessed passion of our Savior
to be the root and ground of our redemption, and reconciliation to God, and the
fountain from whence flows all our justification, and salvation, ^. Petri c
^ ^p ad Romans ^p. 5.
saying with S. Peter that we are redeemed with the precious blood of Christ
the immaculat lamb, and with S. Paul that we are justified in his blood, and
shall be saved from wrath by him, and that there is no other name wherein we can
be saved, but the name of JESUS; ^ct 4. Psalm. 129.
nevertheless we know withal that though his passion, be most meritorious,
and the redemption that we have thereby most copious, yet it was his will that
we should do somewhat of our parts, to have the benefit thereof, which our
adversaries cannot but grant, confessing as they do, that to be partakers
thereof they must be baptized, ^^an. ^.
they must believe, they must repent after they have sinned, and seeing upon
the warrant of the holy scriptures they ad all this to the passion of Christ,
without derogation to the dignity thereof, what reason have they to blame us, if
upon the same warrant we ad another condition no less express in scripture
then any of the rest, seeing our savior himself says, if thou will enter
into life keep the commaundments, to which purpose S. Paul also says, ^p. ad
Hebr. ^.
omnibus obremperantibus sibi factus est causa salutis, that is to say, he was
made a cause of salvation to all such as obey him, Ep. ad Romans cap. 2.
and in another place, the dooers of the law shall be justified before God, and
not the hearers only, and S. James, ^p. Jacob c. ^
we think a man to be justified by works, and not by faith only, and our
Savior himself; not every one, says he, Matthew. cap. 7.
that says to me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he
which does the will of my Father, by all which we see that good works are
necessary to salvation, and must concur thereto, with the merits of Christ's
passion, which being the root and fountain of all man's merit, gives as it
were life and force, both to faith, and also to the good works of faithful men
to make them meritorious before God, wherein three things are to be noted, for
the better explication of this matter.

The first is; that there is two manners of justification, the one, the
justification of the wicked man be he infidel or christian in mortal sin, the
other the justification of the just man, or an increase of Justice; the first
proceeds merely of the grace of God without merit of works, for that it is
not in the power of nature being auerted and alienat from God to convert it
self unto him, without his grace and vocation, Roman 2 3. 5.
and therefore S. Paul worthily excludes from the first justification both of
the Jews, and the gentiles all merit of man. The second, which is the
justification of the just man, or increase of Justice, is procured by good
works proceeding of Gods grace, without the which their can be no
justification, and therefore the Catholics do teach not only the precedence of
Gods grace before every good woork, Psalmo. 51
according to that of the prophet misericordia eius praeueniet me, his mercy
shall prevent or go before me, 1. Cor. ca
but also the concurrence thereof, according as S. Paul says, Joan. 15. ad
Philip.
non ego sed gratia Dei mecum, not I but the grace of God with me, and as our
Savior says, sine me nihil potestis facere, without me you can do nothing,
and again S. Paul, omnia possum in eo qui me comfortat, I can do all things
in him that strengthens or comfort me;

Of the first justification S. Paul says in diners places that we are
justified gratis, freely or for nothing, by the grace of God, by faith, and not
by works, Roman 2. 3. 5.
as meritorious, 2. Cor. cap
and of the second he says (speaking of the effect of alms) yt shall multiply
your seed, Epist. ^ace cap. 2.
and shall augment the increase of the fruit of your justice; and saint James, a
man says he is justified by works and not by faith only, and saint John, he
which does justice is just, and in the Apocalipse, Author op^ imperfect^ Matthew.
he which is just let him be justified still, and of both these iustifications,
says the author of the imperfect work upon S. Matthew, the first justice is to
know God the Father, and Christ his son, and the last justice is to do good
works, finally S. Augustine witnesses, Aug. de ^^ and open^ cap. 14.
that for as much as there were some that taught in the very time of the
Apostles that faith without works might suffice to salvation, (which error
he says did grow of the corrupt, and il understanding of saint Paul's
Epistles,) S. Peter, S. John, S. James, and S. Jude did expressly direct their
intentions in their Epistles to prove the necessity of good works, and
justification thereby, and thus much for the first point.



Math. 10. and Marc 9.
he which geues but a cup of cold water in my name shall not loose his reward,
and again to his Disciples your reward is copious in heaven, Matthew. 5. and Luc
6.
and speaking of the Judgment at the later day, he plainly ascribes the
reward of life everlasting to works, saying, come ye blessed of my Father and
possess the Kingdom prepared for you for when I was hungry you gave me to
eat, when I was naked you clothed me, etc. Math. 25.
And therefore S. John, and S. Paul say, Apoc. 22. ^ Romans 2.
God will render unto every one according to his works, to this purpose also
the Prophet David says, I enclyned my heart, o Lord, to do thy iustifications
for reward, Epist 2. ad Timoth. c. 4.
and S. Paul I have says he fought a good fight, I have kept my faith, I have
consummated or ended my course, and now there is laid up for me the croune of
justice, which our Lord the just Judge will render me in that day; upon these
words of S. Paul OEcumenius says, Oecumeni in ea verba ep. 2. ad timoth. cap.
4.
consider that he craves it as due when he says reddet mihi and non dabit, he
will render it unto me, and not he will give it me, which he also signifies in
that he cauleth him the just judge: Theophilactus also says the same,
Theophilac. in 2. Timoth. cap. 4.
upon the same words, and concludes thus, the croune is a debt by reason of
the justice of the judge, S. Augustine aleadging the same place of S. Paul in
his book of grace and free will, says, Aug. de gra and liberto a^ b^. cap. 6.
he now rehearses meritae sua bona; his good deserts or merits, that he which
after his il deserts got grace, may after his good merits get the croune, etc.
but let us hear concerning this matter of merit, Igat. epist. ^ Roman.
some two or 3. about king Lucius time, S. Ignatius disciple to saint John the
Evangelist, says in his epistle to the Romans, being condemned to be deuowred
of wild beasts, suffer me to be the soul or was of beasts that I may promerori
Deum, gayn, or as a man may say earne almighty God. Tertullian says, Tertul in
scorpiaco.
how at their many mansions in the Fathers house, but according to the variety
of men's merits, and Clemens Alexandrinus; Clemens Alex. 6. str^ mat.
there are says he many mansions according to the worthiness and merits of
those which believe, and origin teaches, Orige l^b. ^ in epist. ad Roman.
that God does not give according to nature, but according to merits, S.
Cyprian says, Cyprian. epist. 14 ad Presb. and diacon vel ^ ^. epist. 1^.
that a penitent man, promere^ur Dominum, obsequijs suis and operibus justice,
does deserve, or as I said before earne our Lord with his obedience and just
works, and in his book of the unity of the Church, speaking of them that
having done great miracles in the name of Christ, shall be rejected of him at
the day of Judgment, S. Augustine gives also the same interpretation of multae,
mansiones tractatu 6.7. in euang. ^^
he says, justice or righteousness is needful, vt promerere quis possit Deum
iudicem, that a man may gain God the judge, which in the words next following
he expounds, saying preceptis eius and monitis obtemperandum est vt merita
nostra accipiant mercedem, we must obey his precepts and admonitions that our
merits may receive reward, Cyprian. (...) de vnitate Ecclesiae.
there to I will ad S. Augustine explicating notably this question according to
our Catholyk faith ever taught in the Church of God, Aug. de gratia and libero
arbitrio ca 6.
when grace, says he, is given then begin also our good merits by the means
of that grace, for if grace be taken away man does presently fall headlong by
his own free will, therefore when a man begins to have good merits, he ought
not to atribute them unto himself, but to God, to whom it is said in the
Psalm, o Lord be my healper, and do not forsake me, etc. Thus far S.
Augustine but to avoid the multitude of allegations, which might be infinite to
this purpose, I will conclude with the second council of Aurange celebrated
1200. years ago, reward says the council, (...) A^^^^^um. se^^^^. ^no. 1^.
is due to good works, if they be done, but grace which is not due, or given
by desert, does go before, that they may be done.

Thus thou see good reader the doctrine of Catholykes concerning merit or good
works, conform to the scriptures and fathers, and no way preiuditial to the
dignity and honor of our Saviors passion, but most honorable to the same,
seeing we teach that all good merits receive their vigor and force from the
merits thereof, he having thereby obtained for us of his father, not only
remission of sin, but also grace to do works acceptable to him and
meritorious of eternal salvation, which works though they be ours in respect
of the concurrence of our free will yet for as much as they be his gifts in that
they proceed of his grace they deserve the reward that he has promised for
the same, and therefore respecting any woorks of man whatsoever as of
themselves, we say with saint Paul, ^oman. ^.
that the passions or sufferings of this life are not worthy of the future glory
that shall be reueyled in us, but considering the same as the gyfts of God, Corin
4.
and ennobled with his grace, we say also with him, that the short and light
tribulation which we suffer here, does work an eternal weygh^ of glory in us.

Therefore I will end with S. Augustine, saying that when God does croune our
merits, he does croune his own gyfts, ^ug. ep. 105. ^ sixth pre^ ^terum.
seeing then, this is the uniform doctrine of all Catholykes, wherein do we
derogate any thing from the passion of Christ, or arrogat to our selves, or our
own works more then the scripture does give us warrant for.

THAT OUR ADVERSARIES who affirm that we derogat from the merits of Christ's
passion do themselves wholly euacuat, and frustrat the same, by their most
wicked, and absurd doctrine of imputative justice, and diverse other points
confuted in this chapter. CAP. XX.
BUT now let us examine the opinion of these fellows, that seem to be so
ielous of the honor of Christ and of his passion, and I dout not we shall find
that they do utterly obscure and frustrat the same, for where as our Savior
Christ gave himself to death, Tit. ^.
as S. Paul says, to the end he might redeem us from iniquity, and make us
clean from sin, and a people acceptable to himself, and followers of good
works, they teach expressly that he has performed nothing of all this. For
though they grant that he redeemed us from death, and by his passion purchased
us life everlasting, yet they confess not, that he redeemed or made us clean
from sin (as we see S. Paul teaches) but plainly affirm the contrary,
Caluinus li^ 2. in^^^t ca. ^ Lutherus lib de liberate Christia. and i^
affectione art 2. 31. 32. and ^6 confessto August^. artic. 6
saying, that original sin is not taken away by baptism, nor any other sin
after baptism remitted, but covered, and not imputed; in so much that they
teach further as a necessary consequent thereof, that the works of the most
just man, are not only infected with sin, but also sins of themselves,
deserving eternal damnation and that therefore there is no righteousness or
justice really in man, but only in Christ, Calvin lib. ^ instis. cap. 1^
Luther. ad ^ 2. ad. Gala^
and imputed to man; whereupon it must needs follow, that the fall of Adam our
father, was of more force to make us sinners, then the passion of our Savior
to free us from sin, and to make us just, which is no less dishonorable to
Christ then contrary to express scripture, Romans 5.
where S. Paul says, that as by the disobedience of one (Adam) many were made
sinners, so by the obedience of one (Christ) many were made just; if then we
were truly sinners by Adam, we are also truly just by Christ, or else our help
is not equivalent to our harm, nor our remedy to our disease, nor our rising
to our false, nor our gain to our loss, nor consequently Christ to Adam,
which were impiety to think, and blasphemy to say, and yet so must our
adversaries be forced to say if they will defend their opinion; but for as much
as not only this their absurd doctrine of imputative justice, but also diverse
other execrable errors, or rather damnable heresies spring all out of one
root, that is to say the foresaid opinion that original sin is not clean
remitted, and taken away by baptism, I will by the confutation thereof overthrow
all the rest that depend thereon, and show withal the dishonor they do to
Christ, and his merits which they seem so much to esteem.

Let us then consider the effects of baptism in the regenerat, which to spoke
generally are two, the one the remission of sins, and the other a
regeneration, or renouation of the inward man, of the first the Prophet
Ezechiel says, Ezechiel. ^p. 36. ^d Ephesians. 5. ^d titum. 3.
I will power upon you a clean water, and you shall be cleansed from all your
filth, or corruption, in which sense the Apostle cauleth it; the water of life
wherewith Christ sanctifyeth and makes clean his Church, ^ Cor. 6. Chriso. in
^om. ad bap. ^ier. in epist. ^d occanum.
and speaking of the baptized that had been fornicators, and Idolaters, these
you were says he, but now you are washed, you are sanctified, you are
justified, by which text S. Chrisostom, and S. Hierome prove that all sins
are forgeuen in baptism, Romans 6.
and the reason is, for that by the virtue thereof the full merits of Christ's
death and passion, Colossen. 2.
are communicated unto us, in which respect, saint Paul says that all that
are baptized in Christ, are baptized in his death, and that we are thereby
buried with him to death of sin, Aug. in Eu^iri cap. 52.
where of S. Augustine says as in Christ there was a true death, so there is in
us a true remission of sin, which cannot be denied, except we will deny the
virtue and force of the blessed blood, and death of Christ which has his
operation thereby, whereof the Apostle says, Colos. 1. ad Haebr. 9.
he reconcyled us by his death, that he might make us holy, and immaculat, and
irreprehensible before him, and in an other place making a comparison betwyxt
the effects of the sacrifices of Christ upon the cross, and the sacrifices of
the old law, he says, but how much more shall the blood of Christ make clean
our conscience from dead works (that is to say from sin) to serve the
living Gods to this purpose says saint John, sanguis Jesus Christ's emundat n^s
ab omni peccato, the blood of Jesus Christ does make us clean from all sin,
1. Joan. 1.
in which respect our Savior Christ is truly cauled the lamb of God which
takes away the sins of the world.

Therefore saint Chrysostom says that a man newly baptized is mundior solis
radijs, cleaner then the beams of the sun, Joan. 1. in homil ad Baptizan.
and compares the sin of the baptized to a spark of fire, faling into the
main sea, wherein it is presently extinguished, S. Basil cauleth it a
remission of debt, Basil. in exhortat. ad Baptis.
and the death of sin. S. Gregory Nazianzen terms it peccati diluuium the
deluge wherein sin is drowned, (and lastly not to be tedious, with many
allegations, in a matter where in all learned fathers do uniformly agree) S.
Augustine says baptism washes away all sins, yea all whatsoever, of deeds,
thoughts, words, of original sin, or other committed ignorantly or wittingly,
Angl. lib. 3^. contra duas epist. pelagi^ norum ca 3.
and in an other place, he says, yt does auferre crimina, non radere, take
sins clean a way, and not shave them only. Lib. 1. cont easdem epis cap. 13.


What then shall we say of Luther, and his fellows that deny such a manifest
principle of Christian religion, affirming that original sin is not taken
away by baptism, but that it remains and infecteth all me^nes works can any
thing be said more to the derogation of Christ's merits, on which they will seem
sometimes wholly to rely? can their other heresies concerning the necessity of
sin, the impossibility to keep the commandments, the sinful or stained
righteousness of the iustest man, or yet their imputative justice, all grounded
and necessarily depending upon the rotten foundation of this pestilent opinion,
can they I say, be like to stand when their foundation fails, as you see? but
this (...) ^ore evident, if we consider the other effect of Bapti^^, which is
regeneration, ^echi. 36.
or renouation of the soul^ whereof the Prophet says, I will give you a n^w
heart and a new spirit, in which respect the Apostle cauleth Baptism lauacrum
regenerationis, It. 3.
and renouations, the water of regeneration, and renouation, for that as our
Savior himself signified a man is borne a new by water, ^eu. 3. ^alat 6.
and the holy ghost, and becomes as saint Paul says noua creatura a new
creature by grace of the holy spirit which is abundantly poured upon him, It.
^. Roma. 5. Act 15. Romans ^.
to which purpose the Apostle says that charity is diffused in our hearts, by
the holy ghost which is given us, and that Christ dwells in our hearts, and
that we live for justification, for that the spirit of God dwells in us, all
which prove a real and inhaerent justice in us, Romans 6.
and not a justice in Christ, imputed only to us, this the Apostle signifies
by the similitude of Baptism with the death and resurrection of Christ saying
that we are buried with him by baptism to the end that as Christ did rise
from death, so we may walk in newnes of life, upon which words, S. Augustine
says, as in Christ there was a true resurrection, so in us there is a true
justification, ^ug. in En^hiri cap. 52.
and S. Chrysostom proves the same by the words of S. Paul, (where he
says, you're washed, you are sanctified, you are justified) he shows says
he, that you are not only made clean, but also that you are made holy and
just, ^ Cor. 6. Chrysostom. ^om. ad Bap. ^itul. 3.
to which purpose he notes that it is cauled lauacrum regenerationis, and not
remissionis or purificationis, the water of regeneration, and not of remission
or purification, for says he, it does not simply remit sins, but makes, us
as though we were of a heavenly generation, Romans Alex. ^. 1. padag. p. 6.
^alm. 81 in o. ^^ in sanctum ba^tisma.
which Clemens Alexandrinus confirms saying being baptized we are
illuminated, being illuminated we are adopted to be the children of God, being
adopted we are made perfect, being perfited we are made immortal, according
to that of the Psalmist, I say you are all Gods, and the children of the
highest. The same also in effect says S. Gregory Nazianzen Baptism says he,
De peccato^um meritis ^^ remissione ^^p. 9. lib. 1.
giving help to our first nativity, of old makes us new, and of human divine,
all which does plainly prove that which we teach, with saint Augustine, who
says the grace of (...) does work inwardly our illumination, and
justification, nevertheless we deny not that the justice wherewith we are ma^^
^ust, is the justice of God by whose grace we have it, but we deny that it is
not ours, and really in us, when he has of his great mercy and liberality
given it us, so that we say it is both his and ours, his, because he gives it,
and ours, because we have it by his gift. Therefore saint Augustine says, let
no Christian man fear to say that we are made just, not by our selves but by
the grace of God, working the same in us. De spiritu littera ca. 1 Luc. 1.
In this sense Elizabeth and Zacharias were called just in the scripture, of
whom we read that ambo crant iusti, they were both just, not before men only,
but aute Deum before God and not because Justice was imputed to them, but
because they did walk in omnibus mandatis and Iustificationibus Domini sine
quet^la, in all the commau^dments and Iustifications of our Lord without blame,
in this sense also it is said in the scripture, Romans 3.
the doers of the law are justified before God, not the bearers only, which
saint John confirms, fore warning as it were and arming us, against these
seducers, (for so he terms all those which teach that a man is not just by
really doing the acts, or works, of justice,) 1. Joan. 3.
let no man says he seduce ^ow, he which does Justice or righteousness is just,
as God is just, he which does sin, is of the devil to this end apeared the
son of God, that he might dissolve the works of the devil: thus far S.
John. Tit. 2.


If then the coming of our Savior, Romans 6.
and his suffering was to dissolve the works of the devil, Ezech. 36.
which is sin, and (as yt is signified in infinite other places of scripture,)
to redeem us from iniquity, to deliver us from the servitude of sin, to
renew us in spirit, to make us new creatures, to cleanse us, to sanctify us, to
justify us, Tit. 3. colos. ^.
that is to say to make us just, yea to make us immaculat, and irrepre^e^sible,
to make us his 1. Cor. 3.
temples his Joan 15.
friends, his Romans ^.
children, how is this performed, if notwithstanding the merits of his passion
applied unto us by Baptism, and other means, we are only reputed to be just,
and not so in deed, but remain still soyled with sin; 1. Joan. 3.
bondmen of iniquity, and children of the devil (as S. John says we are if we
be in sin) how can we say that Christ conquered the devil and sin, and
delivered us from the servitude and bondage of them both if we remayn slaves of
both? for being bondmen of sin, as Luther makes us, we are also slaves of
the devil by consequent, and can it be any derogation to the merits of our
Saviors passion, to say that he made us (who were before thralles and captives
to both the devil and sin) able to vanquish, and conquer them both? nay is it
not far more glorious to him to conquer them daily in us and by us, then if he
had only conquered them for us? for by making such weak ones, as we, tread
them under our feet, his conquest and triumph is far more glorious, his mercy
to us more manifest, his enemies and ours more confounded, 1. Cor. cap. 5.
and we infinitely more obliged, and therefore we may say with saint Paulo,
Deo gratias qui dedit nobis victoriam, God be thanked which gave us victory,
but how by our selves no; per Dominum Iesum Christum, by our Lord Jesus Christ.

Thus thou see good reader how consone^t to the scriptures how glorious to
our Savior, and how comfortable to us is our doctrine concerning justification,
and merits of works, and on the other side how erroneous, and injurious to his
passion is the opinion of our adversaries who to the end they may with better
color and more boldly bark against good works, and the merit thereof, seem
to have in singular estimation the merits of his passion; But where the full
force and true effect thereof is to be showed to Gods greater glory, to the
confusion of our enemy the devil, and our singular comfort, there they hold it
to be of no force or value, yea rather they make it a cloak to cover sin then
a means to cleanse it, and to take it away, and so they establish in the
kingdom of Christ, the tyranny of the devil, whose instruments and proctors
they show themselves to be, woorking in men's minds by their doctrine, that
which the devil does woork by temptation, that is to say discouraging all men
from doing we^, and from keeping the commandments, by teaching the same to be
needless, impossible, and of no merit, whereby they give full scope to
sensuality, and sin, and carry men after them headlong to hell as I could make
it most evident if I list to prosecute this point, which my purposed breuity
will not permit.

THE CONCLUSION CONUINCING by the premises, that our Catholyk doctrine, was
delivered to King Lucius, by Pope Eleutherius, and is the undoubted truth, that
Christ left to his Church, with a note of the notable impudency of our English
ministers. CHAP. XXI.
NOW to return to King Lucius and to conclude, I dout not good reader but thou
have perceived by these few points which I have handled, what has always bin
the doctrine of the Church of God concern^ng the same, and that therefore King
Lucius could receive no other from the Catholyke Roman Church by the which he
was converted to the Christian faith, and if I thought it needful to rip up
every other particular point controuersed betwyxt our adversaries and us, I
could easily show the same in every one.

But what needs it? seeing they cannot prove that any Pope, I will not say from
S. Eleutherius to S. Gregory, but from S. Peter to Clement the eight that now
governs the Church, has taught, and decreed any different doctrine from his
predecessors, whereas on the other side we show evidently that in a perpetual
succession of our Roman Bishops, there has been also a continual succession of
one, and the self same doctrine, where upon it follows infalibly that King
Ethelbert, and the English could not receive from S. Gregory the Pope any other
faith then King Lucius and the britans received from saint Eleutherius, and
that we which now hold communion with the Roman Church teach no other
doctrine then that which was taught by them to our ancestors, and has
successively come from S. Peter, and consequently from our Savior Christ.

Therefore thou may well wonder, good reader, at the impudency of our English
ministers, that are not a shamed to preach and teach the contrary, whereby
thou may also see how lamentable is the case of our poor country wherein such
have the charge, and cure of souls, as have not so much as common honesty to
say the truth in matters as clear as the Sun, and teach such a religion as
for lack of better reasons, and arguments, they are forced to maintain it with
manifest lies, slanders, yea and murders of innocent men, whom they execute
for feigned crimes under color of matter of state, acknowledging thereby
sufficiently the truth of our Catholyk faith seeing they are ashamed to a^ow
that they trooble any man for it, whiles they confess that they punish and put
to death heretykes, namely the Anabaptists, directly for their religion, and
their impudency is so much the more notorious, for that their publyk
proceedings in the daily execution of penal and capital laws, touching only
matter of religion, does contradict and convince their sayings and writings,
wherein they affirm that they put none to death for religion.

But for as much as I have treated this matter at large in diverse parts of my
Apology, besides that I understand that some others also entend to treat
thereof in the answer of a ridiculous challenge, made by O. E. fraught with
most absurd paradoxes, as well concerning this point, as others touching our
Catholyke faith, I remit thee, good reader, thereto, and so conclude this
treatys, beseeching almighty God to give our adversaries the light of his
grace, and us in the mean time patience and constancy, and to thee
indifferency to judge of matters so much importing the eternal good and
salvation of thy soul, which I heartily wish no less then my own.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS OF THIS TREATISE.
THE preface, wherein are declared the causes of the long delay of printing the
Apology, and withal is noted the impudency of a late writer in England
disguysing his name with the letters O. E. who auoweth the fiction of Squyres
employment for a truth and affirms that none are put to death in England for
religion. An Answer to two malicious slanders, auowched in the foresaid libels
concerning the conquest of England, falsely supposed to be pretended, and
solicited, by the Catholyks, and touching the late enterprise of the King of
Spain in Ireland. Also concerning sir William Stanley, and the Jesuits,
calumniated by the lybellers. CHAP. 1. Concerning father Parsons in particular,
and that the extreme malice that the heretyks bear him, is an evident
argument of his great virtue. CHAP. 2. That the Catholykes are persecuted and
martyred now in England for the same causes that the martyrs dyed in the
primative Church, and of the great injustice done to two Priests, condemned
at Lincoln by Judge Glanduile. CHAP. 3. Of the impude^cy of a minister, who
being present at the death of the two martyrs aforesaid, affirmed publykly that
our country was converted by saint Augustine the monk, to the protestants
religion, by occasion where-of the truth of that point is evidently declared.
CHAP. 4. Of the first conversion of our country, whiles it was called Britany,
in the time of King Lucius, with evident proofs, that our Catholyk faith was
then preached and planted there. CHAP. 5. The same is confirmed and proved out
of Gildas the sage. Ca. 6. Certain points of controversy are discussed whereby
it is proved that King Lucius received our Catholyke faith and first of the
Popes supremacy in Ecclesiastical causes. CHAP. 7. That our Savior made S.
Peter supreme head of the church. CHAP. 8. That the successors of saint Peter
to wit, the Bishops of Rome succeed him in the supremacy of the Church. CHAP.
9. That the Bishops of Rome exercised supreme authority in CHAP. 10. The matter
of holy Images is debated, and the use thereof Chap. 11. The commandment of God
touching Images is explicated, and Chap. 12. Concerning the relics of saints
and the reverend use Chap. 13. That our doctrine concerning the sacrifice of the
Mass was Chap. 14. That not only the sacrifice of Melchisedech, but also all
the Chap. 15. That our Savior Christ instituted and offered at his last Chap.
16. That the Apostles practiced the commission given them by it to be a true
sacrifice, and propitiatory for the living and for the dead. Chap. 17 An
answer to the objections of our adversaries out of S. Paul's epistle to the
Hebrews, with a declaration that the heretyks of this time that abolish the
sacrifice of the Mass, have not the new testament of Christ, and that they
show themselves to be most pernicious enemies of humain kind. Chap. 18. Our
doctrine of the merits of woorks, and Justification is proved, and cleared, from
the slanders of our adversaries, commonly published in their sermons, and
lately insinuated in a book set forth concerning the conviction of my Lord of
Essex. Chap. 19. That our adversaries who affirm that we derogate from the
merits of Christ's passion, do themselves wholly euacuat, and frustrat the same,
by their most wicked, and absurd doctrine of imputative justice and concerning
original sin, and diverse other points confuted in this chapter. Chap. 20. The
conclusion conuincing by the premises that our Catholyke doctrine was delivered
to King Lucius by Pope Eleutherius, and is the undoubted truth that Christ left
to his Church, with a note of the notable impude^cy of our English ministers.
Chap. 21.
AN APOLOGY OF T. F. IN DEFENSE OF HIM-SELF AND OTHER CATHOLYKS, FALSELY CHARGED
WITH A feigned conspiracy against her Majesty's person, for the which one Edward
Squyre was wrong-fully condemned and executed in the year of our Lord 1598.
wherein are discovered the wicked, and malicious practices of some inferior
persons to whose examination the causes of Catholykes are commonly committed,
and their injurious manner of proceeding, not only against the said Squyre but
also against many Catholykes that have been unjustly condemned for like feigned
conspiracies, against her majesty and the state.

Written in the year of our Lord 1599. and dedicated to the right honorable
the Lords of her mayesties privy council.

Ecclesiast. cap. 3. 5. 16.

Vidi sub sole in loco iudicij iniquitatem, and in loco iustitiae impietatem.

I have seen under the Sun iniquity in place of judgment, and impiety in
place of justice.

Imprinted with license 1602.

AN ADVERTISMENT TO THE READER ABOUT A FORMER ANSWER OF M. M. Ar.
AFter I had set down to my self this defense or Apology in the form that
here it goes, there came to my hands a certain brief pamphlet written in Rome
by M. Mar. Ar. presently upon the execution of Squier in England, which
confutation though for the substance of the matter it seemed to me very
sufficient to give any man satisfaction by showing the whole matter of Squyers
accusation, comdemnation, and execution to be a very fiction and devised for
certain ends which there are touched; yet thought I not amiss to let this
Apology pass also as it was made, partly for that it conteyneth my own
particular defense which the other touches not, but handles the whole action
in general, and partly also for that the manner of both our proceedings is
different, he showing the whole subject and argument to be a feigned thing, and
I that albeit some occasion had been given of suspicion yet the form of
proceeding against Squire and the rest to be unjust and against all reason,
equity, law, and conscience.

M. Mar. Ar. to prove his intent lays down the historical narration of all
the whole matter and men touched in the same, to wit how Squire and Rolls were
taken upon the sea and brought prisoners to Siuil, and had their liberty there
by Father Parsons means, and how afterward giving new occasion of offense in
matters of religion they were taken again at S. Lucars, and brought back to
Siuil, and there again after certain months imprisonment, delivered out of
prison and put in different Monasteryes for to be instructed, whence they fled
away to the sea side, and excused their flight afterward by letters to Father
Walpoole that was most in danger by that flight which letters are yet extant.

It shows also the improbability of the devise, to wit, that Father Walpoole
(being the man he is) should ever have thought of such a fond way of sending
poison into England by such a fellow as Squire was, suspected still to be a
dissembled protestant, as afterward he proved, and that thing could not be
wrought, nor the poison carried so far but that Rolls his compagnion must
know somewhat thereof, who being at that present in the Tower of London, and
neither brought forth, nor mentioned, nor yet made partaker of the fact, was a
token that matters went not well, nor were directly handled.

Besides this that book declares by many examples the practices of Protestants
in these our days for making Catholykes odious, especially Jesuits of which
order Father Walpoole is, who was feigned to be the contriuer of this conspiracy
which is showed to be as far from the condition of the man, as the matter it
self is from all probability of truth, to wit, any such poison to be made,
bought and sold in Siuil proved by the death of a dog, sent into England by sea
in bladders of leather, poured upon the Queen's Sadle, as also upon the chair
of the Earl of Essex without hurt to the sitter or ryder, the matter
discovered by one Stanley, that neither saw Squire in Spain, nor spoke with
him, and it was denied by Squire first at the bar, and after at his death,
and since his death called in dowt by Stanley his first detector, (as by some
has been written from the place where he abides) the force also of that poison
(if any such had been) is declared by reasons and authority both of physic and
Philosophy that it could not work any such effect as was ymagined, or
pretended, and consequently that those applauses and congratulations both by
words, sighs, and tears which a company of flatterers showed forth at
Squyers arraynment and condemnation for her Maties. so miraculous escape was
most ridiculous and vain.

This is the sum and effect of that answer as briefly set down, as I can
gather it, and it makes the fiction most evident to all such as without
partiality will read it, though I hear say that it may chance come out again
more ample in a second edition, with many Autentical letters, as well of the
city of Siuil, as of the court of Inquisitio^ in that place, to show the
manner of Squyers and Rolls running away from those parts with some other
circumstances to improve the probability of the devised slander in England,
which letters and instruments I thought not good to insert here to my Apology
but to leave the^ to M. Mar. Ar. now at his return hither from Rome to ad to
his former Answer if so he shall think good, for that he makes mention thereof
in the same, and as for this my defense (gentle reader I shall not need to
advise thee of the substance, manner, method, or argument thereof, for that the
breife chapters ensuing will sufficiently setfoorth the same, only I would
admonish thee to consider maturely with thy self how rhow may be used in
matters of Religion which do most import thy soul and salvation, when in
matters of fact and open action thou shall find thy self so egregiously abused.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS OF HER MAties. PRYVIE council.
RIght honorable understanding by common fame, confirmed by letters from Italy,
Flanders, and France, that one Edward Squire, was lately condemned, and
executed in England, for having attempted to poison the Queens Matie. and my
Lord of Essex by the instigation as was surmised of one Father VValpoole a
Jesuit in Siuil, with the priuity and consent of Father Creswel and my self,
here in Madrid, I was (I assure your Lordships) at the first brute amassed and
much afflicted to hear that these good men so far of in my conscience from
such cogitations, and my self no less, were slaundered with matter so heinous,
and odious, and although I had re^ours presently to the brazen wall of our
own innocence, Mo^at. lib. 1. epist. ad Me^oen.
(as the Poet speaks) and the comfort of a good conscience which our Savior
gives his servants in like cases, saying to his Apostles, happy are you when
men shall rail upon you, Matthew. 5.
and persecute you, and speak all evil of you, belying you for my sake,
rejoice and be glad, for your reward is copious in heaven, although I say I
rested comforted with this consideration, and so resolved my self to patience,
and silence, yet waying afterward, that as the Latin proverb says, Qui tacet,
consentire videtur, he that holds his peace seems to consent, and that my
silence might not only turn to my further comdemnation in this matter, but
also to the prejudice of all the good Catholyks of England, against whom every
supposed fault of any one or two (be it never so false) is commonly wrested to
the reproach and condemnation of all; I could not forbear to offer to all
indifferent men this necessary defense and Apology of my innocence in this
affayre, as also to address the same to your Lord ships hands especially for
2. causes which here I will express.

The one was for that it is not only convenient in respect of your place and
dignity, as also of the duty I owe and bear you, but also imports for the
preue^tion of the inconuenie^ce aforesaid, that I seek to satisfy your
honors, before all others in whose hands principally rests the satisfastion
of her Matie. and the moderation of the rigor, or iniust persecution and
vexation which upon this false conceyt may otherwise be used against the
innocents Catholyks of England, which have neither part nor fault therein.

The other is for that persuading my self, that so fond a fiction, or rather
so foul and unchristian a practyse te^ding to the spilling of guyltlesse blood
in this act, and to the slander of innocent people both at home and abroad,
could not proceed from the body of a council consisting of men so honnorable
grave, and wise, as your Lordships are presumed to be, but rather from some
inferior persons of less consideration, and more desirous of garboyles to
whose examinations such causes commonly are committed, who may have abused
perhaps your Lordships in this behalf dazzling your eyes with pretense of
dangers to her Maties. person: in consideration whereof I thought my self
bound as well in conscience as duty to your Lordships to discover unto you not
only the treacherous devises, and dryfts of those that contryned this infamous
tragedy, but also the dishonor danger and inevitable dommages that must
needs redound to her Matie. to your honors, and to the whole state in time,
if such proceedings be permitted, in which respect if those ancient senators
and governors among the Romans being heathens, did think it convenient even for
honor of their common wealth to chasten oftentimes most sharply, and
examplary certain new deuisers of publyk shifts, deceyptes, and dishonorable
trecheryes used by the^ though it were against their enemies, and in far
countries, and to the common public benefit of their state as they pretended,
whereof many examples may be read in Liuy, Halicarnasseus and others, and S.
Augustine in his book of the city of God, thinks that God gave them so
flourishing a Monarchy over the world for this honorable kind of proceeding in
moral justice, how much more ought Christian councelours detest and punish such
base and vile proceedings or rather malicious and diabolical as this is whereof
now I am to treat, used against the blood of Christian subjects at home in
your own sights, to no public benefit, but rather to public infamy, and
shame among all nations where it shall be known, wherefore this a matter so
worthy and necessary for your L. to know and remedy, I hope you will take it
well that it comes dedicated to your selves.

THE AVTORS PROTESTATION of his innocence with the confutation of the fiction
by the improbability of the end that was supposed to move Squyre thereunto.
CHAP. 1.
FIRST then for as much as my innocency in this matter, is best known and most
clear unto my self, by the testimony of my own conscience which is to me
mill testes, as the law says, no one but a thousand witnesses, and would be
no less clear to your Lordships, if my heart were known as well to you, as it
is to God and my self, I think yt convenient for the first point of my
discharge to caul him to witness that is the searcher of hearts and raynes:
Psalm. 7.
which manner of purgation though it may argue weakness or want of credit in him
that uses it, (for as S. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom hom. 9. ^^ acta Ap^
an oath is a giving of surety where man's manners have no credit) nevertheless
it is so conform to all laws humayne and divine, and so confirmed by custom
of all countries, and common wealths, that it cannot justly be refused when
the party in neither infamous for falsehood, nor convict by evident testimonies;
of the crime objected to the contrary, in which respect S. Paul says an oath
is the end of every controversy for the confirmation of the truth. Heb. 6.
Therefore I do here caul almighty God his Angels and Saints to witness that
I am so far from being guilty of this matter which I am charged with, that I
never saw in my life for ought I know, the said Edward Squyre, nor ever had any
correspondence or dealing with him by letters, or any other means, neither yet
ever conspired my self, or was any way privy to any other man's conspiracy of
the death of her Matie or of my Lord of Essex, and this I affirm in such sort,
as if it be not true in all and in every part, I renounce all the benefit I
expect of my Savior Jesus Christ, which I would not do for all the good in the
world, as your Lordships may believe of me, if it please you to consider that
for the only respect not to offend God, and my conscience, I left all the
peasures and commodityes of my own country, to lead this banished life for
many years, not having been any way charged whilst I was in England with
matter of state, or any other greater crime, then that I would not go to your
Churches, and prayers, persuading my self as still I do, that I should offend
God damnably therein.

If therefore I have been and am contented to loose all that a man can loose,
life excepted, rather then to do an act offensive to God and my conscience, I
hope no charitable man can conceive of me that I would now without all
compulsion, hope of gain or fear of loss, advisedly forswear my self and
with a wilful and damnable perjury frustrate and loose all that fruit of my
former sufferings.

Nevertheless if any man be so passionate and uncharitable, that he will not be
satisfied with this my protestation, and solemn oath, let him way well the
matter it self with all the circumstances, and then I doubt not but he will
easily fee the wrong done both to Squyre and us, that are conjoined and
mentioned in his accusation.

that Squire was, and what his and might be
First therefore for this purpose it is to be considered what was Squyres end
therein, seeing as the Philosopher says, the end is the first thing in
intention, though the last in execution, and in a matter of so great weight and
danger as this, there must needs be some great consideration that moved him
thereto, which the contriuers of this tragedy knew so well that for the better
coloring of the devise, they forged the most forcible motive and highest end
that maybe, which is zeal of religion, and hope of aeternal reward, induced
perhaps thereto by the late example yet fresh in memory of the last King of
France, killed by a friar, moved with mere zeal without all hope of temporal
gain, or possibility to escape; therefore they said that Squyre by F. Walpooles
persuasions intended the death of her Matie. and my L. of Essex, to the end to
do a meritorious act, and to gain everlasting glory, but the vanity of this
fiction is evident, seeing it is manifest, that he was a protestant as he showed
plainly at his death, when yt was no time to dissemble, whereupon I infer
that seeing his religion taught him that there is no merit in works, and much
less in such works, how could he imagyn that the killing of her Matie. should
be meritorious, or any way grateful to God, she being the principal pillar of
his religion by whose death the same should be endangered, and the Catholyke
faith like to be furthered, or at the least he must needs imagyn that F.
Walpoole had no other end therein but the furtherance of his religion, if he
moved him to any such matter, could he then be so contrary to him-self, as for
zeal of religion or hope of merit to seek the overthrow of his own religion?
this is incredible, absurd, and impossible; Seeing then it is clear that he
could have no such motive or end as was supposed, and urged in his accusation,
what may be thought of the whole matter buylt upon so weak and falls a ground,
but that the foundation failing the whole buylding must needs fall withal? for
the further proof whereof, and our full purgation, though it might suffice
without further discourse that Squyre at his death cleared both himself and us,
yet to the end that the impiety, and malice of our adversaries may be withal so
evident that they shall have no color, or pretense to have proceeded according
to allegata and probata, (which in some cases may excusse a judge from all
offense, though he condemn an innocent man) I will particularly examine the
grounds whereupon he was condemned.

THE EXAMINATION OF THE grounds wher-vpon Squyre was condemned, and how
uncertain is the trial of truth by torment. CHAP. II.
ALTHOUGH I have little understanding of our english common laws, whereof I
never had further knowledge, then that which I got by the experience of some
few cases that I saw tried at the common Assizes, and in the Kings bench
(which also by my long absence from England, I have in part forgoten) and
therefore cannot prove by the words, and texts thereof, nor by books cases that
Squyre was wrongfully condemned, yet if I prove the same by the approved laws
of other countries, yea and by reason and conscience which are the grounds of
all good laws, yt must needs follow, that either he was condemned flatly
against our english laws also, or else that the same are repugnant to
conscience and reason, which were as great an inconuenie^ce as the other, and
such as I am sure no common Lawyer of England will grant, neither is it to be
supposed.

Now then to come to the examination of this matter, if it be true that is here
reported (as it is like to be, for that we hear yt uniformly from diverse
parts) that Squyre was condemned without any witnesses presented at his
arraynment, upon some light presumptions and his own confession extorted by
torment, as he said himself at the bar, and also at his death, it is clear
that he was wrongfully condemned, for that no law can allow that such a
confession should suffice for the condemnation of any man, without some other
evident proofs; yt being manifest, that the innocent may be forced by torment
as soon to accuse himself falsely as the nocent truly to confess his fault;
which the cyuil law proposes to all Judges carefully to be considered, saying
that Judgment by torment is deceytful, for that often the innocent are
compelled thereby to confess faults which they never committed; Lib. ^. ^. qu.
^f de quaest.
and S. Augustine wisely noting the inconvenience of such trials, lamentably
bewayleth the practice thereof, and the infirmity of man's Judgment in this
manner, in these words.

When a man (says he) is tormented in his own cause to try whether he be
culpable or no, Au^g. 19. de ciuit. dei ^.6.
many times the innocent suffers most certain pains for an uncertain fault,
not because any crime of his is known, but because his innocence is unknown,
so that the ignorance of the judge causes the calamity of the innocent, and
that which is more intolerable, yea and to be lamented with fountaynes of
tears, we see that whiles the Judge tormenteth the accused, least he should
kyl an innocent, it happens by the misery of humayn ignorance, that he
falls into the inconvenience that he seeks to avoid, and ignorantly kills
a guyltles man, whom he tormented to know whether he was guylty or no, for the
accused rather chussing to die then to endure the torment, does many times
accuse himself of that which he never did; Thus much S. Augustyn in this
discourse.

Hereof also Valerius Maximus gives a notable example in a servant of Marcus
Agrius, Lib. 2. cap. 4.
who being accused to have killed a servant of Titus Fanius, did for fear of
torment most constantly affirm that he had done it, though after he was
executed the party whom he confessed to have killed returned home safe, whereto
I might ad many examples of like matters that fall out in day he experience, but
that I will not be tedious to your Lordships, and therefore I will only touch
briefly by the way one that concerns my self, not unlike to this of Squyres
which happened in the year of our Lord 1595. at my being with the Dukes grace
of Feria in Bruxels, The Auctor in danger ^ false accusation upon torments.
where I was through the rigorous, if not malicious proceedings of a certain
Judge, brought to be accused by two several persons, not only to have
intelligence which Sr. Robert Cecyl (whose honor knows how innocent I am
thereof) but also to have conspired together with them the burning of the Kings
munition at Machlyn, though afterward, through the goodness of almighty God,
and the particular favor of the Dukes grace (to whom I am therefore to
acknowledge an aeternal obligation) I was fully cleared thereof; for the
process being at the Dukes request reueiwed by the privy council, and the
proceedings of the Judge thoroughly examined, it appeared that he had not only
given two torments to either of the prisoners without just cause, and so forced
them to accuse both me and them selves wrongfully, but also co^fronted them
together in such sort, that the one instructed the other what he should say,
yea and that he razed their depositions that were different, and made them
agree by his own art, whereto the prisoners consented also for fear of new
torments, choosing rather to die then to endure the same, and determining to
discharge their consciences at their deaths, as well for their own purgation
as mine, and this appearing to be true by the examination not only of the
prisoners themselves, but also of the Judges clark, and the laylor (besides
that it was evident, that there had been no munition at Machlyn to burn of
25. years before) the prisoners were quit of that matter by sentence, and I
for that I was never in the hands of the Justice, was only declared to be
clear and innocent by testimony given me under the hands of the privy
council, and the Judge was also forced to restore my honor, and to do me such
reparation of the wrong, as I rested satisfied.

And I doubt not but if I had as potent a patron and friend in England at this
present as I had at Bruxels, who might procure the proceedings of this matter
of Squyre to be sifted, and examined to the bottom as he did the other, there
would be found no less indirect dealing in this, then there was in that if not
much worse, and more cunningly handled, as after will in part appear.

OF THE CRVELTY OF the Rackmaisters in England, and of the manner of their
examinations. CHAP. III.
BUT to the end your Lordships may the better conceive how Squyre was
circumuented, and forced to accuse both him-self and F. Walpoole may it please
you to enter into the consideration of some of the barbarous usage and tyranie
that the Rackmaisters, tormentours, and inferior officers, and examiners by
whose hands he passed have used in the causes of Catholykes for many years,
and daily do use observing no order of Justice, nor form of law, neither in
examining nor tormenting; for they examine men, not only of their own works
words and thoughts, yea and what they would do or say in such and such cases,
(a thing never practiced either amongst Chrystians or heathens) but also of
other men by name, and with such particularities as they teach them when they
are in torment, what they would have them say of themselves, and others, for
their own ease, against all conscience, and law, which law says, Lib. r. ^.
qu^ qu ff^de qu.
he which examineth in torment ought not to ask particulerly whether Lucius
Titius did the murder but generally who did it, for otherwise he plays the
part of an instructor, and not of an examiner.

Furthermore they seek many times by subtyle, and captious questions to
entangle at unawares some simple Catholykes, that know not the particular
penalties of the laws, nor the dangers thereof, and after they cause them, to
be executed thereupon, whereof I could allege many examples, but one shall
suffice which of my own knowledge I can affirm to be true.

The dealing of Fleetvvood with M. Nelson Priest.
M. Fleetwood not many years since Recorder of London, examining M. John Nelson
Priest, asked him many questions, as yt were by the way of conference,
concerning Schism and the definition thereof, and who were to be called
Schismatikes, and so drew him by little and little from one point to an other so
far that at last he made him by necessary consequences confess, that the
Queen was a Schismatike, and when the poor man saw by the triumph that he
made thereat and by the diligent writing of the clarke that he was fallen into
the snare of some penal law, he protested that he knew not whether he had
offended any law or no, and that willingly he would not have done it, if he
had known it, but notwith-standing the servant of God was after indyted
ther-vpon, araygned, and executed, and when presently after the same day one
M. Metam a learned and grave Priest being conuented before the commissioners
and demanded by the Recorder of the same matters, M. Metam.
and in the same subtyle manner, refused to answer to such bloody questions
(not to give him and the rest occasion of so great a sin, as to spil his
blood) the Recorder fell into an extreme great rage, and reviled him
shamefully, reproching him with tymiditie, and cowardice, the like whereof I
think was never hard nor red of in any Christian, no nor heathen common wealth,
as that those which should be the ministers of Justice, guardians and defenders
of the Laws and means to keep men from transgression thereof, should procure
them to be transgressors, and be offended with men, because they will not
offend: yea and use the said Laws, not as lanternes, or guydes, to lead and
direct men to do their duty, but as stumbling blocks to overthrow them, as
snares to entangle them, and as knyues to cut their throtes, and neither give
them leave to speak, nor to think, nor to hold their peace, which point
Tyberius Caesar though otherwise tyrannical, Sueton. in Tyberius.
did mislike, saying (as Suetonius reports of him) that in a free common
wealth, and tongue and thought ought to be free, which liberty of speech
nevertheless we crave not, but only that it might be lawful for to think what
we list (not matters of treason or conspiracy against the Prince or state as
sycophants do babble) but matters of our faith and conscience such as all
Englishmen from the time that we were made Christians have thought and
professed until these our days, and all Catholykes besides throughout the
world do still think, and this with all duty and love to their temporal
Princes, at least me thinks yt were reason that we should have leave to be
silent, and not to offend the laws by forced speech when we neither mean nor
list to do it, for as the traigical poet says.

Though nothing else permitted be, let silence breed no blame,
For no man craves of any King, less favor thou the same.
To conclude this point of their examinations I cannot persuade my self that
our laws can allow them, Se^ee^ in Oedi^.
seeing the Imperial Laws do ordain exemplar punishment against such
magistrates as shall make any malicious or captious interrogatories, as
appears by a law of Adrian the Emperor, Marcianus C. L. Diuus Adrianus, ff.
de custodia, and exhibitione root
which says. Si quid malign interrogasse, etc. if it shall be proved that they
have examined any maliciously or captiously. Let them be punished in example of
all others to the end that the like be not committed hereafter.

OF THE TORMENTORS and their manner of proceeding against law and conscience.
CHAP. IIII.
SEEING such are their examinatio^s, what maruail is yt though their torments
be no less exorbita^t, which they give commonly to Catholykes without accuser
or witness, and without measure or certain number, as of late years to omit
other examples was evident in two rare gentlemen Priests and religious learned
fathers Southwel and Walpoole whom they tormented, F. Southvvel. F. vvalpoole.
the one 10. and the other 14. times, though they had neither accuser nor
witness, nor just presumption of other matter against them then their religion
for the which only they were after condemned, and executed, whereas by the
civil law a man cannot be tormented except their be proofs against him Baldus
co^s. 25^. verba inquisitionis ver 7. ratio lib. ^.
Luce clari^ra, as Baldus says, clearer then the Sun it self, and testified
at least by one witness Bart l. marit. in principio ff de q. l. confessio extra
iud^.
omni exceptione mayor (against whom no exception can be taken) that either
has seen the crime committed, or otherwise understood it, as certainly as
though he had seen it, in which torment also a certain moderation is
praescribed, which is not lawful for the Judge to exceed, as it shall not be
reiterated Alex. con. 5. number. 4. lib ^. Albert in rubr C. de q number. ^.
but when new proofs are presented, (and as some lawyers say more pregnant
then the first) and that the party tormented be neither Barol in l. questionis
modum n. 1. ff. de qu and in lege co^n ff ad l corn.
killed nor lamed therewith, neither yet that any other kind of torture be used
then ordinary in so much that the Brun de iudicio and tortura f. 65. post, number
6.
Doctors do maruelously enueigh against such Judges as invent new manners of
torments calling them ^iluest verbo Tonura.
ca^nifices and not Iudices, hangmen, and not Judges. Likewise the Canonists do
teach, that it is a mortal sin for a Judge to give torment without sufficient
witness and evidence, or to exceed the number of measure praescribed by the
law, so that it depends not upon the will of the Judge, nor yet is it the
lawful power of a Prince to dispe^ce therewith, Afflict, and gram mat. voto 30
nu 13. ^ voto 3^. number 9.
or to command it to be down in other manner as some very learned Cyuilians
have signified unto kings and princes in some cases and occasions, as
themselves have written, therefore the civil law worthelie ordayneth, Mars in
l. questionis modum nu 73. ff de qu. and in l. 1. praeterea nu 7. in fin. ff. ^
leg cornel. ^ sicarijs.
paenaem capitis, pain of death against the Judges which give torment without
sufficient proofs, and appoynteth other greiuous punishments for them that
observe not the praescript and ordinance of the law in giving the same, wherein
I report my self to the Doctors of the Arches, and M. of the chancery that are
Ciuilians and canonists who cannot be ignorant of their laws in this point.

Whereby your lordship may understand what they deserve that torment the
Catholyks upon their own brains, and bare suspicions, without any proof, or
witness in the world, and that with such extremety as they lame some, and kill
others, and with such deuilish devises as amongst Christians has not been hard
of whereof I could allege some lamentable examples of Priests hanged up by
the members, or privy parts, as of M. Tho. Pormort and M. George Beesley but
especialy of M. Francis Dikenson of whose torments I think good to relate some
perticulers omitting to avoid prolixitie, the stories of the others.

It is not many years since the said M. Francis Dikenson Priest was taken and
committed to prison by one of the persecutors, M. Fra. Dikens^on.
who seeing him to be a very proper young man in the flower of his age, and
imagining that he might quickly overthrow him by the sin of the flesh, found
means to have a woman conveyed to his bed, who being repelled by him, and the
enemy seeing that the practice took no effect, but came to be known not only to
all those that were in prison, but also to many others abroad to the
commendation of the Priests chastity, and honor of the Catholyke Religion, he
was so ince^sed against him, that he caused him to be hanged up, first by the
privy parts (which he made to be pearsed in diverse places with whote yrons)
and after by the hands until he was half dead, and then called in many to see
his said privy parts, inflamed and rankled) with the burning of the whote
yrons, saying unto them after they were gone forth again, behold this chaste
Priest, how he has dressed and spoiled himself, with naughty women, and not
content therewith caused him also to be araygned, and executed for being a
Priest, without having any other matter against him; which kind of cruelty
tending to the overthrow both of soul, body, honor, and all, can hardly be
matched I think with any example of the old heathen persecutours of the
primitive Church.

This I have thought good to represent to your Lordships, as well that it may
please you of your wisdoms and piety to have an eye hereafter unto such
proceedings, as also that your honors may conceive what such merciles men as
these, might make so weak a man as Squyre was to say, or do, to the prejudice
of himself and others, and if nevertheless they have wrought the like effect
(God be thanked) but in very few of that great numbers of Catholykes that have
past their hands in this our persecution, it is not to be ascribed to any
other thing else, but to the miraculous assistance that God for his own glory
has given and gives to these witnesses of his truth, no less then he did in
times past to the ancient martyrs.

THAT THE COMMON laws of England do not admit torment in trial of cryminal
causes, for the condemnation of the delinquent. CHAP. V.
BUT now to proceed with the matter of Squyre; our lawmakers wisely considering
the great inco^ueniences that grow of the secret trial of causes by torment,
the danger of error, the corruption of justice, the circumuention of the party
accused, the slander and calumniation of the innocent, and lastly the small
ground that is to be made upon a confession wrong out by the rack, not only
ordained the public trial, which we have in use, but also excluded all torment
from the same, admitting only the testimony of lawful and sufficient
witnesses, which being had the party is condemned in our law, though he never
confess the crime, so that the confession being not material or necessary for
condemnation (as in other countries it is) torment which serves only to extort
the same, is superfluous, for where the effect is not necessary, the cause is
also needles.

And if our law forbids not, or perhaps ordayneth the use of torment in
matters of conspiracy against the Prince and state, it is to be understood,
that it is not to the end to force the party to confess for his condemnation,
but for the bolting out of the bottom and circumstances of the matter, and to
know all the conf^derates for the praeuention of the danger which may ensewe
to the commonwealth, for otherwyes I must needs say, that our law should be
contrary to it self, and that the danger of error, and of corruption of
Justice, which our lawmakers sought to prevent by our publyke trial, should be
nothing at all remedied thereby.

For what does it profit the prisoner to be brought in publykly to hear his
judgment read in the hearing of all, to have the witnesses confronted with him,
to be tried by a verdit of 12. substantial men, and to have so many causes of
exceptions allowed him against the said witnesses, and Jury (as in the practice
of our law is seen) what does all this I say avail him, if the rackmaister
may have the fingring of him first, and force him by torture to accuse
himself, and that the same accusation shall suffice to prejudice all the
privileges that our law allows him?

Again why are the jurors brought to the bar, but to see the witnesses
deposed, to hear their evidence, and the answer of the party thereunto, and
to understand the whole grounds of the matter for the full satisfaction of
their consciences, and to the end they may give a true verdit.

Edward Squyres araignment.
But in this case of Squyre what clear evidence was produced? what witnesses
were deposed? what warrant had the Jury for their consciences, who hearing by
his own report, that he had been forced by torments to accuse him-self,
condemned him nevertheless upon his own confession, first extorted in the
Tower by torture and by him ratified afterward at the bar for fear of new
torments (as afterward shall be declared) besides some frinolous and vain
arguments urged by M. Attorney and other lawyers whose occupatiou is, to
amplify, and exaggerate every trifle, to make mountains of molehils and with
their retoryke (such as it is) to persuade ignorant me^, that thee moon is
made of green cheese? Truly either this is far from the wisdom pyetie and
intention of our lawmakers, and from the course of our laws, or else we have
the most rigorous and absurd laws in the world.

But seeing the grounds of Squyres condemnation consisted principally in two
points, the one his own confession upon torment, and the other the
presumptions urged by the lawyers which did seem to fortify the same, I will
br^esty treat of either of them a part, thereby to show what may be judged
thereby of their validity, And first of the presumptions.

OF THE PRESVMPTIONS urged by the lawyers against Squyre, and first of the
deposition of John Stallage alias Stanley. CHAP. VI.
THERE was red to the Jury the deposition of one John Stallage alias Stanley
who lately before was come from Spain, and had affirmed that one day in my
lodging in Madrid I enueighed against Squyre with great passion, and oaths,
saying that he had deceived us in not performing his promise, and that I feared
we should be utterly discredited with the King thereby. Whereto I answer that I
protest before God, and upon my salvation, that I never said any such thing to
Stanley in my life, neither is their any man (I suppose) that knows him and
me, and both our qualities, behauiours and conditions, will think it probable
that I would use such words before him if there had been cause, or that so
easily, and eagerly I would fall to sweareing upon the suddayne, which has been
so far of from all the rest of my former life, as my acquaintance will bear
me witness. But to the end it may appear to your honors what a substantial
witness he was, I crave your patience, whiles I discourse of the sufficiency
first of the man, and then of the matter by him alleged.

For the first I assure your Lordships that if his honesty were to be tried by
a Jury of his contrymen in Spain, The conditions of John ^^llage.
I mean either his fellow prisoners in Siuil, or the Catholykes in Madrid, he
would soon be sent after Squyre, for that no man here has other opinion of
him, then that he is a notable drunkard, a common liar, a pilfering, cosening,
and cogging compagnion, yea and (as he himself has made no bones to boast) a
pursecatcher upon the highway, and as I have credibly hard a common
horse-stealer, for the which, and such other virtues of his I understand he
has scowred sundry geoles in England, and should have flowred the gallows
long ere this, if he had had his right, and of these his good conditions,
sufficient testimony may be had, not only by the Englishmen still in prison at
Siuil, but also by those that escaped hence, and are in England, who cannot but
testify the same, if they be put to their oaths.

And as for his behavior here, I assure your Lordships, that within a few
days after he was set at liberty, and that we had noted his demeanor, we
were both weary and ashamed of him, for besides his vile and scandalous life,
to bad to be told, he would sometimes be in such desperate moodes that he would
blaspheeme God, saying that he could not forgive his sins, and sometimes
threaten to make himself away, because he was not regarded and rewarded
according to his expectation, though much better then his lewd conditions
deserved, and to give your Lordships some particular examples of his treachery,
yea and his perjury (which for the matter in hand is most to be considered)
your honors shall understand that first he betrayed his own fellow prisoners
in Siuil revealing certain treatyes and practices they had in hand for their
liberty, and other purposes, and caused some letters they had written to some
of your Lorships to be taken; Secondly he discovered an English ship that
aryued there, not for any zeal to this Kings service, but in hope to get a
third part of the goods, and lastly accused a frenchman called Thomas Dobret
to be an English man, my Lord of Essex his servant, and his spy, which
nevertheless presently upon his escape from hence he revoked by certain
letters that he wrote from S. John de Luys as well to one of the Judges criminal
of Madrid, as to Father Creswel and me wherein he defied, and reuyled us with
very unseemly speech, blaspheming against our Religion and protesting that all
he had done as well in Dobrets matter, as otherwyes was only to get his
liberty, and that Dobret was no Englishman, but a frenchman, for ought he
knew, and so by his own confession acknowledged himself to be perjured, as may
well be supposed, seeing he had given his testimony before against Dobret by oath
and this the English marcha^ts at S. Ihon de Luys who sent us his letters open
can testify, ^. si cui ^. accusat ^^ in l. Cassi^ de S^n^.
so that according to the rule of the law ( qui semel est maelus, semper malus
esse presumitur) he which is once evil, is always presumed to be so in the
same kind, it may be well inferred, that seeing he made no conscience here to
calumniate and accuse others falsely thereby to get his own liberty, he would
make as little scruple there to coin some matter of Squyre and us, to curry
favor with your Lordships, and with the show of some plausible service, to
counterpeyse the offenses he had committed here against your state, if the same
should chance to come to your Lordships, ears, and thus much for the man, now
to the matter.

First that which Stanley affirmed that he heard of me in Madrid was not
particular concerning Squyres employ to kill her Matie. (for the which he was
condemned) but general concerning some service to be done by him, which might
have been understood (if I had spoken it as I never did) of some other matter
of less importance, and danger to the state, then the Queens death, in so
much that howsoever it might serve to induce some light presumpcion, it could
be no evidence sufficient to condemn Squyre, neither yet to give him torment
other circumstances being considered as after shall be proved.

Secondly this Stanley testified nothing upon his own knowledge against
Squyre, ^. testium and ^i glossa c. ^e testibus in ^tam lieteris ^p. licetex
^uadam de ^st^bus.
but only upon hearesay from us here which cannot suffice in law to condemn
any man, especially in this case, seeing it was acknowledged by M. Attorney that
we of whom he was supposed to have heard it, had suborned him to overthrow
Squyre, and besides to do some great mischief in England under color to accuse
Squyre of that matter, so that both he and we are supposed to have conspired to
betray Squyre. Whereupon may be inferred two things very evident the one, that
Stanley being Squyres accuser he could be no witness against him, for that in
law they are to be I. Actor. c. ^e probatio^ibus.
distinct persons, The other that though he were not his accuser, but witness,
yet might not his accusation or testimony be of any force against him for that
if it be true (as law determines) that a mortal enemy to any man cannot be
his Angel. de ^alef. in ver^o, and ad quae ^lam. post ^^^m. 36.
accuser nor a Aret in c. ^^m, oportcat ^. 19. text in ^ per tuas de monia.
lawful witness against him (because the law presumes that whatsoever he
pretends he is not moved thereby by zeal of Justice, but by desire of
revenge) what shall we say of Stanley of whom it was presumed, ^art. in l. 1.
ff. ^e quaest.
by the lawyers the^-selues that neither zeal of Justice, nor love of his
country, nor consideration of his duty to her Matie. nor any other good
respect moved him to accuse Squyre, or to be witness against him, but (as in
Judgment it was anowed and supposed) that he was suborned, and sent in by us
here of purpose to cut Squyres throat, and under color thereof to do also some
other notable mischief wher-vpon in like manner it may be no less probably
co^iectured, that if we here made no conscience to employ Stanley, to two
mischeuous and pernicious purposes at once making the one a color for the
other, we would make as little scruple, for the better compassing of our
designments, to belly Squyre also unto him and so his testimony should be
false, which although it be far fromour customs and consciences, yet I say
it might have seemed probable enough to those that would not stick to use the
like practices toward us, yea and have done many times, as well by counterfeit
letters sent to some principal men of our nation, Practices English ^^secutors
against Cat^^lyks ab^o^
in such sort as they might be intercepted, containing thanks for services
done, as also by words cast out at home of some of us in the presence of such
as were like to blow it abroad to our disgrace, by which means a very honest
and wise gentleman, and confident servant of the Kings was cauled in question
of late years by some adversaries of his, who accused him to have intelligence
with the state of England for that a councelour now dead had said of him in the
presence of some principal Catholykes that he was an honest man, and a friend to
his country, but the commissioners that were deputed for the hearing and
examining of the matter on this side the seas, had neither so little law or
conscience or so small judgment in discovering treacherous devises as to suffer
the party to be so much as apprehended upon such an accusation.

Therefore to conclude if such a testimony as this of Stanley be held good in
our law, (as it is in no law else of the world) such a gappe is laid open to
calumniatours, as no man in England can make account that this head is sure
upon his shoulders.

But put the case that Stanley had been both a lawful witness, and his
testimony never so much to the purpose, yet he could not by any law, either
humayn, or Deuteronomy. ^.
divine be sufficient to condemn Squyre being a lone, and that no man else
witnessed the same particularitie that he did, as had been requisitie to prove
it iuridically, Ma^s cons. n. 25. Silu^ verbo testi^ quaest. 5. Matt. 1^.
in a matter of life and death, wherein as the law says, vox vnius vox
^ullius, the saying of one, is the saying of none, and our Savior says in ore
duorum aut trium testium stet omne verbum, let every matter be decyded by the
witness of two or three witnesses.

And although in some cases our laws admit one only witness, yet the same
cannot be with any reason or conscience practiced, but when the iurers
themselves have so sufficient knowledge of the matter, that they need not any
further testimony for which purpose our law ordayneth (if I be not deceived)
that the Jury shall be impaneled in the same county where the act was done, to
the end that the iurers, may have (either all or some of them at least) some
particular understanding thereof. But in such cases as this of Squyre (whereof
the Jury could have no knowledge but by the evidence and proofs produced) our
laws cannot so far disagree from all other laws humain and divine, as to
condemn a man to death upon the testimony of one alone, though it be never so
direct and pertinent to the purpose and much les when it is so indirect weak
and impertinent as was this testimony of Stanley.

Furthermore seeing that Stanley was not deposed in the presence of the
prisoner, nor of the Jury but only his deposition red, how did the Jury know
for the satisfaction and discharge of their consciences, whether he had given
his testimony voluntarily or by violence, and whether he would stand unto it to
Squyres face or no, which they were bound to consider, yea and to be assured of
yt before they should find him guyltie upon his evidence, for no doubt to those
ends the law ordayneth the public presentation and deposition of the witnesses
before the Jury and the prisoner, for what might be thought, but if Stanley
had said any such thing, yet that he had revoked it again, and would not stand
unto it, or that there was some other iugling in the matter seeing he being then
living, and in the tower was not brought to the court to be deposed there and
confronted with the prisoner as reason and the custom of our law requires,
^art. in l. sin. ^. de quaest. ^arlorum post in^oce^^um in cap. ^o^x.
whereto the civil law is also conform which ordayneth that the witnesses
examined in sumariae informatione be produced again in plenaeri^ iudicio, or
else that their testimony is nothing worth, Glo^^a ^^^gul ^^ l poctum ^ter
haredem. ff. de p^cti^.
and this is thought so necessary in all causes criminal that it cannot be
dispe^ced with no not with the consent of the delinquent himself, who cannot
in such cases renounce his own just defenses.

Therefore to conclude seeing that Stanley was subject to all exceptions as well
for his lewd conditions, and suspicion of subornatio^ against Squyre as also
for being but a single witness, and his evidence not of knowledge but of
hearesay, not particular concerning the killing of the Queen nor given in
publyke, and in presence of the Jury but in private, there were so many detects
therein, that if the Jury found Squyre guyltie thereupon, I must needs say they
were worthy to wear papers for their pains and may perchance wear
fierbrands else where if they repent not, for spilling Christian blood so
wilfully.

OF THE TESTIMONY given by a privy councelor. CHAP. VII.
IT is further reported here that a privy councelor being present at Squyres
araygnme^t did witness that he had seen a letter which had passed between
me, and a kinsman of mine at Rome wherein we advertised one the other, that
although Squyre had not yet performed that which he promised, yet he continued
his determination to do it when opportunity should serve.

Hereto for answer I do first make the same asseueration as before upon my
Salvation, that there never passed any letter between my kinsman and me
concerning Squyre in any sense or to any purpose whatsoever, and that I think
in my conscience my said kinsman never hard tell of him, nor so much as dreamed
of him, or any matter of his in his life except now by this occasion of his
execution written from England.

Secondly I say that persuading my self that so great a councelor would not so
little respect his honor, and conscience as to forge of his own head a matter
so false and odious as this, and to affirm it in such an honorable and publyke
assembly to the prejudice of any man's life and fame if he had seen no such
letter in deed I must needs think that he was abused by some of his
intelligencers or inferior informers, who to make a show of their double
diligence in such affairs did counterfeit the said letter in my name or my
cosens.

But howsoever that was, in this testimony two things are to be considered,
the one, the estate and quality of his person, the other the weight and valewe
of the matter, which being weighed jointly may seem not a little to prejudice
this cause, but considered a part do nothing at all hurt the same.

Cicero orat. p^o muraena.
For the first I say as Cicero said in the like case in defense of Muraena when
Cato was the accuser, that the dignity, authority, and other parts that God
has given to that our english Cato for a public good, ought not to turn to
the damage of any particular man, further then the matter meriteth, but rather
to his benefit, to which purpose Cicero recou^teth, that when the famous Scipio
Africanus accused Lucius Cotta, the great credit, and authority of the accuser
was so far from hurting the defendant that it greatly profited him; for says
he the wise and prudent Judges would not suffer any man so to faul in Judgment
that he might seem to be overthrown principally by the power of his
adversary, and Valerius Maximus tells of Quintus Pompeius Aufidius, Valerius
Max. lib. ^. cap. 5.
that being accused of extorsion, and much pressed with the testimonies of
Lucius Q. Metellus, and of Caius and Q. Cepio, men of sovereign dignity in
that common wealth he was nevertheless absolved, least (says he) it might
seem that he was oppressed by the might of so potent enemies. Such was the
honorable proceeding of the ancient Romans, who thought it no reason, that a
witness or accuser should bring into Judgment over great power or more
authority then ordinary, or overmuch favor, and credit, which ought to be
employed to the defense of the innocent, to the help of the poor and impotent,
and to the comfort of the afflicted, rather then to the danger, distress, and
destruction of subjects.

This I am bold to intimate to your Lordships, not to blame the a foresaid wise
and worthy councelor (to whom I bear all due reverence and respect) but to
the end it may appear that if his authority and dignity, moved the Jury more
then the weight of the matter which he testified, as yt is lykely it did, it
neither ought so to have done, neither was it I am sure any part of his
honors meaning or desire that it should do, and thus much for his person.

As for the matter which he testified; I shall not need to spend many words
therein, for that I am persuaded his honor did not speak as a witness, but by
the way of discourse, seeing that so far as I understand, he was not deposed
and sworn, neither yet the letter brought forth and red in the court, nor
proved to be a true and no counterfeit letter, which I verily believe his
honor will not for all the good in the world, affirm upon his credit, and much
less upon his oath, as it had been necessary either he or some other should
have done to make the same forcible in law, whereof I saw once the experience
in an action of scandaelum magnaetum, in the Kings bench, where a letter of
the plaintiffes being presented by the defendant, I remember M. Atkinson who
pleaded for the playntife, rejected it as not written by him, wher-vpon the
defendant was forced to produce a councelour at Law for witness who upon his
oath affirmed that the letter was of the plaintifes hand, and sealed with his
own seal.

And if this were needful in a civil action yt must needs be much more in a
cause criminal and capital wherein most L. sciant cuncti c. de probatio.
Bossius titulo de conuicti^. number. 9.
evident, and pregnant proofs are required, especially in our law, wherein the
Iuries that are to Judge thereof are ignorant men, in which respect they had
need to have the the matter as clear as the sun, for otherwyes our trial
were the most absurd and barbarous trial in the world, and therefore whenever
yt is objected by the Ciuilians against our law, that simple Idiotes have in
their hands the Judgment of our causes, Plutar. in ^olo^s life.
and (as Anacharsis merrily said to Solon of the populer state of the
Athenians) that wise men propound, and plead cases, and fools decyde them,
when this I say is objected our common Lawyers answer, that our Iurers are not
to Judge de Iure, but de facto, not of matter of Laws, or right it self, but
of matter of fact only that is to say, not of intricate, and ambiguous points
but of plain and evident matters, as of acts done, which nevertheless if
they be to be proved by presumptions, conjectures, and doubtful evidences,
ignorant men will as soon be deceived therein as in matter of law, wher-vpon I
infer, that if in the civil, and all other good approved Laws, (wherein
Learned and wise men are to Judge of the evidence) yt is required, that the
same be most manifest, and testified, by eye witnesses, or others that have as
certain knowledge thereof as eye witnesses, and this especially in matters of
life, and death; much more is it needful in our Law, wherein ignorant and simple
men are to determine the cause, and if we do not say that this was the
intention of our Lawmakers, that ordained our Iuries, we cannot with reason
defend either them or their laws in this behalf, nor excuse them from
exceeding great absurdities, and injurious proceeding.

THAT THE EVIDENCE against Squyre was not sufficient in Law to give him
torment, and that therefore his confession extorted thereby was void in Law, and
his condemnation unjust. CHAP. VIII.
BUT some perhaps will say that although these two testimonies of the privy
councelour, and of Stanley were not sufficient in Law to condemn Squyre yet
they suffised to give suspicion of the matter, and to make him apprehended
examined and tormented, wher-vpon ensewed his confession which being ratified
after by himself at the bar, was a sufficient warrant to the jury to find
him guilty, L. fi cui ff. accusat B. in l. Cas^i. de Sena.
and to the Judges to pronounce sentence against him of death, as they did.

For satisfaction of this point I will briefly prove, first that this evidence
was not sufficient to give Squyre torment; secondly that his confession upon
torment was void in Law and lastly that his ratification thereof at the bar
could not reualidate the same, and although for his purpose I must aid my self
of the Civil law as hitherto I have done, for lack of knowledge and books of
our own laws, yet I am well assured, no wise and learned common lawyer can
reject the reasons alleged by the civil law, as well for that they are
grounded on equity and conscience (in which respect they are received and
confirmed in like manner by the Ecclesiastical, and canon laws of
Christendom) as also for that our law, so far admits the civil law, that
in many cases yt remitteth us unto the decision thereof, as we may see in
matters of testaments, and marriages, and in diverse cases of the chancerie, for
which purpose do serve our Arches, Admiraltie, and M. of the chancery, and this
must needs have place, much more in this case then in many others, for that the
trial by torment properly belongs to the civil law, and not to ours, which
law of ours abhorring (as it seems) the cruelty, and rigor of torture does
exclude it from the trial of common causes (as before I have said) therefore if
in any case it boroweth the use thereof, of the civil law, it must either use it
with the same circumstances, and conditions, or else with more moderation seeing
it tends more to mercy and pity then the other does.

Now then to the matter, though the civil law uses torment in trial of
criminal causes, to force the party to confess the crime if he will not
voluntarily do yt, nevertheless yt ordeyneth that it shall be given with such
circumspection, and consideration, as if the form and circumstances of the law
be truly observed there is little danger or none at all of doing wrong to the
party.

^. 1. ff. de qu.
First yt commands that the judge begin not with torment neither proceed
hastily thereto, but with mature consideration as well of the quality and credit
of the party, Bald. cons. ^ 59. verb^ in questionis ^ver septima^atio lib. 1.
as of the lykelihood and truth of the crime objected.

Secondly that the evidence and proofs produced be most manifest as in the 4.
Chapter of this treatise I have sufficiently proved.

Battol. l. Maritus ff. de qu. l. co^fe^sio extraiudi^lalis.
Thirdly that the witnesses shall be such as no lawful exception can be taken
against them.

Bart. in l. qui ^^^e nu. 6, ff. de quaest.
And although the Judge may give torment with one lawful witness that produces
indicium indubitatum as the lawyers term it, an undoubted and clear evidence
(as for example when there is an eye witness against whom no exception can be
taken, Bart. ibid. au^ innoce^te. ^^icut extra de ^ymon glos. ^ingul. in l. ^in
verbo ve^ inditijs c. ^amiliae her^i^cum, re^epta a Bartol^ ^ald^ etc (...).
for so says Bartol) yet when the said evidence is not so manifest two
witnesses at least are required and the same to be contestes, that is to say,
affirming one and the selfsame thing.

This being true; it appears that Squyre was tormented against all law, for
that the matter and evidence that was brought against him was neither clear,
nor yet testified by lawful and sufficient witness; for as for Sta^ley besides
that he was subject to many exceptions as well of suspicion of subornation, as
also for being his accuser, in which respect he could not be a witness, his
evidence was likewise in it self so defectious that yt could be of no moment or
consideration in the world as I have proved in the 6. Chapter.

And as for the letter which the priu^e councelor testified he had seen, it
was not proved to be a true and no counterfeyt letter, and therefore no such
clear evidence as law requires to the giving of torment, besides that if his
honor will be taken for a witness yet he was not contestis with Stanley for that
they did not testify both of them one and the self same thing as is needful
when the evidence is so weak as this, neither did that letter mention any
particular act but employment of Squyre in general, and for generalities no
particular man can be punished as says the law.

Therefore I conclude that he being tormented unjustly, and against law the
confession so extorted could not be of force to condemn him, though he
ratisied the same afterward publykly at the bar; for all civil lawyers do
agree, that if the evidence be not sufficient to the giving of torment, yea and
also sufficiently proved (in such manner as before I have declared) then the
confession extorted thereby is Glos v^ in l. qu. l bendae ff. qua ^^. Foller. is
pract. cri^ 10 307. n Mars. co^ 95. number. l Alex in l in alien a celus nu.
nu^la, that is to say, to be accounted none at all, though the party should
ratify it a thousand times after (for so Gramon cons 37 ^ 6 and 7.
they write) yea and further, that although after such ratification, there
should be presented sufficient proofs (whereby yt should be manifest that the
confession was true) yet yt could not be thereby Bart. in maritus ^ ff. de qu ^
^ulius ^^ in practic crim qua ^^. number.
reualidate and made good in law for his condemnation, though it were in cases
of assassinat treason or any other like heinous crime whatsoever, and this
being true in the civil law, it cannot be contrad^cted by ours, which is more
favorable to life, and admits no torture in trial of causes for
condemnation, nor relyeth so much upon confession of the party extorted by
torment, as upon sufficient evidence of lawful witness, which in this case of
Squyre was none at all; in which respect the Judges and Jury hearing him say,
that he had been tormented, and seeing the evidence and witness insufficient for
the giving of torment, ought to have held his confession, and the ratification
thereof suspected, and so to have at least suspended their judgment until better
proofs had been produced, presuming that for as much as he might assure
himself, that all the benefit he should reap by the reuocation of his said
confession, would be but new torments worse then death, he resolved himself to
ratify the same and at his death to discharge his conscience, and to clear
himself, as those which accused me at Bruxels determined to do, and as infinite
others have done in like cases. And that this was also his resolution it
appeared manifestly at his death, at what time he utterly denied not only the
fact, and all intention thereof, but also that he had been employed to any such
end by any man, accusing his own frayltie in that he had for torment belyed
himself; which being considered with the weakness of the evidence, does no less
manifest his innocence and ours, then discover the impiety of those that
enueygled him to belly and slander himself and others, whereof I will speak
more hereafter.

AN EXPOSTVLATION which M. Cook her Majesty's Attorney. CHAP. IX.
FOR as much, as I understand that M. Cook her Maties. Attorney was a principal
actor in the tragedy of Squyre, and played the part as well of a kind, as of a
kindly cook, in seasoning such an unsavory matter with salt tears; and of a
notable calumniatour in belying and slandering me with father Walpole and
others, charging me not only with discovering the matter to Stanley (whereof I
have spoken before) but also with imparting it to the King my master of
glorious memory, making his Matie. thereby an abettour of that imaginary
conspiracy, I cannot forbear to answer him bree^ly thereto, and to debate the
matter with himself.

Therefore, good M. Cook, how simple ^oeuer you conceive me to be, yet I would
have you to understand, that I have not got so little experience, and skill of
Kings humors^ in these 15. or 16. years that I have haunted their courts, and
served some of them, that if I should have employed Squyre or any man else, to
kill her Matie. I would have acquaynted any king or sovereign Prince therewith,
whereby they might take me for a Queen or King killer; for howsoever the act
might turn to their benefits, or be to their lykings, I am sure they would
say with Augustus Caesar, I love the treason but I hate traitor, Plutar. in
life of ^c. mulus.
besides that I am not ignorant that they hold it for a necessary point of
state, to maintain the sovereign majesty of Princes as sacred and i^^^o^able,
yea though y^^be of their very enemies, and therefore when Darius was
overthrown by Alexander the great, and traitorously killed afterward by a
subject of his own called Bessu^, he recommended the revenge thereof to no
other, ^ust. lib. 11.
but to Alexander himself, saying that yt was not his particular but the common
cause of Kings, and matter of necessary example, which should be both
dishonorable and dangerous, for him to neglect, in which respect Alexander
afterward revenged the same, not esteeming (says the story) Darius to be so
much his enemy, Idem lib. 11.
as he that slew him.

This consideration might have suffised (I assure you M. Cook) to with hold me
from acquaynting his May. with the matter, if there had been any such, but much
more his Maties. great virtue, piety and Justice, so known to all the
Christian world (howsoever you and your fellows in your hemisphere are
ignorant thereof) that I know not who durst have presumed so much as to intimat
any such matter to him, whose royal heart (the very harbor of honor and true
magnanimity) was no more compatible with murders and mischiefs, the^ your base
mind is capable of Kingly conceits.

This shall suffice for answer to your discourse of my imparting the matter to
the King, seeing there was no other ground thereof, but your own imagination,
which was no less Idle, then your head was addle all that day, being the morrow
after your marriage, as I understand, when you were not as yet come to your
self, having left, as yt should seem, not only your heart, but also your wits
at home with my lady your wife, as yt may well appear by the abundance of
tears you shed in your pitiful pleading, where of I cannot but say as Catulus
said to a bad orator that having employed all his eloquence to move his
audience to pity, Cicero lib. 1. de ocat.
asked him his opinion thereof, whereto he answered; in truth (quoth he) you
moved much pity, for there was no man there, that thought not both you and
your oration much to be pitied, and so Sir I may say of you, that no dout you
moved all wife men that were present to pity you, and to hold you either for
the simplest, or else the most malicious man that ever occupied your place, the
simplect if your tears were from the heart, and the most malicious if they were
feigned.

For though you had been a man of far less understanding in the laws of
England then one that should deserve to be the Queens Attorney, and had not
ben employed in the examination of the cause (as by all lykelyhood you were)
yet you could not but note such weakness and insuffici^ency of the evidence,
such wresting of law, and consequently so little appearence of truth, and less
of her Maties. danger, that you could have no cause of tears, except yt were
to bewail the lamentable case of the poor prisoner, yea and your own, for
being in great part guilty of his blood, which if you saw not, but weapt in
good earnest, for pity of her Matie. your law served you for little, and your
wits for less, and I dare say there were some on the bench that laughed well in
their sleeves to see your simplicity, and thought you were more fit, (as good a
cook as you are) to be a turn spit in the Queens kiching then her attorney in
the kings benche.

But if you saw the poor man's inocency and yet could shed tears like the
crocodil to his destruction your malice surpassed all that ever I heard of. And
truly the best that your best friends can conceive thereof, is that it
proceeded from some natural infirmity of a moist and I Would brain and therefore I
would advise my lady your wife, hereafter to keep you at home, (seeing you have
such a childish trick when you come abroad, to cry for nothing) or else to send
with you a nours with an aple to still you when you cry, for otherwise verily
you will shame your self, and your friends, and so I leave you until you give me
further occasion, which if you do, you may assure your self that I will follow
the council of Solomon and answer a fool according to his foolishnes, least by
other men's silence he may think himself to be wise.

OF THE LIKE SLAVNDERS raised diverse times heretofore against Catholykes, and
of the concurrence of calumniation and persecution. CHAP. X.
YOUR lordships have seen upon what small ground or rather none at all Squyre
was condemned, and we here slaundered, whereby you may judge how Justice is
administered now in your Realm, by those that are or should be the Ministers
thereof for the better declaration whereof, and the further justification as well
of us here for this matter, as also of all Catholykes for the like slanders
raised against them diverse times heretofore both at home and abroad, I will be
so bold as to represent unto your Lordships sundry manifest wrongs, and open
iniustices done unto us in this kind, for if this had been the first we
should have had less cause to complain, and this might have passed the better
vnco^trold, as many others of like sort have done, but seeing this manner of
proceeding against us is now so usual in England that it is grown to a common
practice, (and thereby much guyltles blood shed many innocent men slaundered,
many weak scandalized, the simple abused, and deceived, the true cause of our
suffering obscured, and our religion defamed) no reasonable man can blame me (I
hope) if upon so just an occasion, as the defense of my brethren, our common
cause, and my self, (that am more perticularly interessed in this matter then
many others) I lance a little this long festring sore, to the end that the
malignitie thereof being discovered, it may receive some cure and remedy
through your Lordships wisdoms, whom yt imports, and in whose hands yt
rests to remedy the same.

For this purpose may it please you to consider that there is such a symphathy
betwixt persecution and calumniation as they are ever lightly found to concur
and go accompagned, for besyds that calumniation is of it self a kind of
persecution, we never read that Gods Church was ever persecuted, but his
servants were calumniated and slaundred in which respect our Savior fore
warning his Apostles, and Disciples of the persecutions that they were to
suffer, armeth them no less against slanderous, and calumnious tongues, then
against other furious assaults of his and their enemies, saying, Matthew. ^.
happy are you when men shall rail upon you, and persecute you, and speak all
evil of you, belying you for my sake; and after exhorting them to pray for
their persecutours insinuates also the concurrence of calumniatours, saying
pray for them, Ibidem. 1. cor. cap.
that persecute and caluminiate you; and S. Paul speaking of persecution
raised against him, and the rest of the Apostles says, we are cursed and we
bless, we are persecuted, and we endure yt, we are blasphemed and we beseech.

This will be also more manifest if we consider the nature and property of the
chief persecutour of Gods Church, The devils name and nature.
whose arms, and instruments all other persecutours are, I mean the devil
himself, who being (as the Scripture says) a liar, and the father of lies,
yea and a slaunderer (in which respect he is called Diabolus which signyfieth
nothing else in the greek tongue but a calumniatour) can no more forbear to
lie, and slander, then the dog to bark, when he is augrie, or the snake to
hiss, and therefore whensoever by Gods permission he makes war against the
Church he employeth his instruments no less to slander and calumniate Gods
servants, then corporally to afflict and persecute them.

Hereof the experience has been seen, in all the persecutions, as well of our
Savior himself, as of his Apostles, and infinite other Martyrs whenever the
Church has been persecuted, either by Infidels or heretyks; our Savior was
slau^dered to be a seducer of the people, to woork by the devil, to be enemy
to Caesar, ^. 7. and 10.
to hinder the paying of his tribute, ^^c. 23.
and lastly to make himself a King, S. Paul was falsely charged with profaning
the Temple, ^ct. 14 17. (...) 24 25.
with sowing sedition, stirring up the people to rebellion, and many other such
like odious and greiuous matters, ^ctor. 6.
S. Stephen the first Martyr was stoned to death upon the testimony of false
witnesses, that were suborned to accuse him of blasphemy against God and
Moses; ^^cit. lib. 15. ^ertul. in ^pol. Justin. ^pol. 2. ad ^nton^n. ^useb.
lib. 5. ^p. 1. and 4.
In like sort in the persecutions under Nero, Dioclesian, Antonius and others
the Chrystians were put to death under color that they had set a fire the
city of Rome, killed and sacrifised children eaten man's flesh and stirred up
the people to sedition against the Emperors, and their Gods and religion.

^i^t. Trip. li. ^c 27. Rus. ^ 10. Victor ^^ persee ^andal.
The Arrian heretics in Greece accused S. Athanasius to be a whore master a
witch, and a traitor: The Vandales that were also Arrians in Africa killed
the Catholykes there under pretense that they had secret intelligence with the
Romans against their state and gouerme^t, as we are now: (...) Dia^. ^b. 16.
and lastly the Emperesse Theodora, wife to Iustinia^ the Emperor did cruelly
persecute S. Siluerius Pope of Rome and all his clergy, obiecting falsely
against them that they had written to the Goths to inuit them to invade the
Roman Empire, and other like calumniations whereby to spil their blood with
less admiration, and repugnance of the common people.

^ra^. in lau^em caesa^ij ^atris.
In all which it is to be noted, that (as S. Gregory Nazianzen said of Julian
the Apostata, when he persecuted the Christians) the enemies of Gods Church
endeavored by all subtyle and crafty means, to procure that they which suffered
for Christ's cause should be punished as wicked and facinorous men yea and to
make them and their religion more odious to all, they slaundered them commonly
with matters pernicious, and dangerous to all as with treason against the
Prince and State, so that whilst they were punished as publyke enemies and
neither favored nor pitied by any, their persecutors had free scope to
discharge all their fury upon them without contradiction.

This having been always the custom and practice of the enemies of the
Christian, and Catholyke faith, which we profess, yt is no marueil though
those which impugn the same in England in these our days (provoked or rather
possessed by the same spirit of lies, and calu^niations, that their
praedecessours were) do hold the same course that they have done partly
slaundering us with such devised matter as this of Squyre, which never had
essence or being in rerum natura, but only in imagination and fiction of the
deuisers, and partly ordayning laws and statutes, whereby some principal points
of Catholyke Religion, or else some necessary consequence, exercise and issue
thereof being made treason many may be intrapped within some show of offense
against these laws and statutes, whereupon again yt enseweth that the common
people (who hold for Gospel all that our English parliament enacteth, and have
not the capacity to discern betwixt a true and a feigned treason) hearing that
the Catholykes are always put to death as traitors (whom they understand to
be none but such as commit some heinous crimes against the Prince or state) are
brought to imagyn that all Catholyks are perturbers, and enemies of the common
wealth, and that their religion is not the common, and general religion of
Christendom or that ancient faith in which all their forefathers lived, and
dyed, and our Realm flourished so many hundred years together, but rather some
particular, and pestilent opinion of some sect sprung up of late, that cannot
stand with the safety of Kings, and Princes, nor with the quietness of their
states.

And verily I dare say that such of the common sort as are not above 40.
years of age, and never saw Catholyke times in England and have heard of so
many executions of traiterous papists, The falsehood of the English persecuto^^^.
as we are termed, do think Papistery to be nothing else, but a very compact of
treason, or perhaps understand that Papist, and traitor are but different
words, that signify one and the self same thing, so that although all
persecutours have sought to cover their persecutions with the cloak of treason,
I think none have wrought yt so cunningly as ours have done by means of
these laws seconded with such slanders as this of Squyre against Father
Walpoole and me and others here, of which kind, there have been so many, and
of such diverse sorts in sundry parts of England these later years, as
neither I, nor perhaps any one particular man can take upon him to discover the
same, and therefore I will only touch with convenient brevity a few, which
either are with in the compass of my own knowledge and remembrance, or have
come to my understanding by undoubted, and assured means, and may be proved by
sufficient witnesses that were present thereat, if need require, and liberty
granted to make the proof.

OF THE MOST NOTORIOVS injustice committed in the condemnation of Father Edmond
Campion of the Societye of Jesus, and of eleven other learned and godly Priests
for a feigned conspiracy against her Matie. and the state in the year 1581.
CHAP. XI.
I AM sure there are many yet living that were present at the araygnment of
that worthy man. Father Campion of the Societye of Jesus, and of eleue^
venerable Priests with him, and do remember the notorious injustice done unto
them in sight of all the world, who were indyted and condemned in the year of
our Lord 1581. For a certain conspiracy made at Rome and Rhemes in France to
disposesse her Matie. of the crown by invasion of the realm with the help of
forrayne Princes, the which conspiracy was supposed to be held in the month of
May of the precedent year to wit the 22. of her Maties. Reign at Rome and
Rhemes, for proof whereof first spoke the Queens soliciter and Attorney with
other of the Q^eenes council who began to dilate the matter with large
discourses (as the old Roman orators were wont to do when they meant to draw
out the day and leave no time to their adversaries) handling theses only, and
not hypotheses, to wit general propositions and common places of the
greiuousnesse of treason, of the peril of Kingdoms where traitors live and do
cloak their intensions with show of Religion, of the great importance of the
saftie of her Maties. person and the dangers she had passed, and how much she
was maligned by Catholykes both at home and abroad and other like stuff.

Then came they to declare how many ways rebellions and tumultes had been
attempted by such kind of people, as the excommunication of Pius Quintus, the
hanging up of it by M. Felton, the rising in the North by the Earls of
Northumberland and Westmerland, the late attempts of Doctor Sanders and others
in Ireland, and when no end was made in amplifying and exaggerating of these
matters, the prisoners often times desired that they would come to the
particular points of the indictment and prove some particularities against any
one of them of whom some said that nothing was alleged but original sin,
and the factes of others, some that they were very children when most of the
matters alleged did happen, some that they were of far different places,
states and conditions.

And when these accusers or rather declamers went still forward to urge the
insurrections of other Catholykes against these that were present F. Campion
among other things said, Sir, supposing that diverse men Catholyke in Religion
having for the said Religion, or other causes taken sometimes arms (as of
Protestants also I think, no man can deny yt that considers what has passed
in our days in Germany, France, Flaunders and Scotland) yet what is this to
any of us here at the bar, though we be of the same Religion, this does not
prove us to be of the same action; if a sheep were stolen and a whole family
called in question for the same were it a good manner of proceeding for the
accusers to say your great grand fathers and fathers, and sisters and kynsfolke
loved all mutton, ergo you have stolen the sheep, if you will prove any thing
against us M. Attorney and Solicitor you must leave your ranging speech and
come to say thou Ca^pion or thou Sherwyn, or thou such a one, have done, or
dealt, or committed this act.

This said that servant of God, and to all indifferent men that were present
his demand seemed most just and reasonable, but yet would yt not be hard for a
great while, at last notwithstanding were brought in certain witnesses whose
names were Slead, Cradock, Monday, and Eliot. The first had been a serving man
in Rome and said he had heard by common report that some styrres were like to
be shortly in England; Cradock had been a broken Merchant about Italy, and
imprisoned in Rome for a spy and testified of one that to comfort him in
prison should say, he has happy that he was forth of England, seeing yt was
like that great troubles would ensewe there; Monday was a player of commedies,
and had been some few days in Room, and could say little or nothing at all;
Eliot was a seruingman who having been a Catholyke before, but now in danger for
stealing away a young gentlewoman out of M. Ropers house, and for suspicion of a
robery for which he and his friends were bound to appear at the next assyses)
to get himself free, betrayed first his best and greatest friend M. Pain a
Priest, and afterward took F. Campion and now came into judgment, not to accuse
any particular man present of any matter of weight but to make them odious by
relating a certain fiction of his own against M. Pain absent but in the
tower whom he accused to have told him of a devise that had been thought of to
kyl her Matie. in time of progress or hunting with fifty armed men, which the
other after upon his death took to be most false.

Now then all these witnesses being brought in, and saying no more in effect
them here has been laid down how insufficient there depositions were to
condemn any one of his company, and much less all and every one of them
together I refer me to the judgment of any man that has but common sense,
for albeit we grant that these witnesses were all honest men, (as it is
evident they were lewd and infamous fellows) what proved they against F.
Campion or any of the rest there araygned? what particularities brought they
of the conspiracy, and pretended invasion as with what forces yt should be
do^ne, what forreyn Princes had been treated with all, and how or by whom the
matter had been negociated, and by what means they at Rome conferred with
them at Rhemes and how it came to pass that the conspiracy came to be held by
so many several persons, and in such distant places at one time, as in the end
of one month of May? no doubt for the condemnation of the prisoners, yt had
been requisite that if not all, at least some of these particulars should have
been proved, either against them all or at least against some one of them as
yt is evident yt was not, for though we should grant that some body had told
Slead, or Cradock in Rome that there would be great styrres in England
shortly, what did that touch F. Campion in particular or any of the rest?

And whereas one said that he had heard also at Rhemes of some such styrres like
to ensew, what proved this against any of those that came from Rome, or yet
against those that were come from Rhemes diverse years or months before or
else afterward seeing that there was at that time near hand 200. English at
Rhemes of whom it could not be with any reason presumed that they were all
privy of the conspiracy, if there had been any such, and if only some were
privy thereof how did it appear that those which were araygned were of that
number seeing the witnesses did not particulerlie charge any of them therewith?

Lastly he which testified that M. Pain the Priest, told him of a conspiracy
of some Catholykes to kyl the Queen in a progress what proved he against any
of them at the bar, seeing that M. Pain was none of their company, and the
matter altogether different from the other where upon they were indicted.

Was this then such plain and sufficient evidence as is necessary in law for
condemnation of a man in matter of life and death, which evidence as before I
have showed in Squyres case, ought to be as clear as the Su^ne, not general
but particular, not of hearesay, but of assured, and certain knowledge and
testified by witnesses, auouching one and the self same particulers.

But what need I labor to overthrow their testimonies by law seeing it was
clear to all them that were present at their araignme^ts or deaths, that they
were neither all known one to an other, neither yet to the witnesses
themselves, before they were brought to the bar and that some of them were in
England and some in other places, at the same time that they were supposed to
have co^spired at Rome and Rhemes as diverse of them affirmed, and was by the
oath of M. Thomas Lancaster manifestly proved of M. Colington the Priest, who
was quit thereupon, and the like was also avouched of an other of them by one M.
William Nicolson who being present and moved in conscience to testify a truth,
called to the Judges from the place where he stood, and offered to depose that
he knew that one of the prisoners (whose name I have forgot) was other where
then was said in his inditeme^t, at the same time that the crime was supposed
to be committed, (...) (...) (...) (...)

(...) (...) (...)

(...)

OF TWO CATHOLICS in wales condemned upon the testimony of witnesses
suborned, and hired for money. CHAP. XIIII.
TWO substantial men the one cauled Ihon Hewes and the other Richard White,
having been many mes most cruelly tormented, and examined by Sr. George
Bro^ley, and others his assistants in the Marches of Wales, and confessed
nothing wher-vpon hold might be taken to execute any of the captious laws upon
them, were nevertheless designed to the slaughter, and for that purpose 3.
witnesses were suborned to accuse them, that they had persuaded some to be
Catholykes: the prisoners being araygned thereupon, excepted against the
witnesses, that one of them had been nailed on the pillorie for perjury in
the same shyre as it was notoriously known to all men, and that as well he as
the rest were hired to testify against them, the judges answered to the first
exception, that though the party had been perjured in one case yet he might
say true in an other, and then did put the prisoners to the proof of the
subornation for which purpose, they auowed that a gentleman of good estimation,
who was then in the same town could testify it, and therefore desired he might
be called, the gentleman was sent for, and being deposed, witnessed, that one
Peter Roden told him that Gronow, (for so was one of the witnesses cauled) and
his compagnions had received 15. shillings a piece to give testimony against
the prisoners, and that he was also offered so much himself, and had refused it.
The judges knowing belyke that this was true, and fearing that it would be made
too manifest; would not send for Peter Roden, but rejected the testimony of the
Gentleman as improbable, saying what should any man gain by the death of these
men, that he should suborne witnesses against them? and so without further
trial of the truth thereof, bad the Jury go together, who having some scruple
to condemn them upon the testimony of such infamous, and suborned witnesses
could not agree thereupon, until two of them had been to confer with Sr.
George Bromley, by whom as it should seem, their consciences were so well
satisfied, that they found them guilty, whereupon they were condemned, and
the one of them called Richard White executed at wrexam where he had been long
time before prisoner.

OF WILLIAMS YORK, AND Patrick Cullen executed also for feigned conspiracies
against her Maties person. CHAP. XV.
BUT to return to feigned conspiracies against her Matie. I omit diverse for
lack of perfect knowledge of the particularities, and will speak only of some
published 4. or 5. years ago in a pamphlet printed in diverse languages, as in
English, French, and Duitch, concerning a conspiracy of Doctor Lopez, and two
other portugueses, in which pamphlet two Englishmen called Williams, and York,
and Patrick Cullen an Irishman; were charged to have conspired the death of her
Matie. by the instigation of the banished English Catholykes at Brussels.

And for as much as the pamphleter would seem to justify the condemnation,
and execution, of the said two Englishmen, and the Irishman by their own
confessions, I w^^ but desire your Lordships for the discovery of that fiction,
only to consider the circumstances thereof, not meaning to meddle with the
matter of Doctor Lopez and his fellows, because no English Catholyke was
charged therewith.

The pamphleter says they confessed that the English Catholykes at Brussels
held certain councels amongst themselves, where at were present two Doctors
of divinity, a Jesuit, 5. or 6. gentlemen and others, all which are named in
the pamphlet, who he says conspired altogether the death of her Mayestie, and
persuaded Willia^s, and York to undertake the execution thereof, with the
promise of forty thousand crounes, and that for the greater satisfaction, and
faster binding of them, father Holt the Jesuit took the blessed Sacrament
(which he had brought to the council) kissed yt, and gave yt unto them,
swearing upon the same, that he would pay them the said ^ome, when they should
have effected that which they had promised.

For the examination of this supposed confession, I would wish to be
considered, what likelihood or probability there is, Absurd improbillities.
that those two soldiers Williams, and York, both of them young men (whereof
the first was held but for a cold and weak Catholyk, and the later suspected
to be a protestant, as in deed he was, and then newly come from England,
without any recommendation, or testimony of his affection to Catholyke
religion, or of his good behavior) could win so much credit so quickly,
amongst such principal Catholykes, as to be admitted to their councels (if they
had held any) and to be made partakers of so high a secret, especially seeing
that the Catholykes on this side the sea are not ignorant, that spies are daily
sent from England, to discover what passes amongst them, in which respect they
are so far from trusting in weighty affairs those they know not, as they
hold suspected those of their own religion, that come from thence and bring
not sufficient recommendation, what show otherwise soever they make of zeal to
the Catholyke says;

Is it then credible that so many grave personages, Doctors, Priests, and
gentlemen, all of them wise, and men of experience would recommend such a
matter, as the killing of her Matie. to men unknown unto them, suspected, yea
and mercenary, (seeing as the pamphlet says they meant to do yt for hyre) did
they not know (seeing all the world knows yt) that no man can attempt such a
ma^er without loosing his own life, or putting the same in evident danger,
whether he hit or miss (whereof the late examples, as well of those that killed
the Prince of Orange, and the last King of France, as of those that have failed
to kill him that now raygneth do geeue sufficient testimony) in which respect
neither those two that were supposed to undertake this act for recompense,
could have any probable hope ever to enjoy the reward promised, neither those
Priests and gentlemen could persuade themselves, with any reason, that these or
any others that should promise to do the same for any such consideration of
reward would ever execute it.

Furdermore is yt probable, that those two which should do the fear, would
consent that a matter so dangerous for them should be communicated to so many,
or that the principal of the said supposed councelers, being men of great
consideration and daily practiced in affairs would condescend to treat such a
matter in a council of men so different in quality, and humors, as it is well
known they were, that the pamphlet names; seeing some of them for causes not
unknown, I am sure, to the pamphleter, did fears communicate together in
matters of common conversation, and much les in matters of such importance, yea
and that some others of them were held suspected, of (...) of that company, to
have secret intelliligence with some councillors in England, for the which
they were afterward cauled in question? and therefore it were an absurd thing
to think that so many so diversely disposed, and affected, and some of them
suspected of the rest, should treat together a matter of so great secrecy,
weight, and danger, as the killing of her Mayesty, besyds that, it is evident
(and upon my knowledge I affirm it) that of those which were named to be of
this immaginary council at Brussels, some did resyde ordinarily in Antwerp,
some at S. Omers, and some at Mastrich, yea and were in the said places of
their ordinary residence, at the same time that the pamphleter says they held
these councils at Brussels, which being known in Flanders to be most true did
serve notably for the detection of this slau^derous fiction among the wyser
sor^ of those of that country, which did read the pamphlet in french, or
duitch, who wondered no less at the autors impudency in this behalf, then they
laughed also heartily at his folly, when they noted the ridiculous jest of f^.
Holts carrying the blessed Sacrament to the supposed council, his kissing it,
and swearing upon it, when he did minister it, to Williams, and York; which
are things so far from the custom and use of the Catholyke Church, as every
child on this side the sea, knows it to be an impudent and gross lie;

And where as the pamphleter relyeth wholly upon their confessions for the
justification of their condemnation, yt is most certain that howsoever they
might be forced by torment secretly to confess those particulers, or otherwise
falsely to accuse themselves, as Squyre was, yet Williams at his death utterly
denied the same, and as for York yt was evident enough, that he dyed distracted
of his senses, and was not in case to deny or confess, any thing at that time,
as all those that were present at their deaths may well remember.

And as for Patrick Cullen, (of whom I will speak a word or two) yt is
manifest that he never confessed either publikly or privately that he was any
way employed against her Matie. person, ^atrik Cullen t^ his death.
which at his death M. Toplif acknowledged sufficiently, when he said unto him,
yt is now no more time (Cullen) to disguise the matter, seeing thou must die, and
therefore confess thy treason, and ask her Matie. forgiveness, whereto he
answered that he called God to witness that he was never employed against her
Matie. no^ came into England which any such intention, and yet the pamphleter
affirms that he was also condemned upon his own confession, though he lay
down no particularities, nor circumstances thereof, in which respect it needs
no further answer and therefore to conclude; yt rests only that I here
protest, as I do before God, that I being at Brussels at the same time that
these men were executed, and the pamphlet published, some of the principal of
those gentlemen that were slandered with these matters, did swear unto me, and
take it most deeply upon the charge of their souls, that they never had any
acquaintance, or conference, with Williams and York, in their lives, nor ever
knew them otherwise then by sight, and that there was never held amongst them
any such councels, or assemblies, nor any of those 3. any way employed against
her Maties. person for ought they knew, which as I take my self in conscience
bound to believe, (knowing the great integrity and virtue of the parties, as I
do) so I have thought good upon this occasion to testify it unto your
Lordships, and to all others that shall read this Apology, for your more
abundant satisfaction in this behalf.

OF THE ENDS THAT OUR Adversaries have or may have in slaundering Catholykes
with such treasonable attemptes, and first of the end that they have common
with all persecutors of Gods Church and how much they fail of their purpose
therein. CHAP. XVI.
IT appears (my Lords) by these examples that the slaundering of Catholykes
with treasonable attempts in our coutry is no new practice, but an old for many
years, and so often reiterate, that it is now grown to be stale and a common
custom, or rather held for a special and necessary point of state, but with
what benefit to the state, it shall be discussed after when I shall have briefly
declared the ends that the Autors of these calumniations have or may have
therein, the which may be considered, either as common to all the enemies of
Catholyke religion, or else as particular to these our Adversaries now a days,
of the first I have spoken before discoursing of the concurre^ce of
calumniation and persecution, where I proved that it has been always the
custom of the persecutours of Catholykes to seek by imputation of falls crimes
to obscure the true cause of their sufferings, and consequently the glory of
their martyrdomes, wherein nevertheless how much they have failed of their
purpose (I mean as well these of our time, as those other their praedecessours)
it is evident by common experience, seeing almighty God has in all ages so
disposed, and day he does for his own glory, that the clear light of truth,
and innocence has dispersed the clouds of calumniation in such sort that his
servants have triumphed over all the malice of men, and remained no less
glorious with a double crown of martyrdom then their enemies ignominious and
odious for there double persecution.

The glory of martyrs oppressed by calumniatio^.
For the proof hereof let us look back to former times, and see what the
persecutors of Gods Church, have gained by the like devises; have they thereby
any jot obscured the glory of Gods servants, who are esteemed, honored, and
served through-out the Christian world for glorious Martyrs, and saints of God,
and receive more honor, and glory in one festiual day of theirs, then all the
Monarks of the world in all the feasts of their life? Are not the Altars and
Temples builded to God in their memories more triumphant then the thrones, and
trophes of all earthly Kings? does any Princes power extend it self so far
as theirs, whose dominion reaches from the east to the west, from the one Pole
to the other, whose subjects, servants, and supplyants, are not only the common
people but Princes and potentates, Kings and Emperors, that crouch kneel and
present their petitions, at their toombes and monuments, or whersoeuer there is
any little memory of them? Are all the royal robes, crowns and diademes of
Emperors and Kings so much esteemed, and reverenced in their own Kingdoms as
is throughout Christendom the least rag, or relyke of any one of them, whereto
we see Almighty God gives no less virtue and power oftentimes when it is for
his glory, and their manifestation, to cure the sick, to heal the lame, to
raise the dead, to cast out Devils, then he gave to the hemme of our Saviors
garment, Matthew. 9. Act. 19. Act. 5.
to the handkerchefs that touched S. Paul's body, to the shadow of S. Peter?
This has always been so notorious in Gods Church, that S. Chrysostom
speaking of the great miracles done by the body and relykes of the blessed
martyr saint Babilas, Tom. 5. contra Gent. quid Christus sit Deus in vita
Babilae.
makes the same a manifest argument against the Paynims to prove that Christ
is God, which I wish by the way, that our Protestants in England may note for
their confusion, seeing that denying the virtue of saints Reliks they do
paganize with them, and do deny thereby an evident argument of Christ's
divinity, but to proceed.

On the other side what honor have their calumniatours, and persecutours
purchased to themselves? are not their very names odious and execrable to all
posterity, and as the memory of the other is aeternized with immortal glory,
is not theirs buried in aeternal infamy? Sap. cap. 4.
To this purpose says the book of wisdom that the wicked shall see the end of
the just man, and shall not understand what God has determined of him, and why
our Lord did humble him, they shall see him, and contemn him; but our Lord shall
deride them, for they shall fall afterward without honor, and shall ever be
amongst the dead in shame and infamy.

Hereby may our adversaries partly judge what they shall gain in the end by
murdering so many Catholyks as they do, under color of treasons, and enormious
crimes; but for their further satisfaction in this point let them look abroad
into Christendom, and see what acount is already made of their supposed
traitors I mean such as die directly for religion made lately treason, who of
all Christian Catholyke people in the world are held for no less glorious
martyrs, the^ those of the primitive Church as appears not only by the
public testimony of the most famous writers of this age, but also by the
devotion that all Catholyks, yea and the greatest Princes, and potentates of
Christendom do bear to the least relyke of any one of them, which they think
themselves happy to have, and keep with all due respect, and reverence,
besides that it has pleased almighty God to glorify his name already with
diverse notable miracles done by the same, which hereafter will be known with
sufficient testimony of the truth thereof, and as for their martyrdomes I have
no doubt but as already they are known, acknowledged and honored by all true
Catholykes so in time also convenient they will be approved by the authority of
the whole Church, whiles in the mean time the memory of their persecutors
shall be damned, either to the deep pit of oblivion or else to everlasting
ignominy as they may see it has already happened to their praedecessours,
and thus much for the end common to all persecutours.

OF OTHER ENDS PARTICULAR to our English adversaries and of their disloyalty
therein toward her Majesty. CHAP. XVII.
THE other ends particular to our home adversaries at this day may be thought
to be partly publyke, and for the common good (as they in the depth of their
wisdom, or rather in the height of their folly do imagine) and partly for
their own particular profit or emolument.

The publyke are these, first to incense the Queens Matie. against us to the
end she may give them leave to exercise freely all cruelty upon us, whereby
they hope in time to destroy us, and to extinguish the memory of Catholyke
religion, wherein I wish them by the way to note, how far they are deceived of
their expectation, and how almighty God does daily infatuate, and frustrate
their councels, and turn them to their own confusion, seeing that
notwithstanding all their rigor, there are at this day many more recusants in
England, and sincere Catholyks that will give their lives for their Religion
then there were when the persecution first began; so that we see how true it is
which Tertulian says Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae, the blood of Martyrs is
the seed of the Church: But to proceed.

The second is to irritate also her Matie. against the King Catholyke who is
therefore commonly made an abettor of all those feigned conspiracies, least
otherwise she being of her own inclination desirous of peace, might come to
some composition with him, and so Christendom be brought to repose, which
these me^ imagine would in time grow to be dangerous to their gospel, or rather
to their particular states and commodities which they may be presumed to
esteem more then any ghospel, but how this piece of policy stands with
true reason of state I will signify hereafter.

Thirdly it is not unlikely, that the deuisers of these feigned conspiracies
seeing themselves employed by your Lordships otherwhyles in some matters of
state, take themselves for so great statists, that they make no doubt to extend
their care further then your Lordships mean they should do, to wit to the
whole state and government yea to the person of her Matie. though little to her
good or comfort holding it a high point of policy, and necessary for the common
wealth, Martial lib. 2. Epig^am.
that her Matie. be kept (as a man may say) in aw with thease bugbeares of
imaginary attempts against her person, to the end she may be the more pliable
and easy to be governed, for as the poet says, res est imperiosa timor, fear
is an imperious thing.

Furthermore the end which they may have for their own particular commodity
is to make themselves and their services more gratful to her Matie. and to your
Lordships by their pretended discovery of so many dangerous treasons against
her Matie. and the state.

Whereto I will ad that it also imports your honors to consider whether any
of those that are taken to be the chief discouerers of these supposed
treasons, may be thought to favor the title of any particular pretender to the
crown after her Matie. for in such case they may perhaps use this artifice to
shadow some designeme^t of their own, no less dangerous to her Maties.
person then this which they feign and lay to our charge, to the end they may
the more assuredly and securely execute the same, and that afterward the
suspicion and blame thereof may rest upon us, ^a^. lib. 4. Annal.
which we read was the practice of Seianus in the time of Tiberius the
Emperor, who aspiring to the Empire, and determining to make away Agripina
that was a great mote in his eye, first suborned some to put into her head that
the Emperor meant to poison her, and after made rumors to be spread all over
Rome that some had conspired her death.

I say not this my Lords to charge any man particularly (for I know not who
they are, that are the forgers of these false coins) but because I see that
the like practices have been used to the destruction of Princes, and may with
reason think, that those which have so little conscience to procure the spilling
of so much innocent blood by such damnable devises as these, will make less
scruple to break all laws humayn and divine when there is question of a
crown, I therefore insinuate this to your honors as matter worthy of your
consideration, especially feing it cannot be thought that they bear any good,
and loyal affection to her Matie. knowing that she cannot but be much afflicted
with the vehement apprehension of these supposed treasons, and yet never
ceasing to torment her therewith, framing daily new fantasies of feigned fears,
as though heaven and earth had conspired against her, the concept whereof
(accompagnied with other cares incident to the government of such a potent
state) might suffice to procure the untimely death of the most courageous
prince that lives, and what it may woork in her Matie no less timorous of
nature by reason of her sex, then decaying now in bodily vigeur, by reason of
her declining years, any man may easily judge.

THAT THESE PROCEEDINGS of our adversaries which they hold for polityke are
against all policy, and true reason of state. CHAP. XVIII.
BUT put the case that her Matie. be so invincible of courage, that there is no
fear of any such effect to follow, yet let it be considered whether in other
respects it stand with true reason of state to incence her Matie. against her
subjects by lies and slanders, and them against her, by insupportable wrongs
and cruelties, which were no dout the next way to put all in combustion, if the
Catholykes loyalty, obedience, and patience, were not such, as God be thanked
yt is, and I hope ever will be, such I say, as never has been red nor heard of in
any people so oppressed, so long time together, so many in number, so honorable
in quality, and condition, and so frended abroad as they might be (in respect
of their religion) if they would seek the remedy that other discontented people
have sought in former times, whereby the state of England has been changed, and
turned vpsyde down, twyse or thryse already since the conquest; for how were
the two Kings Richard the 2. and 3. disposessed of their crowns, and lives but
by their own subjects malcontent, succored with small forces from abroad? and
yet no such cause given them as is to us, who are esteemed for no better then
opprob^ium hominum and abiectio plebis, the skorne of men, and outcasts of the
people, and as saint Paul says peripsema mu^di, the very scu^me of the world,
1. Cor. 4.13.
conte^ned trode^ under foot, and derided of all men deprived of all privilege
of natural subjects, of hon^ors and dignities, lands, and lives, for no
greater offenses, then our ancient, and the universal faith of Christendom,
made treason, yea for feigned crimes never meant nor dreamt of.

To this purpose it is to be considered, that no force, nor power is so great
(as Cicero says) that can resist the hatred of a multitude, Cice. offic.
neither any empire so potent, that can long stand by rigor, oppression, and
cruelty, and therefore amongst the causes of the overthrow of empyres, and
Kingdoms, Aristotle worthily reckons hatred, Arist. epoiit. lib. 5.
and fear of the subjects; exemplyfying the same with the small continuance of
all the tyranical states, that had been in his time, or before; Cicer epist. ad
Attidum.
and Caesar confessing that he never knew any cruel man, that could long
conserve him-self and his state, but only Sylla (which yet was not long) he
wisely added, that he would not follow his example; wherein he had great
reason, for one swallow as they say, makes no summer, neither can the example
of a few which escape, counteruayle a common experience, that teaches what
evident dangers do accompany cruelty, and oppression, which no humain power
nor policy ca^ make secure, as it is evident enough to all wise men that will
consider how little security Kings, and Princes, that have incurred the hatred
of their people, have found in the remedies, and defenses, that humain policy
has invented; I mean in their treasures, fortresses, gards, armies, multitude
of spies, wisdom and vigilance of councillors, and such like; for have not a
number of them notwithstanding all this, ben by their subjects chastised, and
reformed, deposed, expelled, imprisoned, killed, and those that have escaped
best, have they not commonly lived a miserable life, afflicted and tormented
with continual fears, ielousyes, and suspicions of their best friends? for as
Seneca says, Senec.
he that is feared of many must needs fear many what did all the wealth, Sect^n.
power, and force of the Roman empire avail the Emperor Claudius, poisoned by
his raster, and Nero so pursued by the people, that he was forced to cut his
own throat, or Domitian killed by his chamberlaynes, or ^omodus murdered by his
concubyn, Ser Aure^ vict.
Phocas by one of his cheifest fauorits, or Caligula, Pertinax, Caracalla,
Heliogabalus, Capitoli^. Lamprid. Eurrop.
Pupienus, Balbinus, Philippe, Galien, Seuerus, Macrinus, Aurelianus,
Maximinus, Probus, with diverse others, some of them slain by their own gards,
and some by their souldiars; to whom we may ad the last King of France,
killed by one alone, in the midst of his puisant army, when he thought himself
most potent and secure.

Whereby it evidently appears how unsure, dangerous and pernicious are the
policies of our adversaries, who following the absurd and pestilent doctrine of
Ma^hiauel think they can assure her Maties. estat by rigor cruelty and
injustice wheareas both reason and experience teaches that mercy and truth (as
Solomon says) do preserve the Prince and that his crown, Pro. 20.
and throne is fortified with clemency, to which purpose also Seneca says,
Seneca lib. 1. de elemen. cap. 19.
the love of subjects is to the Prince a castle inexpugnable, and clemency a
sufficient guard though he be alone in the midst of the market place, so that
these most cruel and bloody devises of our persocutours, are not only impious,
but also foolish in that very point wherein they will have them seem most wise.

But if it be considered how they riuet this piece of policy with an other
point of state, and what may by lykelihood ensew thereof, yt may be thought
their meaning is no other but to put fire to gunpowder and to set all on a
flame and themselves also to burn therewith, or to ru^ne away by the light for
using the matter toward us as they do, procuring so much as in them lies, to
alienat us from our natural obedience to her Matie. and to drive us to some
desperate course (which nevertheless I hope they shall never be able to do) a
man would think they would at least seek to put her majesty in peace with her
neighbors abroad.

But they are so far from the same, that they do not only incite her Matie.
daily against the most potent Prince of Europ, by slaundring him unto her, with
practices against her person and life, but also do seek to kindle him against
her by infamous libels published in diverse languages, and stuffed with lies and
slanders, with ^niurious and dishonorable speeches against his person to make
him an enemy irreconci^able; for who knows not that injurious words offend
much more many times then deeds (as Plutark well notes) especially against
Princes that most of all esteem their honors? for so long as their
contentions ar only for amplifying their dominions, Plutar in the life of
Timoleon.
or merely for matter of state, the enmity commonly ends with the occasion of
the quarrel, and the damages are by restitution or recompense easily repaired
(whereby we see that those Princes which have had the greatest differences and
wars between them selves do many times after become the greatest confederats
and friends) but personal injuries especially touching honor and reputation, as
they proceed from an excessyue hatred in them that offer them, so are they not
easily pardoned, neither yet amongst Princes repacable by any restitution.

What then is the meaning of these make-bates? will they oblige Matie. to a
perpetual war not with some petty Prince or poor potentat, but with the most
pote^t, rich, and mighty Monark of Europe? and upon what confidence? is yt the
wealth and force of England? the strength of allies, and confederats? or yet the
good success of these late wars, which mooues them thereto? who knows not
that in power and wealth her majesty (though she be most puissant and rich) yet
is far inferior to him? in which respect that which Plutark notes of
Cleomenes King of Lacedemony, In the life of Agis and Cleomenes.
and Antigonus the great King of Macedony, may well be said in this case.

It seemed (says he) to proceed of great wisdom, valor, and ^rowes that
Cleomenes could with the forces of one only state maintain war against the
power and treasure of the Kingdom of Macedony, and all the people of
Peloponese and not only defend his own, but also take places and towns of his
enemies. But he which first said that money, is the sinowes of war had great
reason, for even as amongst wrastlers those which have strong bodies by nature,
and hardened by continual exercise do always in time overthrow them which have
nothing but art and agilitte, even so Antigonus who had the power and wel^^ of
a great and rich Kingdom to sustain the expenses of the war, at length
weried and ouerlayd Cleomenes that had no such means to bear the charges
thereof, thus says Plutark in substance, of these two Kings; and so may we
say of her majesty and the King Catholyke, that by all lyklyhood the multitude
of his Kingdoms, the wealth and infinite number of his subjects, the abundance
of his treasures that flow from his Indies, and the strength of his armies and
garrisons continually kept in pay, cannot but wear out in time, the power and
wealth of England, though it were much greater and richer then it is, especialy
if either any breach should fall out betwyxt the french and us, or any civil
wars amongst them, or a new storm arise from any other part, in which cases
how England would be able to weald with so potent an enemy as is his majesty, I
leave to your lordships wife consideration.

But perhaps these men presume upon her Maties. league and amity with forrayn
Princes and States, let them therefore consider what assurance is therein,
seeing experience teaches that the amity of Princes never lasts longer then
fortune favors or consideration of profit concurreth, besides that infinite
occasions of Ielousies, and unexpected quarrels fall out daily amongst Princes
which break the surest leagues, and make the best friends the greatest enemies.

What rests then to make these brewbates so confident? is it her Maties. good
success? but of all other reasons that ought least to move them, for he is
not wise (said Jason to Epaminondas) that fears not the events of war, which
are so variable as neither force nor policy, nor skill of art military nor any
humain means can assure; whereof we need not to seek examples abroad, seeing
we hane enough at home, if we but consider the variety and counterchange of
good and bad success in the wars betwyxt King Henry the sixth and King Edward
the fourth and the great victories, and dominions which our Kings her Maties.
predecessors had in France some years together, and that at last they lost
against all that they had got there; such is the inconstancy of humain
affairs, stable in nothing but in instability, and therefore after a glowing
Sun of prosperity all wise men fear a sharp shower of adversity knowing that
extrema gaudij luctus occupat, Proverb. cap. 14.
which a poor of our time wel-expressed in this distich.

Mirror of Magist.
When hope and hap, when health and wealth are highest,
Then woe and wrack, disease and need are nighest.
In which respect, that is no small point of wisdom in any prosperous and
victorious Prince ever to fear the after clap, and to be such an enemy as he
may after be a friend and so to make war as he exclude not himself from
possibility of peace if his former fortune fail him, yea and during the course
of his prosperity to harken to any reasonable composition, rather then to stand
to the hazards of future events, which many great Princes and famous Captains
not observing, have obscured all their former glory with final disgrace, and
made themselves lamentable examples of humain infelicity.

Plutark in the life of Paulus Aemilius.
Perseus King of Macedony puffed up with pride for diverse victories that he had
got against the Romans, provoked them so long with continual injuries that at
length Paulus AEmilius conquered his country, and carried him and all his
children prisoners to Rome in triumph.

And Charles the last Duke of Burgundy, being grown so hauty and insolent with
his great power, prosperity, excellent wit and courage, that he would not
harken to the most reasonable offers, and humble suits of the Swissers (with
whom he was at variance) lost two battayles unto them at Granson and Morat,
and his credit, Philip. comin.
and friends with all, where upon ensued his other disgraces, and finally the
ruin of him and his state.

This (my good Lords) I say to show the inconsideration of our adversaries who
promising themselves (as it seems) a perpetuity of her Maties. life and
prosperity, think it good policy to kindle the coals of these present wars,
betwyxt her and the King Catholyke, with abuse and injury of them both (as
before has been declared) seeking to make an immortal hatred betwyxt them, and
a quarrel irreconciliable, and yet are withal so unadvised at home, as to
procure (as much as in them lies) to alienat from her Matie. the hearts of her
own subjects, by most exorbitant cruelties, and open injuries, drawing her and
the whole estate thereby into evident dangers both domestical and forrayn,
which dangers if they should concur to the effects that may be feared,
though their own ruins also would be included therein, yet were that but a
small satisfaction, or recompense, for the loss of so many other better then
them selves.

OF TWO OTHER INEVITABLE damages that must needs ensew to her Matie. and her
whole state by the effusion of innocent blood with an intimation of some part
of the remedy. CHAP. XIX.
BUT albeit there were no occasion of fear, either at home or abroad as God be
thanked at home there is little (though no God a mercy to these busy fellows)
yet what greater indignity or injury can be offered to her majesty by her
subjects then to abuse her royal name and authority, to the murdering of so
many innocents as by these devises are put to death in England, whereupon do
follow two inevitable damages to her majesty, and her realm, the one the
infamy that her majesty's government does incur in all the Christian world,
as is manifest to all those that travel over other countries, or read the
books and histories that daily are written thereof by strangers in all
languages, which no trackt of time shall be able to abolish.

The other is the vengance of almighty God due by his justice to all such
notable wrongs done by publyk authority of her Matie. and her laws, the which
what yt may bring upon her and the realm in time, any man that believes there
is a God, and just Judge of humain actions, cannot but fear, seeing not only
the holy Scriptures, but also profane histories do yield innumerable examples
of Gods wrath extended upon realms and states for iniustices committed
therein; Kingdoms are transferred, says the scripture, from nation to nation,
for iniustices, injuries, contumelies, and diverse deceits; Ecclesiastie. cap.
10.
and amongst iniustices there is none that more offends God, the^ the
effusion of innocent blood, and therefore the Prophet exclaymeth in the person
of God, Ezech. 24.
woe be to the bloody city whereof I will make a great heap, as of a pile of
wood to burn; and the same Prophet threatening the destruction of Jerusalem,
Ezech. 22.
and declaring the causes thereof reconeth for one of the principal, Ibid.
the shedding of innocent blood, her Princes (says he) were like woulues
ravening for their pray, to shed blood, Ibid.
and again their were calumntatours and slanderers in box, to shed blood like
wise, afterward in the same place our lord speaks to Jerusalem, saying,
they have received gifts and rewards in thee to spil blood, behold my wrath is
kindled against thee for thy covetousness, and the blood that has been shed in
thee, and therefore I wildispers thee into diverse nations, and scatter thee
into diverse countries, etc.

Also when the King and people of Judah, 4. Reg. ca. 2^
and Jerusalem were led into captivity by Nabucodonozor the scripture says
expressly that it was done for the blood which Manasses had shed, when he
filled Jerusalem with the blood of innocents, and therefore God would not be
appeased.

In like manner our Savior himself prophesing of the destruction of Jerusalem
by the Romans ascribed the same principally to the spilling of innocent blood,
Matthew. 23.
not only of his own but also of the prophets, that he had sent and was to
send, Jerusalem (says he) which kills the Prophets, and stonest them which are
sent to thee, behold your hows shall be left desert, etc.

Hereof many notable examples occur in profane histories, Just. lib. 2^.
but 2. or 3. shall suffice for breuities sake.

Justin tells of the people of Epiras severely punished and almost destroyed,
with dearth, famine, war, and sickness by Gods just Judgment for the cruel
slaughter of Laodomia daughter of Alexander their King.

No less notable and manifest was Gods just judgment upon the Lacedaemonians
for a horible murder and rape committed by two of their citizens upon the two
daughters of Scedasus, Plutark in (...) treatise entitled narationes amatoriae.
who demanding Justice most instantly of the King council, and people, and
being denied it of them all, craved it at Gods hands with infinite imprecations,
and maledictions against their state, and so killed himself also upon his
daughters tomb, where upon ensewed (as Diodorus, Siculus, Diod sic^^ lib. 15.
ca ^4.
and Plutark do note) the memorable overthrow given to the Lacedaemonians by
Epimanondas, hard by the tomb of the two maidens in the plain of Leuctra
where the offense was committed in which deffeit they lost not only their hole
army, but also the empire of Greece, which they had before in their hands many
years.

Such is the style of Gods Justice, to punish injustice, not only in them that
commit it, but also in those that permit and suffer it, yea and in respect of
the sympathy and communication which is in the body politic no less then in
the body natural (where in the detrime^t of the least member redoundeth to the
hurt of the whole) he imputes some times the fault of one to all, and
sometimes for the peoples offenses he punishes the Prince (in which respect
Solomon says the sins of the people make many Princes) and sometimes for the
Princes faults he punishes the people, and otherwhyles for the sins of
either he destroys both. Proverb. cap. 28.


When Acham had stolen part of the spoil of Hie^co contrary to the
commandment of God, Iosue cap 7.
3000. of the children of Israel were overthrown by them of Hay, for his
offense, ^ 2. Reg. ca. 24. ^. Ibid.
which our lord imputed to them all, saying, Israel has sinned and
transgressed my commandment, etc.

For the sin of David in numbering the people, 70000. of his subjects
perished, ^. 2. Paralip. ^. cap. 2. 3. 4. Reg. ca. 24. 1. Reg. ca. 12.
and for the peoples offenses God permitted him to sin.

For King Achaz cause, says the scripture, God did humble the people of Judah
and after gave them into captivity for the sins of their King Manasses.

Lastly when Samuel had anointed Saul for King he said unto the people if you
persevere in your wickedness, both you and your King shall perish.

Herein nevertheless this difference may be noted, that when almighty God does
punish both he uses more rigor toward the Princes and heads of the people,
then toward the meaner sort.

Whereof the holy ghost declares the reason in the book of wisdom where he
speaks to Kings, and Princes, in this manner; Sap 6.
Audite reges, etc. hearken O kings, and understand, learn you which are
Judges of the bounds of the earth in respect that power is given unto you from
our lord, and strength from the highest, who will examine your works, and
search your thoughts, and because when you were ministers of his kingdom, you
did not Judge rightly nor keep the law of Justice, nor walk in the way of God,
he will appear unto you quickly, and horibly, for most rigorous Judgment is
done upon them that govern: with the poor and mean man mercy is used, but
mighty men shall suffer torments mightily.

This my lords I am bold to represent unto your lordships that you may see
thereby the evident danger that your whole estate may be brought into by the
extreme wrongs that our persecutours do us howsoever her Matie. and your
Lordships may be free from the same in will or consent, as I make no doubt but
you are.

For if the Prince and people are so conjoined and linked together with the
communication of merit or demerit, A consequence to be considered.
that God does commonly chastise, the one for the others fault, Iosue. 7.
and for the offenses of either sometimes destroys both (as I have before
declared,) if the private theft of Acham could cause the puklik calamity of the
children of Israel, that had no way consented thereto, what may be feared to
ensew of so horible and publik a crime, of our persecutours, as the effusion of
innocent blood, thirsted sought, and spilt, so often, and by so many subtilities
and devises, by slanders and feigned treasons, by extreme torments unjustly
given, by periuries, by corruption of witnesses, Iuries, and Judges (where by
an infinite number of all sorts are drawn to the participation of the offense)
and all this under pretense of publyk authority of her majesty, of her council
and her ^awes, what may be feared (I say) but that the sin is not private, and
particular, but pnblik and general, and that the whole state remains engaged
for the payment of the penalty.

It rests then my lords that of your wisdoms and piety you procure some
redress of these inconveniences for auersion of Gods wrath from you and us and
the whole realm, and for prevention of the mischief that otherwise must needs
ensue. And if it please your lordships to give me leave to put you in mind of
one necessary mean thereof, and as I have laid open the sore, so to represent
also some part of the salve, yt imports much that for the expiation of so
great a sin, and satisfaction of Gods Justice you lay the penalty upon the
authors and instruments of the injustice as appears by the example of Archams
theft, whereof our lord said to Iosue, Iosue cap. 7.
I will be no longer with you until you have destroyed him that is guilty of this
crime, and when Phinees killed the Israelit which committed fornication with
the Madianit, Number. cap. 25.
he auerted the wrath of God from the children of Israel, as the scripture
testifies. Also when the people were punished with 3. years famine in David's
time for the offense of Saul in killing the Gabaonits, the famine lessed when
seven of Saul's offspring were delivered to the Gabaonits, 2. Reg. ca. 21.
and by them crucified, the like reports Plutark of a most furious plague
where with God punished the cities of Rome and Laurentum for the murder of
King Tatius in Rome, Plutar. in Romu^o.
and of certain Ambassadors of Laurentium, which plague suddenly ceased in
both the cities when justice was done upon the murderers in both places.

I have not said this with any desire of revenge, or uncharitable affection
toward our adversaries, but in respect of my duty to her Matie. and your
lordships, and for the tender love that I do bear to my country, and
universal good of all. For as for them (I mean our enemies) I assure your
Lordships I am so far from desyring any revenge of them that I pity their
case, knowing that except they repent, and do worthy penance God will surely
revenge his own cause and ours, upon them, and throw into the fire, those rods
of his wrath, when he has worn them to the stumps; for such is the course of
his justice, to chastise first his servants and children by the ministry of
wicked men (not moving, but using their evil wills, and malice for the
execution of his holy will) and afterward to punish them most severely for the
same; and therefore though he ordained the destruction of the Temple of
Jerusalem, and the captivity of his people for their sins, yet afterward he
utterly destroyed the Babilonians for having ben the means, 4. Reg. ^^. ^^.
and instruments thereof, to which purpose, the Prophet says, our Lord stirred
up the Kings of the Medes to distroy Babylon, Hier. cap. ^^.
for it is the revenge of our Lord and the revenge of his Temple, and again, I
will render to Babylon (says almighty God by the same Prophet) and to all the
inhabitants of Caldea, all the evil that they have done in Sion. Ibidem.
And after in the same chapter, he comfort his people in captivity, saying,
behold I will make Babylon a desert, etc. and no marvel; Enoch. ^^.
seeing he also destroyed the Amonits, Moabits, and other their neighbors, for
having laughed, and skorned at their desolation and captivity; such is the love
which our Lord bears to his servants, as he reuengeth the least injury that
is done the^, Matthew. 10. Luc. 10. Matthew. ^^.
of whom he has such particular care, as he nu^breth the very hears of their
heads, as our Savior says, and takes all that is done to them, be it good
or evil as done to himself.

And now having laid before your lordships by way of some degression, these
considerations (yet as annexed notwithstanding and conjoined with Squires cause
by coherence of the manner of proceeding (I shall return to treat some few
lines more of a pamphlet set forth for Squyres condemnation after his
execution.

OF A CERTAIN PAMPHLET printed in England concerning the conspiracy of Squyre
after his death, and first of two notable lies which the Author thereof auoweth
upon his own knowledge. CHAP. XX.
HAVING determined to speak no more of Squyres affayre but rather to have
ended with this that has been said, I received from a friend of mine a
pamphlet printed in England by the deputies of Christopher Barker the Queens
printer concerning the matter and offense of Squire, entitled, A letter
written out of England to an English gentleman remaining at Padua, containing a
true report of a strange conspiracy etc. the which pamphlet does give me
occasion to enlarge my self somewhat further then I meant.

For although I hold the same to be sufficiently answered as well by that which
I have already discoursed in this Apology, as also by the foresaid treatise
lately published by our friend M. A. in confutation of the whole fiction,
besides that the pamphlet it self having neither name of author nor privilege,
nor license for the printing may seem rather to be rejected as an infamous
libel, then held worthy of further answer; nevertheless considering that the
Author thereof takes upon him such particular knowledge of all the proceedings
in that matter, that he seems to be no ordinary person, but rather some one
that had his hand in the pie, and again forasmuch as it may be thought that
the Queens printers, neither would nor durst set forth any such pamphlet
touching her Matie and the state, withoue the warrant of some man in
authority, and lastly for that the Author thereof amongst many fools bolts
that be has shot therein, seems to have leuelled one particularly at me,
though he name me not, I have thought good briefly to touch some points thereof.

To come then to the matter, Parts of the Pamphlet.
his discourse consists of 3. parts: the first, his declaration of Squyres
confession, touching the particulers, as well of the supposed conspiracy, as
also of the execution thereof: the second the manner of the discovery of it, the
third this pamphletters comment and censure upon the same, interposed,
sometimes by the way of discourse.

In the first I only wish to be noted two notorious and impudent lies, within
the compass often lines auowed by him upon his own knowledge. The one that
Squyres confession concerning the conspiracy was delivered by himself, without
torture, or show of torture; the other that it was in no point retracted or
disauowed, either at his trial, or at his death, whereas all those that were
present thereat, are witnesses of the contrary, and amongst many others some of
your Lordships that assisted at his trial may well remember I am sure that he
urged a long time that his confession was extorted by torment, and although he
confessed the fact after upon some persuasions and expectation perhaps of
pardon, yet at his death when it imported him for his everlasting good to
discharge his conscience, he revoked his said confession, not only disauowing
the fact, and all intention thereof, but also his supposed employment by Father
Walpoole, and when the shyrif urged him with his confession made at several
times, he answered in the hearing of all the assistants and lookers on, that he
would as well have said any thing else in the world at that time to deliver
himself from the torments which he endured, and being pressed to confess at
leaft his subornation, and employment by the Jesuit (for Father Walpoole was
not otherwyes named there) he flatly denied it, and gave a sufficient reason
to clear both himself and the father, saying that he ran away from Seuil
without the fathers knowledge, and that therefore it might easily be judged that
he was not suborned nor sent by him.

And this I affirm as well upon diverse relations that I have seen thereof in
wryt^ng, as also upon the report of a credible person who was present at his
execution, with whom I have spoken here in Madrid, so that I dare herin boldly
appeal to the consciences not only of M. shiriffe who was kindled with great
choler against the poor man for denying it, but also of all the assistants
and beholders, who were much amazed to hear matter so far from their
expectation, their uttered by him that dyed.

What then may I say of the impudency of this man that makes no bones to put
in print, yea and to affirm upon his knowledge such a notablely, disprouable
by the testimony of so many hnndreths as were present as Squires death? whereto
serves all his exaggeratio^s of the foulness of the fact, his opprobrious
speeches against Father Walpoole his devises of charms, coniurations,
enchantments, exorcismes, cyrcles, and all his Sinons tale so smothely framed,
but to bewray both his vanity and malice, seeing he takes delight and glory
in the vain oftentation of his own lying tongue to the slander both of the
quick and the dead, Psalm. 11.
and therefore let him consider what the psalmist says to him, and such other
calumniatours, Why do thou glory in malice thou which art potent in
iniquity etc. thou have loved all words of ruin and destruction, thou which
art a very tongue of tromperie, and deceit, and therefore God will destroy the
finally, and pluck the up and remove the from thy tabernacle, and thy root from
the land of the living.

OF CERTAIN ABSVRD improbabilities in the same pamphlet touching the manner of
the discovery of Squires supposed conspiracy. CHAP. XXI.
Afterward when he comes to acquaint his Paduan friend with the manner how the
matter was discovered he says thus, when time passed said he, and nothing came
of it, they (he means us here) made construction of it, that Squyre had been
false to them, one of the more passionate of them inueigheth bitterly against
Squyre tells how he was trusted, and how he had undone the cause, and the
better to be revenged on him, is content that one (that they let slip hither,
as if he had fled from them) should give information of this matter not with
the circumstances, but generally against Squyre, partly to win himself
credit, and partly to wreak themselves on Squyre.

Thus far this pamphleters words which being conferred with that which as
before I have signified, was urged against Squyre at his araignment concerning
the same matter, will be the better understood.

It was then declared (I mean at the bar) under the confession of Ihon
Stallage, alias Stanley lately before fleck from hence, that I did one day in
my own lodging inueigh^ against Squyre with great passion and oath, saying that
he had deceived us, and that we should be discredited with the King thereby, and
further that persuading our selves that Squyre had already revealed the matter,
we sent in Stanley to do some other great mischeef, with pretense to accuse
Squyre thereof, whereby it appears that the passionate man, who the pamphleter
says revealed it was my self, and that Stallage was not only he to whom I told
it, but also the man that we let slip to accuse Squyre to be revenged of him,
which how improbable and absurd it is, I remit to the judgment of any
indifferent man that knows him and us, or has but any sparck of prudence to
discover a coggingly.

Great absurdities and improbabilities.
For first how is it credible that we had so little wit, and discourse as (if we
had recommended any such matter to Squyre) to assure our selves that he had
been falls unto us and revealed it only because he had not executed it with in
less then a year? whereof there might be so many lawful impediments ymagined,
as howsoever we might suspect him, yet could we have no reason so fully to
condemn him, that we should send one our selves to discover it, whereupon must
needs follow great inconvenience to us, whether he had detected yt himself or
no; for if he had not, we should not only do wrong to him, but also to our
selves, yea and to all the Catholykes of England in ministering matter of a new
and general persecution; for if our adversaries are feign to invent such like
matters many times to take occasion ther-vpon to persecute us could we be
ignorant that they would do it much more if they had such a just occasion
ministered by our selves, whereby all Catholykes and we especially should be
decried every where for manquellars, and princekillers, traitors, and
homicides, in all tribunals pulpits assemblies, books and sermons, and many an
innocent man suffer for our cause, upon this general condemnation.

Is it likely then, that we would take such a desperate resolution, only upon a
bare suspicion? And put the case that he had revealed it, and that we had
assured our selves thereof, could we have any reason in the world to give
further light of the matter our selves, and so to fortify his accusation of
us, which of it self could not have the credit, nor consequently be so
prejudicial to our common cause as when it should be seconded with a testimony
of our own?

But they say we are passionate men, and especially I, and therefore were
transported with desire of revenge, for so says the pamphleter that to wreak
our selves on Squyre we sent in Stallage to accuse him, because we were
persuaded that he was falls to us; let us then examine this a little, and see
what cohaerence there is therein.

I would, gladly know as well of the Author of the pamphlet, as of M. Attorney
and others that urged this point against Squyre, and us at the bar, what
revenge we could expect to have of Squyre by revealing that which we thought he
himself had revealed? were we so simple to think that we could hurt him thereby?
truly, though these fine heads will not allow us so much wit as themselves, yet
they do us wrong to take from us ordinary discourse and common sense, seeing
these are things so evident, that it rather may be wondered how their deep
conceits could take them for probable, then imagined that we should commit so
gross errors, so that this devise is sufficiently disproued by the
absurdities thereof.

But how simple soever these men take us to be. it appears that the
pamphleter was not well in his wits, A notable folly of the pamphleter.
when he acknowledged that Stanley was suborned by us to accuse Squyre, and
that two letters which he pretended to have stolen out of one of our studies,
weere found to be counterfeit, yea and that thereupon it was collected that
Squyre was an honest man (which in deed was the most direct construction that
could be made thereon) whereby the pamphleter notably discovers the extreme
injustice done to Squyre; for if the subornation of Stanley was so manifest,
that it served for an argument of Squyres honesty, it is clear that the
torment given to him upon Stanleys accusation was against all law and
conscience, whereupon it also follows that the torment being unjustly given,
the confession extorted thereby was utterly void in law, and by consequence the
condemnation grounded upon the confession most unjust, and injurious, as I have
sufficiently proved in the 8. chapter.

Furthermore whereas the Pamphleter confesses that Stanley had two counterfeit
letters concerning this matter, which he praetended to have sto^ne out of one
of our studies, he gives me no sma^ occasion to think that the letter which
the privy councellor urged against Squyre at his araignment, as written
betwixt my kinsman and me, was one of them whereupon for my part I will make no
further collection then that the pamphleter shows himself to be a very
simple man in publishing such th^nges, as directly redound to the overthrow of
the cause which he undertakes to defend.

Well to conclude this point for as much as it does not appear upon what ground
the pamphleter and his fellows affirm that Stanley was sent into England, and
suborned by us, whether upon their own imagination, or else upon his
confession; I lay that their charity toward us, and their proceedings
heretofore in like causes being considered together with Stanleys good
conscience and conditions (whereof I have spoken amply before) it as little
imports what they say or imag^n of us, ^.
as what he has confessed or shall confess except it be at the gallows, which
is now (as matters are handled in England) the only tribunal of truth, I mean
the only place where truth is tried, as may appear by the late example of
Squyre, so that when I shall understand that Stanley is hanged also, and that at
his death he has ratified this, I shall then say that there is some more
probability therein, though since the writing of this it is signified (as has
been said) that he denies all again now in the tower.

And truly if our adversaries did not persuade themselves that he would at his
death confess the truth as Squyre did, and so mar all I doubt not but they
would have hanged him ere this, being the man he is and so well deserving it,
but now as the matter stands, I think for avoiding the foresaid trial of
Tyburne, he may rather fear a fig then a halter seeing those that have him in
their clouches, cannot but conceive that the truth of this matter may in time
come to be discovered to their shame, no less by his life then by his publyk
death, so that I think he may make his will, if he have any thing to dispose,
though the ha^gman is never like to have his coat. Thus much to the text of the
pa^phlet, now to the gloss, and for that hereafter I must be a little more
plain with the Author thereof, then the respect and duty, I owe to your
Lordships would permit, If I should continue my speech to you, I will by your
Lordships leaves address the same henceforth to him and his fellows.

OF CERTAIN IMPERTINENT and foolish glosses of the Author of the pamphlet, and
first concerning the moderation and lenity which he says is used in causes of
Religion where it is not mixed with matter of state. CHAP. XXII.
IN the third page you appeal Sir Pamphleter to the knowledge of your friend in
Padua for the distinction and moderation of the proceeding in England in
ecclesiastical causes with what lenity and gentleness it has been carried,
except where it was mixed with matter of state, for such are your own words.

Hereto I answer that by your restriction and exception of state matters you
overthrow your general proposition of clemency, and prove that there is no
moderation lenity nor gentleness used at all, for where is not matter of state
mixed with religion now a days in England, are not so many essential points of
Catholyke religion made treason as no man can do the duty of a Catholyke, but
he is ipso facto a traitor, seeing no man can be so much as absolved of his
sins, nor receive any Sacrament of Gods Church by the only true ministers
thereof (I mean Priests) but he commits treason? besides the other
captious laws about the Supremacy, the exacting of the oath, and the urging of
Catholykes to come to haeretical service, and communion, under color of
temporal obedience to the Prince, is not in all this, state mixed with religion,
yea and to no other end then to persecute us under co^our of treason and matter
of state, while ye persecute religion, and for religion.

Was not this the very practice of Julian the Apostata who to cover his
persecution of Christians sometimes caused his picture to be set with Jupiter
or other fais Gods and sometimes made himself to be painted with their
enseignes and resemblance, thereby to make such mixture of religion, ^^^om lib.
5. cap. 16. Nicepho lib. 10. cap. 23.
and matter of state, that those which should refuse to commit Idololatry might
be punished under color of contempt of his emperial person.

Sonom. Ibidem.
Hereof says Sozomenus, Nam sic cogitabat, etc. for so Julian thought that if
he persuaded the^ to that, he should more easily bring them to his will in other
points of religion also, and if they resisted in this he might punish them
without mercy, as offenders against both the common wealth and the Empire.

It not this now practiced in England in effect? for what other thing is it to
annex the keys of Peter with the Princes crown the divine power with the
humain, the supremacy spiritual with the government temporal (dignities no
less distinct in nature, then incompatible in lay persons, and especially in
women sex) what other thing is it, I say, then to join Julian with Jupiter,
and to paynt the Prince with the enseignes and resemblance of deity, and to
what other end then under color of treason and matter of state to make away
all those that shall refuse to acknowledge this pretended ecclesiastical
supremacy.

Such then is your mixture of religion with matter of state, as whiles you
pretend to punish none for Catholyke religion, you persecute cruelly all
Catholykes for no other true canse then religion, yea and as the pharisees did,
you persecute and crucify Christ again in his members, Joan. 1^.
as an enemy to Caesar, Joan. 11.
and for the same reason of state that they did cry to Pilate si dimittis hune
non es amicus Caesaris, if you let him escape you are not Caesar's friend for that
his fault is not religion but matter of state against Caesar and again si
dimitiunus hunc venient Romani, etc. if we dismiss this man the Romans
(together with Spaniards) will come and take from us both our place and people,
and will conquer, spoil and destroy us, for which respect you have already
killed some hundreths of Catholykes upon like suspicions and ealumniations by
virtue of your new statutes, besides many murdered for feigned conspiracies, and
falls imputed crimes, and an exceeding multitude of others consumed and wasted
with imprisonment, others pyned a way in banishment, others empouerished and
ruined with taxes, impositions, and penalties, and an infinite number daily
languishing in captivity, penury, and misery, for that they will not yield as
you call it temporal obedience in coming to your service, and communion, and
yet forsooth you trouble none for religion.

But if it please you and your friend in Padua that knows as you say this
matter so well to consider it a little better, you will easily see that the
distinction that you and your fellows make is confusion, your moderation
persecution, your lenity severity, your show and talk of mercy nothing else but
a mere mockery and plain cosinage of the simple reader, for to preach one
thing and practice an other, is I trow the highest point of cosinage that may
be.

But what marvel is it if you draw our religion to matter of state seeing your
own religion has no other rule, nor ground but reason of state, for albeit
the substance of religion, which now you profess different from ours, be
patcht up of old and new heresies, especially of these last of Luther,
Zwinglius and Calvin, yet that which is properly yours, and the key and stay of
all the rest and makes you a body and part different from other Sects of
Lutheranes, Zwinglians, and Caluenists, Puritanes, Brownists, Anabaptists and
the like, is the obedience that you acknowledge in ecclesiastical causes to a
lay head, which although it was first introduced into England by King Henry the
S. only upon animositie against the sea Apostolyke (because thesaid sea would
not allow his deuorce from Queen Catherine (which King in all other points
detested your religion) yet being abolished by Queen Marie her Maties. sister,
and last praedecessour, it was returned again in the beginning of her Maties.
reign that now is, only upon reason of state as all the world knows, and so
has hyherto been continued.

For those polityke statistes of ours that had the use of her Maties. ears in
the beginning, considering that the Queen of Scotland being then married unto
the French King, pretended title unto the crown of England, and fearing that
the sea Apostolyk would favor her pretense in respect of the marriage of her
Maties. mother; yea and that the people would also incline that way, if they
remained still in the obedience of the said sea, 3. Reg. ca. 12.
they hadrecourse to Hieroboams policy and abusing the facility of her
Maties. good nature and young years persuaded her to change the religion then
publikly professed, and not only to banish the authority of the Pope, but also
to follow her father, and brothers example in taking the title of
ecclesiastical supremacy upon her self, a thing absurd, ridiculous, unnatural,
impossible, and therefore worthily rejected, impugned, and derided by Luther
and Caluyn themselves and by their folowers, Luther Calvin Ke^nitius.
and the Puritaines at this day in England, and all other sectaries abroad, as
a matter without all praesident or example in any Christian common wealth or
color of Scripture, except of some few texts that treat of obedience to
Princes in general no less to Heathen Kings, then Christian, and therefore can
not with any show of reason be understood of their primacy in causes
ecclesiastical.

Seeing then your religion so far as it is distinct from others, has no other
ground then reason of state, I doubt not, but if the matter were well examined
what God they believed in, that persuaded her Matie. thereto, or you and your
fellows that manitayne it upon the same reason, and by such unchristian
practices, as you do, you would be found to be co^prehe^ded in the third
division of varro, who said that 3. kynds of men had three different kynds of
Gods, Aug. 6. de cinitat. Dei c. 5.
the Poets one, the Philosophers an other, and statists or Polityks a third and
that every one of them had a different religion according to the difference of
their Gods, as that the religion of the Poets was fabulous, the other of the
Philosophers natural, the third of the Statists, polityke, and accomodated to
government.

And this is that which you profess; For the God you believe in is the Prince,
your scriptures are the acts of Parliament, your religion is to conserve the
state persas and uefas, and therefore as all good Christians do measure the
reason of state by religion, which is the true rule, and the end thereof, and
from the which it cannot in reason dissent or disagre, so you on the other side
reduce and frame religion to your falls reason of state, and by that means
pervert all the order both of nature and grace preferring the body before the
soul, temporal things before spiritual humayn before divine, earth before
heaven the world before God, and which is more you subject both earth, heaven,
body soul, the world, yea God and all, to the private pleasure, and profit of
the Prince, as though he were the end, the Lord, and God of all the world, and
of nature it self, whereupon ensew those monstrous policies which we fee
fraught with all frand, hipocrisy, periuries, slau^ders, murders, and all kind
of cruelty, oppression and impiety, which have ruined infinite Kings with
their countries, and Kingdoms, and what they will bring our poor country unto
in the end, time will tell, whereto I remit me, for as the Italian proverb says,
La vita il sine, ^l di l^da La sera, the end prayseth the life, and the evening
the day.

OF THE TRVE CAUSES OF more moderation used in the beginning then afterward,
and of the difference made by the Laws, betwixt Seminary, and I Mary priests.
CHAP. XXIII.
But to proceed in your observations, you go forward to give example that there
is moderation used in ecclesiastical causes, where matter of state is not mixed
with religion, saying, for else I would gladly learn what should make the
difference the temper of the laws in the first year of the Queen, and in the
23. and 27. but that at the one time they were papists in conscience, and at
the other, they were grown papists in faction, or what should make the
difference at this day in law betwixt a Queen Marie priest, and a Seminary
priest, save that the one is a priest of suspicion, and the other a priest of
sedition.

Hereto I answer that because you say you would gladly learn, and that I take
you to be of a good wit and docile, I will take pains to teach you this point
that you say you would so feign learn. Know you therefore that there were
diverse causes of more moderation and lenity used for some years in the
beginning then afterward, and yet not those which you speak of and so you show
your self either ignorant, or malicious in both.

The first an ordinary rule of state which those great statists that procured
this change could not neglect I mean in case of innovation to use no suddayne
violence, but to proceed by degrees, especially in matter of religion, which is
seldom changed without tumult and trouble, whereof they had seen the
experience in the times of both the kings Henry and Edward, and therefore they
had great reason to water their wine at the beginning, and to use moderation at
least for some years until the state and government were settled.

The second cause was the doctrine of your own gospellers in Q. Maryes time,
who because some of their folowers were burnt for heresy (according to the
Canons and laws of the Church) cried out that they were persecuted, and
published in their books and sermons, that faith ought to be free, and not
forced, and that therefore it was against all conscience to punish or trouble
men for their religion, in which respect the authors of the change, that served
themselves of them in the ecclesiastical and pastoral dignityes, could not for
shame at the very first, use the bloody proceeding which afterward they did,
though nevertheless they forbore not in the very beginning to imprison, and
otherwise to afflict, all Bishops and chief pastors; and such others as would
not subscribe, and come to their Churches, for the which cause I remember that
besides a great number of ecclesiastical and temporal persons, some of my own
kindred and family were called to London, and imprisoned in the second year
of her Majesty's reign, and so remained prisoners many years after.

The third cause was the vain hope that those polityks had that a religion so
sensual, and full of liberty as theirs, authorized with the power of the Prince,
vpholden with laws, promulgate with all artifice of writers preachers, and
perswaders, would easily within a few years infinuate it self into the hearts
of all men, especially of the youth, whereby they made account, that the elder
sort being worn out, there would be within a few years little memory or none
at all left of Catholic religion; but when they saw after some years
experience, how much they were deceived of their expectation, and that through
the zealous endeauours of the learned English Catholics abroad, learned books
written, Colleges and Seminaryes erected, priests made and sent in, and thereby
infinite numbers reduced to the unity of the Catholic Church, not only of the
schismatiks that fell at the first, either by ignorance, or for fear, but also
of the Protestants themselves (and amongst them even many ministers and
principal preachers) and none sooner converted, or more zealously affected to
Catholic religion, then the youngest and fynest wits, wherewith our new
Seminaryes began to be peopled; when those statists I say, saw this, they
thought it then time to bestyrre themselves, and to persecute in good earnest,
and yet to do it in such sort, as they might, if it were possible, avoid the
name, and suspicion of persecutors both at home and abroad, and therefore they
used the same policy that Julian the Apostata did, of whom S. Gregory
Nazianzenus writes, Orat. 3. in Iulianum and orat. 10. in laudem Caesarij.
that he professed not externally his impiety with the courage that other
persecutors his predecessors were wont to do, neither did he oppose himself
against our faith like an Emperor that would gain honor in showing his might
and power by open oppression of the Catholyks, but made war, upon them in a
cowardly and base manner covering his persecution with crafty, and subtyle
devises, envying them, the name and glory of Martyrdom that the soldiers of
Christ had got in former persecutions, and therefore he endeavored to use
violence in such sort as it should not appear, ordayning that the Christians
which suffered for Christ should be put to death as malefactors, this
affirms. S. Gregory Nazia^zen of Julian the apostata wherein you may see a
true pattron of your own proceedings, for to exemplify the same with answer
to the question you ask concerning the temper of the laws made in the 23.
year of her Maties. reign, what other cause had you to make those laws in
that year, but that you knew that Father Campian and diverse Seminary Priests
were come into England lately before, and therefore to make the world believe
that their coming was to no other end but to sow sedition, and trouble the
State, you did not only make those laws, but also shamfully mundered the same
year thesaid famous man, and 11. godly innocent Priests with him for feigned
conspiracies proved against no one of them, and disauowed by them all at their
deaths, which sufficient proof of their innocence, as before I have declared
at large in the 11. chapter, besides many other since made away in like manner
upon like falls pretenses, and especially in the year 88. after the Kings
Armada had past through the channel, in which year you executed above 40.
Priests, and Catholykes in diverse parts of England, to make the world believe
that they had intelligence with the Spaniards or had procured the coming of
thesaid Armada, which could not be proved, nor so much as justly suspected of
anyone of them.

Moreover I dare boldly affirm, neither shall you ever be able with truth to
control me, that whereas our Seminaries have yielded within these 30. years 5.
or 6. hundredth Priests that have labored in that vyneyard (whereof you have put
to death more then a hundredth) you could never justly charge any one of them
with sedition or matter of state except it were Ballard executed with Babington
and the rest, Of Ballard.
whom as I will not excuse, (because I know not how far he waded in those
matters) so will I not condemn him, considering the proceedings of you and your
fellows with Catholykes in like cases, yet this I will be bold to say that if
he had any dealing therein, it was without the consent or knowledge of any of his
superiors, yea or of any intrinsecal friend of theirs, whereof I could yield a
sufficient reason, if it were convenient.

But let us admit that he was as deep in those matters as any of the rest; have
you therefore any reason to condemn all other Seminary Priests for his act, I
do not blame you here for punishing any Catholyke that you should find to be
truly seditious, but I find it strange, and against all reason and justice,
that you do not only punish us for feigned crimes, but also impute the doings of
one or of a few to all, which was always in my time, and I think it still, the
absurd dealing of your lawyers in the araignment of Catholykes urging against
them the attemptes of Doctor Sanders in Ireland, and Feltons setting up of the
Bull, and such like, as though every Catholyke were privy to their doings, or
thought himself bound in conscience to do as they did, which kind of argument
your lawyers would never use, if they were not either most malicious or
ignorant, or thought all their audience to be fools: For what conclusion can
be drawn from one or some particular to a general, as to say, Eaton the
preacher did penance on, the Pillery in cheapsyde and after at Paul's Cross
for lying with his daughter, such a minister was hanged for a rape, such an
other for sod^my, such a one for a murder; ergo, all ministers are mnrderers,
sodomites, rauishers of women, and incestuous persons.

Would your ministers allow this conclusion, or else that laws should be made
against them all for the offense of some of them? and yet to say truly there
have been so many examples of ministers convict and executed for such crimes
that you might with more, reason exterminate the whole ministry, as a very
sink of sin, then condemn all Catholykes as seditious, for Doctor Sa^ders,
and Feltons cause, o^ all Seminary Priests for Ballards.

But to conclude this point, it is evident enough, that neither Ballards
offense (if he committed any) nor theirs that were executed with him could be
any occasion of those rigorous laws against Seminary Priests which were made
some years before, when (as I have said) you had not any one example of a
Seminary man, that had been, or could be touched with any sedition, other then
such as you feigned of them your selves.

Furthermore what just cause had you to make the distinction in your laws
betwixt Queen Marie Priests, Q. Marie. Priests.
and Seminary Priests? have you found any more in the one then in the other,
but only that you know the old Priests of Queen Martyrs time were so spent and
wasted already that there was not left of them perhaps half a score in England
(who also you thought would be in a short time consumed) whereas of the others,
you saw a continual spring, that would flow perpetually, to the undoubted
destruction of your heresy in time, if it were not stopped, in which respect,
you thought good to seem to favor the first, that you might with more show of
reason persecute the later.

Nevertheless you have hanged some of those Q. Marie Priests as well as the
other, only for doing their function counting them therein no less seditious
then the Seminary Priests, and yet you say you spare the one sort as only
superstitious, and punish the other as seditious.

But such seditious and superstitious Priests as these are, were the very
Apostles and Disciples of our Savior, 2. Cor. ^.
for they absolved from sin, as these do, Act. 10.
they administered the Sacraments of Baptism, or the After, extreme unction,
Act. 2. and 20.
and the rest as these do, Iam. 5.
they said mass (that is to say) they offered in sacrifise the blessed, Act. 14.
body and blood of our Savior as these do, they did preach, Act. 17.
and teach the Christian Catholyke doctrine as these do, Act. 24.
finally they were persecuted and punished for sedition as these are.

Thus Sir you may see you had not those causes which you pretend, to change the
temper of your Jaws, nor to distinguish betwyxt Seminary and Queen Marie
Priests, neither any reason at all to call them either superstitious, or
seditious. But let us see some more of your gloses.

THE CONFVTATION OF an inuectiue which the Author of the Pamphlet makes
against the Jesuits. CHAP. XXIIII.
IN your 10. and 11. page you make a digression to treat of the strange
mysteries as you call them of the Jesuits doctrine, how they mingle heaven and
hell, and lift up the hands of the subjects against the anointed of God, you
wonder that Princes do not concur in suppressing them, who you say make
traffyck of their sacred lives; you compare them to pirates that are publyke
enemies to humayne society, and to the Templars that were all put down
throughout Christendom within a few weeks, and lastly you find it strange
that the Bishop of Rome does not purge out a leven as you call them, so strange
and odious.

These in deed are very strange and odious speeches, and no maruayle for there
can be no more sympathy betwixt the Jesuits and you then betwixt good and bad,
light and darkness, Christ and Belial; it is no marvel, that the thief hates
the gallows, the dog the whip or the woolf the mastif, that keeps the flock,
neither that you and all other heretyks malign those, whose schools are your
scourge, Of the Jesuits.
whose books your bane, whose virtue is your confusion, whose vigilance and
industry is the guard simple fowls against the assaults of your heresy and
impiety, wherein the great goodness of God is to be noted who for every disease
provides a remedy, for every poison an antidote, for every harm a help, so it
pleased him of his divine wisdom to provide against a Simon Magus, a Saint
Peter; against an Arrius, an Athanasius; against a Nestorius, a Cyril; against
a Vigilantius, a Hierome; against a Pelagius, an Augustinus; (who was borne in
Africa the same day, that the other was borne in England) against the heretyks
called Albigenses, a Dominik and his holy order of the friar preachers; and
lastly in this our age, against a Martyn Luther and his cursed crew of vicious
Apostates he raised an Ignatius de Loyola with his blessed company, of
virtuous, and Apostolical priests, commonly called Jesuits, whom though the
Devil, and all his instruments (I mean you, and all other heretykes,
apostatates, and atheists) have no less impugned then the catholic Church it
self, which they defend, yet nevertheless their holy Society is through the
providence of God propagate and spread throughout the Christian world from one
pole to the other; and thereby the wrackes and ruynes of Christendom repaired,
insidels converted, heretyks confounded, youth instructed, the weak edifyed,
no less to the glory of God, then to the confusion of his enimyes and theirs.

But to come to the particulers of your slanderous digression; you wonder that
Princes do not concur to the suppression of this sect, as you call it, that
makes a traffic of their lives; and I wonder, you are not ashamed to buyld
such a malicious slander upon so false a ground, seeing I have evidently proved
that this matter of Squyre (whereupon you run all this descant) is a mere
fiction a lewd, and a lowdly, improbale in it self, proved by no witness, or
evidence, extorted from him by torment, retracted and disauowed at his death,
though you shamefully say the contrary: besides that it is now above 20.
years since the Jesuits first entered England in which time you have rackt,
^suits^acked
and rent diverse of them (Father Southwe^ 10. times, Father Walpoole 14. Father
Campion I know not how often) and diverse others for their cause, and all to find
out some such matter, and yet you never got so much as any inkling of any, so
that this contumelious speech of yours, is but a vain blast, that (as a man
may say) shakes no corn, nor cracks any man's credit but your own.

Furthermore how childish and vain is the comparison you make of them to
pirates, thereby to conclude them to be publyke enemies of humayn society,
meaning (by like) by humayne society your selves, whose publyke enemies you may
in deed account them in respect of your heresies, yet in that sense there is
neither truth nor propriety in your manner of speech, for though I allow you to
be humayn and earthly in the highest degree, yet a true society you cannot be
called, being so dissociate, and divided in religion amongst your selves as you
are, except it be the society of Sampsons foxes whose tails were only tied
together and their heads severed. Iudic. 15.


But if you consider the infinite numbers and multitudes of those that from one
end of the world to the other do love at this day and reverence the Jesuits (as
fathers, that give them spiritual food as physicians that cure the diseases of
their souls, and as pilots (not pirates) that guide them to the port of eternal
salvation) you shall easily see the vanity, and idleness of your discourse, and
either be forced to grant that they are no enemies to humain society, or else
absurdly say, that all men besides your selves are seized with such a lethargy,
or senseless stupidity that they cannot discern enemies from friends.

Can any man that is not mad or drunken with heresy as you seem to be, or
overcome with passion persuade himself that so many wise pious, and polityk
kings, Princes, councels, magistrates, and governors (whose dominions
extending from one pole to the other, do conteyne the noblest, and worthyest
parts of humain society among Christians) would be so unadvised to receive them
into their kingdoms countries, cities, and courts, foster them, cherish them,
love, reverence and honor them as they do, if they were such public enemies
to human society as you make them, or any way hurtful to their states,
perilous to Princes lives, preiuditial to public good, or rather if they were
not most necessary, and beneficial to them all?

This is so manifest to men of discourse and reason that I need not further to
enlarge my self therein, seeing there is no man so simple that will prefer the
vain and malicious conceit of a few poor sectary Caluinists hated and
contemned by all other sects of the same breed, before the judgment and
experience of all the rest of Christendom, whereof you are not worthy to be
counted the parings, neither for your number nor for any other respect
whatsoever, and albeit I might say much more in this behalf yet for that the
matter is evident of it self, and the innocence and honor of these servants of
God has been defended by many learned books in these our days against the
barkings of all sectaryes and other their enemies, and emulatours which their
vocation and virtues cannot but purchase unto them, I shall leave of to speak
any more of this argument for the present, and so pass over to that which
remains.

OF THE HIPOCRISY OF the author of the Pamphlet and his fellows, and of a
ridiculous miracle feigned in her Majesty's supposed escape. CHAP. XXV.
IT rests now only to speak a word or two of the religious zeal, and
devotion toward God, which you show in your g^oses wherein you interlace not
only examples of scripture, but also considerations of Gods extraordinary and
visible providence in the preservation of her Majesty from this great
conspiracy, for the manifestation of his own glory, in so much that you make
is miraculous comparing her Majesty's supposed escape to the shaking of the
viper from S. Paul's hand without hurt, but in such ridiculous manner, as in
truth it made me and others good sport when I red it, for though I have heard
many fond comparisons, and similitudes of idle brains in my days, yet never
heard I such an other as this is, and that in print.

A ridiculous comparison.
You say thus, and they are your own words as they ly in the book, that as the
viper was upon S. Paul's hand and shaked of without hurt, so this was done in
July, in the heat of the year, when the pores and veins were openest, to
receive any malign vapor, or tincture if her Majesty by any accident had
laid her hand upon the place.

Of which words there can be no other sense gathered (in my opinion) then this
that as S. Paul being bitten with the viper shaked her from his hand, and had
no hurt, so if by chance her Majesty had laid her hand upon the poisoned
pomel of the Sadle in the month of July when the pores and veins are open she
might have been poisoned or receive malign vapors or tinctures. But good Sir
you might have done well to have put this conceit in ryme^ for so it would have
been at least ryme without reason, whereas now it is neither ryme nor reason,
yet if you had said that her Matie. had touched the poisoned place, as you
signify the contrary (which marres the fashion both of your comparison, and of
your miracle) there had been some more similitude, and matter miraculous, but
as you have handled it there is neither miracle nor meaning, so far as my
reason reaches, and consequently this very first miracle that ever you had for
confirmation of your Gospel in England is miscarried for lack of good handling.
But to leave this to the laughter of all wise men, I will proceed to some other
considerations.

Who is he that seeing so much mention in your discourse of God, of his mercy, of
his providence ordinary, and extraordinary, and of his more then natural
influence to the preservation of her Matie. would not think you to be a very
religious and devout man, or could imagyn that you knew in your conscience,
that all this matter of Squyre was a fiction, as it is evident you did? whereof
I need to bring no better proof then those two notable lies before mentioned,
which you take upon your own conscience, though not only your self, but also
many hundreths that were at Squyres death know the contrary; whereby it
appears that all your show of religion devotion and zeal tends to nothing
else, but to set a glos upon this your counterfeit ware, to make it the more
salable amongst the common people; which exceeds all impiety.

For what can be so exce^able, or sacriligious, as to abuse the sacred name of
almighty God, the holy, scriptures, and show of devotion and religion to such a
mischeuous end, as to slander and calumniate, which any man that belieueth
there is a God would tremble to do. But such is the custom of you, and your
compagnions to make a mask and visard of religion to cover therewith your
impious, and irreligious practices, persuading your selves, that although some
of the wisest may discover your treachery, yet you shall carry away many of the
multitude, which is the fruit you expect of this and such other your infamous,
and slanderous libels, forgeting that of Cicero nullum simulatum di^turnum, no
feigned, or disembled thing can ^ong continue, whereof our Savior warns us
sufficiently, saying, beware of the leven of hipocrites; nothing is secret,
that shall not be revealed, nothing is hid that shall not be known, for those
things which you have said in the dark shall be spoken in the light, and that
which you have spoken priuity in your chamber shall be preached in the house tops.

So that you Sr. libeller, and your fellows cannot look to delude the world
always as you have done many years but that sooner or later God will open the
peoples eyes, and discover unto them your hipocrisy and disguised impiety, yea
and perhaps make them his instruments to revenge his cause, and their own upon
you, wherein may be fulfilled, that which Iobe says of the hipocrite, the
heavens shall reveal his iniquity, and the earth shall rise against him.

Well Sir, though much more matter worthy to be treated do offer it self unto
me at this present, by occasion of this your libel, yet not to ouerlode you at
once, nor to weery the reader, this shall suffice for answer thereunto: only I
will advertise you of one thing, that although you dissemble your name (fearing
belike that the notable untruth auowed by you might turn to your shame if you
should be known) yet I am not ignorant who you are, and have forborne to (...)
you, only to requite your curtesy in sparing to name me in your said libel,
which at the bar other your fellow barristers did not forbear to do, so that
being now every way out of your debt, as I take it, I take my leave of you,
wishing you as much grace as to my self.

THE CONCLUSION TO the Lords of the Council. CHAP. XXVI.
MY very good Lords, although it is a common saying, and commonly true, that
obsequium amicos, veritas ^diu^ parit, flattery gets friends, and truth hatred,
in which respect I might well fear that the playnesse which I have used in this
discourse might be offesiue to your Lordships, yet framing in my self a far
other conceit, of your wisdoms, and judgments then of the common sort of men
(whose ears do ^tch rather after vanity, then verity, after pleasure rather
then profit) I persuade my self that your Lordships are such friends and
patrons of truth, that you cannot mislike to hear it, when it is delivered
upon so just an occasion, as the defense of honor and innocence, and to so
good an end as a publyk benefit, and therefore I hope that when your Lordships
shall have well wayed the particulers represented here to your consideration, I
mean our innocence, the treachery of our adversaries, the abuse offered therein
to her Matie. and your honors, the infamy that grows thereby to your
government, the dangers both domestical, and forrayne, the offense to God in
shedding innocent blood, and lastly the punishment due thereto from his
justice, your Lordships will not only aproue my playnesse accompanied with
reason, sincerity and truth, but also employ your wisdoms, charity, and
authority, to the reparation of our wrongs, and releef of our miseries, whereof
I say, I cannot but have exceeding great hope, when I consider the great zeal
your honors have showed to the mayntenance of justice, in the punishment of
such as you have understood to have abused your co^missions toward Catholykes,
in far less matters then this which I have touched in this Apology, whereof
I have known, and heard of diverse examples, as well before I came out of
England, as since, whereby it is evident, that these other extreme injuries
that our adversaries daily do unto us, proceed merely of their own malice, and
no way of your Lordships will, commission, or consent, and that for the remedy,
there wants nothing, but that your honors may have notice thereof, which I
have therefore presumed to give you in this Apology by the occasion of this my
purgation, which I present unto you in all humility, beseeching your Lordships,
for conclusion of this treatise, to consider from what root all these foul
unchristian practices of our adversaries do spring, as that they are nothing
else but the fruit of heresy, which has no other period where to rest, but
atheism, or apostasy from Christ, as evidently appears by all the east parts
of the world, which from like schism, and heresy, are fallen to flat
infidelity; which if it please your Lordships well to weigh, and the true remedy
withal, which Machiauel, (though in other things he be most absurd and
impious) yet wisely teaches in this case, to wit, to reduce a corrupted state
of common wealth, to the point from whence it first declined, I hope your
honors will see the necessity of the reduction of our realm to the ancient
Catholyke religion, and to the unity of the Catholyke body of Christendom,
whereof it was many hundred years together a principal member, in all honor,
and security, flourishing in justice, equity, and piety, whereas now by this
difunion, and divorce, from the said Catholyke body, and religion, it is not
only exposed to many dangers, and much in ^^my, but is also replenished with
injustice and impiety, as appears by the ordinary, and daily proceedings of
our adversaries against us, declared sufficiently in this Apology, which I
leave to your honors wise consideration, humbly beseeching almighty God to
illuminat your Lordships, and her Mayesty also in this behaulf, which if it
shall please his divine Matie. to do, and with so great a grace, and blessing,
as is the light of his Catholyke faith, to consummate and perfect those other
rare gifts that he has already bestowed upon her Matie. (I mean her many
princely parts, her power by sea, and land, her peace at home, her prosperity
abroad, her long life and raygne) she will be one of the most fortunat, famous,
and glorious Princes, that England or Christiandome has had in many ages, and
a most rare example of Gods inspeakable mercy to the endless comfort of all true
Christians. From Madrid, the last of August. 1599.

Your Lordships humble servant T. F.

THE TABLE OF the Chapters.
THE preamble to the right honorable the Lords of her Majesty's privy council.
The authors protestation of his innocence, Chap. 1. The examination of the
grounds whereupon Squyre was Chap. 2. Of the cruelty of the rackmaisters in
England, and of their Chap. 3. Chap. 4. Chap. 5. Chap. 6. Chap. 7. Chap. 8.
Chap. 9. Chap. 10. Chap. 11. Cha. 12. Chap. 13. Cha. 14. Chap. 15. the end that
they have common with all persecutors of Gods Church, and how much they fail
of their purpose therein. Chap. 16. Of other ends particular to our
adversaries, and of their disloyalty Chap. 17. That these proceedings of our
adversaries which they hold Chap. 18. Of two inevitable dommages that must
needs ensew to the Chap. 19. The confutation of a pamphlet printed in England
concerning Chap. 20. Of certain absurd improbabilities in the pa^phlet
touching Chap 21. Of certain impertinent and foolish gloses of the author of
Chap. 22. Of the true causes of more moderation used in the beginning Chap 23.
The confutatio^ of aninuectiue which the author of the pamphlet Chap. 24. Of
the hipocrisy of the author of the pamphlet, and his fellows, Chap. 25. The
conclusion to the lords of the council. Chap. 26.
Such fevv faults as may have escaped in the printing, it may please the
courteous reader to pardon.


