THE NIGHT-VVALKER, OR THE LITTLE THEIFE.

A COMEDY, As it was presented by her Majesty's Servants, at the Private House
in Drury Lane.

Written by John Fletcher. Gent.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Cotes, for Andrew Crook, and William Cook: 1640.

TO The vvorthily-deserving all his ingenuous Attributes WILLIAM HVDSON Esquire.
Worthy Sir,
I Should derogate from your worth, to doubt of your pardon, andif should wrong
too much your goodness to present the endeavors of some frothy brain to the
trial of your judgment, when the More ignorant world had already condemned
it; but sir, this is one of the ccheirs of much admired, much lamented
Fletcher, whose matchless Fancies are fit only for the perusal of such as
you, who have candor and knowledge so united, that there cannot be a reprive
for those Poems you condemn; accept this weak Testimony of my Service, and
as yours by familiar acquaintance with them, favorably entertain these witty
conceits particularly presented unto you, by him who shall glory in nothing
more than to be styled

The Honorer of Your Virtues, (...)

The Actors Names.
TOm Lurcher. Jacke Wildbraine. Gentlemen. Justice Algripe. Frank Hartlove.
Toby. Servants. Sexton. Bell-Ringers. Boy. A Lady, Mother to Maria. Maria.
Nurse. Mistrisse Newlove. Women. Mistress.
THE NIGHT-VVALKER: OR, The little Thief.
Actus primus, Scena prima
Enter Tom Lurcher and Jack Wildbraine.
Lurc. Jack.

Wild. What wind brought thee hither?
In what old hollow tree, or rotten wall
Have thou been like a Swallow all this Winter,
Where have thou been man?

Lur. Following the Plow.

Wild. What Plow? Thou have no Land,
Stealing's thy own purchase.

Lur. The best inheritance.

Wild. Not in my opinion,
Thou had five hundred pound a year.

Lur. It Is gone,
Prithee no more on it, have I not told thee,
And oftentimes, nature made all men equal,
Her distribution to each child alike;
Till labor came and thrust a new Will in,
Which I allow not: till men won a privilege
By that they call endeavor, which indeed
Is nothing but a lawful Cosenage,
An allowed wayto cheat, why should my neighbor
That has no more soul then his Horsekeeper,
Nor bounteous faculties above a Broom man,
Have forty thousand pound, and I four groates;
Why should he keep it?

Will. Thy old opinion still.

Lur. Why should that Scrivener
That never writ reason in his life, nor any thing
That time e're gloried in, that never knew
How to keep any courtesy concealed
But Noverint universt must proclaim it,
Purchase perpetually, and I a rascal:
Consider this, why should that moldy Cobbler
Marry his daughter to a wealthy Merchant,
And give five thousand pound, is this good justice?
Because he has a tougher constitution;
Can feed upon old songs, and save his money,
Therefore must I go beg?

Will. What Is this to thee?
Thou can not mend it, if thou be determind
To roball like a tyrant, yet take heed
A keener justice do not overtake thee,
And catch you in a Nooze.

Lur. I am no Woodcocke,
He that shall sit down frighted with that foolery
Is not worth pity, let me alone to shuffle;
Thou art for wenching.

Will. For beauty I, a safe course,
No halter hangs in my way, I defy it.

Lur. But a worse fate, a wilful poverty,
For where thou against by one that indeed loves thee,
A thousand will draw from thee, it is thy destiny;
One is a kind of weeping cross Jack,
A gentle purgatory, do not fling at all,
You Will pay the Box so often, till thou perish.

Will. Take you no care for that Sir, it is my pleasure,
I will employ my wits a great deal faster
Then you shall do your fingers, and my Loves,
If I mistake not, shall prove riper harvest
And handsomer, and come within less danger.
Where Is thy young sister?

Lur. I know not where she is, she is not worth caring for,
She has no wit.
Oh you would be nibling with her,
She Is far enough I hope, I know not where,
She Is not worth caring for, a sullenthing
She wod not take my counsel Jack,
And so I parted from her.

Will. Leave her to her wants?

Lur. I gave her a little money what I could spare,
She had a mind toth country, she is turned
By this some Farriers dairy maid, I may meet her
Riding from market one day twixt her Dorsers;
If I do, by this hand I wonnot spare
Her butter pence.

Will. Thou will not rob thy Sister.

Lur. She shall account me for her Eggs and Cheeses.

Will. A pretty Girl, did not old Algripe love her,
A very pretty Girl she was.

Lur. Some such thing,
But he was too wise to fasten; let her pass.

Will. Then where is thy Mistress?

Lur. Where you shannot find her,
Nor know what stuff she is made on, no indeed Sir,
I chose her not for your use.

Will. Sure she is handsome.

Lur. Yes indeed is she, she is very handsome, but that is all one

Will. You Will come toth marriage.

Lur. Is it to day.

Will. Now, now, they are come from Church now.

Lur. Any great preparation,
Does Justice Algripe show his power.

Will. Very glorious, and glorious people there.

Lur. I may meet with him yet er'e I die as cunning as he is.

Will. You may do good Tom at the marriage,
We have Plate and dainty things.

Lur. Do you no harm Sir,
For yet me thinks the marriage should be marred
If thou may have thy will, farewell, say nothing.
Exit Enter Gentlemen.
Will. You are welcome noble friends.

1. I thank you Sir,
Nephew to the old Lady, his name is Wildbraine,
And wild his best condition.

2. I have heard of him,
I pray ye tell me Sir, is young Maria merry
After her marriage rites? does she look lively?
How does she like her man?

Will. Very scurvely,
And as untowardly she prepares herself,
But it is mine Ants will, that this dull metal
Must be mixed with her to allay her handsomeness.

1. Had Hartlove no fast friends?

Will. His means are little,
And where those littles are, as little comforts
Ever keep company: I know she loves him,
His memory beyond the hopes of --
Beyond the Indies in his moldy Cabinets,
But it is her unhansome fate.
Enter Hartlove.
1. I am sorry fort,
Here comes poor Frank, nay we are friends, start not Sir,
We see your willow and are sorry for,
And though it be a wedding we are half mourners.

Fra. Good Gentlemen remember not my fortunes.
They are not to be helped with words.

Will. Look up man,
A proper sensible fellow and shrink for a Wench,
Are there no more? or is she all the hansomnesse?

Fr. Prithee leave fooling.

Will. Prithee leave thou whining,
Have maids forgot to love?

Fr. You are injurious.

Will. Let 'em alone a while, thei'le follow thee.

1. Come good Frank,
Forget now, since there is no remedy,
And show a merry face, as wise men would do.

2. Be a free guest, and think not of those passages.

Will. Think how to nicke him home, thou know she dotes on thee;
Graffe me a dainty medler on his crabstocke;
Pay me the dreaming puppy.

Fr. Well, make your mirth, the whilst I bear my misery;
Honest minds would ha better thoughts.

Will. I am her kinsman,
And love her well, am tender of her youth,
Yet honest Frank, before I would have that stinkard,
That walking rotten tomb, enjoy her maidenhead.

Fr. Prithee leave mocking.

Will. Prithee Frank believe me,
Go to consider, hark, they knock to dinner,
Knock within. Come wo't thou go?

2. I prithee Frank go with us,
And laugh and dance as we do.

Fr. You are light Gentlemen,
Nothing to weigh your hearts, pray give me leave,
I Will come and see, and take my leave.

Will. We Will look for you,
Do not despair, I have a trick yet.
Exit.
Fr. Yes,
When I am mischievous I will believe your projects:
She is gone, for ever gone, I cannot help it,
My hopes and all my happiness gone with her.
Gone like a pleasing dream: what mirth and jollitie
Reigns round about this house? how every office
Swetes with new joys, can she be merry too?
Is all this pleasure set by her appointment?
Sure she has a false heart then; still they grow louder
The old man's god, his gold, has won upon her
(Light hearted Cordial gold) and all my services
That offered naked truth, are clean forgotten:
Yet if she were compelled, but it cannot be,
If I could but imagine her will mine,
Enter Lady and Wildbraine. Although he had her body.

La. He shall come in.
Walk without doors of this day, though an enemy,
It must not be.

Will. You must compel him Madam.

La. No she shall fetch him in, Nephew it shall be so.

Will. It will be fittest.
Exit.
Fr. Can fair Maria look again upon me?
Can there be so much impudence in sweetness?
Enter Maria. Or has she got a strong heart to defy me?
She comes her self: how rich she is in Jewels!
Me thinks they show like frozen Isicles,
Cold winter had hung on her, how the Roses
That kept continual spring within her cheeks
Are withered with the old man's dull embraces?
She would speak to me. I can sigh too Lady
But from a sounder heart: yes, and can weep too
But it is for you, that ever I believed you,
Tears of more pious value then your marriage;
You would encase your self, and I must credit you,
So much my old obedience compells from me;
Go, and forget me, and my poverty,
I need not bid you, you are too perfect that way:
But still remember that I loved Maria,
Loved with a loyal love, nay turn not from me,
I will not ask a treare more, you are bountiful,
Go and rejoice, and I will wait upon you
That little of my life left.

Mar. Good Sir hear me,
What has been done, was the act of my obedience
And not my will: forced from me by my parents,
Now it is done, do as I do, bear it hansomely
And if there can be more society
Without dishonor to my tie of marriage
Or place for noble love, I shall love you still,
You had the first, the last, had my will prosper'd;
You talk of little time of life: dear Frank,
Certain I am not married for eternity,
The joy my marriage brings tells me I am mortal
And shorter lived then you, else I were miserable;
Nor can the gold and ease his age has brought me
Add what I coveted, 'content, go with me,
They seek a day of joy, prithee let us show it
Though it beforc'd, and by this kiss believe me
How ever, I must live at his command now,
I Will dye at yours.

Fr. I have enough, I Will honor ye.
Exeunt. Enter Lurcher.
Lur. Here are my trinkets, and this lusty marriage
I mean to visit, I have shift of all sorts,
And here are thousand wheels to set 'em working,
I am very merry, for I know this wedding
Will yield me lusty pillage, if mad Wildgoose
That deboshd rogue keep but his ancient revells
And breed a hubbub in the house I am happy.
Enter Boy. Now what are you?

Boy. A poor distressed boy Sir,
Friendlesse and comfortless, that would entreat
Some charity and kindness from your worship,
I would feign serve Sir, and as feign endeavor
With dutious labor to deserve the love
Of that good Gentleman shall entertain me.

Lur. A pretty Boy, but of too mild a breeding,
Too tender and too bashful a behavior,
What can thou do?

Boy. I can learn any thing
That Is good and honest, and shall please Master.

Lur. He blushes as he speaks, and that I like not,
I love a bold and secure confidence,
An impudence that one may trust, this boy now
Had I instructed him had been a Jewel,
A treasure for my use, thou can not lie.

Boy. I would not willingly.

Lur. Nor thou have no wit
To dissemble neately.

Boy. Do you love such boys, Sir?

Lur. Oh mainely, mainely, I would have my boy impudent,
Outface all truth, yet do it piously:
Like Proteus, cast himself into all forms,
As sudden and as nimble as his thoughts,
Blench at no danger, though it be the Gallows,
Nor make no conscience of a cosonage
Though it be ith Church; your soft, demure, still children --
Are good for nothing, but to get long graces --
And sing songs to dull tunes; I would keep thee
And cherish thee, had thou any active quality,
And be a tender master to thy knavery,
But thou art not for my use.

Boy. Do you speak this seriously?

Lur. Yes indeed do I.

Boy. Would you have your Boy Sir
Read in these moral mischiefs?

Lur. Now thou mov'st me.

Boy. And be a well traind youth in all activities?

Lur. By any means.

Boy. Or do you this to try me,
Fearing a pronenesse.

Lur. I speak this to make thee.

Boy. Then take me Sir, and cherish me and love me;
You have me what you would: believe me Sir
I can do any thing for your advantage,
I guess at what you mean; I can lie naturally,
As easily, as I can sleep Sir, and securely:
As naturally I can steal too.

Lur. That I am glad on,
Right heartily glad on, hold thee there, thou art excellent.

Boy. Steal any thing from any body living.

Lur. Not from thy Master.

Bo. That Is mine own body.
And must not be.

Lur. The Boy mends mightily.

Boy. A rich man, that like snow, heaps up his moneys
I have a kind of pious zeal to meet still;
A fool that not deserves 'em, I take pity on,
For fear he should run mad, and so I ease him.

Lur. Excellent boy, and able to instruct me,
Of my own nature just.

Boy. I scorn all hazard,
And on the edge of danger I do best sir,
I have a thousand faces to deceive,
And to those twice so many tongues to flatter,
An impudence no brass was ever tougher,
And for my conscience.

Lur. Peace, I ha found a Jewel,
A Jewel all the Indies cannot match,
And thou shat feel --

Boy. This title, and I ha done sir;
I never can confess, I ha that spell on me;
And such rare modesties before a Magistate,
Such Innocence to catch a Judge, such ignorance.

Lur. I Will learn of thee, thou art my own, come Boy
I Will give thee action presently.

Boy. Have at you.

Lur. What must I call thee

Boy. Snap sir.

Lur. It Is most natural
A name borne to thee, sure thou art a Fairie,
Show but thy skill, and I shall make thee happy.
Enter Lady, Nurse, Mistress Newlove, Tebia.
La. Where be these knaves? who strues up all the liveries,
Is the brides bed made?

Tob. Yes Madam and a bell
Hung under it artificially.

La. Out knave out
Must we have larums now?

Tob. A little warning
That we may know when to begin our healths Madam,
The Justice is a kind of old Jade Madam,
That will go merriest with a bell.

La. All the house drunk.

Tob. This is a day of Jubilee.

La. Are the best hangings up, and the plate set out?
Who makes the Posset, Nurse?

Nur. The dairie maid,
And she will put that in will make him caper:
Well Madam, well, you might ha chose another,
A handsomer for your years.

La. Peace he is rich Nurse,
He is rich, and that's beauty.

Nur. I am sure he is rotten,
Would he had been hanged when he first saw her. Termagant!

La. What an angry queen is this, where,
Who looks to him?

To. He is very merry Madam
M. Wildbraine, has him in hand, in the bottom o'th Sellar
He sighs and tipples.

Nur. Alas good Gentleman,
My hearts sore for thee.

La. Sorrow must have his course, sir
Give him some Sack to dry up his remembrance,
How does the Bridegroom, I am afraid of him.

Nur. He is a trim youth to be tender of, hemp take him.
Must my sweet new blown Rose find such a winter
Before her spring be near.

La. Peace, peace, thou art foolish.

Nur. And dances like a Town top: and reeles, and hobbles.

La. Alas, good Gentleman, give him not much wine.

Tom. He shall ha none by my consent.

La. Are the women comforting my daughter?

New. Yes, yes, Madam,
And reading to her a pattern of true patience,
They read and pray for her too.

Nur. They had need,
Ye had better marry her to her grave a great deal:
There will be peace and rest, alas poor gentlewoman,
Must she become a Nurse now in her tenderness?
Well Madam well my heart bleeds.

La. Thou art a fool still

Nur. Pray heaven I be.

La. And an old fool to be vexed thus.
It Is late she must to bed, go knave be merry,
Drink for a Boy, away to all your charges.
Enter Wildbraine, and Frank Heartlove.
Will. Do as thou wot, but if thou do refuse it
Thou art the stupid'st ass, there is no long arguing,
Time is too precious Frank.

Fr. I am hot with wine,
And apt now to believe, but if thou do this
Out of a villainy, to make me wrong her,
As thou art prone enough.

Will. Does she not love thee?
Did she not cry down right eene now to part with thee?
Had she not swounded if I had not caught her?
Can thou have more?

Fr. I must confess all this.

Will. Do not stand prating, and misdoubting, casting,
If she go from thee now, she is lost for ever;
Now now she is going, she that loves thee going,
She whom thou lov st.

Fr. Pray let me think a little.

Wi. There is no leisure; think when thou have embraced her
Can she imagine thou did ever honor her,
Ever believe thy oaths, that tamely sufferst
An old dry ham of horse flesh to enjoy her
Enjoy her Maiden head; take but that from her
That we may tell posterity a man had it,
A handsome man, a gentleman, a young man,
To save the honor of our house, the credit,
It Is no great matter I desire.

Fr. I hear you.

Wi. Free us both from the fear of breeding fowls
And ophs, got by this shadow: we talk too long.

Fr. She is going now to bed, among the women
What opportunity can I have to meet her?

Will. Let me alone, have thou a will? speak soundly,
Speak discreetely, speak home and handsomely,
Is It not pity, nay misery, nay infamy to leave
So rare a pie to be cut up by a rascal.

Fr. I will go presently, now, now, I stay thee.

Wi. Such a dainty Do, to be taken
By one that knows not neck beef from a Phesant,
Nor cannot relish Braggat from Ambrofia.
Is it not conscience.

Fr. Yes, yes, now I feel it.

Wi. A meritorious thing.

Fr. Good Father Wildgoose,
I do confess it.

Will. Come then follow me
And pluck a man's heart up, I Will lock thee privately
Where she alone shall presently pass by,
None near to interupt thee but be sure;

Fr. I shall be sure enough, lead on, and crown me.

Wi. No wringings in your mind now as you love me.
Ex. Enter Lady, Maria, Justice. Gent. Nurse, Newlove.
La. It Is time you were a bed.

In. I prithee sweet heart
Consider my necessity, why art sad?
I must tell you a tale in your ear anon.

Nur. Of Tom Thumb.
I believe that will prove your stiffest story.

New. I pity the young wench.

1. And so do I too.

2. Come, old sticks take fire.

1. But the Plague is, heel burn out instantly;
Give him another cup.

2. Those are but flashes,
A run of sack wonot set him high enough.
Will ye to bed?

M. I must.

1. Come have a good heart,
And win him like a bowl to lie close to you,
Make your best use.

Ju. Nay prithee Ducke go instantly,
I Will dance a Jig or two to warm my body.
Enter Wildbraine.
Wild It Is almost midnight.

La. Prithee to bed Maria.

Will. Go you before, and let the Ladies follow,
And leave her to her thoughts a while, there must be
A time of taking leave of the same fooleries
Bewailing others maiden-heads.

La. Come then,
We Will wait in the next room.

Iu. Do not tarry
For if thou do, by my troth I shall fall asleep Mall.
Exit.
Wi. Do, do, and dream of Dotrells, get you to bed quickly
And let us ha no more stir, come no crying
It Is too late now, carry your self discreetely,
The old thief loves thee dearly, that's the benefit.
For the rest you must make your own play, Nay not that way,
They Will pull ye all to pieces, for your whim whams,
Your garters and your gloves, go modestly
And privately steal to bed, it is very late Mall,
For if you go by them such a new larum.

Ma. I know not which way to avoyde em.

Wi. This way
This through the Cloisters: and so steal to bed,
When you are there once, all will separate
And give ye rest, I came out of my pity
To show you this.

Ma. I thank you.

Wi. Here Is the keys
Go presently and lock the doors fast after ye,
That none shall follow.

Ma. Good night.

Wi. Goodnight sweet Cosen,
A good, and sweet night, or I Will curse thee Frank.
Exit. Enter Frank Hartlove.
Fra. She stays long, sure young Wildgoose has abused me,
He has made sport wi'me, I may yet get out again,
And I may see his face once more, I ha soul intentions,
But they are drawn on by a fouler dealing.
Enter Maria. Hark, hark, it was the door,
Something comes this way, wondrous still, and stealing
May be some walking spirit to affright me.

Ma. Oh heaven my fortune.

Fr. It Is her voice, stay.

Ma. Save me
Bless me you better powers.

Fr. I am no Devil.

Ma. Yare little better to disturb me now.

Pr. My name is Hartlove

Ma. Fie, fie, worthy friend,
Fie noble sir.

Fr. I must talk farther with ye
You know my fair affection.

Ma. So preserve it,
You know I am married now, for shame be civiller,
Not all the earth shall make me.

Fr. Pray walk this way,
And if you ever loved me.

Ma. Take heed Frank
How you divert that love to hate, go home prithee.

Fr. Shall he enjoy that sweet?

Mar. Nay pray unhand me.

Fr. He that nere felt what love was.

Ma. Then I charge you
Stand further off.

Fr. I am tame, but let me walk we'yee,
Talk but a minute.

Mar. So your talk be honest
And my untainted honor suffer not
I Will walk a turn or two.

Fr. Give me your hand then.
Exit. Enter Wildbraine, Justice, Lady, Nurse, Gent. Women, Newlove.
Just. She Is not in her Chamber.

Lad. She is not here.

Will. And I Will tell you what I dreamed

Iu. Give me a Torch.

1 and G. Be not too hasty sir.

Will. Nay let him go,
For if my dream be true, he must be speedy,
He will be trickt, and blazed else.

Nur. As I am a woman
I cannot blame her if she take her liberty,
Would she would make thee cuckold thou old bully,
A notorious cuckold for tormenting her.

La. I Will hang her then.

Nur. I Will bless her then, she does Justice,
Is this old stinking dogs flesh for her diet?

Will. Prithee honest Nurse do not fret too much
For fear I dream you will hang your self too.

Just. The Cloister?

Will. Such was my fancy, I do not say it is true,
Nor do Ibid you be too confident.

Iu. Where are the keys, the keys I say.

Will. I dreamed she had 'em to lock her self in.

Nur. What a devil do you mean?
Enter Servant.
Will. No harm good Nurse be patient

Ser. They are not in the window, where they use to be.

Will. What foolish dreams are these?

Iu. I am mad.

Will. I hope so.
If you be not mad, I Will do my best to make ye.

1. This is some trick.

2. I smell the Wildgoose.

Iu. Come gentlemen, come quickly I beseech you,
Quick as you can, this may be your case Gentlemen.
And bring some lights, some lights.
Exit.
Wi. Move faster, faster, you will come too late else.
I Will stay behind and pray for ye, I had rather she were dishonest,
Than thou should have her.
Enter Maria and Frank.
Mar. You Are most unmanly, yet I have some breath lest;
And this steel to defend me, come not near me,
For if you offer but another violence,
As I have life I Will kill you, if I miss that,
Upon my own heart will I execute,
And let that fair belief out, I had of you.

Fra. Most virtuous Maid, I have done, forgive my follies:
Pardon, O pardon, I now see my wickedness,
And what a monstrous shape it puts upon me,
On your fair hand I seal.
Enter.
Iu. Down with the door.

Ma. We are betraide, oh Frank, Frank.

Fra. I Will dye for ye
Rather than you shall suffer, I Will -- --

Iu. Now Enter.
Enter sweet Gentlemen, mine eyes, mine eyes,
Oh how my head aches.
Enter All.
1. Is it possible?

2. Hold her, she sinkes.

Ma. A plot upon my honor
To poison my fair name, a studied villainy,
Farewell, as I have hope of peace, I am honest,

Iu. My brains, my brains, my monstrous brains, they bud sure.

Nu. She is gone, she is gone.

Iu. A handsome riddance of her.
Would I could as easily lose her memory.

Nur. Is this the sweet of Marriage, have I bred thee
For this reward?

1. Hold, hold, he is desperate too.

Ju. Be sure ye hold him fast, we will bind him over
To the next Sessions, and if I can I Will hang him.

Fr. Nay then I Will live to be a terror to thee,
Sweet Virgin Rose farewell: heaven has thy beauty,
That's only fit for heaven. I Will live a little
To find the villain out that wrought this injury,
And then most blessed soul, I Will climb up to thee.
Farewell, I feel my self another creature.
Exit.
La. Oh misery of miseries.

Nu. I told ye Madam.

La. Carry her in, you will pay back her portion.

Iu. No not a penny, pay me back my credit
And I Will condition weye.

La. A sad wedding
Her grave must be her Bridal bed, oh Mall,
Would I had wed thee to thy own content
Then I had had thee still.

Iu. I am mad, farewell,
Another wanton wife will prove a hell.
Exeunt.
Actus Secundus.
Enter Tom Lurch. and his Boy.
Lur. What have thou done?

Boy. I have walked through all the lodgings.
A silence as if death dwelt there inhabits.

Lur. What have thou seen?

Boy. Naught but a sad confusion thing
Every left in such a loose disorder
That were there twenty thieves, they would be laden.

Lu. It Is very well, I like thy care, but it is strange
A wedding night should be so solitary.

Boy. Certainly there is some cause, some death or sickness
Is fallen suddenly upon some friend,
Or some strange news is come.

Lu. Are they all a bed?

Boy. I think so, and sound a sleep, unless it be
Some women that keep watch in a low parlour,
And drink, and weep, I know not to what end.

Lur. Where Is all the plate?

Boy. Why locked up in that room.
I saw the old Lady, ere she went to bed
Put up her plate, and some of the rich hangings
In a small long chest, her chain and rings are there too,
It stands close by the Table on a form.

Lur. T was a good notice, did thou see the men.

Boy. I saw them sad too, and all take their leaves,
But what they said I was too far to hear sir.

Lur. It Is daintily discovered, we shall certainly
Have a most prosperous night, which way.

Boy. A close one,
A back door, that the women have left open,
To go in and out to fetch necessaries,
Close on the Garden side.

Lur. I love thy diligence,
Were thou not fearful.

Boy. Fearful? I Will be hanged first.

Lur. Say they had spied thee.

Boy. I was then determain'd
To have cried down right too, and have kept 'em company,
As one that had an interest in their sadness,
Or made an errand to I know not whom sir.

Lur. My dainty Boy, let us discharge, that plate
Makes a perpetual motion in my fingers
Till I have fast hold of it.

Bo. Pray be wise sir, do it hansomely, be not greedy,
Lets handle it with such an excellence
As if we would bring theeving into honor:
We must disguise, to fright these reverend watches.

Lur. Still my blessed Boy.

Boy. And clear the Room of drunken Jealousies,
The chest is of some weight, and we may make
Such noise ith carriage we may be snap'd.

Lur. Come open, here is a devils face.

Boy. No, no, sir, we will have no shape so terrible,
We will not do the devil so much pleasure,
To have him face our plot.

Lur. A winding sheet then.

Boy. That's too cold a shift,
I would not wear the reward of my wickedness,
I wonder you are an old thief, and no cunninger,
Where Is the long cloak?

Lur. Here, here.

Boy. Give me the Turbant
And the false beard, I hear some coming this way,
Stoop, stoop, and let me sit upon your shoulders
And now as I direct: stay let 'em enter,
And when I touch move forward, make no noise.

Enter Nurse and Tobie.
Nur. Oh it is a sad time, all the burnt wine is drunk Nicke.

To. We may thank your dry chaps for it, the Canaries gone too
No substance for a sorrowful mind to work upon,
I cannot mourn in beer, if she should walk now
As discontented spirits are wont to do.

Nur. And meet us in the Cellar.

Tob. What sense have we with single beer against her?
What heart can we defy the devil with?

Nur. The March Beere's open.

To. A fortification of March Beer will do well,
I must confess it is a most mighty Armor,
For I presume I cannot pray.

Nur. Why Nicholas?

To. We Coachmen have such tumbling faiths, no prayers
Can go an even pace.

Nur. Hold up your candle.

To. Verily Nurse, I have cried so much
For my young Mistress, that is mortified,
That if I have not more sack to support me,
I shall even sleep, heigho, for another flagon;
These burialls and Christnings are the mournefulst matters,
And they ask more drink.

Nur. Drink to a sad heart's needful.

To. Mine Is ever sad, for I am ever dry Nurse.

Nur. Me thinks the light burns blew, I prithee snuff it
There Is a thief in it I think.

To. There may be one near it.

Nur. What Is that that moves there, in the name of -- Nicholas?
That thing that walks.

To. Would I had a ladder to behold it,
Mercy upon me, the Ghost of one oth' Guard sure,
It Is the Devil by his claws, he smells of Brimstone,
Sure he farts fire, what an earthquake I have in me;
Out with thy prayer book Nurse.

Nur. It fell ithe drying pan, and the Cats eat it.

Tob. J have no power to pray, it grows still longer,
It Is Steeple high now, and it sails away Nurse,
Lets call the Butler up, for he speaks Latin,
And that will daunt the Devil: I am blasted,
My bellies grown to nothing.

Nu. Fie, fly, Tobie.
Exit.
Bo. So let them go, and whilst they are astonishd
Let us presently upon the rest now suddenly.

Lur. Off, off, and up again, when we are near the Parlour,
Art sure thou know the Chest?

Boy. Though it were in the dark sir,
I can go to it.

Lur. On then and be happy.
Exit. Enter Tobie.
Tob. How my haunches quake? is the thing here still
Now can I out-doe any Button maker, at his ownetrade,
I have fifteen fits of an Ague, Nurse, it is gone I hope
The hard hearted woman has left me alone. Nurse --
And she knows too I ha but a lean Conscience to keep me company.
Noise within. The Devils among em in the parlour sure,
The Ghost three stories high, he has the Nurse sure,
He is boiling of her bones now, hark how she whistles:
There Is gentlewomen within too, how will they do?
I Will to the Cook, for he was drunk last night,
And now he is valiant, he is a kin toth' Devil too
And fears no fire,
Enter Lurcher and Boy.
Lur. No light?

Boy. Noneleft sir,
They are gone, and carried all the candles with 'em
Their fright is infinite, lets make good use on it
We must be quick sir, quick, or the house will rise else.

Lu. Was this the Chest?

Boy. Yes, yes.

Lur. There was two of 'em
Or I mistake.

Boy. I know the right, no stay sir,
Nor no discourse, but to our labor Iustily,
Put to your strength and make as little noise,
Then presently out at: the back door.

Lur. Come Boy.
Come happy child and let me hug thy excellence.
Exit. Enter Wildbraine.
Will, What thousand noyses pass through all the rooms?
What cries and hurries? sure the Devils drunk.
And tumbles through the house, my villainies
That never made me apprehend before
Danger or fear, a little now molest me;
My Cosens death sits heavy of my conscience,
Would I had been half hanged when I hammered it.
I aimed at a living divorce, not a burial
That Frank might have had some hope: hark still
In every room confusion, they are all mad,
Most certain all stark mad within the house
A punishment inflicted for my lewdness,
That I might have the more sense of my mischief
And run the more mad too, my Aunt is hanged sure,
Sure hanged her self, or else the fiend has fetched her;
I heard a hundred cries, the Devil, the Devil,
Then roaring and then tumbling, all the chambers
Are a mere babell, or another bedlam.
What should I think? I shake my self too:
Can the Devil find no time, but when we are merry,
Here Is something comes.
Enter Newlove.
New. Oh that I had some company,
I care not what they were, to ease my misery,
To comfort me,

Will. Whose that?

New. Again? nay then receive

Will. Hold, hold I am no fury.
The Merchants wife.

New. Are ye a man? pray heaven you be.

Will. I am.

New. Alas I have met sir
The strangest things too night.

Will. Why do you stare.

New. Pray comfort me, and put your candle out
For if I see the Spirit again I dye fort.
And hold me fast, for I shall shake to pieces else.

Will. I Will warrant you, I Will hold ye,
Hold ye as tenderly; I have put the light out,
Retire into my Chamber, there I Will watch we ye,
I Will keep you from all frights.

New. And will ye keep me.

Will. Keep you as secure Lady.

New. You must not wrong me then, the devil will have us.

Will. No, no, I Will love you, then the devil will fear us.
For he fears all that love, pray come in quickly,
For this is the malicious house he walks in,
The hour he blasts sweet faces, lame the limbs in,
Depraves the senses, now within this half hour
He will have power to turn all Citizens wives
Into strange creatures, Owls, and long-taild Monkeys
Jayes, Pies, and Parrots, quickly, I smell his brimstone.

New. It comes again I am gone, shift for your self sir.
Exit.
Will. Sure this whole night is nothing but illusion,
Here Is nothing comes, all they are mad, damd devil
To drive her back again, 't had been thy policy
To have let us alone, we might have done some fine thing
To have made thy hel-hood laugh, it is a dainty wench
If I had her again, not all your fellow goblins
Nor all their claws should scratch her hence, I Will stay still,
May be her fright will bring her back again,
Yet I will hope.
Enter Toby.
Tob. I can find no bed, no body, nor no chamber,
Sure they are all in the cellar, and I cannot find that neither,
I am led up, and down like a tame ass, my light's out
And I grope up and down like blind-man buffe
And break my face, and break my pate.

Will. It comes again sure
I see the shadow, I Will have faster hold now,
Sure she is mad, I long to lie with a mad-woman,
She must needs have rare new tricks.

Tob. I hear one whisper
If it be the devil now to allure me into his clutches,
For Devils have a kind of tone like crickets,
I have a glimpse of her guise, it is she would steal by me,
But I Will stand sure.

Tob. I have but a dram of wit left,
And that's even ready to run, oh for my bed now.

Will. She named a bed, I like that, she repents sure,
Where is she now.

To. Who Is that.

Will. Are you there, In, In, In presently.

To. I feel his talents through me
It Is an old haggard devil, what will he do with me?

Will. Let me kiss thee first, quick, quick.

To. A lecherous Devil.

Will. What a hairie whore it is, sure she has a muffler.

To. If I should have a young Satan by him, for I dare not deny him,
In what case were I? who durst deliver me?

Will. It Is but my sancie, she is the same, in quickly, gently my
Sweet girl.

To. Sweet Devil be good to me.
Exeunt. Enter Lurch. and Boy.
Lur. Where Is my love Boy.

Boy. She Is coming with a Candle
To see our happy prize.

Lur. I am cruel weary.

Boy. I cannot blame ye, plate is very heavy
To carry without light or help.

Lur. The fear too
At every stumble to be discovered boy,
At every cough to raise a Constable,
Well, we will be merry now.

Boy. We have some reason;
Things compasd without feate or eminent danger
Are too luxurious sir to live upon.
Money and wealth got thus are as full venture,
And carry in their natures as much merit
As his, that digs em out 'oth mine, they last too
Seasoned with doubts and dangers most delitiously,
Riches that fall upon us are too ripe,
And dull our appetites.

Lu. Most learned child.
Enter Mistress.
Mi. You Are welcome, where have you left it.

Lu. In the next room, hard by.

Mi. Is it plate all.

Lu. All, all, and Jewels, I am monstrous weary,
Prithee lets go to bed.

Mi. Prithee lets see it first.

Lu. To morrowes a new sweet.

Mi. Yes to melt it,
But lets agree to night, how it shall be handled
I Will have a new gown.

Lur. Shat have any thing.

Mi. And such a riding suite as Mistress Newloves,
What though I be no gentlewoman borne,
I hope I may atchieve it by my carriage.

Lu. Thou say right.

Mi. You promised me a horse too, and a lackquay.

Lur. Thou shat have horses six, and a postilion.

Mi. That will be stately sweet heart, a postilion.

Lu. Nay we will be in fashion, he shall ride before us
In winter, with as much dirt would dampe a musket,
The inside of our coach shall be of scarlet.

Mi. That will be dear.

Lu. There is a dye projecting
Will make it cheap wench, come thou shall have any thing.

Mi. Where is this chest, I long sweet to behold
Our Jndies.

Boy. Mistress lets melt it first, and then it is fit
You should dispose it, then it is safe from danger.

Mi. I Will be a loving Mistress to my boy too.
Now fetch it in and lets rejoice upon it.

Boy. Hold your light Mistress, we may see to enter.

Mi. Ha what is h ere? call you this a chest?

Boy. We ha mist sir.
Our have and want of light made us mistake?

Mi. A very Coffin.

Lu. How, a Coffin? Boy, It Is very like one.

Boy. The devil owed us a shame, and now he has paid us.

Mi. Is this your Treasure?

Boy. Bury me alive in it.

Lu. It may be there is no room.

Mi. Nay, I will search it,
I Will see what wealth's within, -- -- a woman's face,
And a fair woman's.

Boy. I cannot tell sir,
Belike this was the sadness that possessed 'em;
The plate stood next, I Am sure.

Lur. I shake, I shake Boy, what a cold sweat --

Boy. This may work, what will become on's sir?

Mi. She is cold, dead cold: de'e find 'your conscience,
De'e bring your Gillians hither -- nay, she is punished,
Your concealed love's cased up?

Lur. It Is Maria, the very same, the Bride, new horror!

Mi. These are fine tricks, you hope she is in a sound,
But I Will take order she shall never recover
To bore my nose, come, take her up and bury her
Quickly, or I Will cry out; take her up instantly.

Lu. Be not so hasty fool, that may undo us;
We may be in for murder so; be patient,
Thou see she is dead, and cannot injure thee.

Mi. I am sure she shall not.

Boy. Be not sir dejected,
Too much a strange mistake! this had not been else,
It makes me almost weep to think upon it.

Lu. What an unluckie thief am I?

Mi. I Will no considering, either bestirre your self, or --

Lu. Hold.

Mi. Let it not stay to smell then, I will not
Endure the stink of a Rival.

Lu. Would twere there again.

Boy. We must bury her.

Lu. But where o'th sudden, or with what providence,
That no eyes watch us.

Mi. Take a Spade and follow me.
The next fair ground we meet, make the Church yard;
As I live, I Will see her lodged.
Exit.
Lu. It must be so,
How heavy my heart is, I ha no life left.

Boy. I am past thinking too, no understanding,
That I should miss the right Chest.

Lu. The happy Chest.

Boy. That, which I saw and marked too.

Lu. Well passion wo'not help us,
Had I twenty falls for this?

Boy. It Was my fault sir.
And twenty thousand fears for this, oth'devill,
Now could I curse, well, we have her now,
And must dispose her.
Enter Mistress.
Mi. Hang both for two blind buzzards, here is a Spade
Quickly or I Will call the neighbors.
There Is no remedy,
Would the poor hungry prisoners had this pastie.
Exeunt. Enter Justice, and a Servant with a light.
Ser. 'Twas a strange mischance sir.

Iu. Mischance, say? No it was happiness to me,
There Is so much charge saved, I have her portion,
I Will marry twenty more on such conditions.

Ser. Did it not trouble you sir,
To see her dead?

Iu. Not much, I thank my conscience;
I was tormented till that happened, furies
Were in my brain to think my self a Cuekold
At that time of the night:
When I come home, I charge you shut my doors,
Locks, bolts, and bars, are little enough to secure me,

Ser. Why, and please you?

Iu. Fool to ask that question;
To keep out women, I expect her mother
Will visit me with her clamors, oh I hate
Their noise, and do abhor the whole sex heartlly;
They are all walking Devils, Harpyes, I will study
A week together how to rail sufficiently,
Upon them all, and that I may be furnished,
Thou shat buy all the railing Books and Ballads,
That Malice has invented against women,
I will read nothing else, and practice 'em,
Till I grow fat with curses.

Ser. If you will go
To th'charge, let me alone to find you Books.

Ju. They come near us.

Ser. What Is that?

Ju. Where? hold up the Torch Knave.

Ser. Did you hear nothing? it is a --

Iu. Why do make a stand?

Ser. What Is that?

Iu. Where, where, do see any thing?
We are hard by the Churchyard, and I was never
Valiant at midnight in such irksome places;
They say Ghosts walk sometimes, hark, de'e hear nothing?
Enter Eurcher, Boy, and Mistres.
Mi. No further, dig here, and lay her in quickly.

Lur. What light is that Boy, we shall be discovered;
Set the Coffin up an end, and get behind me,
There Is no avoiding.

Boy. Oh.

Ju. Where Is that groan? I begin to be afraid.

Ser. What shall we do sir?

Iu. We are almost at home now, thou must go forward;
Perhaps 'twas my imagination.

Lur. It Is he?

Boy. I know him too, let me alone.

Ser. Oh sir, a Ghost, the very Ghost of Mistress Bride.
I have no power to run away.

Iu. Cursed Ghost; bless me, preserve me,
I do command thee what so ere thou art,
I do conjure thee leave me; do not fright me;
If thou be a devil vex me not so soon,
If thou be
The spirit of my wife.

Boy. Thy wife.

Iu. I shall be tormented.

Boy. Thy abused wife, that cannot peaceably
Enjoy her death, thou have an evil conscience.

Ju. I know it.

Boy. Among thy other sins which black thy soul,
Call to thy mind thy vow made to another,
Whom thou have wronged, and make her satisfaction
Now I am dead, thou perjured man, or else
A thousand black tormentors shall pursue thee,
Until thou leap into eternal flames;
Where gold which thou adorest here on earth
Melted, the Fiends shall power into thy throat;
For this time pass, go home, and think upon me,

Lur. A way.

Ser. There are more spirits.

Iu. Thank you dear wife,
I Will bestow twenty nobles of a Tomb for thee,
Thou shall not walk and catch cold after death.
They go backward in.
Lu. So, so, they are gone, 'twas my ingenious rascal:
But how do know he made vows to another?

Boy. I overheard the women talk to night on it;
But now lets lose no time sir, pray lets bury
This Gentlewoman, where is my Mistress?
Enter Mistress.
Mi. Here, I durst not tarry.

Lu. We ha so cosen'd the old forty in the hundred,
And the devil hinder him not, he will go a pilgrimage;
But come, about our business, set her down again.

Mar. Oh.

Lur. She groans, ha.

Mar. Oh.

Lur. Again, she stirs.

Mi. Lets fly, or else we shall be torn in pieces.

Lur. And you be good at that, bury your self,
Or let the Sexton take ye for his fee,
Away boy.
Exit.
Mar. I am very cold, dead cold;
Where am I? What Is this? a Coffin? where have I been?
Mercy defend me: Ha, I do remember
I was betrayed, and swounded; my heart aches,
I am wondrous hungry too, dead bodies eat not;
Sure I was meant for burial, I am frozen;
Death, like a cake of Ice dwells round about me,
Darkness spreads over the world too, where? what path,
Best providence direct me.
Exit.
Actus Tertius.
Enter Lady, Wildbraine, Women, Toby,
La. THou art the most unfortunate fellow;

Will. Why Aunt, what have I done?

La. The most malicious varlet,
Thy wicked head never at rest, but hammering,
And hatching hellish things, and to no purpose,
So thou may have thy base will.

Wi. Why do you rail thus?
Cannot a scurvy accident fall out,
But I must be at one end on it?

La. Thou art at both ends.

Wi. Cannot young sullen wenches play the sooles,
And marry, and die, but I must be the agent?
All that I did (and if that be an injury,
Let the world judge it) was but to persuade her
(And as I take it) I was bound to it too,
To make the reverend coxecombe her husband Cuckold:
What else could I advise her, was there harm i'this?
You are of years, and have run through experience,
Would you be content if you were young again,
To have a continual cough grow to your pillow,
A rottenness, that vaults are perfumes to
Hang in your roof, and like a fogge infect you;
Anointed hammes to keep his hinges turning
Reeke ever in your nose, and twenty nightcaps,
With twenty several sweats.

To. Some Jew, some Justice,
A thousand heathen smells to say truth Madam,
And would you mellow my young pretty Mistress
In such a mis-ken?

La. Sir,
Where Is the body of my Girl?

Wi. I know not,
I am no Conjurer, you may look the body,
I was like to be stolen away my self, the Spirit
Had like to ha surprised me in the shape of a woman,
Of a young woman, and you know those are dangerous.

To. So had I Madam, simply though I stand here,
I had been ravished too: I had twenty Spirits
In every corner of the house a Fiend met me.

La. You lie like raskalls,
Was Mistress Newlove such a Spirit sir
To fright your worship;
Well, I discharge you sir, ye'are now at liberty,
Live where you please, and do what prankes you fancy,
You know your substance, though you are my Nephew,
I am no way bound sir to protect your mischief;
So fare you well.

Wi. Farewell good Aunt, I thank you,
Adieu honest Nicke, the devil if he have power,
Will persecute your old bones, for this marriage,
Fare well Mistress Win.

To. And shall we part with dry lips;
Shall we that have been fellow devils together
Flench for an old woman's fart?

Wi. It Is a fine time a night too, but we must part Nick.

To. Shall we never ring again? never toss the tenor,
And roll the changes in a Cup of Claret?
You shall not want what ere I lay my hands on,
As I am sure Automedon the Coachman,
Shall be distributed; bear up, I say, hang sorrow,
Give me that bird abroad that lives at pleasure,
Sam the Butlers true, the Cook a reverend Trojan,
The Faulkner shall sell his Hawks, and swear they were rotten,
There be some wandering spoones, that may be met with,
I Will pawn a Coach horse, peace, utter no sentences.
The harness shall be used in our wars also;
Or shall I drive her (tell me but your will now,
Say but the word) over some rotten bridge,
Or by a Marle pit side, she may slip in daintily,
Let me alone for my self.

Wi. No, no, farewell Toby,
Farewell spinie Nicholas, no such thing,
There be ways in the world, if you see me
A day or two hence, may be we will crack a quart yet,
And pull a bell, commend to the household;
Nay, cry not Toby 'twill make thy head giddy.

To. Sweet Master Wildbraine.

Wi. No more Toby go, the times may alter --
But where is the coarse of my dead cosen,
(If she be dead) I hoped 'thad but dissembled
That sits heavy here: Toby, honest Toby,
Lend me thy Lantern, I forgot 'twas dark,
I had need look to my ways now.

To. Take a lodging with me to night in the Stable,
And ride away to morrow with one of the horses
Next your heart, pray do.

Wi. No, good night good neighbor Toby, I will wander,
I scorn to submit my self, ere I have rambled,
But whether, or with what, that's more material;
No matter, and the worst come it is but stealing,
And my Aunt won'ot see me hanged for her own credit,
And farewell in a halter costs me nothing.
Exit. Enter Hartlove.
Fran. The night, and all the evils the night covers,
The Goblins, Hagges, and the black spawne of darkness
Cannot fright me, no death, I dare thy cruelty,
For I am weary both of life and light too;
Keep my wits heaven, they say spirits appear
To melancholy minds, and the graves open,
I would feign see the fair Marias shadow,
But speak unto her spirit ere I died,
But ask upon my knees a mercy from her:
I was a villain, but her wretched Kinsman,
That set his plot, shall with his heart blood satisfy
Her injured life and honor, what lights this?
Enter Wildbraine with a Lantern.
Will. It is but melancholy walking thus;
The Tavern doors are baricadoed too,
Where I might drink till morn, in expectation;
I cannot meet the Watch neither; nothing in
The likeness of a Constable, whom I might
In my distress abuse, and so be carried,
For want of other lodging to the Counter.

Fra. It Is his voice, Fate, I thank thee.

Wi. Ha, who is that, and thou be a man speak?
Frank Heartlove, then I bare my destinies,
Thou art the man of all the world I wished for;
My Aunt has turned me out a doors, she has,
At this unchristian hour, and I do walk,
Me thinks, like Guido Faux with my dark Lantern,
Stealing to set the town a fire; in the country
I should be taken for William of the Wispe,
Or Robin Goodfellow, and how do Frank?

Ha. The worse for you.

Wi. Come, thar't a fool, art going to thy lodging?
I Will lie with thee to night, and tell thee stories,
How many devils we ha met withal;
Our house is haunted Frank, whole legions,
I saw fifty for my share.

Fr. Did not fright them?

Wi. How, fright them? no, they frighted me sufficiently.

Fr. Thou had wickedness enough to make them stare,
And be afraid o'thee, malicious devil;
And draw thy sword, for by Marias soul;
I will not let thee escape to do more mischief.

Wi. Thou art mad, what do mean?

Fr. To kill thee, nothing else will ease my anger,
The injury is fresh, I bleed with all,
Nor can that word express it, there is no peace in it,
Nor must it be forgiven but in death;
Therefore call up thy valor if thou'st any,
And summon up thy spirits to defend thee;
Thy heart must suffer for thy damned practices,
Against thy noble co^^n, and my innocence.

Wi. Hold, hear a word; did I do any thing
But for your good, that you might have her,
That in that desperate time I might redeem her,
Although with show of loss.

Fr. Out ugly villain,
Fling on her the most hated name of Whore
To the worlds eye, and face it out in courtesy,
Bring him to see it, and make me drunk to attempt it.
Enter Maria.
Ma. I hear some voices this way.

Fr. No more, if you can pray, do it as you fight.

Ma. What new frights oppose me? I have heard that tongue.

Wi. It Is my fortune,
You could not take me in a better time sir,
I ha nothing to lose, but the love I lent thee,
My life my sword protect.

Ma. I know 'em both, but to prevent their ruins,
Must not discover -- -- stay men most desperate;
The mischief you are forward to commit
Will keep me from my grave, and tie my spirit
To endless troubles else.

Wi. Ha, it is her Ghost. Fr. Maria.

Ma. Hear me both, each wound you make
Runs through my soul, and is a new death to me,
Each threatening danger will affright my rest;
Look on me Hartlove, and my kinsman view me;
Was I not late in my unhappy marriage,
Sufficient miserable? full of all misfortunes?
But you must add with your most impious angers
Unto my sleeping dust this insolence?
Would you teach time to speak eternally
Of my disgraces; make Records to keep 'em,
Keep them in brass? fight then, and kill my honor;
Fight deadly both, and let your bloody swords,
Through my revived, and reeking infamy
(That never shall be purged) find your own ruins:
Hartlove, I loved thee once, and hoped again
In a more blessed love to meet thy spirit,
If thou kilst him, thou art a murderer,
And murder shall never inherit heaven:
My time is come, my concealed grave expects me,
Farewell, and follow not, your feet are bloody,
And will pollute my peace: I hope they are melted,
This is my way sure.
Exit.
Fr. Stay blessed souls.

Wi. Would she had come sooner, and ha saved some blood.

Fr. Do bleed?

Wi. Yes certainly, I can both see and feel it.

Fr. Now I well hope it is not dangerous;
Give me thy hand, as far as honor guides me,
I Will know thee again.
Exit.
Wi. I thank thee heartily;
I know not where to get a Surgeon;
This vision troubles me, sure she is living,
And I was foolish blind, I could not find it;
I bleed apace still, and my heart grows heavy,
If I go far I faint, I Will knock at this house,
They may be charitable, would 'twere perfect day.
Enter Mistress.
Mi. It Is not he? What would you sir?

Wi. I would crave a little rest Lady,
And for my hurts some Surgerie, I am a Gentleman
That Fortune of a fight --

Mi. A hansome Gentleman,
Alas he bleedes, a very hansome gentleman,

Will. A sweet young wench, beshrow my heart a fair one;
Fortune has made me some recompense.

Mi. Pray come in, the air is hurtful for you;
Pray let me lead you, I Will have a bed for you presently,
I Will be your Surgeon too, alas sweet gentleman.

Wi. I feel no hurts, the morning comes too fast now.

Mi. Softly I beseech you.
Exit. Enter Lady and Toby.
To. He is not up yet Madam, what meant you
To come forth so early?

La. You block head;
Your eyes are sowed up still, they cannot see
When it is day: oh my poor Maria,
Where be the women?

To. They said they would follow us.

La. He shall not laugh thus at my misery,
And kill my child, and steal away her body,
And keep her Portion too.

To. Let him be hanged fort,
You have my voice.

La. These women not come yet?
A son in law, I Will keep a Conjurer,
But I Will find out his knavery.

To. Do, and I Will help him;
And if he were here this whip should conjure him,
Here Is a capias, and it catch hold on's breech,
I Would make him soon believe the devil were there.

La. An old Usurer.

To. He married the money, that's all he looked for,
For your daughter, let her sink or swim.

La. I Will swim him;
This is his house, I wonder they stay thus,
That we might rail him out on's wits.

To. They Will come,
Fear not Madam, and bring Clappers with 'em,
Or some have lost their old wont, I have heard
No disparagement to your Ladyship, some o'their tongues
Like Tom a Lincoln three miles off.

La. Oh fie,
How tedious are they?

To. What and we lost no time,
You and I shall make a shift to begin with him,
And tune our Instruments, till the confort come
To make up the full noise, I Will knock.

Iu. Who Is that? raps so sawcily?

To. It Is I, Toby, come down, or else we will fetch you down,
Alas, this is but the Sauncebell, here is a Gentlewoman
Will ring you another peale, come down, I say.

Iu. Some new fortifications, look to my doors,
Put double bars, I will not have her enter,
Nor any of her Tribe, they come to terrify me?
Keep out her tongue too if you can.

La. I hear you,
And I will send my tongue up to your worship,
The Echo of it shall fly over the street;
My Daughter, that thou killedst with kindness (Jew)
That thou betrayedst to death, thou double Jew,
And after stol'st her body.

To. Iew's too good for him.

Iu. I defy you both;
Thy daughter played the villain and betrayed me.
Betrayed my honor.

La. Honor, Rascal,
And let that bear an action, I Will try it with thee,
Honor?

To. Oh Reprobate!

La. Thou mustie Justice,
Buy an honorable halter, and hang thy self.

To. A worshipful ropes end is to good for him.

La. Get honor that way, thou wot die a dog else.

To. Come and be whipped first.

La. Where is her Porrion.
Enter Nurse and women.
Iu. Where I Will keep it safely.

Nur. Traitor, thou shall not keep it.

Iu. More of the kennell? put more bolts to the doors there,
And arm your selves, hell is broke loose upon us.

To. I am glad you are come, well blow the house down.

La. Oh Nurse, I have such cause --

Woe. Vilaine, viper, although you had no cause, we are bound
To help.

Nur. Yes, and believe, we come not here to examine,
And if you please we will fire the house.

Iu. Call the Constable.

To. A charitable motion, fire is comfortable.

La. No, no, well only let him know our minds,
We will commit no outrage, he is a Lawyer.

Iu. Give me my Musket.

La. Wheer's my daughters body,
That I may bury it?

Woe. Speak, or we will bury thee,

Nur. Alive we will bury thee, speak old Iniquity.

To. Bury him alive by all means for a testimony.

Iu. Their voices make my house reele, oh for Officers,
I am in a dream, thy daughters spirit
Walks a nights, and troubles all the neighbors;
Go hire a conjurer, I Will say no more.

La. The Law shall say more.

Woe. and Nur. We are witnesses,
And if thou be not hanged --
Enter Lurcher, and Boy.
Lur. Buy a Book of good manners,
A short book of good manners.

Boy. Buy a ballad, a ballad of the maid was got with child.

To. That might ha been my case last night,
I Will have it what ere it cost me.

Boy. A ballad of the Witches hanged at Ludlow.

To. I will have taht too;
There wasan Aunt of mine, I think amongst them,
I would be glad to hear her Testament.

Lur. A new book of women.

Iu. The thunders laid, how they stare at him.

Lur. A new book of fools, a strange book,
Very strange fools.

Iu. I Will owe thee a good turn what e're thou art.

Lur. A book of walking spirits.

Iu. That I like not.

To. Nor I, they walked me the fools morris.

Lur. A book of wicked women.

Iu. That's well thought on.

Lur. Of rude malicious women, of proud women,
Of scolding women, we shall nere get in.

Boy. A ballad of wronged Maids.

La. I Will buy that.

Lur. A little, very little book
Of good and godly women, a very little one,
So little, you may put it in a nutshell.

To. With a small print, that no body can read it.

Nur. Peace firra, or I Will tear your books.

Iu. Open the door, and let him in, I love him.

Lur. A book of evil Magistrates.

La. I marry, dee here that Justice.

Lur. And their eviller wives,
That we are their places in their peticotes.

Iu. Dee you hear that Lady.

Boy. A book new Printed, against Playing,
Dancing, Masking, May-poles; a zealous Brothers book,
And full of fables.

Lur. Another book of women, of mad women,
Women that were borne in March.
Exit.
La. Are you got in?
We would ha pulled your knaves hide else; this fellow
Was sent to abuse us, but we shall have time
To talk more with this Justice.

Iu. Farewell Madam, as you like this come visit me again,
You and your treble strings, now scold your hearts out --

Woe. Shall he carry it thus away?

Nur. Go to the Judge, and what you will have us swear --

La. I thank ye heartily,
I Will keep that for the last, I will go home,
And leave him to his Conscience for a while,
If it sleep long, I Will wake it with a vengeance.
Exit. Enter Servants.
1. What book has he given thee?

2. A dainty book, a book of the great Navy,
Of fifteen hundred ships of Cannon proof,
Built upon Whales to keep their Keeles from sinking;
And Dragons in 'em, that spit fire ten mile;
And Elephants that carry goodly castles.

1. Do thou believe it?

2. Shall we not believe books in Print?

1. I have John Tailors book of Hempeseede too,
Which for two lines I happened on by chance,
I reverence.

2. I prithee what are they?

1. They are so put upon the time, as if
He studied to answer the late Histriomastix,
Talking of change and transformations,
That wittily, and learnedly he bangs him,
So may a Puritans ruff, though starched in Print,
Be turned to Paper, and a Play writ in it:
A Play in the Puritans ruff? I Will buy his Works for it,
And confute Horace with a Water Poet:
What have there, a ballad too?

2. This? This is a piece of Poetry indeed;
He sings; Justice cries within. What noise is that?

1. Some cry in the streets; prithee sing on.
Sing again.
2. Again, do not hear? it is ith'house certainly?

1. It Is a strange noise? and has a tang of the Justice.

2. Lets see?
Exit. Enter the Servants bringing in their Master bound and gagged.
1. Vnty his feet, pull out his gagge, he will choke else;
What desperate rogues were these.

2. Give him fresh air.

Iu. I will never study books more;
I am undone, these villains have undone me,
Rifled my Deske, they have undone me learnedly;
A fire take all their books, I Will burn my Study:
Where were you rascals when the villains bound me,
You could not hear.

1. He gave us books sir, dainty books to busy us;
And we were reading in that which was the Brewhouse;
A great way off, we were finging ballads too,
And could not hear.

Ju. This was a precious thief,
A subtle trick to keep my servants safe.

2. What ha you lost fir?

Iu. They ransacked all before my face, and threatened
To kill me, if I cough'd, they have a chain,
My rings, my box of casting gold, my purse too,
They robbed me miserably; but that which most grieves me,
They took away some writings; 'twas a Rogue
That knew me, and set on by the old Lady,
I will indite her for it.

1. Shall we pursue 'em?

Iu. Run, run, cursed raskalls,
I am out of my wits, let not a creature in,
No not with necessaries.

2. We shall be starved.

Ju. I Will buy my meat at window, as they pass by;
I wonot trust my Scrivenor, he has books too;
And bread I Will ha flung up; I charge ye all
Burn all the books i th house.

1. Your little Prayer book?

Iu. I Will never pray again, i will have my doors
Made, up nothing but walls, and thick ones too;
No sound shall tempt me again, remember I
Have forswoare books.

2. If you should be called to take you oath.

Iu. I will forswear all oaths, rather than see
A thing but in the likeness of a book:
And I were condemned, I Will rather choose to hang,
Than read again; come in, and search all places,
They may be about the house, were the doors locked?

1. But the keys in 'em, and if they be gone,
They could not want wit to lock us in sir.

Iu. Never was man so miserably undone,
I would lose a limb to see their rogueships totter.
Exeunt. Enter Lady and Nurse.
La. Thy brothers daughter, say, and borne in Wales?

Nur. I have long time desired to see her, and I hope
Your Ladyship will not be offended.

La. No, no.

Nur. I should be happy if she might be serviceable
To you Madam.

La. Beshrow me, but at first, she took me much,
Is she not like Maria? setting aside
Her language very like her, and I love her
The bettet for it, I prithee call her hither,
She speaks feate English.

Nur. Why, Guennith, Guennith, du hummah Guenneth;
She is course Madam, after her country guise,
And were she in fine clothes --

La. I Will have her hansome:
What part of Wales were you borne in?
Enter Maria.
Ma. In Abehundis Madams.

Nur. She speaks that name in Welsh, which we call Breck-

La. What can you do? nocke.

Ma. Her was toe many tings in Walls, know not the fashion in Londons; her was
milk the Cowes, make seeze and butters, and spinne very well the Welsh freeze,
her was Cook to te Mou taine cots, and sing very fine prittish tunes, was mage
good ales and breds, and her know to dance on Sundays, marge you now Madams.


La. A pretty innocence, I do like her infinitely, Nurse.
And if I live --
Enter Servant.
Ser. Here is Mr. Hartlove, Madame, come to see you:

La. Alas poor Gentleman, prithee admit him.
Enter Hartlove and Gent.
Ha. Madame, I am come to take my last leave.

La. How sir?

Ha. Of all my home affections, and my friends,
For the interest you had once in Maria,
I would acquaint you when I leave the kingdom.

La. Would there were any thing in my poor power
That might divert your will, and make you happy;
I am sure I have wronged her too, but let your pardon
Assure me you are charitable; she is dead
Which makes us both sad: What do you look on?

1. The likest face --

Ma. Please us awle, why does that sentilman make such unders and mazements at
her, I know her not.


Ha. Be not offended maid.

La. How the Wench blushes, she represents Marias loss to him.

Ma. Will the sentillman hurt her, pray you be her defenses, was have mad
phisnomies, is her troubled with Lunaticks in her praine pans, bless us awle.


Ha. Where had you this face?

Ma. Her faces be our none I warrant her.

Ha. I wonot hurt you, all the lineaments
That built Maria up; all those springing beauties
Dwell on this thing, change but her tongue, I know her:
Let me see your hand.

Ma. Du Guin, was never thieves, and robberies; here is no sindge in her hands
warrant her.


Ha. Trust me, the selfsame white,
And softness, prithee speak our English Dialect.

Ma. Haleggs? what does her speage hard urds to her, to make poor Guennith
ridicles, was no mannerly sentilman to abuse her.


Ha. By the love,
That everlasting love I bare Maria

Ma. Mariai, her name was Guenith, and good names, was poor else, oman maid,
her have no fine kanags to madge her tricksie, yet in her own cuntries was
held a fine ense her can tell her, and honest ense too, marg you dat now, her
can keep her little legs close enough warrant her.


La. How prettily this anger shows.

1. She gabbles innocently.

Ha. Madam, farewell, and all good fortune dwell w'ee,
With me my own affections; farewell maid,
Fair gentle maid.

2. She sighs.

Ma. Du cat a whee.

Ha. I cannot go, there is somewhat calls me back.

Ma. Poor Frank,
How gladly would I entertain thy love,
And meet thy worthy flame, but shame forbids me:
If please her Ladyships dwell here with Guenneth, and learn to spinne and
card ^^ll, to mage flannells, and linseyes ulseis, sall tawg co'd urds to her
Ladyships urships for her.

The tears flow from him. The tears of true affection, woe is me,
O cursed love that glories in maids miseries,
And true men's broken hearts.

La. Alas I pity him, the wench is rude, and knows you not, forgive her.

Ma. Wine your nyes pray you, though was porne in Walls among craggy rocks, and
mountains, yet heart is soft, look you, hur can weep too, when her see men
mage prinie tears and lamentations.


Ha. How hard she holds me?
Just as Maria did, weeps the same drops,
Now as I have a living soul, her sigh too;
What shall I think, is not your name Maria,
If it be not, delude me with so much charity
To say it is.

Ma. Upon her life, you was mighty deal in love with some podies, your pale
seeks and hollow nyes, and pantings upon her posome, know very well, because
look you, her think her honest sentilman, you sall call her Maria.


Ha. Good Madam, think not ill I am thus saucy.

La. Oh no sir, be you not angry with the wench.

Ha. I am most pleased.

1. Lets interrupt him, he will be mad our right else.

2. Observe a little more.

Ha. Would I could in your language beg a kiss.

Ma. If her have necessities of a kiss, look you, dear is one in sarities.


Ha. Let me suffer death,
If in my apprehension, two twinnd cherries
Be more a kin, than her lips to Marias;
And if this harsh illusion would but leave her,
She were the same; good Madam, shall I have
Your consent now.

La. To what?

Ha. To give this Virgin to me.

La. She Is not mine, this is her Kiswoman,
And has more power to dispose; alas, I pity him.
Pray gentlemen prevail with him to go;
More that I wish his comfort than his absence.

Ha. You have been always kind to me, will you
Deny me your fair Chosen.

Nu. 'Twere fit you first obtained her own consent.

Ha. He is no friend that wishes my departure,
I do not trouble you.

1. It Is not Maria.

Ha. Her shadow is enough, I Will dwell with that,
Pursue your own ways, shall we live together?

Ma. If her will come to morrow and tauge to her, her will tell her more of her
meanings, and then if her be melancholy, her will sing her a Welsh song too, to
make her merries, but Guenneth was very honest; her was never love but one
sentleman, and he was bear her great teale of goodills too, was marry one day,
S. Davy her give her five pair of white gloves, if her will dance at her
weddings.


Ha. All I am worth,
And all my hopes, this strange voice would forsake her,
For then she should be -- prithee stay a little,
Hark in thine ear, dissemble not, but tell me,
And save my life; I know you are Maria:
Speak but as I do ten words to confirm me;
You have an English soul, do not disguise it
From me with these strange accents -- She pinched hard
Again, and figh'd.

La. What ailes the Wench?
Exit.
Nur. Why, Gunith.

Ha. She Is gone too.

2. Come leave this dream.

Ha. A dream? I think so;
But 'twas a pleasing one, now I Will obey,
And forget all these wonders, lead the way.
Exeunt.
Actus Quartus.
Enter Wildbraine, and Toby.
Wi. HOnest Toby?

To. Sweet Mr. Wildbraine, -- I am glad I ha met weyee.

Wi. Why did my Aunt send for me?

To. Your Aunt's a mortal, and thinks not on you
For ought I can perceive.

Wi. Is my Cosen alive again?

To. Neither, and yet we do not hear
That she is buried.

Wi. What should make thee glad then?

To. What should make me glad? have I not cause,
To see your Princely body well, and walk thus,
Look blithe and bonny, and your wardrobe whole still.

Wi. The Case is clear, and I ha found a Mine,
A perfect Indie, since my Aunt casheer'd me;
What think'sts of this?

To. Oh delicate bells.

Wi. Thou put me in mind,
We are to ring anon, I meant to send for thee;
Meet me at the old Parish Church.

To. Say no more.

Wi. When thy Lady is a bed, we ha conspired
A midnight peale for joy.

To. If I fail hang me in the bell-ropes.

Wi. And how? and how does my Aunt?

To. She Is up to the ears in Law;
I do so whirle her to the Counselors chambers,
And back again, and bounce her for more money,
And too again, I know not what they do with her,
But she is the merriest thing among these Lawdrivers;
And in their studies half a day together;
If they do get her with Magna Charta, she swears,
By all the ability of her old body,
She will so claw the Justice, she will sell
The tiles of the house she vows, and sack out o'th cellar
(That she worships to Idolatry) but she will hang him.

Wi. I would she could: but hark thee honest Toby,
If a man have a Mistress, may we not
Without my Aunts leave, borrow now and than
A coach to tumble in, toward the Exchange,
And so forth?

To. A Mistress.

Wi. She may be thine when we are married.

To. Command, I Will carry you both in pomp;
And let my Lady go a foot a Law-catching,
And exercise her corns: where is she Master John?

Wi. Shat see her.

To. Shall we ring for her?

Wi. And drink her health.

To. Drink stiffely for five hours.

Wi. We Will drink fifteen.

To. To night? we will ha twenty torches then,
And through the streets drive on triumphantly;
Triumphantly we will drive, by my Ladies door,
As I am a Christian Coachman, I will rattle you
And urine in her Porch, and she shall fear me:
If you say more, I shall run mad outright,
I will drink sack and surfeit instantly;
I know not where I am now.
Exit. Enter Lurcher.
Wi. Hold for thy buttons sake, the knave's transported.

Lur. Jacke Wildbraine?

Wi. Honest Tom, how thrives the fellonious world with thee now?

Lur. You look and talk as you were much exalted.

Wi. Thar't 'ithe right

Tom. I Will te ll thee first,
I ha shook off my Aunt, and yet I live still,
And drink, and sing; her house had like to ha spoiled me;
I keep no hours now;
Nor need any false key
To the old woman's Cabinets, I ha money
Upon my word, and pawn no oaths toth' Butler;
No matrimonial protestations;
Our sack possets to the Chambermaid,
I praise my Fate, there be more ways toth' wood Tom.

Lur. Prithee release my wonder.

Wi. I Will increase it, wipe thine eyes,
Here is a chain worth money and some man had it,
A foolish Diamond, and other trifles --

Lur. The very same, oh Gipsey! Infidel!
All that I sweat, and ventured me neck for,
He has got already; who would trust a strumpet.

Wi. This? This is nothing to what I possess
At home.

Lur. What home?

Wi. A house that shall be namelesse;
The Mistress of it mine too, such a piece
For flesh and blood, added to that so loving --

Lur. Is, she married?

Wi. I know not, nor I care not;
But such a prize, so mounting, so delicious,
Thou will run mad, I Will tell thee more hereafter.

Lur. Nay, prithee a word more.

Wi. I took no pains to find out all this Paradise,
My Destiny threw me upon it in the dark, I found it
Wanting a lodging too.

Lur. No old acquaintance?

Wi. Never, never saw her;
But these things happen not in every age,
I cannot stay, If thou will meet anon
At my own randevow, thou know the Tavern,
We Will sup together, after that, a company
Of merry lads have made a match to ring.

Lur. You keep your exercise, in the old Church?

Wi. No other,
There is no music to the bells, we would
Have bonefires if we durst, and thou would come
It shall cost thee nothing Tom, hang pilfering.
And keep me company, in time I may
Show thee my Wench too.

Lur. I cannot promise; but you will be there?

Wi. We Will toss the bells, and make the steeple
Rore boy, but come to supper then.

Lur. My hand, and expect me:
Yes I will come or send, and to some purpose;
Art come boy?
Enter Boy with Gown, Beard, and Constables staff. Excellent, Knave, how
did thou purchase these?

Boy. The staff I stole last night from a sleeping Constable;
The rest I borrowed by my acquaintance with
The Players boys; you were best to lose no time sir.

Lur. So, so, help boy, it is very well, do I not look
Like one that breaks the Kings peace with authority?
You know your charge, prepare things hansomely,
My diligent boy, and leave me to my office.

Boy. There wants nothing already; but I fly sir.
Exit.
Lur. Now Fortune prove no slut, and I Will adore thee.
Within. Ser. Whose there?
Knocks.
Lur. A friend would speak with Master Justice.

Ser. Who are you?

Lur. I am the Constable.

Ser. My Master is not at leisure to hear business.

Lur. How? Not at leisure to do the king service;
Take heed what you say sir; I know his worship,
If he knew my business, would no excuse.

Ser. You must go to another Justice, I Will assure
My Master is not well in health.

Lur I know not,
But if your worshipful be not at leisure
To do him self a benefit, I am gone sir,
An infinite benefit, and the State shall thank him for;
Thank him, and think on him too; I am an Officer,
And know my place, but I do love the Justice;
I honor any authority above me:
Beside, he is my neighbor, and I worship him.

Ser. You have no books uor ballads Mr. Constable
About you?

Lur. What should I do with books does it become
A man of my place to understand such matters?
Pray call your Master, if he please to follow me,
I shall discover to him such a plot,
Shall get him everlasting fame, I Will be hanged for it
And he be not knighted instantly, and for reward
Have some of the malefactors lands I Will bring him too;
But I cannot dally time.
Within.
Iu. Who Is that?

Ser. A Constable sir, would speak about some business,
He says, will bring you fame, and mighty profit.

Lur. Please your worship, come down, I Will make you happy;
The notabl'st piece of villainy I have in hand sir,
And you shall find it out; I ha made choice
To bring your worship to the first knowledge, and
Thank me, as you find the good on it afterward.

Iu. What is it? Treason?

Lur. It Is little better, I can tell you, I have lodged
A crew of the most rank and desperate villains:
They talk of robberies, and ways they did 'em;
And how they left men bound in their studies.

Iu. With books and ballads?

Lur. That sir? that, and murders,
And thousand knaveries more, tha're very rich sir,
In money, jewels, chains,, and a hundred more
Devices.

Iu. Happy, happy Constable, I meet ye
At the back door, get ready knaves.

Lur. Not a man I beseech you,
I have privately appointed strength about me,
They cannot start, your men would breed suspicion;
All my desire is you would come alone;
That you might have the hope of the enterprise,
That you might hear them first, and then proceed sir,

Iu. I come, I come.

Lur. It Is very well.
Exit.
Iu. Keep all my doors fast, it is something late.

Lur. So, so, and please your worship I Will direct you.
Exit. Enter Boy.
Boy. My Master stays, I doubt his lime-twigges catch not,
If they do, alls provided; but I all
This while forget my own state, fair Maria
Is certainly alive, I met her in
Another habit, with her Nurse, 'twas she:
There is some trick in it, but when this is over,
I Will find it out, this project for the Usurer
May have good effect; however' twill be sport
To mortify him a little;
He Is come without him:
Have you failed sir?
Enter Lurcher.
Lur. Prosper'd? my little ingineere; away,
He is in the next room, be not you seen sir.
Exit.
Boy. The pitfalls ready, never Justice
Was caught in such a nooze, ere he get out,
He shall run through a scouring purgatory,
Shall purge him to the quick, it is night already.
Exit. Enter Algripe and Lurcher.
Lur. Come softly, yet sir softly, are you not weary?

Iu. Tha'st brought me into a melancholy place,
I see no creature.

Lur. This is, sir, their den
Where they suppose themselves secure, I am saint,
With making have; but I must be thus troubled,
And therefore never go without a cordial;
Without this I should die;
How it refreshes me
Already? wilt please your worship? I might have had
The manners to halet you drink before me;
Now am I lusty.

Iu. Thas a good taste.
Seems to drink.
Lur. Taste? how dee find the virtue, nay sir spare it not:
My wife has the receipt, dos it not stir
Your worships body? when you come to examine,
'Till make you speak like Thunder.

Iu. Hoy he.

Lur. It works already.

Iu. Is there never a chair, I was wearier than I thought,
But who shall we have to take 'em, Mr. Constable?

Lur. Let me alone, when I but give the watch word
We will have men enough to surprise an army.

Iu. I begin to be sleepie; what, have a chair?
Enter another with a chair.
Lur. They do not dream of us, it is early rising;
Care, care, and early rising, common wealths men
Are ever subjects to the nods; sit down sir,
A short nap is not much amiss; so, so, he is fast;
Fast as a fish in the net, he has winking powder
Shall work upon him to our wish, remove him,
Nay, we may cut him into collops now
And he n're feel; have you prepared the vault sir?

Boy. Yes, yes, sir, every thing ins place.

Lur. When we ha placed him, you an I boy
Must about another project hard by, his potion
Will bind him sure enough till we return,
This villainy weighes mainely, but well purge ye.
Exit. Bells ring. Enter Sexton.
Sex. Now for mine ears, mine ears be constant to me;
They ring a wager, and I must deal justly, ha boys.
Enter Lurcher and Boy.
Lur. Do here 'em, hark, these be the Ringers?

Boy. Are you sure the same?

Lur. Or my directions fail;
The coast is clear:
How the bells go? how daintily they tumble?
And me thinks they seem to say; Fine fools I Will fit you.

Sex. Excellent again, good boys -- oh that was naught.

Lur. Who Is that?

Boy. Be you concealed by any moanes yet, hark,
They stop, I hope they will to it again, close sir.
Enter Wildbraine, Toby, Ringers.
Wi. A palpable knock.

Rin. 'Twas none.

To. Be Judged by the Sexton then,
If I have ears.

Sex. A Knock, a knock, a gross one.

To. Carman, your gallon of wine, you ring most impiously,
Art thou of the worshipful company of the knights oth' West,
And handle a bell with no more dexterity;
You think you are in Thames street
Justling the carts: oh a clean hands a jewel.

Boy. Good speed to your good exercise.

To. Y' are welcome.

Boy. I come sir from a gentleman, and neighbor hard by,
One that loves your music well.

To. He may have more on it,
Handle a bell, as you were haling timber;
Gross, gross, and base, absurd.

Rin. I Will mend it next peale.

Boy. To entreat a knowledge of you, whether it be
By the Ear you ring thus cunningly or by the Eye;
For to be plain, he has laid ten pounds upon it.

Wi. But which way has he laid?

Boy. That your Ear guides you,
And not your Eye.

To. Has won, has won, the Ear's our only instument:

Boy. But how shall we be sure on it.

To. Put all the lights out, to what end serve our Eyes then,

Wi. A plain Case.

Boy. You say true, it is a fine cunning thing to ring by the ear sure:
And can you ring in the dark so?

Wi. All night long boy.

Boy. It Is wonderful, let this be certain gentlemen,
And half his wager he allows among ye;
Is It possible you should ring so?

To. Possible, thou art a child, I Will ring when I am dead drunk;
Out with the lights, no twinkling of a candle,
I know my rope to, as I know my nose,
And can bang it soundly in the dark, I warrant you.

Wi. Come lets confirm him straight and win the wager.
Exit.
Boy. Let me hear to strengthen me;
And when you have rungile bring the money to you.

Lur. So so, follow 'em;
They shall have a cool reward, one has gold of mine,
Good store in's pocket,
Ring. But this will be revenged in a short warning.
They are at it Iustily; hay, how wantonly
They ring away their clothes, how it delights me;

Boy. Here, here, sir.
Enter Boy with clothes.
Lur. Have Wildbraines?

Boy. His whole case sir; I felt it out, and by the guards
This should be the Coachmans, another suit too.

Lur. Away Boy, quickly now to the Usurer,
His hour to wake approaches.

Boy. That once finished,
You Will give me leave to play sir: here they come.
Exit. Enter Wildbraine, Toby, and Ringers.
Wi. I am monstrous weary,

To. Fie, how I sweat? Reach me my cloak to cover me,
I run to oil like a Propise; 'twas a brave peale.

Sex. Let me light my candle first, then I Will wait on you:

Wi. A very brave peale.

To. Carman, you came in close now.

Wi. Sure it is past midnight.

Rin. No stirring in the streets I hear,

To. Walk further, was that a pillar? it is harder than my nose.
Where Is the Boy promised us five pound?

Wi. Room, I sweat still; come, come, my cloak,
I shall take cold
Enter Sexton.
Sex. Where lies it?

Wi. Here, here, and all our clothes.

Sex. Where, where?

Rin. In The corner.

To. Is thy candle blind too, give me the bottle,
I can drink like a Fish now, like an Elephant.

Sex. Here are the corners, but here are no clothes;
Yes, here is a cuffe.

Wi. A cuffe? give me the candle.
Cuffes wo'not cover me -- I smell a knavery.

To. Is It come to a cuffe? my whole suit turned to a button?

Wi. Now am I as cold again as though 'twere Christmas;
Cold with my fear, I Will never ring by the ear more.

To. My new clothes vanished?

Wi. My all clothes Toby.

Rin. Here Is none.

To. Not one of my dragones wings left to adorn me
Have I muted all my feathers?

Wi Cheated by the ear; a plot to put out the candle;
I could be mad; my chain, my rings, the gold, the gold.

To. The cold, the cold I cry, and I cry truly,
Not one sleeve, nor a cape of a cloak to warm me.

Wi. What miserable fools were we?

To. We had even best, gentlemen,
Every man choose his rope again, and fasten it,
And take a short turn to a better fortune
To be bauds to our miseries, and put our own lights out?

Wi. Preethee Sexton lets have a fire at thy house,
A good fire, we will pay thee some way for it, I am stone cold.

Sex. Alas I pity you, come quickly gentlemen.

Wi. Sure I ha been in a dream, I had no mistress,
Nor gold, nor clothes, but am a ringing rascal.

To. Fellows in affliction, lets take hands all,
Now are we fit for tumblers.
Enter Lurcher and others, bringing in Algripe.
Lur. So, so, presently his sleep will leave him.
And wonder seize upon him,
Bid 'em within be ready.

Iu. What sound's this?
What horrid dinne? what dismal place is this?
I never saw before, and now behold it;
But by the half light of a lamp, that burns here:
My spirits shake, tremble through my body;
Help, help,
Enter two Furies with black tapers. Mercy, protect me, my soul quakes,
What dreadful apparitions! how I shudder!

1, 2 and Fu. Algripe.

Iu. What are you?

1. We are helhounds helhounds, that have commission
From the Prince of darkness,
To fetch thy black soul to him.

Iu. Am I not alive still?

1. Thou art, but we have brought thee instruments
Will quickly rid thy miserable life, Stabbe,

2. Poison.

1. Hang thy self, this choice is offered

2. Thou can not hope for heaven; thy base soul is
Lost to all hope of mercy.

2. Quickly, quickly.
The torments cool

1. And all the Fiends expect thee.
Come with us to that pit of endless horror,
Or we will force thee.

Ju. Oh, oh oh.

1. Groans are too late, sooner the ravisher,
Whose soul is hurled into eternal frost,
Stung with the force of twenty thousand Winters
To punish the distempers of his blood,
Shall hope to get from thence, then thou avoid
The certainty of meeting hell where he is.
Shall murderers be there for ever dying,
Their souls shot through with adders, torn on Engines,
Dying as many deaths for killing one,
Could any imagination number them,
As there be moments in eternity:
And shall that Justice spare thee, that have slain,
Murdered by thy extortion so many?

Iu. Oh, oh.

2. Do execution quickly, or we will carry thee alive to hell.

Iu. Gently, gentle devils, do not force me
To kill my self, nor do not you do it for me;
Oh let me live, I Will make amends for all.

1. Tell us of thy repentance? perjured villain,
Pinch off his flesh, he must be whipped, salted and whipped.

Iu. Oh misery of miseries!

Recorders 1 and 2 Tear his accursed limbs, to hell with him, ha.
A mischief on that innocent face, away.
Creepes in Enter Boy like an Angel.
Boy. Malicious furies hence, choke not the seeds
Of holy penitence.

Iu. This must be an Angel,
How at his presence the fiends crawle away!
Here is some light of mercy.

Boy. Be thou wise,
And entertain it, wretched, wretched man;
What poor defense has all thy wealth been to thee?
What says thy conscience now?

Ju. Be my good Angel, here I promise thee,
To become honest, and renounce all villainy;
Enjoyne me any penance, i will build Churches;
A whole city of Hospitalls.

Boy. Take heed,
There is no dallying, nor are these imposed.

Iu. Name any thing within my power, sweet Angel;
And if I do not faithfully perform it,
Then whip me every day, burn me each minute,
Whole years together, let me freeze to Isicles.

Boy. In The number of thy soul oppressions;
Thou have undone a faithful gentleman,
By taking forfeit of his land.

Iu. Young Lurcher,
I do confess.

Boy. He lives most miserable,
And in despair may hang or drown himself;
Prevent his ruin, or his blood will be
More sin in thy account: have thou forgotten
He had a sister?

Iu. I do well remember it.

Boy. Could thou for Mammon break thy solemn vow.
Made once to that unhappy maid, that weeps
A thousand tears a day for thy unkindnesse,
Was not thy faith contracted, and thy heart?
And could thou marry another?

Ju. But she is dead,
And I will make true satisfaction.

Boy. What do I instance these, that have been false
To all the world.

Iu. I know it, and will henceforth
Practice repentance, do not frown sweet Angel;
I will restore all morgages, forswear
Abominable Usury, live chaste;
For I have been wanton in my shroud, my age;
And if that poor innocent maid, I so abused
Be living, I will marry her, and spend
My days to come religiously.

Boy. I was commanded but a messenger
To tell thee this, and rescue thee from those,
Whose malice would have dradg'd thee quick to hell,
If thou abuse this mercy and repent not,
Double damnation will expect thee for it;
But if thy life be virtuous hereafter,
A blessedness shall reward thy good example,
Thy fright has much diftracted thy weak senses,
Drink of this violl, and renew thy spirits,
I ha done my office, think on it and be happy.

Lur. So, so, He gapes already, now he is fast;
Thou have acted rarely; but this is not all;
First, help to convey him out o'th vault.

Boy. You will dispense with me now, as you promised sir.

Lur. We will make shift without thee, tha'st done well,
By our device this bandoge may escape hell.
Exit. Enter Lady, Nurse, Maria.
La. Did think Maria, this poor outside, and
Dissembling of thy voice could hide thee from
A mothers searching eye, though too much fear,
Lest thou we'rt not the same, might blind a lover
That thought thee dead too; oh my dear Maria,
I hardly kept my joys in from betraying thee:
Welcome again to life, we shall find out
The mystery of thy absence; conceal
Thy person still, for Algripe must not know thee:
And exercise this pretty dialect;
If there be any course in Law to free thee,
Thou shall not be so miserable; be silent
Good Nurse.

Nur. You shall not need to fear me Madam,
I do not love the usuring Jew so well;
Beside, 'twas my trick to disguise her so.

La, Be not dejected Mall.

Ma. Your care may comfort me;
But I despair of happiness.
Hartlove, I dare not see him

Nur. Well withdraw.

La. I shall but grieve to see his passions too,
Since there is no possibility to relieve him.
Enter Hartlove.
Ha. The worlds a Labyrinth, where unguided men
Walk up and down to find their weariness;
No sooner have we measured with much toil
One crooked path, with hope to gain our freedom,
But it betrays us to a new affliction;
What a strange mockery will man become
Shortly to all the creatures?
Oh Mariah!
If thou be dead, why does thy shadow fright me I
Sure it is because I live; were I but certain
To meet thee in one grave, and that our dust
Might have the privilege to mix in silence,
How quickly should my soul shake off this burden!
Enter Boy.
Boy. Thus far my wishes have success, I Will lose
No time: Sir, are not you called Mr. Hartlove?
Pardon my rudeness.

Ha. What does that concern
Thee Boy, it is a name cannot advantage thee,
And I am weary on it.

Boy. Had you concealed,
Or I forgot it sir, so large were my
Directions, that you could not speak this language,
But I should know you by your sorrow.

Ha. Thou
Were well informed, it seems; well, what is your business I

Boy. I come to bring you comfort.

Ha. Is Maria
Alive again? that's somewhat, and yet not
Enough to make my expectation rise, to
Past half a blessing, since we cannot meet
To make it up a full one; thou art mistaken.

Boy. When you have heard me, you will think otherwise;
In vain I should report Maria living:
The comfort that I bring you must depend
Upon her death.

Ha. Thou Art a dessembling boy,
Some one has sent thee to mock me, though my anger
Stoop not to punish thy green years, unripe
For malice; did I know what person sent thee
To tempt my sorrow thus, I should revenge it.

Boy. Indeed I have no thought so uncharitable,
Nor am I sent to grieve you, let me suffer
More punishment than ever boy deserved,
If you do find me false; I serve a Mistress
Would rather dye than play with your misfortunes;
Then good sir hear me out.

Ha. Who is your Mistress?

Boy. Before I name her, give me some encouragement,
That you receive her message, she is one
That is full acquainted with your misery,
And can bring such a portion of her sorrow
In every circumstance so like your own,
You Will love and pity her, and wish your griefs
Might marry one another.

Ha. Thou art wild.
Can thou bring comfort from so sad a creature?
Her miserable story can at best,
But swell my Volume, large enough already.

Boy. She was late beloved, as you were, promised faith,
And marriage, and was worthy of a better
Than he, that stole Marias heart.

Ha. How Is that?

Boy. Just as Maria dealt with your affection;
Did he that married her, deal with my Mistress,
When careless both of honor and Religion;
They cruelly gave away their hearts to strangers.

Ha. Part of this truth I know, but prithee boy
Proceed to that thou came for; thou did promise
Something, thy language cannot hitherto
Encourage me to hope for.

Boy. That I come to,
My Mistress thus unkindly dealt with all,
You may imagine, wanted no affliction;
And had ere this, wept her self dry as marble,
Had not your fortune come to her relief,
And twinne to her own sorrow brought her comfort.

Ha. Could the condition of my fate so equal,
Lessen her sufferings?

Boy. I know not how
Companions in grief sometimes diminish,
And make the pressure easy, by degrees:
She threw her troubles off, remembering yours,
And from her pity of your wrongs, there grew
Affection to your person thus increased,
And with it, confidence, that those whom Nature
Had made so even in their weight of sorrow,
Could not but love as equally one another,
Were things but well prepared, this gave her boldness
To employ me thus far.

Ha. A strange message boy.

Boy. If you incline to meet my Mistress love,
It may beget your comforts; besides that,
It Is some revenge, that you above their scorn
And pride, can laugh at them, whose perjurie
Has made you happy, and undone themselves.

Ha. Have you done boy.

Boy. Only this little more;
When you but see, and know my Mistress well,
You will forgive my tediousness, she is fair,
Fair as Maria was.

Ha. I Will hear no more,
Go foolish boy, and tell thy fonder Mistress
She has no second faith to give away;
And mine; was given to Maria, though her death,
Allow me freedom, see the Picture of her,
Enter Maria, Nurse. I would give ten thousand Empires for the substance;
Yet for Marias sake, whose divine Figure
That rude frame carries, I will love this counterfeit
Above all the world, and had thy Mistress all
The grace and blossom of her sex; now she
Is gone, that was a walking Spring of beauty,
I would not look upon her.

Boy. Sir, your pardon,
I have but done a message; as becomes
A servant, nor did she on whose commands
I gladly waited, bid me urge her love
To your disquiet, she would chide my deligence
If I should make you angry.

Ha. Pretty Boy.

Boy. Indeed I fear I have offended you:
Pray if I have, enjoyne me any penhance for it;
I have performed one duty, and could as willingly
To purge my fault, and show I suffer with you,
Plead your cause to another.

Ha. And I Will take thee
At thy word boy, thou have a moving language,
That pretty innocent, Coppie of Maria
Is all I love, I know not how to speak,
Win her to think well of me, and I will
Reward thee to thy wishes.

Boy. I undertake
Nothing for gain, but since you have resolved
To love no other, I Will be faithful to you,
And my propheticke thoughts bid me already
Say I shall prosper.

Ha. Thou were sent to bless me.

Boy. Pray give us opportunity.

Ha. Be happy.
Exit.
Nur. He Is gone.

Boy. With your fair leave Mistress

Ma. Have you pusinesse with her pray you?

Boy. I have a message from a gentleman,
Please you vouchsafe your ear more private.

Nur. You shall have my absence Niece.
Exit.
Ma. Was the sentleman afeard to declare his matters openly, here was no bodies
was not very honest, if her like not her errands the petter, was wist to keept
her preathes to cool her porridges, can tell her that now for aule her private
hearings, and tawgings.


Boy. You may, if please you, find another language,
And with less pains be understood.

Ma. What is her meaning?

Boy. Come, pray speak your own English.

Ma. Have boys lost her i^ts and memories? please us aule.

Boy. I must be plain then, come, I know you are
Maria, this thin veil cannot obscure you:
I Will tell the world you live, I have not lost ye,
Since first with griese and shame to be surprised,
A violent trance took away show of life;
I could discover by what accident
You were conveyed away at midnight, in
Your coffin, could declare the place, and minute,
When you revived, and what you have done since as perfectly --

Ma. Alas, I am betrayed to new misfortunes.

Boy. You are not for my knowledge, I Will be dumb
For ever, rather than be such a traitor;
Indeed I pity you, and bring no thoughts,
But full of peace, call home your modest blood,
Pale has too long usurped upon your face;
Think upon love again, and the possession
Of full blown joys, now ready to salute you.

Ma. These words undo me more than my own grieses.

Boy. I see how fear would play the tyrant with you,
But I Will remove suspicion; have you in
Your heart an entertainment for his love,
To whom your Virgin faith made the first promise?

Ma. If thou mean Hartlove, thou do wound me still,
I have no life without his memory,
Nor with it any hope to keep it long,
Thou see I walk in darkness like a thief,
That fears to see the world in his own shape,
My very shadow frights me, it is a death
To live thus, and not look day in the face,
Away, I know thee not.

Boy. You shall hereafter know, and thank me Lady,
I Will bring you a discharge at my next visit,
Of all your fears, be content fair Maria,
It Is worth your wonder

Ma. Impossible.

Boy. Be wise and silent,
Dress your self, you shall be what you wish.

Ma. Do this, and be
My better Angel.

Boy. All your cares on me.
Exeunt.
Actus Quintus.
Enter Lurcher, and Boy.
Lur. I Must applaud thy diligence.

Boy. It had been nothing
To ha left him in the Porch; I called his Servants,
With wonders they acknowledged him, I pretended
It was some spice sure of the falling sickness,
And that was charity to bring him home;
They rubbed and chafed him, plied him with strong water,
Still he was senseless, clamors could not wake him;
I wished 'em then get him to bed, they did so,
And almost smothr'd him with rugges and pillowes;
And cause they should have no cause to suspect me,
I watched them till he waked.

Lur. 'Twas excellent.

Boy. When his time came to yawne, and stretch himself,
I bid em not be hasty to discover
How he was brought home, his eyes fully open,
With trembling he began to call his servants,
And told 'em he had seen strange visions,
That should convert him from his Heathen courses;
They wondered, and were silent, there he preached
How sweet the air of a contented conscience
Smelt in his nose now, asked 'em all forgiveness
For their hard pasture since they lived with him;
Bid 'em believe, and fetch out the cold sur-loine:
Pierce the strong beer and let the neighbors joy in it:
The concealed Muskadine should now lie open
To every mouth; that he would give toth' poor,
And mend their wages; that his doors should be
Open to every miserable suitor.

Lur. What said his servants then?

Boy. They durst not speak,
But blessed themselves, and the strange' means that had
Made him a Christian in this over-joy,
I took my leave, and bad 'em say their prayers,
And humor him, lest he turned Jew again.

Lur. Enough, enough. Whose this?
Enter Toby. It Is one of my ringers; stand close, my Ladies Coachman.

To. Buy a mat for a bed, buy a mat;
Would I were at rack and manger among my horses;
We have divided the Sextons
Household stuff amongst us, one has the rugge, and he is
Turned Irish, another has a blanket, and he must beg in it,
The sheets serve another for a frocke, and with the bed-cord,
He may pass for a Porter, nothing but the mat would fall
To my share, which with the help of a tune and a hassocke
Out oth' Church may disguise me till I get home;
A pox a bell-ringing by the Ear, if any man take me
At it again, let him pull mine to the Pillory, I could wish
I had lost mine Ears, so I had my clothes again;
The weather w'onot allow this fashion,
I do look for an ague besides.

Lur. How the Rascal shakes?

To. Here are company:
Buy a mat for a bed, but a mat,
A hassocke for your feet, or a Piss clean and sweet;
Buy a mat for a bed, by a ma:
Ringing, I renounce thee, I Will never come to Church more.

Lur. You with a mat?

To. I am called.
If any one should offer to buy my mat, what a case were I in?
Oh that I were in my oate tubbe with a horse-loafe,
Something to hearten me:
I dare not hear 'em;
Buy a mat for a bed, buy a mat:

Lur. He Is deaf.

To. I am glad I am: buy a mat for a bed.

Lur. How the Rascal sweats? What a pickle he is in?
Every street he goes through will be a new torment,

To. If ever I meet at midnight more a jangling:
I am cold, and yet I drop; buy a mat for a bed buy a mat.
Exit.
Lur. He has punishment enough.
Enter Wildbraine. Who Is this, my the other youth? he is turned Bear.

Wi. I am half a fraid of my self: this poor shift
I got oth' Sexton to convey me hansomely
To some harbor, the wench will hardly know me;
They Will take me for some Watchman oth' parish;
I ha never a penny left me, that's one comfort;
And ringing has begot a monstrous stomach,
And that is another mischief, I were best go home,
For every thing will scorn me in this habit.
Besides, I am so full of these young bell-ringers;
If I get in adoores, not the power oth' country,
Nor all my Aunts curses shall disembogue me.

Lur. Bid her come hither presently, -- hum, it is he.
Exit. Ser.
Will. I am betrayed to one that will eternally laugh at me,
Three of these rouges will Jeere a horse to death.

Lur. It Is Mr. Wildbraine sure, and yet me thinks
His fashion's strangely altered; sir watchman,
You rugamuffin, turn you louzie bears skin:
You with the bedridden bill.

Wi. Has found me out;
There Is no avoiding him, I had rather now
Be arraigned at Newgate for a robbery
Than answer to his Articles: your will sir,
I am in haste.

Lur. Nay then I will make bold wo'yee;
A Watchman and ashamed to show his countenance,
His face of authority; I have seen that physiognomy;
Were you never in prison for pilfering?

Wi. How the rouge worries me.

Lur. Why may not this
Be the villain rob d my house last night,
And walks disguised in this malignant rugge,
Armed with a tun of Iron, I will have you
Before a Magistrate.

Wi. What will become of me?

Lur. What art thou? speak.

Wi. I am the wandering Jew, and please your worship.

Lur. By your leave Rabbi, I will show you then
A Synagogue, iclip't Bridewell, where you
Under correction may rest your self;
You have brought a bill to guard you, there be dog whips
To firke such rugg'd curres, whips without bells
Indeed.

Wi. Bells.

Lur. How he sweets?

Wi. I must be known, as good at first; now, jeere on,
But do not anger me too impudently,
The Rabbi will be moved then.

Lu. How? Iacks Wildebraim
What time oth' Moon man, ha? what strange bells
Have in thy brains.

Wi. No more bells,
No more bells, they ring backwards.

Lu. Why, where is the Wench, the blessing that befell thee?
The unexpected happiness? where is that Jacke?
Where are thy golden days?

Wi. It was his trick as sure as I am lousie,
But how to be revenged --

Lu. Fie, fie, Jack,
Marry a Watchmans widow in thy young days,
With a revenew of old Iron, and a rugge,
Is this the Paragon, the dainty Piece,
The delicate divine Rogue?

Wi. It Is euough I am undone,
Marked for a misery, and so leave prating;
Give me my bill,

Lur. You need not ask your Tailors,
Unless you had better linings; it may be
To avoid suspicion you are going thus
Disguised to your fair Mistress.

Wi. Mock no further,
Or as I live I Will lay my bill o'thy pate,
I Will take a Watchmans fury into my fingers,
To ha no judgment to distinguish persons
And knock thee down.

Lu. Come, I ha done, and now
Will speak some comfort to thee, I will lead thee
Now to my Mistress hither to concealed;
She shall take pity on thee too, she loves
A hansome man; thy misery invites me
To do thee good, I Will not be jealous Jack;
Her beauty shall commend it self; but do not
When I have brought you into grace supplant me.

Wi. Art thou in earnest, by this cold Iron --

Lu. No oaths, I am not costive; here she comes:
Enter Mistress. Sweet heart, I have brought a gentleman,
A friend of mine to be acquainted with you,
He Is other than he seems; why do you stare thus?

Mi. Oh sir, forgive me, I have done you wrong.

Lur. What Is the matter? did ever see her af re Jack?

Wi. Prithee do what thou wo't wo'mee, if thou have
A mind, hang me up quickly.

Lur. Never despair, I Will give thee my share rather,
Take her, I hope she loves thee at first sight,
She has Peticoates will patch thee up a suit;
I resign all, only I Will keep these trifles,
I took some pains for 'em, I take it Jack;
What think you pinke of beauty, come let me
Counsel you both to marry, she has a trade,
If you have audacitie to hook in Gamsters:
Let Us ha a wedding, you will be wondrous rich;
For she is impudent, and thou art miserable;
'Twill be a rare match.

Mi. As you are a man forgive me, I Will redeem all.

Lur. You wo'not to these geere of marriage then?

Wi. No, no, I thank you Tom, I can watch for
A groat a night, and be every gentleman's fellow.

Lur. Rise, and be good, keep home and tend your business.
Exit. Mi.
Wi. Thou have don't to purpose, give me thy hand Tom;
Shall we be friends? thou see what state I am in,
I Will undertake this penance to my Aunt,
Just as I am, and openly I Will go;
Where, if I be received again for current,
And fortune smile once more --

Lur. Nay, nay, I me satisfied, so farewell honest louzie Jack.

Wi. I cannot help it, some men meet with strange destinies.
If things go right thou may be hanged, and I
May live to see it, and purchase thy apparel:
So farewell Tom, commend me to thy Polcat.
Exit. Enter Lady, Nurse, Servant.
La. Now that I have my counsel ready, and my cause ripe;
The Judges all informed of the abuses;
Now that he should be gone.

Nur. No man knows whether,
And yet they talk he went forth with a Constable
That told him of strange business, that would bring him
Money and lands, and heaven knows what; but they
Have searched, and can not find out such an Officer:
And as a secret, Madam, they told your man
Nicholas, whom you sent thither as a spy,
They had a shrewd suspicion 'twas the devil
In The likeness of a Constable, that has tempted him
By this time to strange things; there have been men
As rich as he, have met convenient rivers,
And so forth; many trees have borne strange fruits:
De'e think he has not hanged himself?

La. If he be hanged, who has his goods?

Nur. They are forfeited, they say.

La. He has hanged himself for certain then,
Only to cosen me of my Girls portion.

Nu. Very likely.

La. Or did not the Constable carry him to some prison?

Nu. They thought on that too, and searched every where.

La. He may be close for treason, perhaps executed.

Nu. Nay, they did look among the quarters too,
And mustered all the bridge-house for his nightcap.
Enter Servant.
Ser. Madam, here is the gentleman again.

La. What gentleman?

Ser. He that loved my young Mistress.

La. Alas, it is Heartlove, 'twill but feed his melancholy,
To let him see Maria, since we dare not
Yet tell the world she lives; and certainly,
Did not the violence of h^^ passion blind him,
He would see past her borrowed tongue and habit.

Nu. Please you entertain him a while Madam,
I Will cast about for some thing with your daughter.

La. Do what thou wot, pray Mr. Hartlove enter.
Enter Hartlove. Exit. Ser. and Nurse severally.
Ha. Madam, I come to ask your gentle pardon.

La. Pardon, for what? you never offended me,

Ha. Yes, if you be the mother of Maria.

La. I was her mother, but that word is canceled,
And buried with her in that very minute
Her soul fled from her, we lost both our names
Of mother and of daughter.

Ha. Alas, Madam,
If your relation did consist but in
Those naked terms, I had a title nearer,
Since love unites more than the tie of blood;
No matter for the empty voice of mother;
Your nature still is left, which in her absence
Must love Maria, and not see her ashes
And memory polluted.

La. You amaze me, by whom?

Ha. By me, I am the vile profaner.

La. Why do you speak thus indiscreetly sir?
You ever honored her.

Ha. I did alive,
But since she died, I ha been a villain to her.

Le. I do beseech you say not so; all this
Is but to make me know, how much I sinned
In forcing her to marry.

Ha. Do not mock me,
I charge you by the Virgin you have wept for;
For I have done an impious act against her,
A deed able to fright her from her sleep,
And through her marble, often to be revenged;
A wickedness, that if I should be filent,
You as a witness must accuse me for it.

La. Was I a witness?

Ha. Yes, you knew I loved
Maria once; or grant, you did but think so,
By what I ha professed, or she has told you,
Was It not a fault unpardonable in me,
When I should drop my tears upon her grave.
Yes, and proose sufficient.

La. To what?

Ha. That I forgetful of my fame and vows
To fair Maria, ere the worm could pierce
Her tender shroud, had changed her for an other;
Did you not blush to see me turn a Rebel?
So soon to court a shadow, a strange thing,
Without a name? Did you not curse my levitie,
Or think upon her death with the less sorrow
That she had escaped a punishment more killing,
Oh how I shame to think on it.

La. Sir in my
Opinion, 'twas an argument of love
To your Maria, for whose sake you could
Affect one that but carried her small likeness.

Ha. No more, you are too charitable, but
I know my guilt, and will from henceforth never
Change words with that strange maid, whose innocent face
Like your Marias won so late upon me,
My passions are corrected, and I can
Look on her now, and woman kind, without
Love in a thought; it is thus, I came to tell you.
If after this acknowledgement, youl'e be
So kind to show me in what filent grave
You have disposed your daughter, I will ask
Forgiveness of all her dust, and never leave,
Till with the loud confession of my shame
I wake her ghost, and that pronounce my pardon:
Will you deny this favor? then farewell,
I Will never see you more: ha!
Enter Nurse, Maria in her own apparel, after some show of wonder he goes
toward her.
La. Be not deluded sir, upon my life
This is the soul whom you but thought Maria
In my daughters habit; what did you mean Nurse?
I knew she would but cozen you, is she not like now?
One dew unto another is not nearer.

Nu. She thinks she is a gentlewoman;
And that imagination has so taken her,
She scorns to speak, how hansomely she carries it,
As if she were a well bread thing, her body?
And I warrant you, what looks?

La. Pray be not foolish.

Ha. I disturb no body, speak but half a word
And I am satisfied, but what needs that?
I Will swear it is she.

La. But do not, I beseech you,
For trust me sir, you know not what I know.

Ha. Peace then,
And let me pray, she holds up her hands with me.

La. This will betray all.

Ha. Love ever honored,
And ever young, thou Sovereign of all hearts,
Of all our sorrows, the sweet ease,
She weeps now, Does she still cozen me?

Nu. You will see anon,
'Twas her desire, expect the issue Madam.

Ha. My souls so big, I cannot pray; it is she,
I will go nearer.
Enter Algripe, Lurcher, Boy.
Nur. Here Is Mr. Algripe and other strangers Madam.

Al. Here good Lady,
Upon my knees I ask thy worships pardon;
Here Is the whole sum I had with thy fair daughter;
Would she were living, I might have her peace too,
And yield her up again to her old liberty:
I had a wife before, and could not marry;
My penance shall be on that man that honored her
To confer some land.

La. This is incredible.

Al. It Is truth.

Lur. Do you know me sir?

Al. Ha, the gentleman I deceived.

Lur. My name is Lurcher.

Al. 'Shat have thy morgage.

Lur. I ha that already, no matter for the deed
If you release it.

Al. I Will do it before thy witness;
But where is thy sister? if she live I am happy, though
I conceal our contract, which was
Stolen from me with the evidence of this land.
The Boy goes to Maria and gives her a paper; she wonders, and smiles upon
Hartlove, he amazed approaches her: afterward she shows it her mother, and
then gives it to Hartlove.
Nur. Your daughter smiles.

Lur. I hope she lives, but where, I cannot tell sir.

Boy. Even here, and please you sir.

Al. How?

Boy. Nay, it is she;
To work thy fair way, I preserved you brother,
That would have lost me willingly, and served ye
Thus like a Boy; I served you faithfully,
And cast your plots but to preserve your credit;
Your foul ones I diverted to fair uses;
So far as you would hearken to my counsel;
That all the world may know how much you owe me.

Al. Welcome entirely, welcome my dear Alathe,
And when I lose the again, blessing forsake me:
Nay, let me kiss thee in these clothes.

Lur. And I too,
And bless the time I had so wise a sister, were thou the little thief?

Boy. I stole the contract, I must confess,
And kept it to my self, it most concern me.

Ha. Contracted? this distroies his after marriage.

Ma. Dare you give this hand
To this young gentleman, my heart goes with it.

Al. Maria alive I how my hearts exalted, it is my duty;
Take her Frank Hartlove, take her; and all joys
With her; besides some land to advance her Jointure.

La. What I have is your own, and blessings crown ye.

Ha. Give me room,
And fresh air to confider, gentlemen,
My hopes are too high.

Ma. Be more temperate,
Or I Will be Welsh again.

Al. A day of wonder.

Lur. Lady, your love, I ha kept my word; there was
A time, when my much sufferings made me hate you,
And to that end I did my best to cross you:
And fearing you were dead I stole your Coffin,
That you might never more usurp my office:
Many more knacks I did, which at the Weddings
Shall be told of as harmless tales.
Enter Wildbrains. Shout within.
Wi. Hallow your throats a pieces, I am at home;
If you can roar me out again --

La. What thing is this?

Lur. A continent of fleas: room for the Pageant;
Make room asore there; your kinsman Madam.

La. My kinsman? let me wonder!

Wi. Do, an I Will wonder too, to see this company
At peace one with another; it is not worth
Your admiration, I was never dead yet;
You Are merry Aunt, I see, and all your company:
If ye be not, I Will fool up, and provoke ye;
I will do any thing to get your love again:
I Will forswear midnight Tavernes and remptations;
Give good example to your Grooms, the maids
Shall go to bed and take their rest this year;
None shall appear with blisters in their bellies.

Lur. And when you will fool again, you may go ring.

Wi. Madam, have mercy.

La. Your submission sir,
I gladly take, we will
Enquire the reason of this habit afterward;
Now you are soundly shamed, well wi restoore you:
Where Is Toby?
Where Is the Coachman?

Nur. He Is a bed, Madam,
And has an ague, he says.

Lur. I Will be his Physician.

La. We must a foot then.

Lur. Ere the Priest ha done
Toby shall wait upon you with his Coach,
And make your Flanders Mares dance back again we'yee,
I warrant you Madam you are mortified,
Your suit shall be granted too.

Wi. Make, make room before there.

La. Home forward with glad hearts, home child.

Ma. I wait you.

Ha. On joyfully, the cure of all our grief,
Is owing to this pretty little These.
Exeunt Omnes.
FINIS.

