THE WAY TO BLESSEDNESS, A TREATISE OR COMMENTARY, ON THE FIRST PSALM.

PSALM. 119. 1. Blessed are the undefiled in the way: who walk in the Law of
the Lord. By PHINEES FLETCHER, B. in D. and Minister of Gods Word at Hilgay, in
NORFOLK.

LONDON, Printed by I. D. for James Boler, and are to be sold at the Marigold,
in Paul's Churchyard, 1632.

TO MY MOST HONORED, FREE, AND BOVNTIFVLL Patron, Sir HENRY WILOVGHBY, Baronet,
and to his most worthy Lady, all blessings of this, and a better life.
Sir,
THe ignorant generally complain of too much preaching, and some learned of
too much writing. The first have no eyes to see, either the grace of God in his
word, or their own want of grace, for want of that grac^ous word. The other (I
think) in this, have squint eyes, or at least look not the r^ght way to the
Gospel. For did they condemn only the wanton, idle, and vain Pamphlets,
(which too licentiously pandaring for lust) stand forth in every shop, or those
turbulent libells, which being engendered in earthly minds, break forth into
all bitterness, and fill the world with storms and schisms, who would not
rise up with them against the wicked? But the books by them censured, nay
despised, and derided, are such as tend to edification; and are scorned, either
because they savor not of profound and deep learning, or not bumbasted with
multiplicitie of reading, or not stuck thick enough with the flowers of
Rhetorike; when yet our own experience makes us see these despised labors
wonderfully to prosper in the Church: whether it be that the Lord delights to
glorify his power in infirmity, and takes no pleasure in the wisdom of
words, (which makes the cross of Christ of no effect) or as light, so the
word, is most clear and powerful, when least mixed. Famous is that history
of Sozomen, who has left it upon record, that in the first Council of Nice,
when an heathen Philosopher did not a little stumble the learned Christians, a
simple old man stepped out, and with plain dealing both confuted, and converted
him: No question there is great, and even necessary use of those special
gifts in the Church: yet by such examples the Lord plainly shows, that he
will not have his meanest grace despised. I am persuaded, that with as much
reason, and less blasphemy we may quarrel with the Creator, for making so
many rivers and fountains on earth, so many stars in heaven; as with the
Redeemer, and blessed Spirit, for storing this Kingdom with those gifts which
make it as a watered garden, and another firmament, full of glorious lights,
shedding their beams into every corner.

For my self, if any desire to know the reasons impelling me to write what
before I had spoken, and give way to my private and weak meditations to look
out in public, upon so learned an Age; the chief are these.

John 21. 15. 16. 17.
Feed my sheep, together with that enforcing motive, As thou love me. Oh!
who can love him sufficiently who loved to death, whose love passes knowledge?
Ephe. 3. ^9.
Or how can any man feed too much, when no man can love enough? Therefore that
Apostle, there so adjured, contented not himself to feed by preaching, but to
this day feeds us by his writing. The same precept is often by his blessed
Spirit pressed upon his Ministers: 1 Pet. 5. 2. and 4. 10.
Feed the flock of Christ. As every man has received the gift, so let him
administer it ^o other, Act.20. 28.
as good Stewards of the manifold graces of God. Take heed to your selves, and
to the flock, over which the holy Ghost has made you Overseers to feed the
Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood. O strong
adjuration! Now God forbid, that I should ever esteem any pains sufficient
for that, for which God thought not his blood too much. Lord has foretold he
will exact of all his servants, Math. 25. 26. 30.
to whom he commits these treasures of his grace, so that the single talent
shall be accountable, and the slothful person adjudged to a fearful
condemnation, and execution for not putting it to the bank. Gods people,
especially those committed to me by Christ. Surely there is a wonderful love
between a faithful Pastor and his faithful people. The Galatians could give
their eyes; Gal. 4. 15.
Romans 16. 4.
Aquila and Priscilla their lives to the Apostle. But beyond all admiration was
the love of that Apostle, 2 Cor. 12. 5.
who not only loved the more, Phil. 1. 22. 23. 24.
the less he was beloved, their neglect (as it were by Antiperistasis)
kindling, and enflaming his affections, but could willingly defer his joys
with Christ in heaven, and still live under the bloody persecution of Jews,
Gentiles, false Brethren, and (which is worse then all these) the fiery
opposition, and loathsome, but forced struglings with remainders of sin, that
he might build the Church. He knew not which to choose, his presence with
Christ in infinite felicity, or his edifying the Church with all worldly
misery. milkie way in heaven. And I doubt not, but this little and weak work
shall through his power, who brings light out of da^kenesse, direct some, or
further them in that blessed way to eternal life.
But it may be, some will stop my way with slight e^tertainment, and strong
opposition of the world.

This cannot weigh with those stronger arguments inciting me to this duty. I
remember the Astronomers distinguish the visible fixed stars into six several
magnitudes; Those of the first and chiefest exceed the whole earth in quantity
an hundred and sevenfold, and even the most obscure and cloudy of the sixth
magnitude, eighteen-fold with advantage. Thus those first and great stars
(the holy Apostles,) their followers and immediate Successors how wonderfully
they did surmount the whole earth, may easily appear in this; that when all
the world interposed it self to eclipse their light, yet did they then shine
more bright, and filled the whole earth with the glorious splendor of the
Gospel of Christ. So even in these last ages, we have known that
notwithstanding all the opposition of Popes, Emperors, and many other Princes
(the whole earth indeed being banded against a very few, and far inferior to
those first Ministers) yet did they overcome all their malice, and shed the
long obscured light into all parts of the Christian world. For my self I rest
assured, that one heavenly spark in the least of those stars shining in the
right hand of Christ shall not, nor cannot by any earthly opposition be so
ecclipsed, but that it shall break through, and both enlighten, and inflame
some of those whom God has chosen.

It may be some also will object, that other more learned, and every way more
sufficient, have already labored in this Vineyard, and set forth their works
on this Psalm.

I willingly confess it: yet I know not any more but one, even that eloquent
Apollos, M. Bolton.
powerful and mighty in the word; and am certain, that learned and religious
men will not disdain, that when he from this living fountain has filled his
silver Cisterne, I should also with my earthly pitcher draw, and pour out some
of the same water of life unto the sheep of my Master.

Now most worthy Patron, I have been bold to entitle you, and your worthy
Lady to this labor, not only in remembrance of your much love, and my long
courteous entertainment in your house (such as I never saw any Gentleman give
unto their Minister;) or that first I initiated my weak Ministry in your
Family and Hamlet; but especially because I acknowledge my self, and
whatsoever is mine

Yours in the Lord Jesus Christ; To whose grace, and fulness of it, he shall
ever commend you, and all yours, who thirsts and longs for your soul; PHINEES
FLETCHER.

To my dear Parishioners of HILGAY in NORFOLK.
CHristian Brethren, my conscience, and he tha^ is greater then the conscience
bears me witness, that I never spared any pains for your profit, either
public or private, but by prayer for you, and preaching to you, have labored
with all, nay above my strength, to bring you to that true knowledge of God,
and our Lord Jesus Christ; and settle you in his grace. What is wrought in
every ones heart God only knows. But (blessed be his name for ever) some
fruit the Lord of the Harvest has made me see springing, some even ripening,
which has encouraged me to publish this little work: not only that other
Christians if it please the Lord, may receive some help, but especially that
you of this flock whom God has called, may be further builded in your most
holy faith; and others who have yet resisted, may either be recalled and
brought home, or else being convinced, have a testimony witnessing to their
faces their rebellion, and justifying their condemna^ion both here, and in the
day of the Lord.

Neither have I been disheartened by the opposition of some instruments of
Satan; Ier. 7.9. 10.
but accounting their malicious and causeless quarrelling, the second mark of
Gods effectual working by my infirmity, I have with more heart and
cheerfulness labored in the work of God. Now my Brethren, and dearly
beloved in the Lord Jesus Christ, I be^eech you in the Lord, remember and well
consider your holy calling: You profess your selves Christians, even the
followers of Christ, and you have, and may here again evidently discern the
Lord, by his Spirit showing you the old and good way, and leading you in it by
footing of this excellent Prophet. Now manifest your selves to be, as your are
and will be called; be Christians: follow the voice of the Lord in his word,
follow his followers, and set your feet into the path of life. Will you walk
in the counsel of the ungodly? stand in the way of sinners? sit down in the
seat of scorners? Will you swear, curse, lie, slander? will you drink, roar,
will you speak wantonly, will you with such carelessness profane the Sabbath,
despise God in his saving Ordinances, neglect the Lord in your families, and
then think and say, We shall be delivered, though we do all these
abominatio^s? Take heed my Brethren, we serve a most gracious, but yet a
jealous God, whose jealousy shall smoke against such despisers, to bring all
the fearful curses temporal and eternal (threatened in the Law) upon such a
rebellious miserable creature. Deuteronomy. 29. 19. 20.

To conclude (dear Brethren) after whom I long in the bowels of Christ, the
Lord has set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: the same Lord
give you an heart to choose life, that here waying in grace, hereafter you may
be filled with glory. Amen, LORD JESUS, Amen. So shall ever pray

Your faithful Pastor Phinees Fletcher.

The Preface to every Christian Reader.
IN all Sciences whether liberal, or manual, that Scholar makes the most
happy progress, whose Master does first by instruction lay down before him
the grounds of his Art, and then farther opens them by practice, and example.
That guide will best conduct us, who not only points out the way with his
finger, but beats it with his foot, and cheerfully calls us after him.

This happiness our great, and only Doctor affords us in his scriptures, who
both propounds distinctly the mysteries of our faith in the Gospel, and the
rule of our manners in the law, and with all illustrats both in the plain
tracte, beaten by himself, and his faithful members, whose footsteps of holy
faith, and conversation, printed deep before us, have made the way much more
easy for us that follow.

It is no small light to us, when we see the combat between the Spirit, and
the flesh doctrinally expressed. Gal. 5. 17. But when we behold it acted
personally in the Apostle (Romans 7.) and view him wrestling with that loathsome,
and cumbersome enemy, even the body of death, sometime taking, sometime
giving the foil, crying out for help, and breaking forth into thanks for his
victory, it does not only clear our understanding, but powerfully works on
our affections, shows our enemy, and kindles us against him; first teaches
us, that fight we must; then instructs us how to fight how to overcome, and how
to use the conquest.

Therefore I dare boldly affirm, and every good Christians experience will
confirm it, no portion of scripture yields more comfort to a soul struggling
with sin, and almost fainting under the burden of corruption, then that
duel there managed by the Apostle under the persons of all the faithful. And
this is the reason why the book of Psalms is by all acknowledged the most
profitable, and usefull^ because we here behold lively drawn, by Gods own
finger, not only the face, and hands (the outward profession, and actions) but
the very heart of that man, who was according to Gods own heart: and so may
take there a full view of every limb, and be acquainted with every joint, and
feature of the new, and inward man: we shall there see that heart ever in
action, continually drawing from that living fountain the word (to which it
cleaues unseparably) the waters of life, and having thoroughly concocted them in
the affection, returning them again to every part for growth and practice.

Sometime we may perceive him, as a Conqueror, with that stone which the
builders refused, casting down the Goliath, which de^ies the Israel of God,
even every high thing, which exalst it self against the knowledge of God; yea
with his head in his hand, bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ; sometime again fainting (as in the battle with
Ishibenob) under the spear of those uncircumcised affections, which still
border on Gods people, and are sworn, and restles enemies against the Spirit.
Here may you view him tugging, with that roaring Lion, who seeks whom he may
devour, and reskuing out of his mouth that almost lost sheep; there again
compast about with mighty bulls of Basan, gaping on him with their mouths,
bayted with dogs, even the assembly of the wicked, and crying loud for help,
that his soul may be delivered from the sword, and the power of the dog.
Oft-times you may hear him, like the Lark, singing, and mounting in his song;
his heart well tuned, and his tongue co^sorting with it, both full to the
brinks, and overflowing with praise, and thanksgiving, yet often mourning like
a dove, and chattering like a swallow, his spirit drunk up, and sinking in the
deep waters, sticking fast in the mire, where no stay is: sometime faith even
soring so high that it is singed with presumption, sometime plunged in the deep
laboring for life, altogether benumbd, and almost frozen in despair.

In a word, the Book of Psalms is a field, where we may be most skilfully
trained in all our Christian warfare: where this great Commander, famous for
earthly, but far more renowned for heavenly victories, will breed us up in
skill, and courage by his own example: where, of the one side we shall learn
to know all our spiritual enemies, their colors, weapons, stratagems, their
manner of charging; of the other side our Captain, succors, armours offensive,
and defensive, our discipline, conflict, victory, and triumph, and all these
not only by relation, but action in our fellow-souldier, and an old
experienced Commander.

This was the cause why having in the flock (over which the great Shepherd
has set me) for some years laid a foundation in the more contemplative, and
doctrinall parts of scripture; I after desired to build on this ground, and
lead them on to the practical, here to learn of this holy Psalmi^t, how to
do that, which they have there learnt must be done. In this little brook this
net has not wholly been in vain; which has persuaded me to let it down into
the sea; I have not fished for vain glory, or applause of men, nor used such
trammels, as may enclose any such game. He that has spent most labor this
way, has took nothing, but that proverb: He has fished fair, and caught a
frog. But if Christ may receive any glory from hence, or any of his members
pro^ite: this is all my Ambition; for which I will earnestly sue to him, who
delights to glori^ie his power in humane weakness, and teaches the only
wisdom by this reputed foolishnes. To his grace, in the Lord Jesus Christ^ I
heartily commend thee true Christian Reader; earnestly praying, thou may grow
in knowledge; and more, in practice of what thou know.

Thy fellow servants. Phinees Fletcher.

The Analysis.
(...) the P(...)er. 1. the Author. Principal, The holy Ghost. Subordinate,
The Kingly Prophet David.
2. The matter here observe 1. the Scope General of all Scripture; to to be a
lamp unto our feet, etc. Special to discover 1. the blessedness of man. 2.
the misery of man.

2. The method where our Guide points out 1. The right end desired of all 1.
more confusedly and far off in the sum, Blessed etc. 2. more distinctly aad
near hand. 1. by similitude A tree 1. planted. ver. 1. 2. watered. ver. 1. 3.
fruitful. ver. 1. 4. flourishing ver. 1.
2. by a part of it namely Prosperity ver. 3.

And with the end the way to it. 1. The left hand to be declined 1. ungodly
counsel ver. 1. 2. way of sinners. ver. 1. 3. seat of scorners. ver. 1.
2. The right hand to be followed. 1. delighting in the word amplified by the
time. day and night v. 2 2. meditating in the word amplified by the time. day
and night v. 2

2. The contrary end detested of all, described. 1. Negatiuely, not so: that
is, 1. not blessed, but cursed. ver. 4. 2. not planted, but wild. ver. 4. 3.
not watered, but parched. ver. 4. 4. not fruitful, but barren. ver. 4. 5. not
flourishing, but fading. ver. 4. 6. not prospering, but confounded. ver. 4.
2. Affirmatively. 1. By a similitude, As chafe blown away, verse. 4. 2.
Simply, 1. to be condemned. ver. 5. 2. to be separated. ver. 5.


3. The reason of both, Gods providence over-looking both verse. 6. overruling
both verse. 6.





A Treatise or Commentary upon the first Psalm.
Psalm I.
1 Blessed is the man that walks not in the Counsel of the ungodly, nor
stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful.

2 But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he meditate
day and night.

3 And he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that brings
forth his fruit in his season, his leaf also shall not wither, and whatsoever
he does shall prosper.

4 The ungodly are not so; but are like the chafe which the wind drives away.

5 Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in judgment, nor sinners in the
Congregation of the righteous.

6 For the Lord knows the way of the righteous, and the way of the wicked
shall perish.


Blessedness is that greatest good of man, which all desire and seek for it
self, and all other things for it: that Haven of rest, to which man drives
with all his sails, and oars, and there vnfraughts all his thoughts and
actions; sits down, and so acquieteth his soul, Where it is situate, and how
to shape our course to attain it, no Card or Compass, but only Gods Word can
direct us. They which sail thither without this Needle (do but observe them)
after with their guide they have compassed Sea and Land, finish their voyage in
the dead Sea. Most men, and almost all that travail this way, are wasted by
such Pilots, that it is no marvel to see them so widely or wildely to err
and wander.

The Covetous man sets Mammon at the stern, and makes no doubt, but to arrive
safely there with such a guide The Ambitious chooses Lucifer, and fully
persuades himself to attain it by his direction. The Voluptuous takes along
Beliall with him, (that dissolute and unthrifty companion) and fears not,
while he holds the rudder, to touch at this Land of Happiness. The very best,
and wisest not only of the Heathen, but worldly Professors resting themselves
upon Morality, and Form, have seemed to themselves and others a long time to
make a good voyage, but all at length split at one rock, and meet in the
gulf of destruction.

Some few embarking themselves in that sure, but despised Vessel of Gods word,
and utterly rejecting all other Pilots, giving up themselves unto the direction
of the blessed Spirit, have, not indeed without many storms, yet safely landed
their souls in that blessed Haven, and possessed the inheritance of rest and
promise. Prove. 8. 31.
Hence it is that the Wisdom of God whose delights are with the children of
men, Mat. 9. 36.
seeing such multitudes scattered, and wandering as sheep without a shepherd,
has compassion on them, and as well by his own, as by this his King of Heralds
voice, and by his Son (the wisest type of Wisdom) calls to these wandering
wretches: Prove. 9.6.
Forsake your way ye foolish, and you shall live, and walk in the way of
understanding.

Now of this Psalm, (where our happy estate is excellently described, and the
way to it plainly poynted out to us) it is fit to consider as well the Author
as the matter. The Author is either principal, or subordinate, our head Jesus
Christ, who by his Spirit indicted it, and the Prophet David, whom he used as
his Secretary, or hand to write it. The scope, as of all other Scripture, is to
be a lamp unto our feet, and a light unto our paths, Psalm. 119.105
and as the very finger of God, to point out the new, and dangerous, but
intising way to misery, and the old, and safe way, which leads to happiness.
The method or order is this. First our Guide shows us a far off, a general
and confused view of blessedness; the end of all our travel: then points out
the left hand way, which to an unwary eye seems fair, and likely, and warnes
us to take heed of it; which more perfectly he describes, by the several
periods of it. These are three. 1. walking in the counsel of the ungodly; 2.
standing in the way of sinners; 3. sitting in the seat of the scornful:

All this in the first verse.

Secondly, he sets out the true way to happiness, which seems the farthest
about, but is the nearest home^ and our several journies in it, which are but
two: first delighting; secondly, meditating in Gods word, which is amplified
from the time, day and night: And this is contained in the second verse.

Thirdly, in the next place he more distinctly and severally discovers this
happiness, that so he may win us to it; First, by a most familiar and
elegant similitude of a tree: 1. planted: 2. watered: 3. fruitful: 4.
flourishing: then by a part of it namely, prosperity. This in the 3 verse.

Fourthly h^ displayes the woeful estate of those who go the other way; first
negatiuely, They are not so: not blessed, not planted, not watered, not
fruitful, not flourishing, they prosper not. Again affirmatively, by a
comparison: they are as chafe blown away with the wind; and therefore shall
be separated from the wheat, and burnt with fire. This is deliver^d in the 4
and 5 v^rses.

Lastly in the sixth, he gives an infallible reason of all he speaks, namely,
the providence of God over-looking, and disposing both.

Now as a Guide, who undertakes only to bring us in the right way to our
journies end, in our passage will beguile the way with some discourse, or name
to us the Towns, Castles, Rivers, etc. by which we pass. So this holy Saint
leading us forward, entertaines the way with much profitable matter: pointing
out though obscurely old Babylon, and new Jerusalem, the false, and true Church
with their laws and manners. Having thus prepared the way, let us now enter
upon it, and in the first we will observe the Guide himself; from whom we gather
this proposition.

Proposition.
The Prophet David, and in him, the holy Ghost is the Author of this Psalm.

And that we may profit the more by this Teacher, let us consider how he is
qualified for this office: wise Princes, if they cannot make men fit for any
place, will choose such as are already made to their hand. But the Lords
election prepares, and enables his servants for any calling in his Church. Let
us then behold him either in his spiritual or temporal estate. First God
took him (the youngest of many brethren) from following the sheep, and made
him a Shepherd of men; King over his only people, the house of Israel; and
so filled his heart with wisdom, valor, and other gifts necessary for
government, that never any Prince jointly in them all, was more, or indeed
equally renowned. He blessed his reign with many famous victories; 2 Samuel 7. 9.
was with him wheresoever he went, cut off all his enemies, and made him a
great name, like the name of the great men which are on the earth.

Secondly, his spiritual estate may be considered either in his public
office, 2 Chronicles. 8.14
as he was a Prophet, a man of God, none more famous among the Prophets: or in
his private disposition, Acts 13, 22.
a man after Gods own heart, propounded as a pattern, especially to Princes;
whence it is that all his successors are either condemned for not following
him, or commended for treading in his footsteps.

For confirmation of this Proposition, Proof.
it is evident that the Holy Ghost is the prime Author of the Book of Psalms:
For all Scripture is inspired, and holy men spoke as they were moved by the
holy Ghost. 2 Timothy 3. 16.
Moreover our Savior reckons the Psalms with Moses, 2 Pet. 1. 20. 21.
and the Prophets as holy Scripture: Luke 24. 44. 45. Luke 20.42.
and David by Christ is entitled to this Book: and the Scripture gives
evident witness of the Spirit speaking by him; 2 Samuel 23.1,2
The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his word was in my tongue.

It will not be unprofitable to lay down some reasons or grounds of this
action, Grounds.
as well in God the principal, as in David the subordinate Author. The cause
then why God writes, and writes in this kind, by songs, and why he employes
David, as his hand, are either in himself, in us, or in this holy Proph^t. In
himself his gracious will and wisdom; Luke 10. 21.
He reveals and conceales these things, because it so pleases him. See also
Exodus 33. 13. 17. and Numb. 12. 6, 7, 8. In us whom he teaches, there are some
occasions, as 1. our difficulty in learning, especially things spiritual. 2.
our natural delight in Music. 3. A certain aptness in numbers to convey to
our minds, and settle in our memories these profitablelessons. The reasons why
he uses David in this employment, may be 1. the gift of Music, in which he
excelled. 2. the sanctifying gifts of Gods Spirit, which afforded ditties to
his notes, and by expressing his holy affections, filled others, on all
o^casions, to lay open, and pour out their hearts to God in prayer. In David
the cause of writing may be 1. his Faith: Psalm. 116. 10.
I believed therefore I spoke. 2. his love, desiring to draw others on to that
happiness, which himself had found. Join these together, and we shall find a
good ground of this action. We are unapt to learn, there is an aptness in
this kind of teaching to sink easier, and deeper into our minds: God knows
in his wisdom what is best for us, and his love will effect it; therefore
having-fitted David with this quality of holy Music, he stirs up his heart
to utter by faith, what he had learned, and by love to draw on our lagging
affections to the like gracious practice.

2 Timothy 3. 16.
Now because the Word of God whether written, or preached, is given for our use
and profit, for teaching, confuting, trying, comforting, and exhorting, that by
applying it partly to our understanding, we might grow in light, and be better
informed in our judgment, partly, to our will and affections, we might be
reformed, let us see what use we may make of this point, and first for our
instruction.

Instruction. 1. Learn then here, that man is of an indocible nature,
especially in things spiritual, hard to conceive, prone to forget; why else
should God himself undertake this Office? Why should he employ so many
Writers? so many Speakers? furnish them with all multiplicity of learning,
great variety of gifts, singular, and diverse utterance? Had we a good capacity
to conceive the lessons of the Spirit, were we of firm memory, to retain what
we had rightly conceived, all this labor had bin in vain, and needless.

No surely, our understandings are overwhelmed with a thick mist, an
Egyptian palpable darkness, not easily dispelled by this glorious light;
well may the beams of Gods word shine round about us, Zach. 7.12.
but until the Spirit of God shine in our hearts, and opens a window for it,
not one spark of light can enter. O^r affections are stones, our hearts
nether-milstones, Adamants, not without much labor and difficulty broken with
that hammer of God, unless also his Almighty hand hold the hands of his
workmen, and strike with them. How justly does our Master complain of us?
Esaias 28.9. 10.11.
Whom shall I teach knowledge? and whom shall I make to understand the things
that he hears? them that are weaned from the milk, and drawn from the
breast: for precept must be upon praecept, praecept upon praecept, line upon
line, line upon line, here a little and there a little: for with stammering
lips, and with another tongue will he speak to this people. Look as we t^ach
our Infants to speak, we meet them half way, by descending to their
stammering speech: we speak like children, that they may learn to speak like
men; we frame our words, and fit them to their tongues, we beat speech into
them by a continual, and never weary repetition^ Thus the Lord must deal with
vs^ He comes down to our infant capacity, 1 Cor. 3. 1.2
he speaks mil^e to us, not as he is able to utter, but as we are able to
bear. Secondly by many blows, Phil. 3. 1.
and often it^rations, redubling his praecepts, he drives in and fastens
instruction into us. We are dull of hearing, when we ought for our time to be
teachers, we had need to be ta^ght again which be the first principles of the
oracles of God. Heb. 5.11.12
When the Lord laid down the doctrine of regeneration, though we are teachers
in Isra^ll (as if we had no spirit in us) we dream of a carnal re-entrance
into the ^omb; and when it is further opened, and explained, John 3. 3.4.5 9.
10.
we conceive an impossibility in it, and ask how these things can be? When
Christ so plainly and frequently unfolds the mystery of his death and
resurrection, we (though his Apostles) so long conversant with him, understand
none of these things, neither perceive the things which are spoken. Luke 18.
31. 32. 33. 34.
If Christ warnes us of Pharisaicall leaven, our minds are presently thinking
of want of bread: Yet are we not more hard to conceive then easy to forget.
Math. 16 6.7.
How easily do we forget the consolation, which speaks to us as children?
Heb. 12. 5.
How easily do we forget the works which we have seen with our eyes? True it
is, things do not sink so deep into our minds through our ears, as through
our eyes, but how soon did the people of God forget his works which they saw?
Psalm. 78. 11. 42.
Certainly had those actions been not Gods, but some man's, things which
concern our temporal, not spiritual life, it had be^ne impossible so soon
to have razed them out of our minds. Oh! how often by this our untowardness
do we compel our most patient Doctor to chide with us; Ier. 2.32.
Can a maid forget her ornament, or a bride her attire? yet my people have
forgotten me days without number. O you of little faith, why do you think
thus? Mat 16 8.9.
Do you not yet perceive, nor remember? Nay many times we enforce him, Job.
33^14.16
When God speaks once, or twice, and we attend not, to open our ears by
corrections, and by smart to quicken us.

Gods wonderful patience, compassion, and goodness to us, in admitting to his
school such untoward scholars, and our happiness in such a Teacher. Happy is
the child, who being rude, and unteachable, dull, and blockish, meets with a
Master skillful to handle him, and patient in his defects; Our Doctor has the
keys of David, not only to unseale the book, but to unlock our minds, able
to make poor Fishermen instructors to the wisest, and most learned of all the
world. Admi^^ble is his patience, 1 Pet. 3. 20
Psalm. 95. 10.
with what great forbearance did he instruct the old world by Noah? How long
did he suffer the indocible Israelits in the wilderness? See also Esaias 30. 18.
As a man who meets with an unapt Scholar, plies him early and late, and
supplies with his own diligence, what the child wants in parts; so the Lord
rises up early every day, applies himself to us in all manner of teaching,
speaking to our eyes, in his works, Scripture, and Sacraments, to the ears by
preaching in season, and out of season, mingling even pleasure with profit,
instructing with delight, and builds up our souls with songs. If we count our
selves happy when we have placed our child with a skillful, honest, patient,
and painful man, who will teach him in any trade; infinitely happy are we,
that we are entered into his School, who is the only Doctor. Verily that which
the Heathens fained of their Amphion, we find true in our selves by
experience; that this heavenly music of our divine Singer, gathers together
stony hearts, quickens, and fits them to the Temple of Gods Spirit.

ear, and raise up our hearts to diligent attention: Do thou hear him take
out any lesson for thee of instruction, showing thee what is good, or evil,
what way leads to happiness, what carries thee to perdition: what thou must
choose, and practice, what thou must reject, and avoid? Remember then, and say
with thy self: It is that Divine wisdom, that Spirit of Truth, John 16 13.
who can neither lie, nor err, purposely sent to lead me into all truth; it is
even he that reads this Lecture to me; and he has chosen the mouth of a
Kingly Prophet to utter it, who having past through all estates, and by
continual study, and practice in the word of God, being grown wiser then his
enemies, then the ancient, of more understanding then all his teachers, Psalm.
119.98, 99,100.
from his experience, and by his example can yield me excellent direction, and
shall not I attend him? I will say, Speak Lord for thy Servant hears. Do
thou hear him, 1 Samuel 3. 9.
reproving openly those that sin, sharply rebuking, that men may be sound in
the ^aith? 1 Timothy 5. 20.
Oh then think with thy self; Tit. 1.13.
Is not this that most pure Spirit, whose eye cannot endure sin and
iniquity, Haba. 1. 13.
and who was purposely sent to reprove the world of sin, and does he not call
to me by such a tongue, John 16.8.
which having tasted the bitterness of sin, lifts up as bitter, and loud a
cry, Psalm. 51.7.
Purge me with Hysop, and I shall be clean, wash me, and I shall be whiter
then snow, and shall I not heed such a warning? I will hear the rod, and who
has appointed it. Mic. 6. 9.
When he pours forth the oil of comfort into thy wounded heart, bruised, and
broken with repentance: Take words to thy self, and say. This is that glorious
Comforter, whom my Savior has sent to dwell in me, Hos. 14 3.
and speak peace unto me, Ephe. 1.13.14
that he might be a seal, and earnest of his promises, and that inheritance
purchased with his blood. This oil he brings to my bleeding soul in that
horn of David, an horn taken from his Altar, consecrated, and fitted by that
holy Anointing; Psalm. 132^ 17.
I will therefore open my sores unto him, and call upon him: O Lord heal me
for my bones are vexed. Psalm. 6.2.
When thou art exhorted to walk in the good path, and to run in the way of
Gods commandments, thus meditate; It is the only true Way who has given me
his Spirit to lead me, and he now calls upon me by the voice of such a Guide,
who conducts me no farther, nor faster, then himself by his own example goes
before me; and shall not I hasten my slow feet, Psalm. 143.10
and spur on my dull affections to follow? Yes certainly, I will say unto
him, Cant. 1. 3.
Let thy good spirit lead me into the land of righteousness: Psalm. 119. 32.
Draw me and I will run after thee. O enlarge my heart, and I will run in the
way of thy Commandments. In all thy course let this thought of thy Guide never
depart from thee, but commune thus with thine own heart: what is there that
should stop me in this way? What is there that should not rather incite and
hasten me? Shall I say? I have great possessions, promoted to some high o^fice;
increased in children, keep a great family, and burdened with many affairs
both public and private? But how far did this my Guide exceed me in all
outward blessings? Yet I find that every where he uses them, as so many cords
to pull on his heart with more force to the practice of Godliness.

Should I complain of discouragements, trouble, contempt, poverty, affliction?
Psalm. 119. 87 51. 141. 143.
What a shame were this to me, when I hear him professing? They had almost
conumed me upon earth, but I forsook not thy precepts: The proud have had me
exceedingly in derision, yet have I not declined from thy Law. I am small, and
despised, yet do I not forget thy statutes. Trouble and anguish are come upon
me, yet are thy Commandments my delight. Follow therefore cheerfully so good
a Leader, and learn of him in riches, 1 Timothy 6. 18.
to be rich in good works, in poverty, to be poor in spirit; 1. Chron. 29.
3.4.
to employ all thy power to adorn and beautify the Temple of God within thee:
and when thou art despised by worldly Michals, for thy zeal and cheerfulness
in Gods service, 2 Samuel 6. 16. 20.21,
to be more vile, and low in thine own eyes.

2 Re^utation. Let us here not so much refute, as detest and accurse those
Popish blasphemies concerning this, and other Scriptures: Surely though a
reverend opinion, and speech of the written Word, be not ever an infallible
sign of a faithful Christian, yet an un-reverend aestimation, contemptuous,
and disgraceful speech, is a sure argument of infidelity, and Atheism. The
Ancients received the Scriptures as the Judge sent from heaven, and the voice
of Christ, which they durst not censure, but by which they censured all other
writings; yielding to the Canonical Scriptures, and to them alone, an
un-deniable consent. Thus Origin, thus Austen; August: cont. C^es commu. l. 2^
c. 31. 32
And above other Scriptures, they wonderfully extolled the Psalms: affirming
the Prophet was a most sweet and delightful companion of our journey,
relieving, and helping all sorts that travail this way, becoming all to all
men; that there is nothing which we may not learn in the Psalms; that such as
with a faithful, and serious mind exercise themselves in the Psalms, are in a
manner fellowed with the Angels of God. Thus Nazianzen, Austen, Chrysostom,
Bernard. Now how they which boast so much of Antiquity, and the only Church,
agree with the Ancients, and with the true Church, we may perceive in this
particulars. It is almost incredible how basely, and despitefully they speak
of the Oracles of God. Let me clear this point a little. 1. They a^firme the
Scriptures Andrad: Orthod. Rhem. test.
mistie, and dark, despising that woe pronounced on those who call light
darkness, and darkness light: 2 Pet. 3.
nor once fearing in evident terms to contradict the Spirit of truth, Esaias 5.
20.
who so often calls it light. 2. They obscure it by many Council. Trid. S^ss. 3.
Apocryphal, and humane writings, which (as the Moon under the Sun mingled
with the word of truth, make a fearful Eclipse in the Church: commanding
those Bastard writings to be received as the Genuine, with aequall authority
and estimation. 3. They have set up an earthly Meteor, exhaled from their own
brain to be ((...)) another counterfeit Sun to confront the true, in
pretense, to supply the defects of it. This is their Council. Triden. Sess 3.
Traditions, in word equaling, but in deed, preferring them before the
Scripture. 4. The better to depresse the splendor of it, they have labored to
hide it under a bushel, under the veil of an Ibid.
unknown tongue. And of many other have they chosen the Vulgar translation as
Authentical, which of all the rest is known, and by some of their own
confessed, to be the most barbarous, spotted and defective, commanding it
(under censure of Anathema) to be received, and in no pretense whatsoever, in
any thing rejected. 5. They affirm the Scripture is no further a light, then
it shall please the Pope to kindle, and light it up by his breath and
interpretation; Hosi^ de expr. Dei verb.
defining, that whatsoever has the holy Fathers exposition, has the very word
of God, though he know not whether it do, nor how it can possibly agree with
the word expounded: peremptorily decreeing, that no man presume to receive it
in any other sense, then the holy Mother Church interprets it, whose
Prerogative it is to unfold it. 6. With monstrous impudence they dare
maintain, that the Bellar. de Sacra^ lib. 2^ c. 25.
strength of all former Councels (and if of all, then of that Council also,
which was held by the Apostles) and all Doctrines depends upon the authority of
the present Church. Lastly they reproach and revile it, that it is a Pig^. de
Hi^rar. l. 3.
nose of wax, a Lesbian, or leaden rule: that it may be well defended, as
godlily spoken, that the Scriptures without the Churches authority, is of no
more force then AEsops fables: and there the same Hosius sticks not plainly
to say, Hosi. de anchor. scrip.
that the Scripture should have little weight with them, without the Churches
authority. Nay, a Priest in a controversy with my self, blasphemously averres
(which testimony of Jesuitical doctrine I will ever keep by me) that the
Scripture was not written by the command of God, nor of set purpose, but by
chance. I have seen some so grossly painted, that the daubing, being melted
in the Sun, has hung by drops upon their cheeks, discovering their
deformity, publishing their shame: Thus it is with this painted whore of Rome.

As thus they spue out their gall upon the Scriptures in general (for they are
those two faithful witnesses which vex these earthly men) Rev. 11. 10.
so especially has that Pillar of the Council held in Constance, H^siu^.
disgorged his spleen against the book of Psalms in particular. David (says
he) wrote some f^w Psalms, why might he not? For even now no Prince is
forbidden to make rithmes, psalm^s, or verses in the praise of God; all sorts
of us learned and unlearned turn Poets: Thus far the Cardinal. Consider now
whether this be not the beast, which usurpes the horns, the power of the
Lamb, Rev. 13.11.
but speaks with the tongue of the Dragon.

Reproof 1. First, those are here to be rebuked, who from this gracious
dealing of God, continually plying them by ceaseles teaching, admoni^hing, and
exhorting, take no notice of their indisposition, and backwardness, nor give
any credit unto this truth, when this their untowardnesse is evidently
discovered unto them. It is strange to see what strangers men are at home; like
some idle Gallants, who wander through all the world, and know nothing of their
own Country: Prove. 17.24.
So these Salomons fools, their eyes walk through the world, but never look
into their own hearts. Surely as the eyes of our body stand naturally outward,
and cannot turn themselves to spy out any thing within; so the minds of
natural men can roll themselves every way, but have no sight inward. Hence it
is, that wicked men being altogether unacquainted with themselves, and mere
forreiners in their own hearts, cannot endure to be alone: (which the
Philosopher gives as a good reason, why impious men hate solitariness;) and
hence flows that vain, and proud conceit of our own abilities, despising and
censuring others, discerning every mote in our neighbors, but not the beam in
our own eye. How scornfully did the Pharisees hear themselves taxed with
blindness? Ioh. 9.39. 40.
They could soon spy the Apostles hands unwashed, but never dreamt of their
own unwashed hearts and those stinking in-sides which never felt any water. Mat
15. 2.
Luke 5.33.
How soon could they find out the Apostles not so frequently fasting, as
themselves? but the stews in their own eyes, fraught with adulteries, the
carrion of their own spirits rotting in the grave of hypocrisy, but fairly
whited over, they never thought of it. As the blind man in the Gospel could
perceive nothing, till his eyes began to be opened, but then soon had feeling
of his imperfection in sight, and the first thing he saw was his want of
perfect sense, discerning men as trees: so while we lie in the darkness of
ignorance, we discover no weakness; but so soon as the light of Gods spirit
enters into the heart, we presently find out a world of wickedness: what man
is able (till God set in his hand) to make the ignorant man see and acknowledge
his ignorance? As the natural, so the spiritual fool, the greater idiot he
is, the better he conceits of himself, as wiser then seven men that can
render a reason. Prove. 26.16.
The truth is they have not so much wit as to know they have none: who can
persuade the natural man, ^sal. 406.
that his heart is an Adamant, that his ear is im-passable, and must be bored?
See the conceit of men, Deuteronomy. 5. 27. Deuteronomy. 29.4.
Do but you (say they to Moses) hear God, and declare it to us, and we will
hear and do it: this they ignorantly and arrogantly spoke of themselves, when
yet God had not given them hearts to perceive, eyes to see, ears to hear unto
that day. Thus is it at this day with those, whose eyes, ears, and hearts God
has not opened; they neither do, nor can perceive their own wants, and so
think, and speak proudly of themselves, that they have good hearts to God,
that they have good intents, strong faith, love to God with all their souls,
etc. But when God sheds his light into their souls, what a cloud of ignorance,
hardness of heart, what coldness, what deadnes, what unbelief, what a world of
factious flesh rebelling against the spirit, do they perceive in th^mselues?
Take heed of this spiritual pride rooted in ignorance; for as the corn must
grow downward, before it can shoot upward, so must thou fall in thy self,
before thou can rise in Christ, dye to thy self, before thou can live to
him; 1 Cor. 3. 18.
learn first to be a fool, before thou can be wise.

God speaks in his word, whither we hear or read^ If Christ had not known
both our carelessness in hearing, and danger of this negligence; he would not
need^esly have warned us, Luke 8. 18.
take heed how you hear: and so frequently have wakened our attention, crying
out, Luke 8.8.
he that has ears to hear, let him hear. Some out of weakness, together
with Satan's lying in wait, and want of right preparation, soon forget what
they are doing; never imagining that the work of their salvation is in hand;
and that Christ himself by the mouth of his mess^ngers is treating with them.
When we read the word, too seldom do we observe who holds the hand of the
writer, and thus the devil steals away our life from us. Certainly most
hearers are as the high way, their hearts and ears so traversed and trampled
by vain thoughts, and worldly cares going and coming, and continually passing
to and fro, that they hear little, observe less, profit nothing: why do not
we spy out our dissolute behavior, and judge our selves before God? Ier. 5.12.
Nay how many are there which deny the Lord, and say it is not he? The
obstinate resolution of many to continue in sin, so hardens their hearts,
that they deny their own^ knowledge, and will not believe, what they dare not,
nor cannot gainsay.

See those Israelites; they knew Jeremy a true Prophet, (for they had a
deare-bought experience of God speaking by him) therefore they come to inquire
of him, Ier. 42.2:5. and 43. 2.
and solemnly swear to follow the advice of God given by him: yet when he
crossed them in their particular and purposed designs, they give him (nay indeed
their own consciences witnessing for him) the lie; Thou speak slalsly. Thus
when the covetous hears the thunders of the word against riotours, or the
riotour against the niggard, they can yield some honor to it, and at least in
word acknowledge the voice of God: but when the reproof is brought home to
their own doors, and laid to their hearts, then presently we shall hear, the
Prophets shall be as the wind, the word is not in them, thus shall it be to
them. Ier. 5.13.


If we could but open our eyes to see the danger of this careless behavior,
surely it would provoke us to more diligence; the danger either in respect of
God or the creature. The crows are not so busy in thy seed-time, as these
wicked spirits in this heavenly tillage to make thee a fruitless and so an
accursed ground. How lamentable were the estate of a Town half affamished,
and round beleagred with a strong enemy, who kept them from all succor, that
they might see even at their gates store of corn sent by their friends, but no
entrance for it by reason of the enemy. This is their condition: The food of
eternal life is sent by Christ, brought by his messengers, stands ready at the
ear to enter, but the devil bars the gate, and turns it from them. In
respect of God the danger is yet greater; for he has protested to yield us the
like measure, Mark 4. 24.
as we shall see more largely hereafter: if we suffer him thus to go after us,
entreating us to turn, and be reconciled, and we are careless; the tide shall
change, when we shall as earnestly cry and howl for mercy, and he will laugh
at our destruction: see his word, Prove. 1. 24, 26, 28. and the deed answering
it, Zach. 7. 12, 13.

Exhortation. Let us therefore shake out this spiritual drowsinesse, wake our
ears, and watch them to keep them waking: let this thought be ever in thy
heart to hold them open; I see indeed a man, but I hear the Lord, the voice is
man's, but the word is Gods: whether I consider the power and authority, or the
love of the speaker, or matter of the speech, necessity of attention lies upon
my soul. He is my sovereign Lord, Ephe. 4^ 19.
in whose hand is my life and death, temporal and eternal, his love
wonderful, passing the love of all creatures, passing knowledge: the subject
of his speech is my happiness, laying down plainly before mine eyes the way
of my eternal life; and should I neglect such a speech, and such a speaker?
Thus when we have provoked our hearts to this duty, let us inquire the means
enabling us to perform it, and constantly practice them. Means 1. Labor to
empty thy heart, and to cast out the ignorant conceit of knowledge; Luke 1.53.
he feeds the hungry: Away with that proud opinion of goodness and ability.
2. Consider the necessity, and the nature of the word, purposely sent to
supply it, Romans 1. 16.
being the wisdom and power of God to salvation.

Verse I. Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly,
nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful.
The body of this Psalm has these two especial members. 1. The double estate
of man. 2. The cause of it; both which the Holy Ghost propounds as the
strongest incentiues to godliness. The first is as a cord of love to draw; the
second as a whip to drive us. The estate of man is either blessed and happy, or
cursed and miserable. The blessed described first more confusedly and
generally, in that word Blessed (or as in the Hebrew blessednesses) where thus
God reasons with us; Thou desire to be blessed, all thy actions, all thy
wishes tend to this issue: but lo yonder is true blessedness, and I am here
ready to be thy Guide, and have to this end lent thee my word, to be a lamp to
thy feet, and a light to thy paths, Psalm. 119.105
up then, follow me, and I will certainly bring thee to all thy wishes.

Secondly, he points out the way to attain it: and first that which must be
left and forsaken, which is three fold; 1. the counsel of the ungodly: 2.
standing with sinners. 3. sitting with the scornful. Then he sets out the
path, which we must take, and walk in: namely, the Word, this we do as well
by delighting, as meditating in it: these are the two feet which carry us in
the way to happiness, and this meditation amplified by the time, day and
night; so thus God pleads with us, would thou go in the strait way to
happiness? the shortest cut, nay the only tract is by holiness, take heed
therefore of those three left hand paths: thou shall see ungodly men walk in
evil counsel, obstinate sinners stand in perverse ways, mockers sit down in
the chair of scorning: all these may seem to flesh and blood fair and
likely; but take thou heed, turn aside, and enter not into them, and know that
they lead thee through vanity to destruction: but lo, there lies directly
before thee, a narrow path of meditating, and delighting in the word of God,
set in thy foot here, take this strait way, and it shall certainly bring thee
to thy desired ends: and know howsoever it seems at first hard, and much
about, thou shall find it pleasant, and the nearest way to thy home.

Thirdly, this happy condition of man is more particularly set out to the view,
and clearly revealed unto us. 1. by a most elegant similitude of a tree, 1.
planted: 2- watered: 3. fruitful: 4. ever flourishing: 2. by some part of it,
namely Prosperity, where thus again our Guide confers with us; Lift up thine
eyes now, and behold right before thee the joy of life, the crown of thy
labors, the haven of all thy desires; see how directly this path leads thee to
the true vine Christ Jesus, and grafts thee in him, in whom only thou art
blessed with all spiritual blessings: behold how these waters of the Sanctuary
flowing from the well of life, fill thee with fruit, and sustain thee in a
most flourishing estate: consider from the time thou have constantly set thy
foot in this way, I will bless thee, and make a^l thy ways to prosper.

In the next place the cursed state of man is laid down 1. negatiuely, not so
the wicked; that is, not blessed, but cursed; not planted, but wild; not
watered, but parched; not fruitful, but barren; not ^lourishing, but
withering, and blasted; not prospering, but confounded: 2. positiuely, 1. by a
comparison of chafe, driven by the wind: 2. by a double consequent, they
cannot stand in the day of judgment, nor in the congregation of the just.

Lastly he shows the cause of both^ namely, the Providence of God over-looking
and overruling all creatures where yet further we may hear our gracious God
instructing us: Look yonder, and view well the issue and end of these men,
which take the other way, ^^e further they go, the further they wander from
that which they seek, they are in a very wilderness, wild, dry, and barren,
see there how they are stubbed up, and cast into the fire: Psalm. 73.19.
how suddenly are they destroyed, perished, and horribly consumed? Know then
the paths of men are directed by the Lord, wait thou therefore on the Lord,
Psalm. 37.23. 24.
and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee, and thou shall inherit the Land:
when the wicked men shall perish, thou shall see it.

Now in this first verse observe 1. the way: 2. those that go in it: 3. their
proceedings or journies: every one of these expressed in three several
degrees; In the way mark 1. the entrance, counsel: 2. the continuance or
progress, the habitual practice of sin more specially here called the way: 3.
the uttermost extent of it rest or seat.

The persons of wicked men going in this way, are either the ungodly (dissolute
careless men, Phil. 3.19.
whose belly is their God, who mind earthly things) hypocrites and Atheists in
heart, who have given up and sold themselves unto the world: or 2. the sinner,
the notorious customary sinner, who proclaims his sin as Sodom: 3. the
mocker, who derides, and makes a jest of Religion: Lastly, their proceedings
are metaphorically expressed by those three positions of the body, walking,
standing, and sitting.

This then is the first proposition offering it self to our consideration.

Proposition.
The Prophet pronounces them blessed who walk not in the counsel of the
ungodly.

Wh^re some words had need to be unfolded. 1. That word Blessed, is of the
plural number in the original, and literally should be rendered Blessednesses:
for blessedness is the sum of many particular blessings, and may be
considered, either in the beginnings or perfection of it. The perfect
blessedness consists in a full removal of all evil, and ceaseles enjoying
all that good of which we are ^^pable. The imperfect blessedness may stand
with many evils, but requires such proportion of good which out-weighs the
evil for the present, and will at length certainly end in perfection. Mat. 5.
11.
For our Savior doubts not to pronounce those blessed, who are grievously
persecuted; and the reason is, Romans 5. 3. and 8. 18.
because we rejoice in tribulation, and the present afflictions are not worthy
of the glory which shall be showed us: nay, he affirms those that mourn
blessed; Mat. 5.4.
and such as hunger and thirst for righteousness; and observe the reason there
given by our Lord, because (though they are not yet) they shall be satisfied.
Thus the eternal Truth, who is blessed for ever, and the fountain of all
blessings, and blessedness, doubts not to style those blessed, who pressed with
much evil, yet have more comfort, and though yet imperfect, shall in time
attain perfection.

2 Walking, is a common metaphor in Scripture, signifying our conversation and
frame of life. The body is said to walk, when the feet carry it from one
place to another; so when our affections and desires move us from the practice
of good to evil, or from evil to good, we are said to walk in it: thus to
walk after the Law, is to frame our conversation to the direction of the law,
Act^ 21.24.
to walk after the spirit, is to square our actions according to his rule in
the Gospel.

3. Counsel may be here taken either for the devise which men follow
themselves, or advise which they give us.

4. The ungodly are such who have no true knowledge of God, to fear, trust, and
love him, but either openly in word (as some) or as more in their deeds
proclaim their Atheism of heart, or else closely deceiving others, and many
times th^mselues (as those Scribes and Pharisees hypocrites) under profession of
religion bury a dead and rotten heart. This then is the ^ense of the words.
Whosoever forsakes the advice which Atheists and hypocrites take themselves,
and give others; and avoid them, not conversing, or framing his life with them
in their course, he is already in a blessed estate, not indeed of perfection,
but yet such as here out-weighing any evil, will surely bring him to
perfection.

This is proved by frequent testimonies: Proof.
forsake your way you foolish, and you shall li^e and walk in the way of
understanding. He that desires to see good must eschew evil: Prove. 9.6.
so our Savior, blessed are you when they separate you: Psalm. 34.12. 13. 14.
see also 2 Cor. 6. 17. 18. Luke 6. 22.


The reasons of this speech in the Prophet may be diverse 1. His knowledge
gotten in the Sanctuary, Grounds.
where he clearly saw his former error. He (as most men) was not a little
shaken, with seeing some outward prosperity, and glorious paintings of
happiness in wicked men, but when he came into the sanctuary of God, Psalm.
73.17. 18. 19.
the veil was taken from his eyes, and he discov^red their misery. 2. His
experience of this work of Gods providence, Psalm. 37.35. 36.
I have seen the wicked strong, and spreading himself like a green bay tree,
yet he passed away, and lo^ he was gone, and I sought him, but he could not be
found. 3. His compassion and pity to wandering souls, carried away with the
vain pomp, and seeming prosperity of the wicked. 4. The spreading nature of
grace, wherewith his heart was seasoned, which contrary to earthly happiness,
delights lights to impart it self to others, as knowing that maine difference
betwixt earthly and heavenly riches, that the earthly are diminished, the
heavenly multiplied by distribution.

Instruction.
These may be the grounds of this action in the Prophet, whence we learn first
this Instruction;

As long as thou live in this wicked world, thou shall not fail to hear
wicked counsel; ungodly men will be at both ears, and not cease to give thee
such advice, as may provoke to lewd and ungodly courses. Thou shall hear the
profane Atheist (perhaps more covertly, yet to the same purpose) persuade thee:
Job 21.15.
Who is the Almighty that we should serve him, and what profit should we have
if we should pray unto him? Mal. 3.14,15.
It is in vain to serve God, and to walk humbly before him: the proud are
blessed, and they that work wickedness are set up, and they that tempt God, are
delivered. Thou shall hear the unrighteous man intising: Pro. 1.11,12, 13, 14.
Come with us, we will lay wait for blood, and lie privily for the innocent
without a cause; we will swallow them up alive, like a grave, eve^ whole, as
they that go down into the pit: we shall find all precious riches, and fill our
houses with spoil. Cast in thy lot among us, we will all have one purse. Thou
shall hear the intemperate man persuading: Isay 56. 12.
come I will bring wine, and we will fill ourselves with strong drink, and to
morrow shall be as this day and much more abundant: 1 Cor. 15. 32.
Come let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. That malicious enemy
of man is a cunning fowler; he has ever his stalking horse by him, and when he
has taken any captive soul, he makes it a stall to invite others: most
forcibly he allures, when he is least seen; therefore will he ever shroud
himself there, where he is least suspected: he will hide himself behind some
good friend, who wishes us well; Genesis 3. 6.
he will borrow Eves hand to reach the apple to Adam, and his wives tongue to
shake Jobs patience, Job. 2.9.
he will abuse his well-meaning friends by planting in repentance, to root
out his faith.

Thus he covered his serpents sting in Peter's tongue, Master spare thy self:
Mat. 16.21, 23.
thus did he ever, thus does he now, but then especially will he try all his
wits, when he sees thou beginnest to suspect thy way, and now fear that this
broad path leads thee to perdition. If once it come into thy heart, by the
motion of the Spirit in his word, to put off this form and carcass of
godliness, and to labor for the life and power of it, instantly he will set
before thee the straitness of this narrow gate, by which thou must pass;
where thou must lay down thy profits, pleasures, and bid them farewell for
ever: he will tell thee of a tedious and irksome way overgrowne with thorns,
and briars, skornes and scoffs of men, Psalm. 35.15.
tearing, and ceasing not, hate there, where thou expectest, and have hitherto
enjoyed much love, and perhaps deserved it: and when once he has softened thy
heart by these, and many other such suggestions, he will send in some of his
Agents to speak for him, and strike while it is hot: many times such, nay most
frequently such that know not what they do, a parent, a child, a friend, a
wife, that shall skrue into thy heart with pleasing insinuations and speak
words welcome to ^^^sh and blood: as, why will you enter into such an austere
and sour kind of life? there is no joy, no solace in it; many by these courses
have come to much sorrow of mind, and never knew merry hour after: What?
Think you that none but such strait-laced creatures can enter into Gods
Kingdom? Do you not see your Father, a wise man, this, or that scholar,
such, or such a Minister use no such spiced conscience, and yet make no doubt
but to do as well as you, and come to heaven before you? It is not amiss, will
some say, that you are turned into the right path, but why go you so fast? It
is good to use temper and moderation, Be not righteous overmuch; such hot
spirits soonest tire, and seldom hold out. Thus will he labor to quench the
Spirit, and first ^ndeavouring to rake up those sparks of that fiery Baptism,
under the cover of more stayednesse, and better temper, will soon bring thee
to luke-warmnesse, and a little after drown and freeze thy heart in a deep
security, and so one devil being cast out a while, brings in seven other
worse then himself.

God is compared to leaven, Mat. 13.33.
which is hid in three peckes of meal, till all is leavened. Mark 9.50.
Fitly is grace resembled to salt, which has not only seasoning in it self,
but imparts it to any thing that touches it: Psalm. 34. 8^ 11
Thus here the Psalmist having purged out that old leaven, and entered into the
new lump, both here and every where invites and pulls on others to the same
condition. Thus is it with all the Saints, when Andrew had found Christ, John
1. John 4.
he draws along with him his brother Peter^ when Christ had called Philip,
Philip calls Nathanaell^ the woman of Samaria invites all her Townsmen. Do but
find one gracious man, who has received this treasure, and hides it up in a
napkin? No certainly; Grace is a Baptism of fire, which catches any thing
that is near, and kindles it with the same flame, spreading, and stretching it
self round about. And as the natural life in all creatures desires to impart
it self, and to bring forth the like; so especially in this new creature, (as
being far more good, and therefore more communicatiue.) Hence also is it,
that the Prophet describes the calling of the Gentiles by their mutual
exhortations, and inciting one the other: Come let us go up into the mountain
of the Lord, and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths,
and presently after the Prophet from an holy zeal and emulation calls out to
his Countrymen: Esaias 2^ 3.5.
O house of Jacob, come, and let us walk in the light of the Lord: as if he
had said; O ye Israelites, shall the Gentiles, forreiners, and strangers,
flock and flow to the house of God, to give up their names to Christ by
thousands into his army: and shall we Natives, his own people, his flesh,
stand still? Shall the wild Olive be grafted in, and we the natural branches
be cut off? Shall those starved creatures, from their hunger, crowd him, thrust
and throng him, and snatch the Kingdom of heaven with violence: and shall we
who have tasted and known his infinite sweetness, go away empty? O no; for
shame, if not for glory, pluck up your feet, mend your pace, follow me, and
let us never suffer, that we who have set out so long before them, should now
be cast behind, and come short of the goal. Compare that parallel place with
this: Zecha. ^. 20. 21.
Thus says the Lord of Hoasts, that there shall yet come people, and the
inhabitanes of great Cities: and they that are in one City, shall go to
another, saying: Up, let us go and pray before the Lord, and seek the Lord of
hosts: I will go also. In which words he that has an ear cannot but hear
the new-quickned soul, enlivened in the first resurrection, call unto such as
are yet dead in trespasses, and buried in the grave of their lusts: Prove. 6 9.
How long wilt^ thou sleep O sluggard? ^ when will thou arise out of sleep?
The day spring from on high has visited us; Luke 1.7.^.
Awake thou that sleep, Ephesians. 5. 14.
rise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. 1 These. 4. 10.
The Lord himself is descended from heaven with the voice of that Arch-angell
of the Covenant, and with the trumpet of God. John 3. 19.
Open thine eyes, and see that great light is come into the world, and shall we
love darkness more then light, Because the grave could not rise up to life,
therefore life is come down into the grave: up then let us lay down the body
of death, and joyfully together run into his embraces.

Certainly as that woman in the Gospel, Luke 15.
when she had lighted up a candle, swept, and searched her house, and at length
found her money, could not hold in her affection, which brake an open passage
from the heart to the mouth, calling others to rejoice with her: so when the
eyes of our mind, by the light of GODS word have found out that heavenly
treasure, it fills (as new wine) the heart with gladness, and it must have
vent. As this Prophet, ( I believed, therefore did I speak) so will it be with
the faithful. We also believe, and therefore we speak. Psalm 116. 10.
2 Cor. 4^13.


Come out from among them, and be ye separate; 2 Cor. 6. 17.
but how far it must be stretched, is necessary to be a little opened. 1.
Therefore in respect of place, a separation is not exacted: we must go out of
the world, if we thus separate. 2. nor much less in exercise of Christian
duties: 1 Cor. 5.^0.
that were manifestly impious; David did not run out of the tabernacle, when he
saw Doeg there: the ^ares shall grow with the wheat, neither will the good corn
pluck out it self, because the weeds are mingled with it: Mat. 25.32.
that separation is reserved for the last day^ as a part of our perfect
happiness. But this separation must be first inward in the heart: as a bodily
eye cannot see a spiritual substance, so a carnal man cannot with a fleshly
eye perceive spiritual things, hence he judges them foolish. 1 Cor. 2. 14.
The spiritual man by a spiritual light sees and acknowledges it to be the
wisdom of God: And we speak wisdom among them that are perfect, not the
wisdom of this world, 1 Cor. 2. 6, 7.
etc. but we speak the wisdom of God: here is a manifest separation in
understanding and judgment. 2. The carnal person savours the things of the
flesh; he feels no sweetness, no relish in those spiritual dainties, Romans 8.
5.
but embraces the present world, and takes his portion in it. Contrary, Romans
8.5.
the spiritual man savours the things of the spirit: how sweet are thy words
unto my taste, yea sweeter then honey unto my mouth! Thy testimonies have I
taken for an heritage for ever: for they are the rejoicing of my heart: Psalm.
119.103 111.
here we see a palpable difference and opposition in their will and affections:
Again there is an outward and more open separation in their external actions:
the worldly man as he has his treasure and heart, so likewise his conversation
on earth, he minds earthly things, even in heavenly affairs; but the others
conversation is in heaven. Look first to their speech^ Phil. 3.19^20.
Psalm. 5 9.
you shall find the mouth of a carnal man an open sepulcher belching out
stinking breath in oaths, curses, lies, slanders, making nothing of idle,
jesting, wanton, and rotten talk: but even vain, and idle, how much more
unsavory and rotten speech must not once be named among Saints: Ephe. 5.3,4.
he must turn the current of his words to edification, to minister grace to
the hearers, his speec^ must be always in grace, Ephe. 4. 29^
seasoned with that salt of the Sanctuary, that it may be a pleasing and
acceptable sacri^ice: Colos. 4.6.
and because he knows it an untamed monster, James 3. 7,8.
not to be subjected by man, he calls to him for help, who is able to subdue
all things to himself: Psalm. 141. 3.
Set a watch O Lord before my mouth, keep the door of my lips: the like
contrariety shall we find in all their actions. In their society also and
company there must be a separation. For 1. in general, we may not delight in
such (as they are such) with some we may and ought to converse, while we have
hope to do them good: thus our Savior with Publicans: so likewise with
Princes, Parents, Masters, under whose authority God has subjected us. 2.
Howsoever we may relieve bodily necessities of the most wicked men, and
obstinate in their wickedness, of whose conversion we have no hope, yet must
we (as much as duty to God and man, and civility will give leave) avoid them.
Tit. 3.10.
Reject an heretic after once or twice admonition: but now have I written unto
you, not to keep company, 1 Cor. 5.11.
if any man that is called a brother be a fornicatour, or covetous, or an
idolater, or railer, or a drunkard, or extortioner, with such an one no not to
eat. 2 These. 3.14.
If any man obey not our word, note that man, and keep not company with him.
Consider the disposition of this man, Psalm. 139.3. and 26. 4, 5.
a man after Gods own heart: O that thou would slay the wicked: depart from
m^e you bloody men. I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in
with dissemblers. I hate the congregation of evil doers, and will not fit with
the wicked. ^useb. l. 3. ^. 25
It is recorded of S. John the Apostle, that he would not stay in the bath,
where he saw C^rinthus a father of heretics: Id. l. 4. c. 14.
and of Polycarpus his scholar, that when he was saluted by Marcion, a
notorious heretic, and demanded in a familiar manner if he knew him, he
instantly answered, I know thee the firstborn of Satan: so Paphnutius an holy
Confessor, would not himself, nor suffer Maximus Bishop of Jerusalem to tarry
in the Council assembled against Athanasius. Neither should any man think
this strange; For we wonder not to see sheep run from wolves, or dogs, to
their flocks, or not converse with swine: well might we wonder to see doves
sort themselves with kites or crows. Christians are the sheep of Christ (
John 10. 11.) his doves, ( Cant. 6. 8. Isay 60. 8.) all men choose their company
either for likeness of affection or for some pleasure, or profit which they
either do, or hope to receive from such society. But as Christians are new
creatures, most contrary to other men, (these darkness, those light, Ephe. 5.
8.) so can they expect no pleasure or profit by seeing, or hearing God
dishonored, and their holy profession slandered. Remember the Apostles
admonition, Ephe. 5.11.12
Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove them
rather: for it is a shame to speak of those things, which are done of them in
secret.

The Elect of God not only shall be hereafter, but are already blessed.

For as here the Prophet, so elsewhere our Savior determines, that for the
present they are blessed; even when they are under persecution, Mat. 5. 11.
Blessed are you when men persecute you, etc. Nay, without all question, if in
this respect we compare them with other men, though it may seem a paradoxe, it
cannot be denied, that there is less distance between a Saint on earth, and
the blessed estate of Saints in heaven, then between the condition of wicked,
and holy men even in this world. Eccle. 9.4.
Better is a living dog, then a dead lion; happier is the poorest Lazarus
raised from the death of sin, then the most stately Epicure who dead in
sins, rots in the grave of his lusts. Who can deny, but that there is more
difference between the dead and the living, then between the weak and strong?
Now the blessedness of man consists in this especially, that he is partaker of
the divine nature, and the life of God.

As therefore the newborn infant has life as well as the best grown, so
has the faithful, who is begotten of God, and borne anew, the true
blessedness, though he is short of perfection. True it is that to a carnal
eye there is no such appearance; the fleshly and worldly man discernes no such
thing: nay, he takes the godly man to be the most miserable on earth; and no
marvel, for how should the lower nature reach up to the higher, and
transcendent? How should a tree conceive of sense, or a beast of reason? The
natural man therefore who perceiues not this spiritual estate, nor cannot
conceive aright of it, may easily applaud himself, and despise that which he
knows not: but the higher nature comprehending the inferior, can rightly
judge of both: man easily discernes between sense and reason, and knows well
which is to be preferred. Search all the world, and thou shall never find a
Saint, Heb. 11. 26.
who prizes not the rebuke of Christ, before all the treasures of Egypt. And
that we may better see this blessed estate of a true Christian, and with more
thankfulness remember it, do but consider a little his present condition;
weigh together the evil yet pressing him, and the good comforting; Thou will
say, he is full of sorrow and mourning, but, blessed are they that mourn: he
feels this godly sorrow to be such, as he repents not of it; Mat 5. 4.
he knows that it is better to go to the house of mourning, then to the house
of feasting. Eccle. 7.4.
Thou perhaps dislikest his condition, as being bound, and wained from earthly
and worldly delights and pleasures: but first he knows his liberty, in any
lawful use of the creature, and for abuse, in which the worldling has set all
his joy, he accounts, and indeed knows it to be a deadly poison, a toad, a
serpent, as venomous, as loathsome, and as much detesteth, as any can approve
it. Thou will say; None are so obnoxious to injury, to contempt, and despite
of all men: Mat. 5. 11. 12.
he knows all these troubles to be as so many gemmes set in his crown of
glory. 2 Cor. 4 17.
Thou will add, besides these outward fightings, how many terrors are there
within: but he will tell thee, he is one of the Israel of God, and in all
these wrastlings with men and Angels shall prevail: Romans 8. 38.
so that nothing neither life, nor death, principalities, height, depth, things
present, or to come shall separate him from the love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord. Put now in the other balance those particular blessings which
make up his happiness here on earth: do but go along with him, while he
leads thee through the palace, or rather temple which God has built within
him. First, thou shall see a little heaven in his understanding, wherein all
those bright stars of the Apostles and Prophets shed their beams, nay, where
Christ himself, that great Light and Sun of the world is risen; look into
his heart, and thou shall see a little paradise, planted with all choice,
immortal, and heavenly fruit, and in the midst God himself walking; even a
third heaven, where in the throng of Saintly thoughts God himself has set his
throne. Thou may (perhaps) see some battles against sin, wrastlings with
corruption, combats with principalities and powers, but with God a most sweet
peace, Phil. 4.7.
a peace which passes all understanding. Psalm. 45. 13.


In a word, thou shall find him all glorious within, rich, and stored with much
abundance and infinite wealth: 1 Cor. 3.22.
Whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or
things present, or things to come, all are his: nay, he that is all in all, God
is his. The Father has already begotten him to himself: Christ is his head:
James 1.18.
the holy Ghost his comforter, Ephesians. 1. 13. 14. 22.
and earnest of that glorious inheritance purchased for him: the Father so
loved him, that he has given him his only beloved Son; the Son so
honored him, that he has bestowed his life upon him, and parted with him his
Kingdom: the holy Ghost so delighted in him, that he dwells in him, enlivens
him, leads, sustaines, strengthens, and will never forsake him, till he is
enthroned in heaven. No marveile therefore if blessed Augustine feared not to
affirm; A^g in Psalm. 148.
It is more that he has already done for thee, then what he has promised to
do: what has he done? he has died for thee; what has he promised? that thou
shall live with him; It is more incredible that the Eternal should once die,
then that thou a mortal should live for ever. He has promised heaven, but
given the Lord of heaven and earth; Certainly, he that ponders these good
things which the faithful already possess, shall soon find them more
weighty, then any evil which now they suffer.

Christ? Get this first lesson by-heart, that he is blessed who is indeed a
Christian: know, and ever remember that man may teach thee to preserve a whole,
or repair a decayed body; how to secure thy earthly estate, or wring it out of
the hand of a griping oppressor: but thy souls health and happiness is only
taught by God: and no humane science will presume to lead thee ^o true, and
everlasting blessedness, but one, even this of the heavenly Doctor: thus he
here teaches thee in the Psalmist, Blessed is the man, etc. Thus also that
Eternal Wisdom in that wise Solomon instructs thee, blessed is the man, that
keeps my ways, blessed are they that hear me, Pro. 8.32,33, 34.
watching daily at my gates, and giving attendance at the posts of my doors,
for he that finds me, finds life. Thus when himself in person, and in our
flesh became our Teacher, he enters us with this first lesson; Mat. 5.3,4, etc.
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven: Blessed
are they that mourn etc. And indeed it is the especial point of art to
inflame the learner, and fire his heart with desire of that knowledge, which we
profess to teach: which cannot be otherwise, or at least better effected, then
by propounding some necessary or excellent fruit, or consequent of it. And in
every reasonable Agent, the end must be first in the mind, nay continually in
the memory, if they will proceed orderly: common experience makes us see, that
while we hunt for any thing upon a cold sent, (as they say) we are but coldly
affected, but when we are in view, we follow eagerly.

When Moses had him in his eye who is invisible, and saw in his hand that
recompense of reward, Heb. 11, 26, 27.
with what courage could he break through all impediments, the riches and
pleasures of Egypt, the fiercenes of the King etc. Thus Christ himself
fastening in his heart the joy and honor prepared for him at the right hand of
God, endured the cross, and despised the shame: Heb. 12.2.
such therefore as are Vshers in the school of Christ, let them observe this
rule of the great Master; remembering that the Scripture was given to instruct,
that the man of God, might be perfect in every good work: 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.
and whosoever art a Christian, if ever thou desire to be a proficient in
this study, stamp in thy heart, and print in thine eyes this lesson, Blessed
is the man that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, etc.

Examination.
Try here what progress thou have made in the way of happiness: has God
separated the light in thy soul from the darkness? this is the first work
of the spirit in the new creation: Genesis 1.4.
have thou at least so much light, as to discern with grief, much darkness
in thy heart? Have thou attain^d to that step of wisdom, to know thou
know nothing as thou ought to know? 1 C^^ 8. 2.
and therefore call for knowledge, and cryest for unders^anding: Pro. 2. 3.
do thou from sense of blindness lift up thy voice to that light of the
world, Mat. 20. 30, 31.
thou Son of David have mercy upon me. If men discourage and rebuke thee,
do thou so much more cry out, thou Son of David have mercy upon me? throw
away all impediments to come unto Christ that he may give thee light? Pro 2. 4.
Do thou seek for wisdom as for silver, Romans 8.5.
and search for it as for treasures? what savor have thou in spiritual
things? Is the love of God to thee better then life? Psalm. 63. 3. Psalm. 119-103
72.
Is his promise and word sweeter then honey, or the honey-combe? more precious
then all riches? Have thou esteemed the word of his mouth more then thy
appointed food? Job. 23. 12.
Can thou long for the house of thy God? having chosen him the portion of
thine inheritance, Psalm. 84.2. Psalm. 16. 5^6.
do thou rej^yce that the lines are fallen unto thee in pleasant places? Mat.
16. 17.
Know th^n flesh and blood has not wrought this in thee, but thy Father which
is in heaven. 1 John 3. 14.
Consider thy company, Psalm. 16. 3.
have thou loved the Brethren? Is thy delight in the Saints, and them that
excel? Though thou art great, can thou abase thy self to be a companion of
all those that fear the Lord, and keep his precepts? Psalm 119.63. Psalm. 31. 6.
Can thou hate those that hold of superstitious vanities, and say, Psalm.
119.115. Psalm. 15. 4.
away from me you wicked, for I will keep the Commandments of my God? Is a
vile person contemned in thine eyes, but thou make much of them that fear
the Lord? when thou chusest a companion of thy life, can thou think favor
deceitful, and beauty vanity, Pro. 31. 30.
and take to thee a woman that fears the Lord? when thou art a Master, do
thou set this as a law, there shall no deceitful person dwell in my house, he
that tells lies shall not remain in my sight? He has put the sword of
Magistracy into thine hand, will thou use it as this King? Psalm. 101.7. Psalm.
101. 5,6.
Him that privily slandereth his neighbor will I destroy, him that has a
proud look, and an high heart I cannot suffer: mine eyes shall be upon the
faithful of the Land. Then know who has separated thee, even that great
Shepherd, who has given himself for our sins, that he might deliver us
from this present evil world. But if it be otherwise with thee, know surely,
thou have not yet set footing in this way of happiness, but art miserable,
poor, blind, and naked.

Reproof.
Now here come under reproof all such who give any ungodly counsel, especially
such as labor to withdraw any Christian, either from following those good
motions, which are first cast into them by the Spirit, in hearing the word, or
from the service, and first love wherewith they have entertained the Gospel,
yet not all alike. For some from weakness, and unwariness, being holy men,
are themselves ensnared by Satan, and made his instruments to bring on others.

Thus the brethren of Joseph counseled, and encouraged one the other to
murder. Genesis 37.19, 20.
Jobs friends bent all their force to pluck away Job from the fast hold he had
laid on the Rock by faith, never discovering the Devil at the end of the
rope. Mat. 16.22.
Thus did Peter when he heard that bitter reproof, Go behind me Satan: and
again when he was rebuked by Paul for that dissimulation, whereby many Jews
and Barnabas himself stepped not with a right foot in the Gospel. These may
justly be blamed for keeping no better watch over Satan's enterprises, and not
more narrowly marking his fingers. Thus now many Saints are circumvented by
him. To instance in some experienced example. I have known a soul beaten
down by the word of God, and caused to see his sin, full of fear and
trouble, repair to a faithful Minister or Brother: opens his heart to them,
and discovers his smarting wound: they being cunningly handled by Satan, begin
to pity his estate, and out of compassion think it a great sin to persecute
him, whom God has smitten, and ad sorrow to such as he has wounded. Hence
setting aside the wine, which would indeed cause some smart, but purge the
evil, they strait power in the oil of all spiritual comfort, and so dress
the wound, that it is soon skinned, but after breaks forth with far more
grief, and will ask much more time, and labor to heal. Whereas if they had
first thoroughly searched, and ransacked the sore with the knife of
circumcision, and cleansed it well with further reproof, they might perhaps
have made the orifice wider, and the wound somewhat deeper, but much more
soon, and soundly have cured it. But if these deserve some reproof, what
rebuke can be whetted sharp enough to rake those ulcerous souls, which being
themselves full of dead flesh, infect, and corrupt others by their rotten
stench, and putrefaction? How hellish is the condition of that man, whose heart
is the ma^sion, whose mouth is the very shop of the Devil? where he forgeth
those fiery darts, whereby he assaulteth the faithful, and strikes through
many a simple and unwarie soul. Lamentable is it to see, that many, who from
faith, or fear to man detest to be traitors, and dare not persuade a subject
from loyalty to his Prince, yet without fear, or shame will employ all their
wit, and engines to withdraw a Christian from his allegiance and faithful
service to Christ. Many who will not a little scorn to be a Baud unto a man,
will ambitiously pandare for the Devil. O let Baal plead for himself will thou entise a soul wedded, and ready to be bedded with Christ, from his arms
to the embraces of Mammon: and do thou not fear that jealous God, If
jealousy be the rage of a man, what is this jealousy of God? but the divine
indignation, which will not spare in the day of vengeance? Pro. 6.34,35.
he cannot bear the sight of any ransom, neither will he rest contens, though
thou give many gifts.

Christian is to be rebuked, who by vain terrors and bug-beares is driven from
his station: It has been an old Stratagem in war to set upon their beasts of
carriage the Boys and Skuls, which followed the Camp, and to place them in fit
distance, so to distract the enemy, and terrify him with vain numbers. This
was ever the slight of Satan, and though it be his continual practice, yet men
seldom observe it. He sets before their eyes many scar-crowes, loss of some
things esteemed good, and contrary evils; Thus he deals with the Israelites,
and with the vain show of walled Cities, and Giants, makes them forget their
Rock, Number. 13.33. 34.
and strong God of their salvation, and fall into open despair and rebellion.
Thus he deceived David himself, a most expert and wise Captain in those
spiritual battles; after he had committed adultery, he sets before his eyes
shame, and loss of reputation, and with this idle show drives him into two
foul sins, first to make Vriah drunk, then to murder him. Thus he
assaulted Moses with loss of treasures and pleasures of Egypt, the Kings
anger, etc. And thus frights he many in our times. To the covetous he suggests,
what will you leave the sweetness of present gain for future promises? a
certainetie for an uncertainty: o^ a bird in the hand is worth two in the
bush! With the drunkard he will plead; will thou change thy merry company for
such a sour, and joylesse life? with the beginning Christian; see thou not
all men generally go another way? see thou not how many reproaches, what
spite, what contempt will meet thee in the face? If thou take that way
never look for good hour after all thy former credit and reputation is lost.
How many silly souls has he struck with these affrightings, and drawn them
headlong from their profession? But if we laugh at those that are scared with
a vizard, how ridiculous to be amazed with such empty shows of evil? Awake,
and open thine eyes, and see the vanity of these scar-crowes. Thou loosest the
pleasures of sin, true; and is it not a pitiful thing for a swine to loose
his tumbling in the mire? Thou loosest thy sinful profits; and is this so
woeful a matter, to loose a millstone off thy neck, when thou art now in a
deep water? Thou loosest thy credit and friends: no doubt a shrewd loss, to
miss his good word, who is himself stark naught; to lose a companion who will
bring us to the gallows: sum up thy loss, and thou shall find this is the
total; thou loosest death and hell, but what? do thou get nothing by this
loss? thou changest fading, and stinking pleasures, for the pleasu^es at Gods
right hand: thou changest earthly riches, for heavenly; reputation among men,
for the praise of God. In a word thou changest vanity and vexation of spirit,
for sound and everlasting happiness, and even dung for Christ: he that winnes
the whole world, and loses his own soul, makes but a fools ba^gaine, and
(as Deborah sings Judge. 5. 19.) get no gain of money.

If you tell a true Christian that he has a great loss in forsaking Father,
Mother, etc. he will but pity thy ignorance, Mark 10. 29 30.
when he has already in possession an hundred fold gain, beside the
certainty of an inheritance infinitely (beyond his own thought) excellent.

Christians take good occasion to chide and shame themselves in their own
hearts: when they look upon their sloathfulnesse in the harvest of Christ:
Have we felt the sweetness of Christ his yoke? Have we shaken off those not
more heavy, then loathsome chains of Satan? do we feel the ease of this
heavenly liberty? why then do we not call on others, and invite them, Psalm.
34.8.
Taste, and see how gracious the Lord is? When Christ has taken us by the hand
why do we not catch hold on others, such especially as are near us? when he
draws us, why d^aw not we those that are linked with us in kind^ed,
friendship, acquaintance, and pull them after? Though the laborers reap, and
bind the sheaues, yet even children gleane and gather some handfuls to carry
home. The Minister is the workman hi^^d by God to gather in his harvest, but
the very weakest may by his help (who delights to glorify his power in
infirmity) and ought in private to help forward, and pick up some ^oo^e and
straggling souls, as God gives them opportun^ti^^ is he a faithful servant to
the Lord of the harvest, who seeing a poor soul separated from the sheaues
(the Church of God) lying as a prey to that Foul of the air, will not stretch
forth his hand to take it up, and bring it home? Has he any charity, who
suffers a weak soul bound many years in the prison of Satan, and pressed
under the burden of sin, to lie still, kept down with that hellish weight, and
puts not to his hand to raise it? should thou see thine enemies ox
straying, would thou not drive him home Saw thou thine enemies Ass fallen
under his load, would thou not he^pe him up? if thou have love to man, thou will; if obedience to God thou must lend him thy help? Exodus 23. 4,5.
And what? shall the beast of thine enemy be more precious in thine eye then
the soul of thy brother? Oh can thou think thy best endeavors too much for
that, for which thy Master (the Wisdom of God) thought not his best blood too
good? Where is thy love? What (I pray thee) what can be the reason, why thou, a
parent, shou^d'st beat thy brains, toil thy weary and w^ake body to enrich
thy children, train them up in some serviceable qualities, prefer them to
great and bountiful persons, and yet be altogether careless, o^ very cold to
stock them in grace, to bring them up in instruction of the Lord, fit and
commend them to his service, who is not only ready to accept them, but to give
them not a corruptible living, but eternal life, not a poor farm, but a rich
inheritance, to instate them with himself in a Kingdom of glory? What is the
cause that being a Husband, who from dear love to thy wife, can purhase her
a joynter, whereby she may live comfortably when thou art dead, can not draw
on thy yoke fellow to this partnership with Christ? Why is it that out of love
to thy brethren, allies, friends, and acquaintance in the flesh, thou can
cheerfully show them all civil courtesies, ride, run, sue, and work out
some good for them, mourn with them in their sorrow, rejoice with them in
their prosperity, and yet thou on earth worse then Dives in hell, Luke 16. 27,
28.
wilt never labor to prevent, that they come not to that place of eternal
torment? The truth is the cause of this spiritual carelessness is want of
spiritual love, and grace; Christian love expresses it self in Christian
duties, as natural love in civil offices: had thou so much as one grain
of heavenly love rooted in thy heart, it would spring, bud, and yield this
true fruit of doing some good.

It is a property of goodness to be communicatiue of it self, which effect
is as natural to it as to fire to warm; therefore God being infinite Goodness,
and working infinitely, communicates himself even personally to his creature,
namely, to the humanity of Christ; and has by him united all the Elect to
himself, John 17.21.
to be one with him through Christ. Thus is it with those children whom he
has begotten through the word of truth, in his own likeness; James 1. 18.
they being partakers of his divine nature cannot but communicate it with
others, 2 Pet. 1.4.
so far as they are able to work, and diffuse it abroad to those with whom
they converse, as we heard before. There is no sign then of grace in that
heart which does not pity and succor as it is able, the souls of their
brethren, which are entangled in the snare of Satan.

God, Come out from among them and separate your selves, says the Lord: 2 Cor.
6.17.
as first, those wilfully blind souls, who (having devoted themselves to that
whore of Rome) will not open their eyes to see her filthy nakedness, so
plainly discovered by God in his word.

That Angel of God, to whom he has given great power, has cried out
migh^ily, it is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon that great City: Revel. 18. 1,2.
and the often-doubled voice of God, from heaven has called, Go out of her my
people that ye be not partakers of her sins: Revel. 18.4. And yet how many
still cleave unto her, and dote upon her wrinkles? Surely if Christ had not so
painted out to us his Rival, the Antichrist, almost in every limb by that
un-erring finger of his Spirit, or had not we lived in those times, when the
accomplishment of those predictions has given broad light to these mysteries;
did not that Man of sin with a whorish and shameless forehead stand out to
accept, and avouch those blasphemous titles, the Monarke, Spouse, and only
head of the universal Church, from whom it receives even spiritual influence:
did he not make good the flatteries of his slaves, in receiving, and
justifying the Papal Omnipotency, challenging to be Vice-God, there might be
some show of excuse in these blind wretches. But alas! what hope is there to
pull them from the embraces of this spiritual strumpet, when they are so
strangely bewitched with her painted face: that they make, and imagine the
beams of the Sun to borrow light from her eyes, even the Scriptures to
receive authority from the Church, and that the Pope only must give the sense,
Reu. 3. 18.
which is the light of them? There is no other means but only prayer to that
incomprehensible light, Genesis 19. 16.
that he would anoint their eyes with eye-salue, that they may see, and being
merciful unto them, would catch them by the hand, and lead them out of Sodom.
So likewise half- Christians, half- Antichristians; some that would be
Mediators betwixt Christ and Antichrist, and bring them together to make them
friends, which still are sick of the dregs which they have drunk in her cup
of fornications. They put religion in superstitious abstinence from meats and
drinkes^ They cannot approve the marriage of Ministers: 1 Timothy 4. 1. 2. etc.
many such dreams trouble them, all which God himself has branded as
Antichristian merchandise, and doctrines of Devils.

And how many besides these, who have not yet made any separation in judgment,
will, affection, or practice from ungodly men, minding earthly things,
despising the riches of Gods mercy, lukewarm, and key-cold, heartlesse to any
good duty, and even frozen in their dregs, whose mouths are ever vomiting
unsauorie and rotten speech, hands full of oppression, bribery and gifts, feet
swift to evil, having not so much as a show of godliness, whose sins go
before into judgment? Nay, I would there were not too many, who having beside
these outward warnings, inward checkes of conscience (showing the scarres of
former wounds received by wicked company) and their experienced weakness,
not able to stand out in tentation, calling to them to avoid these occasions,
yet still linger and make no haste to get away. Hence it comes that they are
first bruised with some open, and shameful fall, before they free themselves:
but oh remember, Luke 14.26.
if thou can not hate father, mother, wife and children, brethren and
sisters, credit, nay, living, and life for Christ, thou can not be his
Disciple.

Christians are here condemned, and may judge how far they are from that
estate they profess, and boast of, who find no relish of happiness in this
separation, but rather delight themselves in worldly, and sinful pleasures. As
for that liberty of Christ, his easy and sweet yoke, they esteem it a
burden, and ^ccount that strictnes of holy life, and waynednes from this world
a discomfortable, and ioyles condition. Hence is it that abusing Christian
liberty unto fleshy license, they condemn, revile, and scoff such, as will
not run with them to the same excess of riot. This their behavior openly
proclaims them Infidels, and those fools which say in their hearts, there is
no God. For a Christian believer knows that the Lord is the Spirit, and where
the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. 2 Cor. 3.1^
That bond therefore which draws them nearest, and ties them fastest to the
Lord Jesus, they account a most happy, and pleasant knot. And contrary the
rebellious dispositions of their nature, yet cleaving to them, which as uneaven
nooks, and corners suffer them not to lie so close to the foundation, they
deadly hate, lament, and give them up to the hammer of Gods word to be hewn
off; I cannot therefore but marveile which way these men go about to make
their hearts believe, that they are Christians; Can they be ignorant that in
the death, burial, and resurrection of Christ, not some, but every member of
Christ descended into his grave, and rose again? Why do they, or how can they
think that man a member of Christ, who was never conformable to his death, by
dying to sin? nor felt the power of his resurrection, through that quickening
Spirit, renewing him in all holiness, and righteousness? Gal. 5.24. and 6. 14.
Every member of Christ is crucified to the world, and the world to him: Col.
3. 1,2.
They that are risen again with Christ have taken off their affections from
earthly things, and removed them to their due place, even where Christ sits at
the right hand of God, Phil. 3.20.
and as Citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem have there their conversation.
Traveling through this world, and wilderness to their Canaan, they use the world
as not abusing it. 1 Cor. 7.31.
Let these men therefore cast their counters again; and consider well, how
far they are short of their account. Oh whosoever thou art, that go under
the name of a Christian, and yet shakest off that bond of strictnes, and power
of Godliness, (which turns the fountain in the heart, and the stream of men's
actions from this world toward heaven) despising such a course in thy self,
deriding it in others, do but a little, yet seriously, consider how base
account thou make of heaven, and much more of the Lord of heaven. Surely if a
willing restraint from sinful delights (as fools esteem, and call them) is a
miserable estate, the heavenly Saints are more wretched then earthly men; and
the God of heaven, blessed for ever, is of all most miserable, whose very
essence, and nature does necessarily free him from all sinful inclinations:
and know, that cannot be in the least degree miserable, which is in him in the
highest degree, who is infinitely blessed.

Consolation. Whosoever art hated in this world, separated, reviled, despised,
and rejected of earthly men; whosoever art esteemd a strange creature, in that
thou runnest not into the same excess of riot with the wicked: comfort thy
self: Open thine ear, and let in that heavenly voice, lay it up in thy heart,
as a cordial; Luke 6. 22,23
Blessed are you when men hate, separate, and reproach you, and cast out your
name for evil for Christ, and for the Gospel: rejoice in that day, and leap
for joy, for behold your reward is great in heaven. Isay 51. 7, 8. 12, 13.
Harken unto me you that know righteousness, the people in whose heart is my
Law, fear you not the reproach of men, neither be afraid of their rebukes; for
the moth shall eat them up as a garment, and the worm shall eat them like
wool: but my righteousness shall be for ever, and my salvation from generation
to generation. I am he that comfort thee, who art thou that should fear a
mortal man, and the son of man that shall be made as grass, and forgettest
the Lord thy Maker?

Exhortation. Exhort, and awaken thine ear to hearken unto the Wisdom of
God, and follow his direction: Pro. 4. 14,15.
Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil men:
avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it and pass away: let them turn to
thee, but turn not thou to them. And for quickening to this duty, Ier. 15. 19.
do but consider, first the mischief which will inevitably follow, if thou
walk in the counsel of ungodly men.

1. If thou go with them in their ways, thou shall with them meet many
annoiances: Pro. 13. 20.
He that walks with the wise shall be wise, but a companion of fools shall
be afflicted: for (as it was with Balaam, when his way was not straight) the
Angel of the Lord with a drawn swo^d comes forth to withstand thee: and will
often meet thee, and if God give leave, cut thee off in the midst of thy
journey. Psalm. 34.16. Psalm. 37.9. 38.
The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off their
remembrance from the earth. Evil doers shall be cut off, transgressors shall
be destroyed together, and the end of the wicked shall be cut off. They live
not out half their days. Infinite examples we see of this kind in the
Scriptures: and may daily by experience, if we observe the works of God, his
fearful and sudden ^udgements upon impenitent and godless persons: certain
is it, thy conscience will resist, strike, and wound thee, and make thy course
very troublesome and grievous.

2. If thou walk on with the wicked, thou shall surely lodge in the same
Inn, and sink with them into everlasting destruction: so that if thou
separatest not thy self from them, Christ will separate thee from himself,
and from his flock for ever. If thou departest not from them, thou shall
perish in their sins: Number. 16.26.
if thou come not out of Babylon, thou shall partake of her Reu. 18.4.
plagues.

Secondly, call to mind the great profit which will ensue upon this separation:
Pro. 21. 16.
God accepts thee for his child, and becomes presently a Father unto thee. 2
Cor, 6. 17. 18.
And this is the very sum of all happiness, for how can he want any good
thing which enjoys such a Father? Evil men can give good things to their
children: Mat. 7. 11.
what shall he deny to his, who is infinite Godnesse? Remember this, and stop
thy ears: and consider thou have enterteined a better Counselor, Esaias 9. 6.
Esaias 11.2.
even the Spirit of counsel. Do nothing without his advise. Say with thy
self: The counsel of the world savours well to flesh and blood: But let me
try it, and see how it agrees with his advise, who is my best friend. Is there
any Father like to my heavenly Father, any friend comparable to Christ Jesus?
Is there any wisdom like that of the Spirit of God? But they give me other
counsel; O therefore far be it from me, Deuteronomy. 33. 9.
to prefer Father, Mother, profit, pleasure, or any thing before the Lord
Jesus. Nay in this respect, I will say to Father, and Mother, I have not seen
you, and to my brethren, I know you not: but I will observe his word, and keep
his covenant. Now if thou desire to know what course must be taken for
effecting this separation: know first, it is the work of God, for who has
separated thee? 1 Cor. 4. 7.
and then remember, that God has appointed his word to be his means for
working it. It is Gods Minister, who by Gods word in his mouth, causes this
separation. Ier. 15. 19.
They take away the precious from the vile: therefore so often compared to
fire, which separateth the dross from the purer metal. Hearken therefore
conscionably to the word of God, wait upon the posts of his doors, and he will
give the will and the deed.

Proposition II.
The second point offered to us in this verse is,

Proposition
The Prophet pronounces him blessed, who stands not in the way of sinners.

To err from the right way, especially in this darkness, or at least dim
light may befall any man, but to per^ist in an evil way when it is discovered,
is the part of a brutish, not reasonable creature: the Prophet therefore
proceeds to that further degree and step of wickedness, namely, wilfulness
and obstinacy, after reproof and conviction. Let us first clear some of the
words, that we may go on with more profit. Sinners; Certain is it that all
men are sinners, if we take the word in the largest sense: Romans 3.23. Romans 5.12.
For all men have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God: sin, and
death the attendant of sin have gone over all men: in which sense the most
righteous man on earth may be called a sinner. But this word is often used in
Scripture by specialtie, for notorious sinners, Esaias 57.20.
such, who sweltring and boiling in sinful lusts, Jude 13.
foam out their own shame, in an open scumme of all filthiness. In this sense
Mary Magdalen before her conversion, Luke 7. 39^
was accounted a sinner: 1 Samuel 15. 18.
that is, one known, and commonly noted to go on in gross sins. Thus the
Amalekits are called sinners. Such then are here called sinners, 1 King. 21.25
who live in open and notorious sins: as Achab who sold himself to work
wickedness: who accustomed to sin, follow it with greediness., Ephesians. 4. 19.


2 To stand, is such a position of the body, wherein it begins to settle it
self to some rest: and therefore by a metaphor ordinarily in Scripture is
taken for such a disposition of mind, whereby resisting all opposition, or
persuasion to the contrary, we resolve to maintain the course we have begun. 1
Cor. 16.13.
Thus is it taken in the good sense: Stand in the faith; Ephe. 6.11. 13.14.
where to stand is so to harden our selves in continuance of our holy
profession, that we resolve to die, rather then to be removed by any tentation
and assault of the enemy.

Lastly, the way argues also a perseverance, and proceeding in any course; That
is, a way where no stoppage is, but a path continually trodden, and beaten by
the passenger. Now evil ways may be considered either in doctrine, (so
heresy is called an evil way) or in manners, and conversation; so an
habitual or customarie sin is an evil way. In all these words is expressed a
further degree of sin. A sinner in this sense is more then an ungodly man,
the way more then counsel, standing more then walking. And every one of these
words imply continuance, perseverance, and stubbornness in evil. This then is
the meaning of the words: Whosoever does not rest in sin, nor stubbornly
persist in the rebellious course of notorious offenders, him the Prophet
pronounces blessed. No proof shall need; the proposition being sufficiently
evidenced in it self, and every converted sinner a strong witness for it. The
grounds or reasons may be first in God, his infinite grace, which opens a
posterne unto his favor, for those that unfainedly return unto him, and
forsake their evil ways, he covers See Ier. 3.1. 12,13,14.
all their past rebellions, and imputes not sin unto them. Secondly, Ezekiel.
18.21, ^2, 23.
in the Prophet, his knowledge of Gods goodness, as well by an outward and
ordinary revelation in the word, Job. 33.23. 24.26.27.28.
as by an inward experience in himself. He had walked in some counsels of the
ungodly, Psalm. 119. 59.
but yet considering his ways, and turning his feet into the testimonies of
his Lord; he found mercy and favor. The Prophet therefore first knowing, Psalm.
32.1,2.
blessed is the man whose wickedness is forgiven, to whom the Lord imputes no
sin. Secondly, being assured by an infallible and inward experience, Psa.
32.5.7
that when we hide not our iniquity, but acknowledge and confess our sinn^,
the Lord forgiveth the punishment, and compasses such about with joyful
deliverance; upon these grounds builds this certain truth, that the man is
blessed, who although he have walked in the counsel of the ungodly, yet being
reproved, stands not in the way of sinners, but turns his feet into the old
and good way. Gather hence first these instructions.

Instruction 1. The heart of man (as it is in nature) is not only prone to
evil, but resolute in it: resisting all means of recalling, and hating to be
reformed. See Psalm. 50. 17. Romans 2. 5. Men will harden their hearts, and make
them as an Adamant, Zechar. 7. 12. and by no means will yield to God in his
word. Some perhaps will object, we may see many wicked men of better temper,
then so: Thus Rehoboam obeyed the word of the Lord by the Prophet Semajah. 1
King. 12.22 24.
Thus Amaziah hearkened to the voice of God, and sent away the Israelites: and
Herod heard the word gladly, 2 Chronicles. 25. 7.^0.
reverenced the Preacher of it, and did many things. Mark. 6.20.
But we must know that the action of God bending men to subjection, may be
double: either by a common grace of restraint, or particular of the sanctifying
Spirit. Thus the Lord works in Heathens. I kept thee that thou should not
sin against me: Genesis 20.6.
bowing them to some kind of yielding to some parts of his will, for the good
of the faithful, peace of the Church, and other ends best known to his
wisdom. Secondly, he plants obedience of faith in his children, and brings
their wills, and affections under the yoke of Christ, creating in them a new
heart, and conforming them to the divine nature. But when both of these are
wanting, do but observe how men rush into all impiety, breaking through all
lets, never regarding threatenings of the Law of God, promises of the Gospel,
shame of men, their own future or present good, or hurt: no better then mad
men, worse indeed then bruit beasts. Consider Pharaoh, Exodus 5. 2^
God co^ma^ds him to let his people go serve him, he defies God, and questions
who he is, he sees diverse miracles, but is moved nothing at all; At length his
own Inchanters tell him, this is the finger of God, Exodus 5.2.
he relents not, he sees himself annoied with vermin, and his Country
destroyed, yet will not stoop: his own servants entreat him to dismiss them,
yet still he refuses: Exodus 8.19.
when he was compeld to seek unto God by Moses, and promises obedience, no
sooner had he rest, Exodus 10.7.
but instantly breaks promise, and furiously threatens Moses. At length when
affrighted with instant fear, death, and hor^our, Exodus 10.16. 17. 28.
he was enforced to thrust them out of his Land, yet presently after he a^meth
all Egypt to fetch them back again: and perishes, but yields not. But he
was an Heathen: look then to Professors; Ier. 18.6.
God shows the Jews by a palpable demonstration, that they were in his hand
as clay in the Potters they deny it not, he calls them to repentance, and tells
them a plague else was near them: they speak desperately,; surely we will
walk after our own imaginations, and do every man after the stubbornness of
his wicked heart. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 18.
The Prophet still follows them with admonition; they acknowledge him a
Prophet, a Priest, a Wiseman: yet obstinately conspire against him, and
against the word. Have not we such live among us? Yes, thousands of swearers,
drunkards, covetous, who stand out against God, his word, their own
conscience, their own good and happiness, and scorn all stoppage. Neither is
there any means (without the power of God concurring and working with it)
which can prevail. Esaias 1.5.
Are they smitten? they fall away more and more: Reu. 16.9.
they break out to blasphemy, but mend not. Are they kindly entreated, and
waged with blessings? The fatter they grow the more they kick. Deuteronomy. 32. 15.

God, and becoming a new creature. See Luke ^3.3.5. Unless you repent, you
shall all likewise perish. All men naturally are going in the broad way to
destruction; All have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God. Romans 3.23.
This broad way therefore must be forsaken, and we must entet into that narrow
tract, if we mean to attain a blessed estate. Certainly as the Israelites
could not enter into the Land of promise till those Rebels were consumed among
them, so till these cursed affections which by continual rebellion labor to
vex the Spirit, begin to die and drop away from us, we are not fit to enter
into the Kingdom of God. Luke 13. 3^4.
Mat. 11. 21.
Those Galileans whose blood was mingled with their sacrifices, and those who
perished by the fall of the tower in Siloam, were no greater sinners then
others: hence that woe pronounced to those unrepentant sinners. Mark.1.4.
Hence our baptism whereby we are entered into the Covenant of grace, Luke 3. 3.
is called the baptism of repentance: Acts 13. 24.
and as John the Baptist, Mat. 3.2.
so also Christ begins his sermons; Mark.1.15^
The Kingdom of God is at hand, repent, and believe the Gospel. Gal. k. 15.
Nothing is availeable to this end but the new creature, neither i^deed can we
be in Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
till we are newly created, and molded. For repentance is that saving grace of
God, whereby we are changed and become other men, altogether contrary to our
former estate. The word of God is as a mould, in which the image of Christ is
lively graven by the finger of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 18.
into which when the holy Ghost has cast us, we are transformed into the same
fashion. Read, and consider well that similitude, where the Gospel is compared
to a mirror in which beholding the image of the Lord, we are transformed into
the same likeness. Ephe. 5.8.
The first alteration is in the mind from darkness to light: Before so
perverse in our judgment, that we esteemed spiritual (even Gods) wisdom as
folly, 1 Cor. 1. 21. 23. and 3.^6. 7. 14.
but after this new birth, we discern in this folly (for so foolish men count
and call it) no less then a divine, and heavenly wisdom. The second change is
in the will, and affections: the same will, which h^retofore refused to
hearken, an^ pulled away the shoulder, Zech. 7. 11.
now chooses, and rests in that object of faith which before it rejected. Mary
has chosen the best part. Luke 10. 42.
The affections are from earthly changed into heavenly, honoring, and
fervently loving, what they despised heretofore and hated. Romans 8. 5.
They who are fleshly savor the things of the flesh, but the spiritual man
savours the things of the spirit. Col. 3.1,2, 3.
They who are risen with Christ, take off their affections from the world, and
set them upon Christ. The last transformation is in the outward man, both in
words, and works, see Ephe. 4. 22, 23, 24, 25, 28. the like read Colos. 3. 8,
9, 10, 12, 14. Man therefore by consenting to the Devil, and revolting from
God, lost that divine image which was printed in him, but received a new
Character of Satan, being wholly conformed to that Prince of darkness. But God
in much mercy having compassion on men, and choosing them to his glory, has set
out his word as a fire, Ier. 23.29.
and hammer to melt, and fashion them again to that image which they left, and
so restore them unto their former purity and estate. Thus his word is his
voice crying o^t unto us, Stand in the ways, and behold, and ask for the old
way, which is the good way, and walk therein, and you shall find rest for your
souls: Ier. 6. 16.
again he puts forth his power with his voice: Romans 1.16.
whence the word is called his power to salvation: so that as in the creation
he spoke the word, and it was done; his voice being active and doing what is
commanded: so in this new creation, when he speaks the word, let there be
light, let there be fruit, instantly light, and fruit insues: when therefore
men harkening unto this powerful word, working salvation, are renewed in their
mind, and walk in newness of life, they find no little rest and peace to
their souls for the present, and are in the way to that eternal and glorious
rest, in which consists the supreme perfection, and happiness of man.

God in his word, Luke 12. 47. 48.
is a state much further from blessedness, then gross ignorance. He is less
worthy of favor, who knows his Masters will, and does it not, then he that
neither does, nor knows it: rebellion is no better then witchcraft. 1 Samuel
15.23
Those words ( Acts 17. 30. that time of ignorance God regarded not) though
they cannot be wrested to any connivence of God, as if he winked, and would not
see those foul sins of the Heathen, yet cannot but import more danger to
such as continue in this ignorance, when God has su^ficiently revealed
himself and his will. Less excuse have they, and much deeper condemnation,
Ioh. 3.19.
who when light appeared, loved darkness more then light, then such who ever
sat in darkness, and the shadow of death. The long-suffering of God manifests
it self abundantly in bearing, and forbearing, granting longer time, summoning
by his works, and warning them by his judgments, and afflictions, but
especially by his word, calling out to them and showing their danger: Job. ^3.
14.
He speaks once or twice; he whets his sword before he strikes, Psalm. 7.12,13.
bends his bow and makes it ready, before he shootes out those swift arrows;
he cuts not off till there is no hope of healing, he spares till there is no
remedy. 2 Chronicles 36. 16.
But the more gracious he has been in giving warnings, the less favorable is
he in his judgments; Amos 3. 2.
you only have I known of all the people of the earth, therefore will I visit
you for your iniquities.

This certainly is the reason, why the Israelites before the coming of
Christ, were often more sharply visited with the rod, then any other Nation,
their neighbors: and after the coming of Christ, have been made the public
spectacle of all the world for misery, because in the time of the Prophets, the
Lord affoorded them many glorious beams of spiritual light, more then to all
other people, and afterward gave in unto them that great Light of the world to
walk openly before them. As their light therefore was more, so was their
rebellion, as their rebellion, so their punishment. An old diseased body which
has worn out all medicines, and grows still worse, is farthest from
recoverie and health. When that great Husbandman expostulates with his
Vineyard, what could have been more done unto my vineyard, which I have not
done to it? Esaias 5. 4.
and yet complains, Esaias. 1. 5, 6.
it brought forth wild grapes, it was far from a blessing: when the more we are
smitten, the more we fall away, so that from the head to the foot there is
nothing but swellings, and sores, full of corruption, we are far from health.
Ier. 2.27.
When we turn the back not the face to God, let us know it had been better
for us not to have known the way of righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.21.
then after we have known it to turn from the holy Commandment.

Refut.
Here is fit occasion, (and the times require it) to confute, and reprove our
obstinate Papists (who in name only are Catholics) who having been convinced,
or at least vexed with the light of the Gospel; have some hated, resisted, and
blasphemed; some winked, and shut their windows against it^ that it might not
enter; stubbornly resolving to cleave unto that man of sin, and stand fast in
his accursed and palpable errors. Is not that child of perdition rev^aled?
Has not the finger of God in his word painted, and pointed him out, that he
who even shuts his eyes, cannot but grope and feel him? Have not his stoutest
Champions been driven by dint of that two-edged sword into shameless corners,
and been forced in his defense to steel their foreheads, and without
blushing to d^ny things as generally known, confessed, and openly in view, as
the Sun in his brightness? As namely, that the ancient head-ship or
government of Rome by Emperors stands yet firm, that the Emperor of Germany
is the Emperor, Commander or Head of Rome, who yet has less to do there,
then the Popes skullian? Are they not compelled to deny that other Kings have
shared out the Empire among them? and so are bound to maintain, that this
Territory subject to their Emperor (which is hardly equal to a Dukedom)
must be divided into ten Kingdoms? See Revel. 17. 12.
Yea that the Kingdom of Antichrist shall be, not a mystery of iniquity, but
an heathen persecution? Are they not compelled to grant and maintain
impossibilities? that the Devil shall beget Antichrist of a woman, and this
woeman must be of the tribe of Dan? that in three years and an half
Antichrist shall conquer and subdue more Countries, then it is possible for any
man in that space to travel, and run through? Fitly does the Spirit compare
the Grecian Monarchy to a Leopard, Dan 7. 6.
the swiftest of four footed creatures, and yet winged, nay beyond any foul,
with four wings, for more speed, because in so short a time, as ten years,
that most prosperous Commander Alexander the great, brought into subjection
the greatest part of the earth then known: But what beast, what foul, must
this Papisticall A^tichrist be? How many feet must he have? How many wings?
Who in much less then half this time, shall bring under his yoke, and reign
over many more Countries and people then ever Antichrist ^new. Is it possible in
reason, that any who has not plucked out his eyes, should think the Pope
Christ his subject? nay, Deputy? who opposes and exalts himself above all
that is called God? Does he not challenge to be unto the Universal Church, an
head to give influence, a Monarch to give Laws, nay a Spouse, to give and
receive benevolence: so that to be subject to the Pope is of necessity to
salvation: nay does he not usurp, and with all tyranny maintain a
Monarchical Omnipotency? Surely that judgment mentioned by Tertullian is
fallen upon them; They believe without Scriptures, that they may believe
against Scriptures. We evidently see the Prophecy of the Apostle fulfilled in
them, 2 These. 2.10, 11,12.
Because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved,
therefore God has sent them strong delusions, that they should believe lies,
that all they might be damned, which believed not the truth. But the Popish
Faction a^firme, that they cannot be accounted heretics, because they have
never bee^e convicted, nor condemned by a general Council, But first it is
su^ficient conviction to prove an heretic, that his error is manifest^d unto
him by the Scripture, unless we will think Simon Magus no heretic, until
he was dead, and rotten, because no Council before his death condemned his
errors. Again the Papists maintain things openly interdicted in general
Councels. Thus they use, and defend in their Pope the title of chief or
highest Priest, censured, and forbidden by the 3. Council of Carthage: so also
the worship of Angels is by them stiffely maintained, yet condemned plainly by
the Apostle in the old heretics, Colos. 2.18. and after by the Council of
Laodicea. They set up images in Churches prohibited by the Council of
Eliberis. But what hope is there that this harlot will reform any error, who
in her head Paul 4. in his Epistle to Gropper, condemning certain abuses, and
doctrines, S^ss. 6. c. 1.2.3.
as being such which could not by that way, (that is by Scripture) be defended,
yet never reformed any, either abuse or doctrine; nay who in her whole
representative body, the Council of Trent, is not ashamed to conf^sse, that
Christ ordained, and distributed to his Apostles (non conficientibus) not
ad^inistring the Sacrament both bread and wine: and cannot deny but that it was
so continued in the primitive Church, yet take upon themselves power to
determine that whole Christ, and the true Sacrament is received in the bread
alone: and that the Church has authority to alter this institution of Christ;
with a most brazen face challenging right to change any thing in the Sacrament,
excepting the substance, and so consequently denying the blood of Christ
(repr^sented, and presented in the Cup) to be of the substance of the Lords
Supper.

God which calls thee out of thy sin? be it either some gracious promise, or
sharp reproof, how stand thou affected to it? The word is a fire to melt,
and soften the iron heart of man, that it may be fit to receive the impression
of Gods image. Thus Josiah melted: 2 Chro. 34.27
the hearts of Gods people tremble at his voice: and when they profit, are
pricked in hearing. Either thou stand in the way of sinners, Esaias 66. 5.
or else it is thus with th^e. Acts 2 ^7.
Amaziah can with some patience hear, and follow the command, 2 Chronicles. 25.
10,16.
but hate the reproof of the word. 1 King. 20.13. and 1 King. 22.8.
Ahab can approve and obey the counsel of God in ordering his Armies, but
hates Michaiah, who would order his conversation according to the rule of God.
Oh! then consid^r how thou art disposed to the rebuke of Christ: as Moses who
preferred it before the treasures of Egypt? or as Herod who beheaded his
messenger? How of^e^ have thou heard that gentle reprehension, joined with a
gracious invitaton; O ye disobedient children return, and I will heal your
rebellions? Ier. 3.22. 25.
does thy heart then answer? Behold we come unto thee; for thou art the Lord
our God, we lie down in our eonfusion, and our shame covers us. Ier. 31.18,19
Have thou lamented with Ephraim, Thou have corrected me, and I was chastised:
Convert thou me, and I shall be converted, for thou art the Lord my God. Surely
after I converted, I repented, etc. Zech. 12.10.
Thus do these heirs of happiness: Job.42.6.
they will lament, they will mourn as for an only son: they will abhor
themselves and lie down in ashes.

Psalm. 119.59. 60.
Do thou consider thy ways, and turn thy feet into the testimonies of the
Lord? Do thou make have, and delayest not? David stricken down with that
sin of adultery and murder, and benumbed with so many blows of Satan, lay a
while as dead; but when the rebuking voice of God called unto him, and
testified Thou art the m^n: 2 Samuel 12.7. 13.
how soon did he awake from his swoone, and expressed a whole world of grief
in one word I have sinned? As thou have fallen with that Saint, so have thou
risen with him? and renewing strength have fortified thy self, and art become
even impregnable on that side? The more foul thy sins are, the more are thy
tears, and sorrow, the more thy love to thy gracious Lord, pardoning such, and
so many offenses? Observe every where this disposition in the Saints, and happy
art thou, if thou can find it in thy self. But thou shall see Ahab humble
himself in sackcloth, but still proudly and rebelliously disposed in heart.
Thou shall hear the sinner say; They have stricken me, but I was not sick,
they have beat^n me, but I knew not; when I awoke therefore, will I seek it
yet still. Pro. 23. 35.
If it be thus with thee, if thou confessest thy sin with thy lips, but
forsakest it not in thy heart, how should thou find mercy? If thou tremblest
for fear of judgment, as Felix, and yet nourishest in thee a corrupt heart:
and put off the word, I will hear another time; what art thou better, nay
how much worse then that Heathen? Consider what str^ames of tears flowed from
the eyes of Mary Magdalen? What fire of love burned in her heart? How did Paul
humble himself in respect of his pers^cution? How ardent his love to Christ,
flaming out in all his actions? Thus will thy heart be affected, thus thy
actions directed, if thou art in the same estate.

Reproof.
Here come under reproof; God, and put it from them. Two sorts may we find
among this kind of people. One which more openly, other that more secretly
oppose it. Of the one more gross opposers, we read in the old Testament. Mica.
2. 6.
Prophecy not, say they to them that prophecy, they shall not prophecy to
them, that they shall not take shame. Esaias 30.9,10, 11.
This is a rebellious people, lying children, children that will not hear the
Law of the Lord; which say unto Seers see not: and to the Prophets, prophecy
not right things unto us: speak unto us smooth things, prophecy deceit?: Go
out of the way etc. And the like we find in the new. Acts 4.18. and 13. 45. and
18. 6.
They commanded them not to speak at all, nor teach in the name of Jesus. But
when the Jews saw the multitudes they were silled with envy, and spoke
against those things, contradicting and blaspheming. Again; they opposed and
blasphemed. Such we see every where, corrupt men, sold under sin, and heardned
in it: some drowned in a senseless ignorance, that neither do, nor will know
any necessity of this light, and therefore wholly despising all prophesying.
And to cover their shameful Atheism, they stand much upon prayer, and do not
a little magnify it in word: But their words are wind: they do as much
despise prayer indeed, and as openly express the contempt of it in their
actions as of preaching. Some again of more knowledge will not deny the
necessity of it, as knowing it too shameful to affirm there is no need of
that, which Christ openly testifies to be the one needful thing. Luke 10.42.
they will therefore come to it, perhaps frequent it, it may be pay for it: but
then they must have preachers acco^ding to their own, not Gods heart. If he
will spend an hour in the pulpit in vain flourishes of humane wisdom, keep
off from their conscience, and two or three hours in the Alehouse, or
Wine-Taverne, this is the good Churchman, nothing to dear for him. But if he
be such as dares not please men, Gal. 1.10.
least he be turned out of Christ his service; who would rather seek their
good, then their good will; if he bring home the rebuke of Christ to their
hearts, labor to beat down their rebellion, and draw them to the obedience of
the Lord Jesus, they will not abide him, but devise an hundred slanderous
discouragements, and use all even the most wicked means to stop his mouth.
Many other are there, which not so openly resist the word, yet in some private
and retired actions stand out in rebellion against the Lord. How many thousands
live among us, convinced of their sins, yet living in them, and following
them with greediness? Does not the covetous know, that he is an Idolat^r: that
extortioners, usurers, and oppressors shall not ent^r into the Kingdom of
God? does not the drunkard, swearer curser, Sabboth-break^r know he lives in
sin, and is under the curse, and wrath of God? yet do they reform their
ways; and make conscience of duty, when they have warning from God? How far
are they from it? Look to the meaner sort, they harden themselves in
ignorance; look to the great ones, Ier. 5.3.4.5.
they have altogether broken the yoke. Oh! that these would turn into their
hearts, and consider what they do: that they would well ponder first the
folly, then the heinousness and hatefulness of this their behavior:
certainly nothing can be invented more fooli^h: no marveile if the Wisdom of
God continually deba^es these men with the title of fools in the Proverbs: for
can any natural folly be compared with this? Find in all the world such a
fool, that wilfully will run into known and confessed destruction? that
will struggle with his Master, whom he knows stronger, and able to over-master
him. And do not men know and acknowledge God to be Almighty, not to be
resisted? yet will they provoke him. Are we not naturally afraid of those who
can kill the body? and where is the fear of him who can kill body and soul?
Now how odious it is and heinous, may appear in two circumstances; first the
greatness, secondly the goodness of the person whom we offend and provoke;
Mala. 1.14.
The Lord is the great King, and his name dreadful even among the heathen: the
pure Angels, nay the rebellious devils tremble at his presence. His goodness
to us is unutterable; he is our Father, the fountain of our life, and all
blessings which we enjoy, expect, or desire. How great an offense is treason
against a King, the Lords anointed? how heinous the rebellion of a child
against a father? how detestable the insurrection of unnatural Absolon against
David his King and Father? so complete a King, so loving a Father? how
grievous to thy soul is the rebellion of thy wife, child, or servant? hence
God compares it to witchcraft; 1 Samuel 15.23.
for in it as in witchcraft, the Covenant is broken, God renownced, and the
Devil acknowledg^d for God and Lord; our vows of obedience to God utterly
broken and our souls delivered up unto the service of the Prince of darkness
and disobedience.

occasion to cut a passage through rocks, and Adamants, unto the secure and
careless hearts of men? what trumpet can sound loud enough to awake their dead
spirits? God created us most blessed, and gave us power to stand in that happy
estate: we wilfully forsook the means and it: Since, when we were carried
down in the torrent of our lusts, into utter destruction, and are even sinking
into that bottomless pit; he casts out to us the cords of his love, to draw
us, haleth to us with a loud voice to look about, to see, and consider our
danger; betimes to take hold of mercy, before we sink and are past recoverie.
In the mean time, as if we were rather bathing in the very fountains of all
felicity, then swallowed in these whirl-pools of death and hell, we pass
along plesantly, never o^ce respecting his voice or dreaming of any danger. The
Lord has sent in among us his Heralds never so many, never so loud; they have
cried out to us, they have lifted up their voices like trumpets, and have
showed us our crying sins: what has followed? Some few (as the shaking of an
Olive tree, two or three berries in the utmost boughs) have hearkened and
trembled at the word; and taking hold of the rock of their salvation, have
tu^ned their feet into the old and good way: some have obtained, but the rest
are hardened. How lamentable a spectacle is ready to meet us at every turn?
numberles numbers of men and women, young and old, rich and poor running a
vie, who shall safest plie himself in the waye^ of sin, and who shall first
and deepest plunge himself into hell. Surely as the men of God were wont to go
to the house of the Lord, ( Psalm. 42. 4) so go these men to the chambers of
death, with the voice of singing, as a multitude that keeps a feast: how
truly may God expostulate with us, as once with his people? Hos. 4. 2.
by swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing they break out, and blood
touches blood: Psalm. 82.2,3,6 7
how often and loud has God by the voice of his Ambassadors cried in the cares
of earthly Gods, how long will you judge unjustly, and accept the persons of
the wicked? Do right to the poor, and fatherless; do justice to the
afflicted and needy: If not I have said you are Gods, and the children of the
most high, but you shall die as a man, and you Princes shall fall like other.
Ezekiel. 22 7.
But may we not still complain? In thee have they oppressed the stranger, in
thee have they vexed the fatherless and widow? How frequently and earnestly
has the great Judge of all the world in his Law charged Lawyers. Exodus 23.6,7,
8.
Thou shall not overthrow the right of the poor in his suit. Thou shall keep
thee from a false matter: Thou shall take no gift, for the gift blinds the
wise, and perverteth the way of the righteous. Haba. 2.6.
If you go on, shall they not take up a taunting proverb against you, and
say; hoe they increase that which is not their own: how long? and he that
ladeth himself with thick clay? yet still is it true; in thee have they taken
gifts to shed blood: Ezekiel. 22. 12.
and they love to say with shame bring you: Hos. 4.18.
they eat up the people as bread: Psalm 14.4.
they build, plant, purchase, and make no end, till their heirs spend it as
ill as they got it.

How straightly has God commanded the rich, Deuteronomy 15. 8.
thou shall open thy hand to thy poor brother, and lend him sufficient for his
need. Thou shall not give to usury to thy brother, usury of money, Deuteronomy. 23.19.
usury of meat, or usury of any thing that is put to usury: thou shall relieve
thy brother, thou shall take no usury nor vantage. Lev. 25.35, 36.
He that was infinitely rich became poor for our sakes, 2 Cor. 8. 9.
that we through his poverty might be made rich. Luke 12. 33.
Sell that you have, and give alms, make you bags which wax not old, a
treasure that can never fail in heaven. Psalm. 15. 5.
If not know the Usurer, 1 Cor. 0.10.
or Extortioner shall never enter upon my mount: Know that thou shall weep and
howl, and the rust of thy treasure shall eat thy soul like fire: James 5. 1,
3.
and so thou have heaped up (goodly) treasure for thy self against the last
day, even treasures of wrath against the day of wrath. Romans 2.5.
Yet to how many thousands may we say; thou have taken usury and increase, thou
have defrauded thy neighbor by extortion, Ezekiel. 22.12.
and have forgotten me says the Lord God. How many that buy the poor for
silver, and the needy for shoes? Amo^. 8 6.
How continually has the Lord called upon us? Take not my name in vain; Exodus
20.7.
swear not at all: above all things swear not. Mat. 5. 34.
O do not this abominable thing, which my soul hates. Iam. 5.12.
Is it not enough that thou refrainest prayer, and praise, but thou will
blaspheme? Will thou turn those calves of thy lips my due sacrifice, to
dogs or hell hounds barking against thy Creator? Remember thy self and me,
Zech. 5.3.
and know I will not hold thee guiltless: my curse shall here light upon thee,
how much more hereafter? Yet still the Land mournes for oaths. Men have made a
conspiracy; all sorts, sexes, ages have whet and set their tongues against
heaven, and hardly one of an hundred that fears an oath.

How loud has God th^ndered his woes against i^temperate persons? Esaias.
5.11.22.
Woe to them that rise up early to follow drunkenness, and continue till
night until the wine do inflame them: woe to them that are mighty to drink
wine, Esaias. 28.1.
and strong to power in strong drink: woe to the drunkards of Ephraim. He
counsels, Pro. 23. 31.
look not on the wine when it is red, and shows his color in the cup. Luke
21. 34.
Take heed least your hearts be oppressed with surfeting and drunkenness. If
not; know that day will come upon you unawares: no drunkard shall enter into
the Kingdom of heaven^ 1. Cor. 6. 10.
yet what place is there where this devil of drunkenness has not entered into
the swine, and carried them headlong into destruction: Court, City, Country,
Esaias 28.7. 8.
nay even the Universities all have erred because of wine, and are out of the
way because of strong drink: for all their tables are full of filthy vomiting,
and no place is clean: the Dutch manners have followed the Dutch errors, and
the stench of it is gone up to heaven, and incessantly calls upon the justice of
God for vengeance.

Even then when all Religion and Charity lamentably implored our help in
fasting, praying, and humbling our souls, to entreat the Lord for his
afflicted Church: when the Adversaries roared in the midst of the Congregation
and set up their banners for signs, Psalm. 74. 4.
we were so far from fearing that curse of Meroz, Judge. 5. 23.
for not going to help the Lord against the mighty, or at least striving for
them by prayers and h^miliation, Esaias 22^13.
that when God called to weeping and mourning, behold joy and gladness,
slaying oxen, killing sheep, eating and drinking, for to morrow we shall die.
Does not the word daily sound in our ears? Pro. 5. 8,15, 18, 19. and 6. 25.
Pro. 5. 11. and 6.26.
Drink the waters of thine own cistern: rejoice with the wife of thy youth,
let her breasts satisfy thee at all time: but keep thee far from the
strange woman, and come not near the doors of her house: desire not her
beauty in thy heart, else shall thou be brought to a piece of bread. Thou
shall mourn in the end, when thou have consumed thy flesh and thy body: yet
what fruit have we returned to God from the fulness of our long peace, but this,
Ier. 5.7.8.9.
I have fed them to the full, yet committed they adultery, and assembled
themselves by companies in harlots houses; They rose up like fed horses, every
one neighed after his neighbors wife: and what follows but even that
threatening, shall I no^ visit for these things, shall not my soul be avenged
on such a Nation as this?

To draw a little nearer to our selves in particular; do not the Messengers of
Christ sojourning among us, as his Leigers, daily call, entreat, and invite us
to repentance? Turn you, cast away all your transgressions, make you a new
heart, and a new spirit, for why will you dye? Ezekiel. 18. 31.
When God has allotted you six days, and appropriated but one to himself;
when he does not challenge two or three hours, but the day to be separated to
his holy service, when he has hedged and and walled in this his peculiar,
with so many cautions and motives, why will you thus transgress against the
Lord? why will you, or how dare you make it common by doing your own works,
and speaking your own words on the Lords day? When the Lord has so fearfully
adjured us, 2 Timothy 4.1.2.
I charge thee by God, and the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, preach the
word, be instant in season, out of season: and so often and strictly charged
you, Iam. 1. 19.
be slow to speak, but swift to hear: 1 Pet, 2.2.
long for the sincere milk of the Gospel, that thou may grow by it. Take
heed how thou hear: why do we n^glect Christ Jesus speaking to us in these
glad tidings of salvation? Luke 8. 18.
Why do we turn away our ears, and say in heart as those wretched Jews, we
are Lords, we will no more come at thee? Ier. 231.
When we admonish you, Speak every man the truth unto his neighbor: let no
corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which tends to
edifying: Ephe. 4.29.31 and 5.3.
Put away bitterness, anger, and all evil speaking: let no uncleannes be so
much as named among you, as becomes Saints, for none such have inheritance
with God. Cleanse thy heart from the leaven of maliciousness; purge thy tongue
from railing, reviling, slandering, when we are thus earnest with you, what
fruit reap we from all our labor? we speak in the air, we see these
sins, and many other spring, grow, and flourish among you. Some very few have
their hearts opened, but most shut up their ears and hearts, least Christ
knocking by his word should enter: and while we mourn for them in secret,
they openly laugh at us, while we pray for them, they mock and flout us. But
what will you do in the end thereof? Know assuredly (and oh that he who has
the keys of David would let this knowledge into thy heart) Thine own
wickedness shall correct thee, and thy turnings back shall reprove thee. Ier.
2.19.
Know therefore and behold it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou have
forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in thee, says the Lord of
Hoasts.

Consolat.
Hence may the contrite, and broken heart gather strength, and comfort it self
in the Lord, God has not cast away sinners, but has purposely sent his son
to heal and save them. Therefore he is anointed, and made the Christ of God,
Luke 4. 18.
that he might heal the broken hearted, that he should preach deliverance to
the Captives, Acts 26.17. ^8.
and should set at liberty them that are bruised. Therefore Christ sends his
Messengers, and his word, to open men's eyes, that they may turn from the power
of Satan, unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith.

The Lord has opened unto us a passage to return to his grace by Christ, and
to eternal happiness. But some dejected soul will say, O I have walked in
the counsel of the ungodly, I have not only delighted in wicked company, but
all my life have I spent in vanity, and noisome lusts. I have greedily
followed the pleasures of youth, and have not withheld from mine eyes
whatsoever they have desired: when my pleasures grew loathsome, then with as
much violence I pursued the world, and the covetous desires of it; and all my
care and delight was here on earth to plant, build, and purchase for my self
an earthly convenience. As for those fruits of the Spirit, that house made
without hands, eternal in the heavens, the inheritance of the Saints in light,
I seldom dreamed of it, but neglected the gracious offers of God.

But let me ask thee; Do thou not still persevere in the way of sinners? Now
that thine eyes are opened to see thy vanity, do thou lament thy folly,
turn thy feet with have into the good way? Ier. 10. 23.
Do thou cry uncessantly O Lord I know that the way of man is not in
himself, neither is it in man to walk and direct his steps; O therefore
turn thou mine eyes away from vanity, and quicken thou me in the way. Psalm.
119. 37.
Do thou labor to redeem thy lost time? know then all is safe with thee.
Some will reply. O but my sins are an heavy burden, too heavy for me,
pressing down^ my soul to hell. Then have thou right unto Christ; therefore be
of good comfort, arise he calls thee; Come un^to me all you that are weary
and heavy laden, Mat. 11.28.
and I will ease you. Cast away this cloak of s^ame, and come unto thy Savior.
But I am the chief of sinners. Another claims this precedencie, who was yet
the chief of Saints. For this cause heinous offenders have been received to
m^rcie, 1. Tim. 1. 15. 16.
that, that for thy example Christ should show all long suffering to those
which should believe in his name: believe therefore, and thou shall be saved. O
but my time is past: I have not regarded God heretofore in his word, and now I
am shut out foe ever. No time is past, while thou have any time, God has not
tied himself unto thy times, but has put the^ into his own hand: So long as
he lends his voice to call, thy time is not past. But alas I feel a world of
sinful filthiness still dwelling, and rebelling in me, now more then ever. Know
this is rather a symptom of health, then sickness. Thou feel sin more now,
not because it, but because thy health, and sense of Spirit increases: diseases
in their strength dead the senses, so that little pain is felt, but when life
prevails, and begins to expel the sick matter, our pain with our sense
returns.

Know assuredly, he that has dethroned sin reigning in thee, can easily
subdue sin fighting against thee. Look then into thy bosom, if thou find
there an heart melting, and trembling at the word, thrusting it self with all
humble subjection into the yoke of Christ: answering to his call, Seek my
face, Lord thy face will I seek, thou art then in that true way which leads to
blessedness, nay that way which is blessedness, even Jesus Christ thy head.

Exhortation
Let every soul therefore stir up it self, and first weighing that warning
given us by the wisdom of God, If sinners entise thee, consent thou not, walk
not thou in the way with them, etc, Pro. 1. 10. 11. 15.
then take words of exhortation, and lay them to heart: say unto thy soul;
Thou have wearied thy self in thy ways, and have found nothing, thou have
hunted for the delights and pleasures of the sons of men: Eccle 2.1.2. 8.9.10.
thou have ^^ken pleasure in pleasant things, thou have proved thy self with
joy, and when thou have caught it, thou have found it vanity: thou have said
of laughter thou art mad; and of joy, what is it that thou do? thou have
gathered to thy self silver and gold and chief treasures: thou art
wonderfully increased, and behold all is vanity and vexation of spirit. Say
unto the world, so many years have I served thee in all thy profits and
pleasures; I was in the day consumed with heat, and with frosts in the night:
my sleep departed from mine eyes, and thou have changed my wages ten times: (
Genesis 31. 7 40.) my childhood I gave thee for babies, my youth for wantones, my
riper age for riches, and behold all is vanity: and now except my God had
been with me, thou had sent me away empty ( Genesis 31.42.) Say unto sin, O
thou wicked and bewitching strumpet thus long have I waited upon thy pleasures,
and fulfilled thy sinful lusts, I have polluted my self, and am become as an
Ethiopian; I have doted upon thee, and served thee with greediness: for thee
had I forsaken all those rich graces, and hopes laid up for me in heaven: and
what have I gained, I have sown the wind, and reaped the whirlwind; I have
sown to the flesh, and reap^d corruption: all my wages are nothing else but
death and hell, and should I serve thee any longer? Say unto the Lord Jesus, I
come unto thee most blessed Savior, full of confusion, that so late I come
unto thee, whose service is glorious freedom, whose wages everlasting
happiness: Hosea 14.3.
take away all mine iniquity, and receive me graciously, so shall I offer the
calves of my lips. But if thou find thy heart still lingering and prolonging
the time in this Sodom, quicken it with these motives. Do I mock at his idle
pains, who spreads a fishing net upon the mountains, plowes the sands, or
sowes the seas? Can I forbear laughing to see a man seek for grapes among
thorns, or figs from thistles? and shall I practice my self what I deride in
others? seek now for an earthly paradise? heaven in earth? happiness in
worldly misery? Do I think he deserves to be deceived, who being often abused
with lies, will still trust? and shall I give credit to the worlds lying
flatteries? has not all my life been fed with vain promises? every state I
found full of vanity for the present, but still bearing me in hand that better
was coming. My childhood seemed grievous, being kept from liberty, and
prisoned in continual fear and subjection: but it promised much happiness in
youth. My youth I found much worse, full of labor and travel without, hurried
with lusts within: but an haven was showed me in marriage, and riper age: but
this incresed my cares within, and pains without: and what shall I hope
farther? Esaias 30. 18.
to find rest in the grave and hell? Again has my gracious and long-suff^ring
Father all this time waited that he may have mercy on me? Has my most loving
Savior thus long stood at the door of my ^are, and knocked, and still calls
unto me Open to me my love, my head is full of the dew, and my locks with drops
of the night, Cant. 5.
and shall I any longer delay, and plead excuse? Do I accurse the pride of that
Hildebrand or Gregory 7. pope of Rome.
Antichristian Prelate, who exalting himself above not only the meaner, but the
higher Gods on earth, nay even the Augustus, enforced the Emperor to stand
without^ begging entrance, and pardon, while he solaced himself with his
Matilda, and shall I proud worm, dare to hold out the Creator, and Lord of all
things, who stands and entreats for entrance into my heart, and beseeches me
(me vile earth and ashes) to be reconciled to him? When his own dear Spouse
deferred him, did she not seek long before she could find him: but the
watchme^ soon found her, smote her, and wounded her: and if it were done thus
to the green tree, what shall be done to the dry? Esaias 26. 8.9. 13.
Away therefore from me all ye wicked vanities, for I will keep the
commandments of my God. Lord I will wait for thee in the way of thy
judgments, the desire of my soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of
thee. Other Lords ^aue ruled me, but I will remember only thy name. Psalm.
143.10.
Teach me to do thy will, for thou art my Lord, lead me by thy spirit into the
land of uprightness.

Nor sits in the seat of the scornful. As in earthly possessions, men first
trade and busy themselves in the world, and ^mploying what they get, begin to
gather stock, and increase their substance; Lastly being now full, and well
furnished, they purchase, plant, build, settle themselves and their estates: so
is it in spiritual evils, and that sinful condition of man. The portion of
sin bequeathed us by the first Adam we employ, and tra^fick with it: and so
we soon grow to more fulness of evil, come on to habitual, customary, and
notorious wickedness: at length we write our sins with a pen of iron, and with
the point of a diamond, Ier. 17.1.
and grave them upon our hearts: Dan. 6 24.
so finishing our iniquity, we seal up our sins, and by these deeds of
darkness settle our souls in much security, in this miserable purchase.
Like dead men we lie down in our lusts, and (as some great persons) proud of
our rottenesse, with much cost and ostentation build up our sepulchers of this
body of death, compose our selves in our grau^s, and set up our rest in them.
Here therefore the Prophet lays down the lowest degree of sin (even that
which is next to hell) and in avoiding it, the least degree of happiness. So
then in this third proposition;

Proposition
David pronounces that man blessed who sits not in the seat or chair of
scorners.

For some opening of these words, consider what is here meant by sitting, what
by a seat or chair, lastly who are scorners. A seat or chair (as we know)
properly taken, is some frame of wood, or other matter purposely made for the
resting of the body; and by Metonymie (because Princes and Judges had thrones
and chaires of state, where the people being assembled, and standing about them
received judgment: see Psalm. 122. 5. and Exodus 18. 13.) hence a seat is taken
for precedencie, power, and authority. Thus the seat of Moses is used for his
power, and authority in the word, Mat. 23. 2.
which God committing first to Moses, derived to all his successors: so the
Throne or seat of David for that temporal preced^ncie and power whereby he
governed and judged that people. So likewise sitting, being a position of the
body composed to rest, is by Metonymie used for exercise of authority and
power. Revel. 18. 7.
I sit as Queen. The Lord says to my Lord, sit at my right hand: Psalm. 101. 1.
and by a Metaphor being lent from the body to the soul, may signify either
to rest in sin, or to use a Lordly power, or freedom to follow it. Thus we
read of a Lord of anger, a Lord of appetite, (for so is the word, Prove. 22. 34.
and 23. 2.) so then to sit in the seat, may intend, both that security of
wicked men, whereby they sleep in sin, and resolve to rest in it, and also
for that lifting up, and pride, shaking off the yoke of Christ, judging, and
p^osecuting the good, and Godly. Lastly scorning is an action of men, wherey
they think, and speak basely of any thing, and from contempt, rising out of
pride, reject it^ A scorner therefore every where in Scripture, is taken for
such a sinner, who being flesht in all wickedness, filled, and puffed with pride,
and vain conceit of his own wit, despises the wisdom of God in the word,
and makes a jest of sin, the reprover, and reproof of it, see Pro. 1. 22.
and 14.9. when men conceive well of their own ways, and are bladderd up with
a windy opinion of wisdom in themselves, then they basely esteem of other
counsel, mock, and deride whatsoever comes cross of their own praejudging
conceits. The sense then of this proposition is. Although thou have sorted thy
self with worldlings, and have been misled in their ungodly courses, although
after many reproofs, thou have neglected the grace which was offered; and have
now long continued in thy folly, even despising in thy carnal conceit the
wisdom of God in his word, yet if thou now returnest, leanest not still to
thine own wit, but yeeldest up thy self to the yoke of Christ, thou art here
already, and shall be must more hereafter happy, and blessed.

To witness this truth (beside many other) the whole 15. chap. of S. Lukes
Gospel may be fitly cited: where in those parables, especially that of the
Prodigal (spending, rioting, never returning, till by extreme misery he was
scourged home, yet then graciously received, entertained with a feast, and
clothed with the best robe) our Savior a^firms much joy to be in heaven for
one sinner, that converteth. Even scorners are called to repentance, and grace
offered; and the Prophet invites, and calls to such, Pro. 1. 22.
Be no more mockers least your bonds increase. Esaias 28.22.
And it is more then probable, that some of those who mocked the Apostles as if
they had been overtaken with wine, Acts 2.13. 41.
were not only called by the word, but thoroughly recalled, and pricked in
their hearts, baptized and saved.

The grounds and reasons of this (as the former) proposition may be. 1. In God,
his infinite and unutterable mercy, taking no delight in the death of the
sinner, but calling to return, and ready to receive. Esaias. 55.7.
Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let
him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for
he will abundantly pardon. 2. In David, who had both by the word, and no
question by experience, seen this work of Gods mercy in many notorious
sinners.

Instruction.
Gather hence these instructions. God, and open contempt of his justice. There
are many respects which aggravate sins, and make them either more or less
odious. The sin of an eminent person more scandalous and heinous, and
therefore not only punishments but (which is not to be read with neglect)
sacrifices of greater price set out for them. Levit. 4. 3.22. 23^27^28. Levit.
21.9.
Sins of ignorance in a Priest were propitiated with a young Bullock, the
same sin in a Ruler reconciled with a male goat, in other with a female. A
Priests daughter if she play the whore must be burnt with fire. So the
excellency of the person offended aggravates the offense; reviling the Prince,
more then railing at a subject; blaspheming God, worse then slandering man.
Many circumstances there are which lessen a trespass, or increase it; whence our
Savior more deeply censures the Jews then Pilate, they Gods people, he an
heathen; they from outrage, and furious malice, with threats, and tumult drive
him against his judgment, to corrupt judgment, and abuse the Ordinance of God,
even his justice; but he desirous to content the people, fearful to incur
Caesar's displeasure, John 19. 11.
laboring to save the innocent, was at length overcome by their importunity
and clamours, therefore had they the greater sin. Verily the justice of God,
proportioning a greater measure of damnation to some, then others, necessarily
argues the sins of men to be of diverse size and measure. The sin of
Bethsaida, Capernaum, Chorazin, more intolerable then those of Tire, Sidon,
Sodom or Gomorra.

Sins and sinners may well be resembled to diseases, and diseased bodies.
Every disease as it more distempers the body, and disturbs that just
proportion, and mixture of humors convenient, and agreeable to nature, so is
it more grievous: some so strong, that they catch, and infect; and the bodies
infected sonoysome, that they spread their poison, and even dart^out venom to
wound others, with whom they converse. Thus every sinful disease of the soul,
as it is more contrary to that spiritual crasis, or temper of life, in which
God created it, is more foul, dangerous, and even infectious. Levit. 18.25^
Hence we read that many Lands have been polluted and tainted with some
noto^iously sinful people, and even sick of them, till it had spued them out.
So was it with the Canaanites. Nay even the Israelites also after they were
entered into the Land, defiled it with idols, and false worship, and were
therefore cast out: see Ier. 16. 13. 18.

And surely as any sin is more heinous, foul, and abominable, so is it more
strong to infect: witness that monster of idolatry, which how soon it poisoned
the whole world, and how easily yet it sh^ds its venom into the hearts of men,
the old heathenish, Jewish, and now Popish Idolaters su^^iciently testify: no
less contagious is swearing, drunkenness, cursing, and such other: what
reasonable man can deny these sins to be as catching, as pox, plague, or any
like disease of the body. No sooner entr^d that image worship into the earth,
but it shed it self into the whole body of the world, and hardly one member
even Abraham escaped, and even he not untainted. In the time of Jeremy the
land mourned for oaths, in our time it is to be wondered, that the land sinkes
not to hell under the burden of this sin: there is hardly one of an hundred
that makes conscience of all oaths: they have petty oaths (as they account
them) and coin strange Gods to swear by, the Mass, Ladikin, or Lakin, and
much like gross profaneness they continually use without fear or wit: yet is
cursing as ordinary as swearing, and d^unk^nnesse comes not behind any of them,
how gen^rall it is, and how it has, and does infect, witness the ruin of
many families, the pining and lean cheeks of many wives and children, and the
loathsome stink of it in every corner.

Spirit (when he enters into the heart of man, and ^nlivens him with his
gracious presence) leads him through every good path, stirs up, directs, and
strengthens him to walk in the counsel of God, to stand in the old and good
way, and leaves him not till he has seated him in fullness of grace, and
glory: so when those spiritual wickednesses in high places, Satan with his
legions, enters and possesses the heart of any man, he drives him through all
the degrees of sin, carries him headlong, and suff^rs him not to stop
(unless the Lord overruled him) till he be plunged in the bottomless pit.
Hence it is, that the faithful are first awaked, Ephe. 5.14^
and commanded to stand up, to receive light, and being once raised, and
quick^ed with Christ, Psalm 84 7.
they go from strength to strength, till they appear all of them before the
Lord in Sion. They mend their speed, and run in the way of Gods
commandments; burning in love, Phil. 3. 13.14.
they forget what is behind, reach forth to that which is before, and press
hard toward the mark for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.
2 Timothy 3.13.
Hence is it, that wicked men wax worse and worse, rush into all impiety, as
an horse to the battle, and being caught and violently driven (as a ship in a
storm) with the tempest of their sensual desires, never stop but in eternal
death. 2 Pet^ 1. 5,6,7
So as the godly go on from faith to virtue, from virtue to knowledge, from
knowledge to temperance, etc. so the wicked man laying a foundation in
ignorance builds upon it wilfulness; Read Ephe. 4. 18,19.
wilful darkness grows up to obstinacy, and hardness of heart, hardness
procures senslesnes, want of feeling ushers into wantonness, and delight in
sin: and this delight brings in greediness. O there is in the sinful heart
of man a praecipice, and strange downfall in the desire, and practice of
iniquity, which will not endure any stay till it be cut off by God, being
either stopped by his grace, and turned into the good way, or stricken with
death, and sent to their place: hurried with sensuality they cannot cease to
sin, drink iniquity as a thirsty man water: as it draws them, so they
draw it with cart-ropes: they will take great pains to do ^ickedly. 2 Pet.
2.12. 14.
And as a man that wilfully flings himself from an high rock or steeple,
cannot stay, Job 15. 16.
but still falls, Esaias 5.18.
and the further he goes, sinkes with more force and speed, Ier. 9.5.
so is it with our sinful nature; altogether like those swine in the Gospel,
which being left to the Devil, were carried by him, and could not stop till
they came to those steep rocks, nor stay there, till they had cast themselves
down into the sea, and were stifeled.

Observe it in some particulars; When Satan had kindled in the heart of Cain
that hellish brand of anger, it could not be quenched with the neerenesse of
blood, and dear relation of an only Brother, till anger had enflamed it with
hatred, and hatred broke out into actual murder. So in Sodom fullness of
bread, or luxury breeds idleness, idleness lust, and lust rushes into that
bestiall filthiness against nature. And would to God some remnants of this
cursed disposition remained not still in the faithful; howsoever it be
over-mastered by his Spirit dwelling in them, and reigning for Christ. When
David gave his eyes leave to wander in wanton looks, his eyes draw his heart
to wanton thoughts and desires, and his heart drives on his body to actual
uncleanness. Thus was he carried headlong to adultery: adultery pulls him on
(under pretense of saving his credit) to make Vriah drunk, and at length to
murder him. Consider this with fear, and not only know the falsenesse and
cunning deceiveablenes of the heart, but remember that when men even Gods
chosen give way to sin, God often suffers them to be carried down in the
current of it, that before they can think of it, they are almost sunk, and
swallowed in death and despair.

God in his word, in his works, in his Saints. For as God is denied, so is he
derided, either in word, and open profession of Atheism, or more secretly, in
rebellious actions, proceeding from inward contempt of God. As there are some
which have denied God in words, through fear, and weakness, which yet
confessed him in their heart: Tit. 1.16.
so are there many who professing God in their words, deny him in works, being
altogether abominable, disobedient, and to every good work reprobate. Neither
are these Atheists to be found among Heathens only, Pro. 1. 25. 29.
but every where swarm in the visible Church of God. How often does the
wisdom of God complain of, and threatens the despisers of his word? Ier. 20
7.8. and 17. 15.
How often do the Prophets cry out of them? I am in derision daily; every one
mocketh me, the word of God was made a reproach to me, and a derision daily: 2
Pet. 3.3.
see the manner of their skosting. Jude 18.
They say unto me, where is the word of the Lord? let it come now. Thus
Ezekiell chap. 33. 32. So likewise God is mocked in his works by those
Atheists, which being foretold by the Apostles, we see daily walking after
their lusts. Numberles are they that mock God in his Saints; see Psalm. 14. 6.
and 69. 7. 9. 11. 12. It might seem a strange and marveilous thing, that even
those who profess Christ should mock him: should mock him in his word, and
despise his wisdom in those ordinances which himself appointed, and
commended to his Church: unless the Spirit had showed us the cause of it;
namely, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
the natural man discernes not the things of God, but judges them folly: now
we know that folly is the most proper object of scorn. And many hipocrites are
in the visible Church, who have Lord often in their mouths, yet never in their
hearts; but are in deed, howsoever in show they seem otherwise, natural,
sensual and divellish. Do but observe the ordinary behavior of men in this
open light; how common is it for men to absent themselves from the public
service of God in the Sabbath, never blushing in plain terms to prefer their
own vain conceits before the ordinances of God? affirming and maintaining,
that they can serve God as well at home, and in the chimney corner, by reading
some good book, etc. as in the Church by hearing the Preacher? And so wilfully
blind are they, that they cannot see how basely in this they esteem of Gods
wisdom, who continually employes his servants, and commands them to be
instant: the wisdom of God sends them Prophets, Apostles, wise men, etc. Mat.
23. 34.
If God send them dare we think it needless? were he not more then fond,
who would send a Guide with a man, who without any direction can as well come
to his journeyes end? How ordinary is it to draw near to God in his word, to
set before him, yet openly by sleeping, reading, nay many times talking,
proclaim^ the contempt and scorn in which they hold that Ordinance, the power
of God to salvation? This behavior were intolerable toward men, yet God must
take it at our hand. Mal. 1.8.
Offer such service to thy Prince, and try whether he will be content with it,
and accept thy person? If he command thee to attend his pleasure at the Court;
and sets thee a day, dare thou break day with him? dare thou refuse? and
answer, that thou can do him as good service at home? If thy father be in
conference with thee, direct thee how to assure to thy self and thy posterity
thy inheritance, were it not an impudent contempt in the mean time to stand
prating with some servant, or lie down and sleep?

How palpable then is our base conceit of God, and his words, that when we
hear his Wisdom affirming, blessed are they that hear me, and wait upon the
posts of my doors, Pro. 8. 34.
Get thee forth (if thou would find me) by the steps of the flocks, Cant.
1.7.8.
and feed thy kids by the tents of the shepherds; Heb. 10,25.
warnes us not to forsake the Assemblies, dare reply again, I shall do as
well at home in mine own house, as in his Courts, I shall as soon find him
in my private walks, as among the flocks and shepherds. The cause of this
contempt questionless is, that soveraigntie, and dominion of lust in the
heart, which swayeth the whole man, yea even rides him, as with a snaffle,
turning him from the way it likes not, and driving him as with a spur, to any
action, though never so unreasonable. This the Apostle intimates, 2 Pet. 3 3.
where he gives a general cause of this action in scornful men; namely, their
following of lusts: and more particularly those worldly lusts of covetousness
are most strong this way to draw the heart unto this despising of the word.
Luke 16. 14.
All this heard the Pharisees, who were covetous, and they mocked him. Thus
those mockers Ez^k. 33. 31.

Lord sometimes even out of the chair of scorning, to bring some home to his
own dominion (so to manifest the power of his word, and the wonders of his
grace) yet certainly such are farthest off from his kingdom, and in a more
remote distance from happiness, then other degrees of sinners. For in some
kinds it is not with sinful dispositions, as with these postures of the body:
the body which walks, neither stands, nor sits; the body which stands, neither
sits, nor walks; and that which sits, neither walks, nor stands: but that
soul which stands in the way of sinners, walks in the counsel of the ungodly,
and he which sits with scorners, both walks and stands with sinners. For as a
reasonable creature includes and comprehends both vegetation and sense, and as
higher degrees of holiness contain the lower: so in sin, he that sit^ in the
seat of mockers, in the same instant walks in the counsel of the ungodly,
and stands also in the way of sinners. Mocking of Gods Messengers, and
despising the word is expressed by God to be the last and lowest degree of
sin in his people, immediately going before destruction. 2 Chronicles. 36. 16.
scorners are an abomination to men: Pro. 24.9.
therefore Sarah could not endure mocking Ismael to stay in her house with her
son, Genesis 21.9.10. How much more detestable are they in those most pure eyes of
God, and shall be thrust out of his house? A fearful curse God pronounces
upon any child that shall mock his Father in the flesh, or despises his
Mothers instruction; Pro. 30.17.
the ravens of the valley shall pick out his eyes. Surely then that soul
which mocketh his Creator, and despises the instruction of the heavenly
Jerusalem, that foul of the air, who pickes up that good seed, shall devour
it.

Examination.
Try here thy ways, see and consider how far thou have proceeded in the paths
of death: have thou hearkened to the counsel of the ungodly? have thou stood
with sinners? so that after conviction and checks of conscience thou have still
gone further, and sat down among the despisers and mockers? Thou art even at
the pits brinke, there is but a step betwixt death and thee, and if thou do
not quickly draw back thy foot, thou will soon fall into a bottomless
perdition.

Now because every one flatters himself, and draws out his name from this
number, remember (as before was showed) that God is mocked in his works, Pro.
17. 5.
in his word, in his Saints. For even he that mocketh the poor, reprocheth his
Maker; and all these kinds of mocking are either inward by despising (see Prove.
1. 22. 24. 25. thus Michal despised David in her heart; 2. Sam. 6.16.
) or outward, partly by word injesting, flouting, scornful speaking (thus
Elisha was mocked, 2 Kings 2. 23.
come up thou bald head, come up thou bald head) or by actions and gestures, as
Christ was derided by the Soldiers, they cloth him with purple, they crown
him with thorns, they bend the knee etc. Now then consider thy ways. The Lord
in the Sabbath calls thee to remembrance of that great work, the creation of
thee, and all the world, and that greater, of thy redemption by Christ: have
thou not here sat with scorners? For have thou neither in thy heart lightly
esteemed, nor in thy words jested, nor in thy actions slighted this solemn
day? and so scorned that great work of God offering grace unto thee in his
Ordinances? How many must confess themselves guilty of this sin? For the
word; when thou have heard it sometime threatening, sometime promising, have
thou not set it at thy heels? have thou neither in thought, word, or action
slighted it? When thou have conversed with the Saints, have thou not despised
that holy fellowship, and skoffed like profane Ismael? Common and ordinary is
this abuse, and too few who can exempt themselves from this sin. Look
therefore about thee, and quickly retire thy se^fe, least thou fall into that
pit, whence there is no returning: for if thou continuest to go on in this
last degree, thou may soon proceed so far that thou shall never be able to
retire. Certainly to crucify Christ again, to make a mock of him to forsake
the holy fellowship of the Saints, and after knowledge wilfully to plunge our
selves into sin; not some particular sin, but that general renounci^g of
our holy profession (which will easily, and soon ensue upon this scorning, and
is but the last degree of it) is a state, not only dangerous, but desperate,
see Heb. 6. 6. and 10. 25. 26. 27.

Reproof.
How sharply then are all scorners to be rebuked? as 1. Those who inwardly
despise, or outwardly deride God in his works. Do but consider how general
this sin is by some few particulars, for how does the prid^ of the rich and
wealthy carry them in heart to despise the poor, and to express it in their
words and actions? How basely do they account of them? as if they had no
fellowship with them in the same nature and grace. Let a man converse with us,
who b^ares an high sail, whose lands, w^alth, friends^ apparel are fair, he
has all respect, and courtesy from us, be he never so poor in grace, nay
openly known to be a bondslave to sin, and Satan: But if a man of mean
parentage, and estate, though indeed a son of God, rich in grace, and heir
of glory, have any thing to do with us, we will hardly afford him a kind look,
or word. How common is this vanity to despise the wisdom of the poor? Eccle,
9.16.
Though the wisdom of God has openly testified, Pro. 28. 6.
The poor which walks in his uprightnes, is a better man then the rich which
peruerteth his way, yet will not men believe it. For the better man ought to
have more respect: we find it by experience too true: that friends, and
Brethren reject the poor, be they never so instant with them: Pro. 19.7.
and so g^nerall is it, that he ascribes it to all; what the cause of this
contempt is, God himself tells us. Pro. 14.21.
The sinner despises his neighbor, but he that has mercy on the poor is
blessed, where despising and showing mercy being opposed by God, teaches us,
that when we withdraw our hand from doing them good, or oppress them then we
despise them: and this despising is not only, sinful, but rises from gross,
customary sin: so that when we are hardened in rebellion, then we proceed to
despise the poor, and God in him: But oh, thou vain man, thou proud earth,
art not thou the same clay of the same potter? and who has separated thee? who
makes rich, and poor. How presumest thou to despise the work of God, being
thy self the work of his hands? Look to thy beginning and ending, and spy
out (if thou can) any difference betwixt thee and the poorest. Art thou not
servant to the same Lord, wearest thou not the same livery of skin and flesh?
do thou not sleep in the same dust and nakedness? wast thou borne with
lands, treasure, or scepters in thy hand? what difference in the grave between
thy mace and his mattocke? Oh if thou have so much light, look a little into
thy heart, and see there a far more miserable and desperate poverty. How
poor is thy understanding in spiritual light, and treasures of knowledge? how
poor thy heart in bowels of mercy? how needy art thou in faith, love, and
those heavenly riches? Thou which art beggarly in the true, can thou despise
the want of Luke 16.11.
wicked riches? Have thou not received all from God? Art thou not his debtour?
why boastest thou of thy debts? of that, of which thou art only a Steward, and
accountable to thy Master? Certainly as that earth which is replenished with
precious metals, is altogether in the superficies barren and unfruitful, so
is it with ^arthly men, who when they are swollen up with this worldly wealth,
are most miserable beggars in the true and durable riches: insomuch that the
Truth himself has spoken it, Mat. 19. 24.
a Camel shall as soon be drawn through the eye of a needle, as those men
into the Kingdom of God. Boldly I dare a^firme it, that he has never felt his
inward misery, who despises outward poverty.

Again consider how contemptuously other works of God are used by most men;
for to omit many; that work of his mercy in having patience with us, and
forbearing us, how is it despised, how scornfully abused? May we not say to
thousands with the Apostle, Romans 2.4.
thou despisest the riches of his bountifulness, and patience, and
long-suffering: do we not see with our eyes the complaint of Solomon verified
among us? Eccle. 8.11.
because sentence against an evil work is not speedily executed, therefore
the heart of men is fully set in them to do evil. Nay certainly so profane
is the heart and so full of cursed Atheism, that when the Lord holds his
tongue, Psalm. 50 20.
men begin to think that God is like to themselves. But surely in nothing more
palpably appears our contempt of God in his works then in the open, wilful,
and even despitefull breach of the Sabbath, so often, and never enough
reproved. For first it is a day consecrated, and set out by God as holy, for
remembrance of those two greatest works of Gods power, wisdom, and goodness
toward us, namely the Creation and Redemption. Again it self is one of those
works of God, which especially manifests his grace toward us, and is one of
his loue-tokens, in that he has set out this day as a sign, a working and
e^fectuall sign, whereby we in ^anctifying it to him, shall find and feel he
is our God, Ezekiel. 20.12.
who sanctifies us to himself. Besides in setting down that precept, he has
particularly hedged in our transgressing nature, provoking us by many strong
motives to observe it^ laying forth means to help us, tying a thread of
remembrance about our hearts, that we might be wholly without excuse, so that
whosoever with care reads it, he cannot but see, that the Lord more presses
that commandment, and inforceth it upon our conscience then all the rest, as
being the means whereby he writes all the rest in our hearts. Do but now
behold the practice of men (and not to mention the Papists, who holding not the
head Christ Jesus) regard not his day, but abuse it, and maintain the abuse to
any journey, or other affairs, but deifying the Saints, most superstitiously
observe days by the Pope dedicated to their service:) let us look unto our
selves. Are not Ministers charged, nay fearfully adjured to preach the word, to
be instant in season, and out of season: 2 Timothy 4. 1. 2.
yet how many despise the very season of sowing that precious and immortal
seed? As great a charge is given to the people for hearing, and as great, and
more is their neglect and contempt, openly proclaimed by them, as well by their
spending some of those few hours of Gods public worship in their own
works, abroad in the field, or at home in their beds, by their fires etc. as
also by an impudent avouching and defending their sin; scorning all reproof,
and deriding the reprover, Nay even some that are called and reputed honest
men, and boast themselves to be good keepers of their Church, make no
conscience to mispend the rest of the Sabbath, in any vain, or idle
employment, taking liberty to dash out any instruction they have received with
ordinary, nay many times unlawful, and at any time sinful recreations.

Whence can this behavior proceed, but from a notorious contempt of God? from
a grounded Atheism and wilful unbelief of heart? And what? Art thou indeed
stronger then God? Ier. 7.19.
Do thou provoke him to anger, and do thou not provoke thy self to
confusion of face? Oh! know and remember God is not mocked, and when he
denounces so frequently unto thee for this sin destruction of body and
soul, he See Esaias 29 20.
mockes thee not. Thine own reason will teach thee; as thou sowest, so shall
thou reap: if thou sowest the wind, thou shall reap the whirlwinde, if thou
sowest contempt, thou shall reap derision: Pro. 3.34.
with the scorner he scorneth.

2. Mocking God in his Saints must here be reproved, Christ in his members,
and indeed despises not so much the person, as holiness in the person.
Holiness without all question is that Attribute of God in which he most
excells, and delights, the very beauty of the Lord. Here we admire his power,
grace, mercy, but in heaven the Saints and glorious Angels beholding his face,
are ravished with that beauty of his holiness, and in their praise, double
this property, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts: In man it is the very
image, Esaias 6.2.
Rev 4.8.
(when he is begotten unto God as his child through the immortal seed of his
word) he does resemble his heavenly Father: which therefore the Lord commands
us to follow, and to labor for it, Levit. 11 44. 45.
and sets down the penalty of our neglect, 1 Pet. 1.15.16
we shall never see his face; Heb. 12 ^4.
but shall be banished from his presence. It is the very end why God has
chosen us, Ephe. 1.4. and 5. 26.27.
why Christ has given himself for us; yea the effect of his blood, the
especial work of Gods Spirit dwelling in us. 2 Pet. 1. 4.
In a word it is the very nature of God communicated to us. There is no sin
therefore which more evidently exalts it self against Christ, none that
reaches so high toward heaven in defiance of God, as this, when men despise in
heart this image and nature of God, and in despitefull terms and gestures
publish themselves the scornful enemies of holiness.

How common this divellish profaneness is, may easily be seen; first in
fastening the odious name of Sectaries and Heretics upon those which desire
and endeavor to fly the corruption which is in the world through lust, and in
truth of heart to follow after righteousness: for if a man with fear and
trembling strives to eschew evil, and do good, and has set up his resolution
to walk godlily, righteously, and soberly in this present world; how soon is
he branded by worldly and wicked men with the name of a Puritan? Which being
ancient Heretics, sheltring their rank and stinking sins under that abuse
of Scripture, To the pure all things are pure: pretended themselves to be
clean, pure, and holy in the practice of all filthiness. Nay, they are not
afraid (if they discern in any more shows of godliness then ordinary) to
deride him, by applying to him that title, which is the most honorable, that
belongs to a Christian, as, This is one of the holy Brotherhood, one of the
holy Sisters: Surely if they think them not such, and speak ironically,
accounting them hipocrites of whom they thus speak, (for thus they excuse
themselves) then are they most inexcusable, who dare abuse to mockery the
greatest honor, that ever God vouchsafed the creature: to be a Brother, and
heir with Christ, and to apply a name appropriate to Gods Saints unto such, as
they esteem no better then whited tombs, and painted sepulchers. And because
folly is the especial object of contempt, they are come to that height of bold
Atheism, that they will impudently term such Gods fools. But as the Apostle
affirms the folly of God to be far above the wisdom of men: so these
fools (as they call them) of God, are far above these worldly wise
Achitophels, who with all their policy can never escape, nay by it run into
destruction and perdition of body and soul. That these should be Christians,
who mock Christianity, that these should be children of God, who scoff at
the Brotherhood of Christ, let them believe who can; for my self I cannot see
how the greatest charity (which is always joined with wisdom) can otherwise
account of these men, then of most wretched Infidels, filled with contempt of
Christ, and hellish Atheism: well therefore may we pray against their
wickedness; Psalm. 31.18.
let the lying lips be made dumb, which speak grievous things proudly, and
contemptuously against the righteous. Psalm. 79.4.12.
We are a reproach to our neighbors: a scorn and derision to those that are
round about us: Render seven fold into their bosom the reproach, wherewith they
have reproched thee O Lord.

God, and him in this his Ordinance, are here evidently condemned. Let such
know it is impossible to separate the despising of the meanest in Gods
Ministry, from the contempt of Christ, and God his Father, Luke 10.16.
he that despises you despises me, and he that despises me, despises him
that sent me: where Christ in general speaks of all Ministers, whom he
employeth in the glad tidings of salvation, and particularly of such as were
not Apostles, but the seventie Disciples, who (if we consider them at that
time) in the knowledge of Christian mysteries of faith were far inferior to
the most ordinary Professors at this day. In vain therefore shall men plead
before the tribunal of Christ; Lord when did we hear thee preaching unto us,
and scorned thy word? for he will, nay has already answered, he that hears
whom I send, hears me: and therefore what you have done to the lowest of
these my messengers, you have done unto me. Moreover there is nothing more
certain then this judgment of God, that he will mock^, and scorn thy word,
when thou with as much earnestnes shall sue to him, as he now to thee. Pro.
1.25.26.
Because you despised all my counsel, I will laugh at your destruction, and
mock when your fear comm^th: See also Psalm 2. verse. 4.

And herein the Romish Church manifests her whordome, in that she has, and
still does make a mock of that most holy word of Christ. Surely that which
Pope Leo 10. spoke, the rest of that Hierarchy think, and are not dainty to
express their thoughts in their actions, who blasphemously boasted, that the
fable, or tale of Christ had brought them no small advantage. Evidently in
those two actions do they discover themselves what they think of Religion.

1. That they turn the whole stream of it into the bottomless gulf of their
covetousness and ambition, and frame it wholly to earthly ends, accepting no
doctrine, nor allowing it as good, which tends not to the advancement of the
Clergy, and either directly, or by some fetching about, brings them in profit
or honor. This cannot but appear to any man, who does not wink, or looks
not through Jesuitical spectacles. 2. In that they equal such humane writings
with the divine, in which shines no spark of divine light, but are branded
with manifest untruths and impossibilities, and ascribe such works to the holy
Ghost, wherein the Author protests his end of writing, 2 Macab. 15. 2 last
verses.
to delight the ear of the reader, nay desires to be excused for slender and
bare speaking.
Comfort.
Hence arises much consolation to an afflicted soul, which having a deep sense
of sin, Comfort.
speaks as the Apostle, I am chief of sinners. How far soever thou have
gone in evil, if thou turn from it, and ^efusest any longer to sit in the
chair of scorning, thou shall be accepted and blessed. There are three degrees
of men departed this life: the first, when a man is newly dead and laid out;
another cos^in'd, and going to the grave; a third buried, and stinking in the
tomb. Christ raised all these: Iairus daughter in the house: the widows son
upon the bear, going to the grave: Ephe. 2.1.5.
Lazarus in the sepulcher: he quickens by his spirit, not only those that are
dead, but buried also in sins and trespasses. Fear not therefore but come
unto Christ, or rather receive Christ coming to thee: believe only, and thou
shall live.

Exhortation
Take heed now to thy foot, and enter not into the way of scorners: be no more
a mocker, least thy bonds increase. Thou can not but see every where profane
men (the plague of these last times) making a jest of Religion, Esaias. 28.52.
despising God in his works, in his word, in his Saints: set not in with them,
but fly from them, as from the pestilence.

And for a motive to stop thee from this course, consider their steps, how
many feet have gone that way, how few returned? Thou shall find they perish by
skores (2 King. 2. 24.) but hardly one or two single souls retyring safely
from this last step of sin. But especially awaken thy soul from this
sin, with assurance of like measure from God: O seriously think with thy
self; will not the day come, is it not running poast toward me, and I know not
how near, when I shall fi^de no comfort but only in peace with God? My
pleasures, my wealth will forsake me, my friends will weep for me, my body
full of deadly griefs, my soul pinched with thousand pangs of conscience, the
bell summoning me, the grave gaping for me, my accusers one without, another
within me, and the Judge who cannot be bribed, much less any longer mocked,
^eady to arraine me. Oh then how welcome to me will be the least hope, that
God would lend me a merciful ear to hear me? If he should then deride my
petition, scorn my supplication, and laugh at my misery, what can be expected
but a fearful instant damnation? how soon would those foul spirits plunge my
desolate soul into that eternal torment, that lake of fire and brimstone?
Shall I then willingly pluck this infinite misery upon my head? Has not the
Truth, which cannot lie assured me, and will not my reason confirm it, that he
scorns the scorner? How should I look upon his face when he must be my Judge,
whom I scorned to be my friend? How shall I stand before his wrath, whose grace
I d^rided? O therefore my soul prevent this mischief betimes, accept of grace
while he offers it: seek, search sue for it now, that thou may then
assuredly find it: go forth to meet it, which is sent to meet thee: take
hold of it and leave it not, which will hold up thy head at that day, and will
never leave thee, till thou art seated in eternal happiness.

Psalm I. Ver. 2. But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law
does he meditate day and night.
THE Prophet having in the former verse laid down the way which must be
declined by all those which would come to happiness; in this, propounds
positiuely the path which without fail will bring us to it, if we follow it to
the end. In this way he sets out two periods: 1. delighting in Gods Law; 2.
meditating in it day and night: from which issue two points of doctrine.

Proposition
1. The Prophet affirms him blessed, who delights in the law of God. 2. The
Psalmist pronounces him blessed, who meditates day and night in the law of the
Lord.
In the former these particulars must be opened^ 1. what is the law of the
Lord: 2. what this delight in the law. The law is sometime strictly taken for
the first scriptures, the five books of Moses: and then ordinarily
distinguished, either from the writer, and called the Law of Moses; Luke 2. 22.
and 16. 16. and 24. 44.
or by adding the other opposite member, the law and the Prophets: sometime it
is more largely extended, as comprehending all the prophetical writings of the
old Testament: as is manifest John 10. 34. where the book of Psalms is made
part of the Law.

But the word here used properly signifies doctrine, yet is generally and
rightly translated Law, because whatsoever God would have us know concerning
his will and pleasure, is there by himself taught, revealed, and promulgated,
Deuteronomy. 29.29. so that he appoints it the only ordinary means of life. Luke
16. 29, 30, 31. 2. because all doctrines delivered in the word, are so many
sanctions of the supreme Majesty, binding the conscience to all obedience,
and perfect subjection. Again his delight is by some translated his will, the
word signifying that action of the mind, whereby willingly, pleasingly, and
with love the heart cleaues to any thing: so used Genesis 34. 19.

This then is the meaning of the words; Whosoever loves the Law, or word of
God, cleaues to it, takes pleasure in that which God there commands: he is
entered already into a blessed estate. This as it is here plainly testified, so
also the Apostle adds his suffrage unto it, evidently affirming that as his
misery consists in being vexed with the body of death, resisting the law of
God: Romans 7. 22.
so his happiness in delighting in that law concerning the inward man.

The grounds or reasons of this testimony in David are, 1. his knowledge in
the word of God, Psalm. 119. 50. 92, 93.
whence he had taken forth this lesson^ Deuteronomy. 28. 2. his experience, having
felt by this delight an unspeakable happiness, being holden up in his deepest
afflictions, and quickened from his deadness by this word. Hence gather these
lessons.

Instruction.
The Scripture contains all that doctrine, which is profitable to the
perfection of a Christian, so far as to make him wise to salvation, and to
bring him to everlasting happiness. For if he be blessed, Psalm. 19. 7^
who with delight entertaines it; 2 Timothy 3.15. 16. 17.
necessarily it must contain whatsoever is necessary, or profitable to that
end. Thus elsewhere he pronounces it perfect. And the Apostle speaking of the
Scriptures, affirms them able to make wise to salvation, and profitable to
instruct, etc. so far, that the man of God may be perfect in every good
work. And hence is it, that when God by Moses had written this law, and
delivered it to the people he straightly charg^th them to add nothing to it, nor
take any thing from it, Deuteronomy. 4.2.
and again doubles this precept, Deuteronomy. 12. 32. And without all question,
howsoever it pleased the Lord of his goodness by the succeeding Prophets to
expound and open the law, and farther to press and enforce it, yet did never
any Prophet add any new doctrine to the former: words they add^d to clear and
unfold it, but no new matter or precept to the duties commanded. Thus after did
the Apostles, Acts 26^22.
as witnesses that chosen Vessel, they said no other things, then those which
Moses and the Prophets did say should come. Certainly as in the creation of the
bodily light, the Lord made and spread over the world a general brightness:
which after he gathered into one body (the Sun) and made it as a fountain,
from whose beams not only other creatures, but the heavenly lights themselves
should borrow all their splendor, even the Moon and stars. So having in
this little world of man created a spiritual light of wisdom and knowledge in
his understanding, diffused and spread it over mankind, and for some ages of
the world derived both by tradition, (as we may more then probably gather) from
one to another: but especially to the Patriarchs, by inspiration and gift of
Prophecy: But in process of time when he had called out a Nation, and
sanctified them to himself to be his Church and people, he contracted this
spiritual light into the body of the Scripture, and appointed not only the
people in his Church, but even the Stars, the Ministers to take from it what
they brought to us, and to shine with no other beams to the people, then which
they drew from the word. Hence the Prophet recals the people to this fountain
of light, Esaias. 8.20.
to the law, to the testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it
is because there is no light^ in them. Hence so often called Light: and the
Apostle (as before) witnesses that the Minister is made wise to salvation, and
perfect to every good work by it. As therefore the Creator framed one great
original light, to rule the day, so that by the beams of it the creature
might have power to discern all things necessary to be seen: so to this end
he calls the Scripture light, because he has given it a lightsome quality,
whereby it discovers unto us whatsoever is necessary to eternal life; and it
might direct and instruct us in every good way and work: for surely words are
to the ear the same, that light is to the eye; the eye by light discerns
things visible, and distinguishes every creature which it sees: so the word
of man opens his intention to us, which else lies hidden in his heart; and is
altogether imperceptible.

Thus the word of God does manifest unto us the will and purpose of God, and
clearly reveals to all and every one, what is necessary for them to know; as
being all plain to them that will understand. Pro. 8.9.
Now then seeing God cannot dissemble, and it were blasphemy to affirm that
he who has given us Christ, would give us an obscure light, which should make
us doubtful in seeing; and should utter words to discover his mind, which we
cannot understand; (this he does in judgment to the reprobate, but he deals
not so with his children: see Mar. 4. 11. 12.) How lewdly does he think of
God, who should affirm, that he gives to his children a word, calls it light,
commands them so to use it, and continually to converse with it, which yet is
dark, and imperfect, and may easily deceive them.

God has written down for our eyes, by the hands of his Secretaries, or that,
which he speaks to our ^ares, by the mouth of his Messengers, is the very
law, doctrine, and word of that great Iehova, the Lord of all, and therefore so
to be received, with more reverence, and subjection, then any word or law of
any creature. The first of these is evidently affirmed here, namely that this
doctrine is the law of the Lord: the second necessarily deducted, that therefore
it must be received with all submission and obedience, which becomes us
servants to so great a Lord. Neither can this doctrine be confined to the
Scriptures only, seeing God does not only by writing, but by preaching teach
us the way to happiness, 2 Timothy 3. 16.
2 Pet. 1.21.
and lead us in it. Hence is it, that as the Scriptures are said to be inspired
of God, and by the moving of the holy Ghost, Luke 10.16.
so our Savior without any ambiguitie plainly testifies, that he speaks, and
is heard in his Ministers. Flesh and blood stands out against this truth, and
by no means will yield to it, that the Ministers who now live, speak the very
word of God, and that the word which they hear, is indeed not man's but Gods.
The Prophets (say they) and Apostles were extraordinary men, and furnished with
peculiar gifts for such a calling, and with an unerring spirit: therefore their
word was infallibly God^ message, and so to be received: but not so the
Ministers of our times, who have not the same gifts, but may err, and be
deceived. True it is, that the Prophets and Apostles were ((...)) so infallibly
assisted by the Spirit, that they could not err in their preaching; and
therefore their word without skanning might be safely received by those who
knew them to be such. But because even the faithful themselves did not at the
first thus know them: therefore they examined their preaching by the
touchstone of the Scripture.

Paul was a singular Apostle in doctrine, and miracles, etc. yet did not the
faithful take his word at adventure, but tried it by the Scripture, and then
gave credit to it. Acts 17. 11. Nay certainly had even these men (though known
Apostles) preached other doctrine, Gal. 1.8.
then was revealed in the written word, it might not be received. And therefore
though the Ministers of these times, are nothing comparable to them in gifts,
yet being Messengers of the same God, sent by him, when they speak the same
doctrine, which was before by them published, and after left in writing, they
speak no less the word of God, then they: unless we think the quality of
man can alter the truth of God. When Satan spoke, Luke 4.34.
Thou art the holy one of God, was it not the truth? When Balaam a false
Prophet, overruled by God, prophesied, was not the prophecietrue, because the
tongue was false, and might, nay often did speak lies? How much more is that
word to be received as the truth of God, which being spoken by his Messengers,
is no other then himself has written? In the time of the Law, as there were
some extraordinary Ministers, (as Prophets) so were there ordinary Teachers
(the Levites) who expounded the Law, and instructed the people: and dare any
man deny their preaching to be the word of God? So was it likewise in the times
of the Apostles. They ordained Ministers in every congregation, and was not
their word the embassage of God? Epaphras no Apostle, and (as far as we can
gather) no inspired Preacher, yet planted the Church of the Colossians; Col.
^.5.
and the word preached by him was the word of Christ, the Gospel, the word of
truth. To conclude this point; Hence the word delivered by Timothy, an
inferior Minister, was equally the word of God, as if it had been uttered by
the Apostle: see 1 These. 2. 13. Nay it must be remembered, that those words of
our Savior, Luke 10. 16.
he that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you, despises me, were
not spoken to the Apostles, but to the seventie Disciples; and then, when as
yet the holy Ghost was not given; nay, when as yet the Apostles themselves were
altogether unacquainted with the chief mysteries of salvation, even the death
and resurrection of Christ. But if any man reply, that he cannot give so
assured assent unto the word now preached, as to that of the Apostles, let him
know the fault is in himself not in the word, Gal. 1.8.
and Ordinance of God: for he ought to be so steadfastly grounded in the truth,
Ephe. 4.1^.
that if Angels from heaven should preach otherwise, he should be able to
distinguish, and accurse it: know therefore Pastors and Teachers are as well
given by Christ to his Church, as Apostles and Evangelists: both are his
Messengers, and these speak no less the word of God, then the other; so far
as they mingle not their own inventions, but keep themselves to their
commission, and instructions delivered to them in the packet of the Scripture.
How therefore this word is to be received; with what reverence, and subject
obedience, judge thy self, and consider the example of Cornelius (see Acts 10.
33.) nay even of that Heathen King, who rose up from his Throne, Judge. 3.20.
to receive a message sent from God, but delivered by a subject.

God is full of sweetness, and pleasure: containing in it whatsoever may give
content or joy to the heart of man; This truth evidently appears in this
place, seeing delight in it is here required of all those which shall be
blessed; The experience of Gods Saints, and their profession approues it; Psalm.
19.8.10. and 119. 103. 111.
They rejoice in heart: Sweeter then the honey or the honey comb: They are the
joy of our hearts. Ier. 15. 16.
The words of truth are pleasant words. Eccle. 12.10.
Hence the Church of Christ affirms the mouth of Christ to be as sweet things.
Cant. 5. 16.
And the reason is evident: For as nothing is more grievous to the nature of
man then dark^nesse, imprisonment, death; so nothing more cheerful then the
contrary, light, liberty, and life. Psalm. 198. and 119.105.130.
Now the word of God is the very light of our eyes, not only as the bodily
light, which is but a ( medium) or mean of seeing^ but first opening the eye,
and giving it inward light, and then as a mean, and outward light, revealing
other things to us. So is it also called the means of liberty, as well
discovering unto us our natural bondage, and sla^very, and how we are freed by
Christ, as also bringing us out of the chains of Satan, into the liberty of
Gods child^en. Hence it is called the Law of liberty. Iam. 1^25. and 2. 12.
So Christ is sent to preach liberty to the captives.

Luke 4.18.
Certainly the word of God is to the soul of man as the Angel to Peter; Acts
12.
It finds him in prison, bound with diverse chains, in a deep sleep, in a
dark Dungeon; but it wakes him, stirs him up, shakes off his bonds, brings
him out, opens the iron gate, and leaves him not till he is come to himself,
and feels he is delivered by Christ. Nay it is his life, by which (being dead
in sins and trespasses by nature) he is quickened, and raised up not to a
corruptible, but eternal and glorious life. Therefore is it called our life,
that is, Deuteronomy. 32.47.
the means which God has appointed as well to give us life, 1 Pet. 1.23. and
2.2.
as here to continue it: therefore compared to seed and food: Look then as
light is a pleasant thing, and it is a good thing to the eyes to see the Sun,
Eccle. 11.7.
so much more the soul, which has been long held in miserable blindness and
darkness, cannot but rejoice in the word, which brings him that true light.
As a man being held in fetters, and restraint, is in a new world when he
enjoyes his liberty: so likewise that captive soul, which has long been
bound, and held fast by Satan in those heavy chains of sin, is wonderfully
ravished with the joyful message of that glorious liberty. Or as a man dying,
and ready to drop into the grave, is not a little revived with the promise of a
skillful Physician, assuring him life: so the soul that is now drawing near
to the gates of Hell, and almost swallowed up in eternal death, how is he
refreshed with the glad tidings of Salvation? Therefore in all the history of
the Apostles travels, and publishing the Gospel, we shall ever find that this
word preached filled the Cities, houses, and hearts of men with rejoicing and
gladness: see Act. 8. 8.39. and 13.48. and 16. 34. And indeed as Corn, Wine,
and such creatures were purposely created by God to strengthen, and cheer up
the body of man: and by his ordinance, not of themselves, have this power and
force to work to that end to which he ordained them: so this food of the soul
is that creature appointed by God, to fill the soul with gladness and strength
to life eternal, and therefore shall not miss of this end, where God
employeth it. Even in earthly affairs, heaviness in the heart of man does
bring it down, but a good word rejoices it: Pro. 12.25.
how much more true is this of the word of God? If that friendly word of Boaz
filled the heart of Ruth with comfort and joy, that being a stranger, Ruth.2.
and having forsaken her friends and Country, she found new friends, good words
and usage in a foreign place; how much more must the cordials of that great
Comforter in his word cheering our hearts, and assuring us, that though we have
forgotten our own people, and our fathers house, yet of strangers and
forreiners we are entered into the household of God, and have found the Lord
Jesus so sure and fast a friend to our souls, how much more joy and
cheerfulness will this put into us? How do cool waters refresh a weary
Pilgrim toiled in dust and travail? Pro. 25 25.
so is glad news from a far Country. Surely when the soul has wearied it
self, and found nothing; when it is tired in the travail, dust, and sweat of
the world, and has found all to be vanity and vexation of spirit: how welcome
are those waters of life, flowing from the Sanctuary? how ravishing those glad
tidings of p^ace sent down from heaven by the Lord Jesus Christ, and brought
home to ^his heart by the blessed Spirit in the ministry of the Gospel,
which is the power of God to salvation.

God, but to do it with delight; that their hearts should stand so affected to
the word as to their refreshing and pleasure: for here is the feast of fat
things, Esaias 25.6.
which the Lord makes for all nations, and therefore inviteth to come
cheerfully unto it, being free and costing us nothing: Esaias 55.1.2.
and wills us to delight our souls in fatness: Esaias 58.13. 14.
verily the promise of delighting our selves in the Lord is confined to that
duty of delighting in these duties. And indeed this delight being nothing
else, but that willingness of mind pleasing it self in this action, infinite
passages shall we find in the scripture bending this way, and exhorting us to
embrace the word with this willing cheerfulness. James 1.19.
Be swift to hear. Be more ready to hear, etc. Eccle. 4. 17.
And the practice of the Saints is evident to this end, as was before proved.
Reason will further enforce this affection upon us; for 1. It is an Ordinance
of God purposely set out by him for this end, even to solace the heart, and
fill it with true joy and comfort, as was before showed: and hence is it, that
there is no estate of man which may not there find what soever is comfortable
and useful. 2. Even heathen wise men acknowledged that in wisdom there were
admirable pleasures, and could perceive, and profess him to be the wisest and
happiest, who was ((...)) the most godly wise. 3. Especially the very object of
delight being goodness, hence the will is necessitated to take pleasure in it. It
proceeds from God the infinite good^ it is in its kind infinitely good, therefore
called the good word of God: Heb. 6 5.
the end and effect of it to lead us to our supreme good and happiness. But is
it not the savor of death? No otherwise then Christ is a rock of stumbling,
not in it self, but by the perverseness of man. Nay rather this argues the
goodness of it; because as a thing is more good, so the abuse of it is more
dangerous. In a word; whatsoever goodness is in any creature, whereby the
bodily sense and life is refreshed, all this in a far more excellent manner,
and measure is comprised in the word. The fleshly eye is ravished with
beautiful colors, and corporal fairness, but the understanding is that eye
of the soul to which truth is the most proper and pleasing object: Romans 10.15.
and therefore the feet beautiful that bring it. The ear is pleased with
sweet words, and ^loquent speeches; Eccle. 12. 10.
but how pleasant to a spiritual ear is this upright writing, the words of
truth? The taste is delighted with sweet meats; but the word is honey, and ^he
honey comb to the mouth of the soul. How delightful is gain and profit to a
worldly heart? But this word is the curr^nt coin of that heavenly Kingdom,
which stocketh the heart with the treasures of grace, and brings us to those
full riches, and inheritance of glory. It is therefore our duty to draw our
averse hearts to delight in it, and not only necessarily, but joyfully to
converse with it.

Examination.
Try here and prove thy self whether thou art yet entered into this way of
happiness. See here the happy or blessed man delights in the law of God: as
well the word it self, as the way set him down in that word is pleasant and
delightful. Observe therefore the work and wisdom of our Creator, and thou
shall find that as he has allotted to the creatures several beings and
natures; so has he filled every nature with several affections and
dispositions. Among the sensible some take their pastime in the air, some in
the water, nay some within the earth. In the vegetative we see some trees, and
herbs delight and thrive in waterie and marish grounds, other in dry and
rockie; some in hot, and others in cold; some in a fat, others in a barren
soil. Thus in the food and nourishment of sensible bodies what a strange
difference do we see? That is pleasant and wholesome to one which to another is
loathsome and a deadly poison. Thus has that all-wise Creator disposed, that
there shall be a kind of aptness, and affection in one creature to sustain
and bear up the nature of another. Now as he has given to the creatures
several natures, and fitted them with several nourishments answearable to
their constitutions; so also has he so tempered their complexions, that they
are necessarily, and strongly carried by their appetite to desire those things,
whereby their nature is sustained and comforted: applying their taste to delight
in those nourishments. Thus in thy bodily life he has given bread and wine for
thy sustenance, and so ordained, that by his blessing there is in this food a
power of increasing, and strengthening the body, and in the body a necessary and
earnest desire of these aliments, and in the taste a pleasure to receive them.
Thus now is it with thy soul. If thou art entered into this new life; John 6.
51.
Christ Jesus is that bread which came down from heaven, the bread and water
of life, the true vine, which cheeres up thy soul: he is brought home to thee
in his word, which word God has purposely given to be the means of spiritual
life, and has put into it his power to salvation: therefore as he has given
to the spiritual man an unseparable appetite to hunger and thirst after it; so
likewise has he given a spiritual taste, to which this good and wholesome word
is as honey and the honey comb, so that they are not a little delighted and
pleased with it. If therefore thou can find in thee this spiritual taste,
constantly delighting in the word; it is a sure note of life.

But had not Herod, and have not temporary believers a taste, yea a delighting
taste in the word? Yes: but 1. not constantly; no not in the promise. 3. The
delight which they have, is not indeed in the word, but in their own conceits
falsely drawn from it: as remission of sins at all adventure; mercy and grace
without any true change or repentance, and such like; yea even then many things
of Gods law they spit out as bitter and unsavory. But the true Believer has
this taste in him constantly, though sometimes dulled by tentation; and
rejoices not only in those sweet promises which nourish him, but even in
those bitter reproves; as in sour, but wholesome salets, provoking to
appetite, and clensing the stomach. So likewise all the ways of heavenly
wisdom pointed out to him are ways of pleasure. The way of godliness,
righteousness, sobriety are all delightful. This is not so with the wicked
man, who may please himself (or at least seem so) in some of these: but has
no heart to many necessary duties, nay utterly d^tests and abhors them. The
most civil man will take much liberty not only in omission of pious duties,
as of prayer in his closet and family, breach of some part of the Sabbath, but
^steems it a light matter to break out into commission of some ungodlines, as
oaths so they be not frequent, nor of the greater size in his measure: but
especially in shaping a religion, and worship of God after his own fancy,
neglecting, nay even despising the rule of God, at least preciseness of that
rule. The hypocrite will gild over his outside with a fair resemblance of
piety to God, and the eye must be very sharp to spy out a fault in the
outward form of his profession, but is far from that seeming care of
righteousness, and just dealing with men, but that we may easily discern
gross neglect of such duties. But he that delights in the Law of God cannot
be thus disposed. But as he loves the Lord for himself, and delights his soul
in rendering to God that which is his: so does he love his brother for God, and
will carefully observe his respects unto him.

Refut.
3. Seeing the Lord gives this name of Law to the Scripture, hence is just
occasion to refute that blasphemous error of Popery, that the written word is
not a perfect rule or direction. But 1. God in evident terms contradicts it;
Psalm. 19.7.
The Law of the Lord is perfect. 2. By many necessary arguments it may be
proved: for that is perfect to which nothing may be added, or from it
detracted: and thus is it with the Scripture. Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 12. 32. Prove.
30.6. Rev. 22. 18. 19. And very idle is the cavil of the Papists, who affirm
that the Prophets and Apostles added many things: But first for the Prophets,
it is clear that they added no new doctrine (as was said before) but in their
prophecies largely expounded, and further enforced the duties before commanded:
and not the most prying ^apist is able to show any new doctrine in any Prophet
which before by Moses was not delivered. The Apostles disclaim all addition:
as before we saw Act. 26.22. Again that which is able to make wise to salvation
through faith, that is a perfect rule and doctrine; such is the Scripture. Nay
that which is inspired by God to this end, that the man of God even every
faithful Minister, may be made perfect in his office, to instruct, refute,
exhort, etc. that surely is a perfect rule; but such is the Scripture: see 2 Timothy 3^15.16.17. Let contentious heretics search their brains to find out
thorny distin^tions, and subtle shifts to delude the truth: But far be it
from any who truly fears God, and has tasted his love, once to imagine,
that he has given to the wicked world a perfect light (beside the lesser
lights) that he mad^ al things eve^ the most abject creatures perfect in their
kind, but gave his Elect an imperfect light, not able to direct them
sufficiently to life^ that he made his word (so excellent a creature) lame and
imperfect. Surely though the Lord has appointed Ministers as lesser lights,
and left some glimmering traditions, to clear some darker points; yet he is
wilfully blind, that will not confess the Scripture to be that great, and set
light, from whose beams all other receive their luster: so that whatsoever
shines not with this light, is but as rotten wood, glaring in ^he night to such
as err in darkness; bnt when it is brought to the light is indeed very dirt,
and of no use for any direction: see Esaias 8. 20. and 2 Pet. 1. 13.

Reproof.
1. Those are here reproved, who in practice of religion will either add to
this Law, or diminish: for many will put religion in many things, which have no
warrant from this Law: and other (as far wide on the other hand) will take
liberty to detract from it, making no conscience of duties there commanded.

This fault is not only palpable among the Antichri^stian Papists, who have
add^d Laws of perfection, and rules of religion which they magnify, and
extol above the rule of Christ, as of Dominicke, Francis, etc. and place the
top, and pitch of their devotion in abstinence from meat^s, marriage, and other
lawful and holy ordinances of God: l^aving the meaner degrees of holiness to
Laiks, which consists in keeping the commandments of God; but challenging the
height of perfection to their religious orders, Friars, Nuns, etc. standing
only in will worship and devices of men. So also they make light account of many
precepts, insomuch that they place among their venial sins, diverse grievous
and enormous transgressions of the Law, as well against God, as man; affirming
that they need no repentance, but are taken off by sprinkling holy water, the
Bishops blessing, and saying a Pater noster, although the person minds not
what he says; Thus it seems that with them, one gross sin may take away
another. But this offense is common also among many other ignorant people, who
are ever learning, and never come to the knowledge of the truth. Thus some put
all their religion into their good meaning: some place it in the outward and
formal performance of some duties: Many savoring strongly of the old leaven,
imagine they do not a little please God in abstaining from some meats in the
time of Lent. They will serve God at home when they should be employed in his
public service, by reading some good book, and saying some good prayers in
their chimney corner, nay even in the place and season of hearing, they will be
reading, and so pluck down that curse on their heads; Pro. 28.9.
He that turns away his ear from hearing, even his prayer shall be
abominable.

There is no more common sin th^n this presumption, to prescribe unto God a
worship of their own devising, and despise that wisdom of God in his perfect
law by prefer^ing their own conceits before it: curtailing his worship, and
cutting it off at their pleasure, and piecing it out, and lengthning it again
with their own inventions. This rebel^io^ as it reigned among the heathens, so
it prevailed even among Gods people so far, that it made all their service,
and their persons also most odious, and abhorr^d to God: as we may see Psalm.
106. 29. 30. Esaias 1.11.12.13.14.15. What Prince will endure laws to be by his
subje^ts prescribed to him? what Father, or Master will be obeyed at his child's
or servants discretion? How strange is this pride, that we should disdain to
receive from a fellow creature, whom we wage for a f^w p^nce, that usage and
service, which we will put upon God? and what madn^s in men to think, that
either they should know better then God, how he should be worshipped, or that
God will take this insolent carriage at their hands to give him what they list?

God in his word; some more grossly in speech, others little l^sse palpably,
altogether as lewdly in their works. Oh! how many are there in every
Congregation which deny the Lord, Ier. 5.12.13.
and say It is not he: The Prophets shall be as the wind, and the word is not
in them. The generality of men are like Ahab, 2 King. 22. greedily they drink
in any flattery of Sycophants, but if any speak to them that which is evil,
that is, if we tell them they shall not pro^per in their wickedness, in their
swearing, oppression, drunknes, presently they hate both the word and speaker:
and are ready to reply with those proud men, Ier. 43. 2.
thou speak falsely: the Lord our God has not sent thee: It is with the
Ministers of Christ, as sometimes it was with his own person. Luke 4.
22.23.24. etc. At first they all gave witness to him, and wondered at the
gracious words which he spoke: but when he came near the quick, and began to
grate upon their galled consciences, presently they thrust him out of their
City, and would have slung him headlong from the brow of the hill. Thus also
in^inite numbers of people deny him in their works: utterly refusing to square
their life and practice according to this rule of Gods word, whereby the Lord
is manifestly denied. For when they confess with their tongues, that it is
Gods will, yet resolve in their hearts to do their own; their practice is as
an hundred tongues to proclaim their denial of God. Certainly the ground of
this disobedience and rebellion, is gross infidelity, even a resolute
unbelief of Scripture. John 5.46.47
Had the Jews believed Moses, then would they also have believed Christ. But
if they believed not his writings, they could not believe Christ his preaching:
how truly may we apply this sentence of our Savior to this unbeleeving
generation? Had you believed Christ, you would have believed us; for he spok^
of us, and has told you: He that hears you, hears me. But if you believe
not his writing, how should you believe our preaching? If you despise his word
in his hand, you will easily scorn it in our mouths.

And indeed this unbelief is more apparent, because the more men urge and
press the Scripture on the conscience, and practice of men, (observing the
rule of his Spirit in preaching to edification, and laboring to beat down
whatsoever exalts it self against Christ, that every thought may be subjected
to his Scepter) the less credit estimation, and good opinion they gain among
men: the less their doctrine and persons regarded. But if neglecting the
evidence of the Spirit, they stick their sermons full of Rhetorical flowers,
and witty conceits of men: if they come in ostentation of much reading, stored
with the citations of Poets, Rabbis, Schoolmen, and with the sentences of
ancient Doctors (of whom there is no doubt, very good and much profitable use
in their season) the more they go on in this course, where the conscience is
not stirred, (as being altogether loose from man) the more are they admired,
reputed, and followed. Oh this word of God is sharp, a two-edged,
deepe-cutting sword, whose downright blows cleave the heart of our sinful
nature; when those vain flourishes never move us: hence it is feared, and
hated by those who live in sin, and resolve to rest in the form of
godliness. Therefore that most fearful judgment falls often upon them; Hos.
4. 9.
there shall be like people, like priest. The people rise up early to follow
drunkenness, Esaias 24. 2. compare Esaias 5.11. with 56. 12.
and the Priests ready to invite them, Come I will bring wine, and we will fill
our selves with strong drink: when the people are deaf, the pastor is blind;
they desire to be soothed, he fills his tongue with flatt^ry. The people
desire, Esaias 30. 10.
Cause the holy One of Israel to cease from us: and the Lord justly gives them
up to the doctrines of men, and vain flourishes of humane wisdom. In a word
as they wish, so they receive from God (in his just judgment) Ministers, not
after Gods, but their own hearts, that they who have no pleasure in the truth
may believe lies, and vanities, 2 These. 2. 10. 11.
and putting from them the power of Gods salvation, may sink in their own
perdition.

3. Those are here sharply to be rebuked, who have no relish in the word of
God, no^ find any sweetness in it. The complaint of the Prophet is now
verified in many, who make no question but they are Christians good enough.
Ier. 6.10.
They have uncircumcised ears, they cannot hear; the word os the Lord is unto
them as a reproach: they have no delight in it. How woeful is their estate, if
they had any sense to apprehend it? and how much more woeful, that they have
no feeling of this their woeful misery? That man is far spent, who being
diseased cannot abide either good physike, or wholesome meat, but wholly
delights in such a diet, as is prescribed him by his distemper: and how near
is that soul to hell, who loathing all remedy, cannot taste any thing which
should do it good, but longs for all sinful matter, whereby it is every hour
made riper for hell. Certainly where the conscience cannot but confess a life
to come, how fearful is this condition, which evidently shows the soul to
be dead unto that life, dead in sins and trespasses? for what life can be in
any creature, which desires not (and that necessarily) the means whereby this
life is maintained, thriues, and prospers? what affection of life, where we
delight not in that which preserues it? Now were this death (as in the death of
beasts) the deprivation only of life, and so a perpetual sleep without
dreams, a senselessness without any either pleasure or trouble, it were the
less miserable. But when the heart knows that after this life so short, there
succeeds another, which is endless, where both soul and body again united
shall continue for ever, either in a most joyful glory, or an hellish torment,
no hope of change? how miserable is this estate, which testifies to our face,
that we have no sign of this life, but are marked to that endless and
fearful perdition?

Consolat.
Now how sovereign a cordial is this doctrine to those who can truly apply it
to their own souls? If thou find^st thy heart take pleasure in this word, and
thou can say as the Prophet (and as he, truly say) Thy word was found by me,
and I did eat it; and it was the joy and rejoicing of my heart, Ier. 15. 16.
thou shall find the same comfort which is there given to that Saint; and
assure thy self that God will make good to thee, what here he promises: Thou
shall be blessed. Surely even then when thy disquiet soul, working in thee,
boiles in grief, and vexation to see that law of thy members rebelling against
the Spirit; and so strongly opposing, that thou can not do the good thing
which thou would, then this delight in the law concerning the inward man,
will be a sovereign comfort to thy afflicted spirit; so that thou will be able
(with peace) to say, Romans 7.20.
It is not I, but sin that dwells in me: neither shall it be imputed to me,
but to the enemy prevailing against me.

Exhortation
Suffer then the words of exhortation, and labor for this delight in the law of
God: Strive with thy dead heart to bring it to this duty, that thou may
take pleasure in pleasing thy Lord. And to quicken thee in it consider
seriously the equity of it. Can there be a more easy command then this?
namely to delight in thine own good and happiness? Now there is nothing in the
word of God but that which wholly tends this way: Cant. 5.16.
nothing in the yoke of Christ, but that which is sweet and easy. Remember how
sweet the mouth of Christ is to those, who have been acquainted with his word,
and exercised in it.

But what means should we use to work our souls unto this delight in the
word of God.

1. Thou must purge thy taste from delight in sin: when wickedness is sweet in
thy mouth, and thou hidest it under thy tongue, when thou favourest it, and
wilt not forsake it, thou can not possibly favor the word of God.

2. Thou must earnestly entreat the Lord to open thine eyes, that thou may
see thy estate, how naked, blind, poor and miserable thou art in nature, that
so thou may have more sense how necessary this Ordinance of God is, and how
wretched thou art without it. Be instant therefore with the Lord to give thee
this hunger and thirst: This will make that reproof which to flesh and blood
is most bitter, sweet and pleasant: for the person that is full, despises the
honey comb: but to the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet. Pro. 27.7.


Proposition 2.
Now follows the second proposition arising from this verse, namely;

Proposition
The Psalmist pronounces him blessed, who day and night meditateth in the word
of God.

Where is no need to expound many words: for some are clear enough of
themselves, and othersome have before been sufficiently explained. Here only
consider what is this meditation; and how that phrase day and night (expressing
the continuance of this duty) is to be understood.

This word meditation implies a vehement motion of the mind, breaking forth
into action. The best Interpreter even the holy Ghost thus explaines this word
in another place. Joshua 1.8.
Let not this book of the law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein
day and night: that thou may observe and do according to all that is
written therein. Where we see the nature of meditation rightly unfolded;
consisting 1. in observation, that includes diligent attending, marking, and
remembering; 2. in practicing: so what he there particulary commends to Joshua,
he inforceth other where generally upon all: Deuteronomy. 6. 3, 4, 5 6^ 7. etc. where
we are commanded to get these words by heart, to teach them others, continually
to think of them, that we may bring our hearts to the love of God.

2. Night and day is a phrase of speech, implying not only frequencie, but
such a continuance, as (though it be not without some intermissio^, yet) is
without negligence carefully, and cheerfully performed in the season of it.
Some have thought that night signifies the time of affliction and trouble, day
the time of our prosperity, and gladness: and no doubt but darkness is in
Scripture often taken for grievance, and trouble; light for solace and comfort.
No question also, but it is our duty in the evil day, and in all our
rejoicing to meditate in this word: but seeing the former is not only the
genuine, or natural interpretation of the words, but also includes the latter;
by night and day must here be understood a continual revolving of the will of
God, sometime in hearing it when the season gives leave, sometime reading it,
frequently recollecting it in our memory, and without intermission expressing
it in all our actions and constant practice. Thus then run the words:
Whosoever with a fervent and zealous heart gives up himself to the word of
God, to hear, read, think of it to practice and do it: and that not by
starts, but in a continual course of life and conversation: this man is
already blessed, and shall at length attain to perfect happiness.

Pro. 8. 33.
Proof. Blessed is the man that hears me, watching daily at my gates, and
attending at the posts of my doors. Blessed are they that hear the word of
God, and keep it. Luke 11. 28.
He that looks in the perfect law of liberty, and continues therein, James
1.25.
not being a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work shall be blessed in his
deed.

The grounds or reasons may be, 1. in the nature of the word.2. in God ordering
it, and working with it.

First therefore as God has given to every creature a certain nature, whereby
it is fitted for any work or end, and has in it self a power to work unto
that end: (as to light to discover, Romans 1. 16.
and present things to the eye; to feed, to produce the like unto it self) so
has he made this word to be his Ordinance, Ier. 9.23.24.
which shall work powerfully unto salvation. And as he has ordained that our
perfection and happiness shall consist in the knowledge of himself, in
sanctification, and eternal life; so has he given a virtue to this his
immortal word, to open all things unto us necessary for this knowledge, (and
therefore calls it light) to sanctify, and breed us to life eternal. And as
seed simply considered without his appointm^nt could have no force to produce
the like, no more could this word, which therefore by the natural man is
counted foolishness,

2. In us who are wholly dead in nature, and have no power in our selves to
work out our own salvation; but as since the curse, the earth must with much
labor be ordered and fitted, before it can be fruitful; so since our cursed
fall, we cannot attain this fruit, but with this spiritual labor and tillage.

3. In God, working in his own institution: he is the great Husbandman John
15. 1. he that gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3. 6. and 15. 10. Now therefore as no
instrument has power in it self to work to its end, but must be used,
applied, and directed by the hand of the workman: so here unless the Spirit
use this hammer, it breaks not the stone in our hearts. Look then as in
earthly tillage the ground must be first plowed up and prepared, the labourer
must cast in good seed, harrow, weed, etc. and yet still without the former and
latter rain, and the blessing of that Almighty Creator, and Governor all is
in vain; thus God has made the Law to be as a Coulter to break up this
fallow ground of our hearts, sent in his Ministers with this his plough, to
prepare and fit it: so he gives his Gospel to be the seed of life, causes his
servants to scatter it, nay makes the same Ordinance to be as rain and heat
to draw out the virtue and power of it into our practice: yet all this is done
by his blessing, he only gives all the success, and causes it to work to
salvation. Use this first for Instruction; Instruction.
1. It is the word of God and that holy doctrine (laid up and treasured in the
Scripture, thence brought out to us by the Stewards of Christ in the preached
word) which makes men happy. And indeed seeing the Spirit does there not only
set out one, but the only way to a blessed estate, we may hence conclude, that
there is no other way which leads to happiness, nor any other appointed, and
effectual (revealed) mean to attain it, but this. Hence called the power if
God to salvation. Romans 1. 16. 1 Cor. 1.18. Hence it is by the Spirit resembled
to such things, as are most necessary causes and helps of life. Before we
attain the life of God, it is as seed to beget us, 1 Pet. 1. 23. Iam. 1. 18.
when we are borne again, it is food: milk while we are babes, that we may
grow; 1 Pet. 2. 2. stronger meat to establish us ( Heb. 5.13.14.) when we
attain more ripeness. Observe continually, that when the Lord compares this
our happiness to any earthly thing, still the word of God holds that part in the
similitude, which evidently shows it to be his instrument, whereby he begins
and perfects this work in us. 1 Pet. 2. 5.
As when in some places we are likened to the Temple of God, Ier. 23. 29^
and every pa^ticular Christian to be a lively stone, Ezekiel. 13.
Acts 20. 32.
then in other places the Spirit resembles the word to an hammer that breaks
the stone, Mat. 13.
and doctrine to mortar, which holds us in this building; Esaias 55.10^
so is it that means whereby God builds further. When our happiness is
compared to an harvest, then the word is called seed, 1. Cor. 3^6.
the Pr^achers of it sowers; The word likewise is rain, the Preachers those
that water. Acts 20.32.
When the blessed estate of man is compared to an inheritance, the word is not
only made the means whereby we become Sons, but is said to give us
inheritance with the Saints. Very frequent are these similitudes in the
Scripture. Look therefore, as in all creatures God has ordained the fruit,
and therefore appointed the means, which being blessed by him, bring forth
their ^ff^cts: so in this kind, whom God has ordained unto eternal life, to
them he sends his word, blesses it, and so produces the effect purposed by
himself. As when he created the first Adam, he created no more (though he were
Almighty to have of nothing framed many millions) but appointed all other men,
yea even Eve her self to flow from his loins: so when he gave our Lord to be
the second Adam, he decreed that all his Elect should flow from him, and s^t
out this immortal seed to this end: and though he be able of stones to raise
up children unto Abraham, yet does he use no other means then this, appointed
by his own wisdom, either to give this life, or to nourish it. 2. Seeing the
word of God is the Guide, which leads us to happiness, we learn also hence
one of the most principal duties of man; namely to hear, read, record, and
converse with it, employing his time in it. Art thou a Minister of the word?
then have thou this precept from God, 1 Timothy 4.13. 16
give attendance to reading: take heed unto learning and continue therein. Art
thou an hearer? Thou must be swift to hear. James 1. 19.
It in authority, then Gods charge lies upon thee; Deuteronomy. 17.18. 19.
He shall write him this law repeated in a book, and it shall be with him: and
he shall read therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear
the Lord. Joshua 1. 8.
The like command is given to Joshua. Whatsoever thou art hearken to that
general commandment; Deuteronomy. 6. 6.7.
All these words which I command thee this day shall be in thy heart, and thou
shall rehearse them continually. Pro. 4.20.21.
My son hearken unto my words incline thine ear unto my sayings. Let them
not depart from thine eyes, but keep them in the midst of thy heart. Col. 3.16.
Let the word of God dwell in you richly. The practice of the Saints answers
this precept: Psalm. 119.97.
Thus David; he loves the Law; this constant love brought forth continual
meditation. So Jeremy and Job, Ier. 15. 16. Job 23. 12.

And even our reason it self (if we hearken to it) will strongly enforce this
duty upon us. Our own sense will tell us, that an excellent object of the eye
is the writings of m^n skillful, witty, and learned: whereby with little
pains we come to know all the fruit of their studies, and reap in a few
hours, what they have labored many years. Now if the writings of prudent and
understanding men, in which all their wisdom, and their very souls are
opened and discovered to us, be the most noble object of a reasonable creatures
eye; then certainly the most excelling object of a Christian eye is the
written word of God; which unlocks, and brings forth unto our view the glorious
wisdom of our God. Thy reason therefore will frame this argument. Every
creature ought principally to employ it self in that, which is the most
excellent object of it: but the Scripture is the most excellent object of the
eye, therefore the eye must especially busy and employ it self in conversing
with the Scripture. So likewise the most proper object of the ear is sound,
the most excellent object of the ear is the voice of man, and words expressing
their notions: but that which infinitely excells it, is the word of God, and
his voice, unfolding his gracious purpose toward us, and therefore above all
other to be most attended and followed. The most proper object of the
understanding is truth, the most excellent then must be the truth of God.
Certainly the highest degree of happiness consists in our likeness to God:
and therefore our beholding him as he is, being the means whereby we are
conformed to his image, is of all other things most to be desired. When
therefore we shall see him face to face, and know him as we are known, then
shall we in our measure be perfected after the similitude of his glory: see 1
John 3. 2. Thus when Moses desired to see the glory of God, Exodus 34.29. 30.
though he could not see him face to face (which no man living on earth can
do) but the back parts alone (that is; discerned so much only of his glory,
as our imperfect nature can receive, as when we see the back of a man, our
knowledge is but imperfect) yet his face shined so gloriously, that the people,
yea his own brother Aaron feared to come near him. Our imperfect happiness
then to which we may attain on earth is, to be imperfectly conformed to his
likeness in some degree of holiness, which is effected by beholding him in
his word. For now in the pr^ached word of God we see him, not indeed face to
face, yet not (as the Jews) veiled, but with open face, and so by looking into
that perfect myrrour, wherein he shines forth unto us in his grace, 2 Cor. 3.18.
we are changed into the same image by the spirit of the Lord. Look as the eye
receives into it self the object or thing it sees (so that it may be seen in
the eye) so the understanding being (as the Philosopher speaks) all to all,
taking into it self the image of God, expressed in his word, is more and more
conformed unto it. A seal joined to wax brings forth the same impressure;
when therefore the Spirit, having graven this image of God in his holy word,
th^n applies it effectually to the understanding, it cannot but produce the
same image and stamp. If therefore we would diligently consider, and compare
those places, I^r. 9.23.24. and Romans 10. 14. we would soon confess; 1. that
all our good consists in the knowledge of God: and 2. that the knowledge of
God depends on his word: and then necessarily acknowledge, that it is a maine
duty of every man to converse with the word of God, and continually to
meditate in it.

3. It is also a second duty belonging to every Christian, 1 Pet. 4 10.
Let every man as he has received the gift, John 21. 15
minister the same one to another. Acts 20. 28.
If thou art in the Ministry, then have thou a strict charge from God, 1 Pet.
5. 1. 2.
to feed the flock, ^ Tim. 4. 1.2.
and to be instant in season and out of season. If thou art one of the sheep
of Christ, yet common is this precept, to be in some kind a builder: But you
Beloved, build up your selves in you^ most holy faith. Jude 20.
The word must dwell richly in us, that we may teach and admonish one another:
Colos 3.16.
we must exhort one another, and edify one another. 1 These. 5.11
Reason also will enforce it; For in common good works ev^ry one should put to
his helping hand. Children and women may forward a building: and th^ugh the
Masons and Carp^nters be the principal, yet the house will sooner be finished,
where many hands make light work: Romans 12.5.
why are we called members one of the other, if not in this respect? The
principal m^mbers are especially appointed for the good of the rest, but no
member unprofitable in the common good of the body. The head conveyes sense
and motion, the heart life to the more special parts: but these derive it to
others, and those other to the rest. Thus is it in the mystical body. Again
the more we build up others, the more our selves are builded up in faith and
every grace. Thus the Apostle knew that by strengthening the Romans, himself
should receive further strength and comfort: Romans 1.11.12
As a good Prince the more he inriches his Kingdom, the more he increases his
own revenewes, and fills his Exchequer. The Saints also regulate their practice
by this precept. Thus Aquila and Priscilla take home unto them Apollos, Acts
18.26.
an eloquent Teacher, Pro. 4.3.4. and 3^.1.2.
and instruct him more perfectly in the way of the Lord. Genesis 18. 19.
David and Bathsheba instruct Solomon their son: 1 Samuel 25.31.
Abraham his household: nay even a woman fears not to admonish David. Therefore
as the Minister being appointed by God, and set over any flock is bound by the
Lord to employ the gifts bestowed on him, to the building of that people, to
bring forth old and new as a good Scribe; to show the light of the word to
those that sit in darkness, for instruction to the ignorant for refutation to
those that err, for reproof against such as sin, for comfort to the
afflicted, for exhortation to the sloathfull; so likewise is every Christian
bound, as God gives ability and opportunity to apply the same word to the
same ends, where they see need of it. Surely if men that are rich in this
unrighteous Mammon, are charged not to store it up in chests, but in those
living bags, even every needy Christian; how much more does the Lord require
it as an especial duty at our hand, to succor any Brother, distressed in any
spiritual want, so far as he enableth us with the riches of his grace? the
fruit of this good seed. Thus the Apostles are commanded both to have this
light kindled up in their own hearts, and to set it out in their good works.
So the Apostles command others, Col. 3. 16.
not only that it must dwell richly within them, but also to hold forth the
word of life. Philip 2. 16.
Doing is frequently in the Scripture (and in our practice ought ever to be)
coupled with hearing. See Iam. 1. 22. Mat. 7. 24. Luke 8.21. John 13.17. Reason
will also further press this duty. For, 1. God therefore reveals and
teaches us his will, to that very end, that we may do it. See Deuteronomy. 6.1. and
29. 29. Now then seeing the end of any action is the accomplishment and
perfection of it; that man is an unreasonable creature, who would do a thing
to no end, and no better then a fool, that will do it but to a wrong end. 2.
It is not the hearing, but the doing of the word which makes us blessed: see
Mat. 7. 21. Iam. 1. 25. hearing indeed is the way to doing, but doing the way
to happiness. 3. Learning without doing, will heap up more vengeance. Luke
12. 47. For when we know the will of our Prince, Father, Master, this makes our
negligence to be contempt, not only unexcusable, but heinous.


It was a good advice of a Moral Philosopher, who counseled not only women,
but even men also to carry a looking-glass continually about them: but to this
end, that often beholding their feature and form in it, if they found the
outward proportion comely, then to labor that the inside might be
correspondent: but if they perceived any natural deformity in the body, then
to stri^e to hide or outshine it with inward beauty. How good counsel is
this for a Christian with a little change? we should ever have this excellent
mirror about us, to this end, that by it we might mend all our imperfections,
and take away the spots of our defiled nature. For certainly to little purpose
does that man behold himself in this Glass, who when he has seen any blots
or filthiness in himself, does not presently employ his best endevors to wash
and cleanse his soul. Verily there is nothing that settles and roots the word
in the heart of man but this practice. For as in any other trade or Art, when
any precept is laid down to us, and we presently put it in practice, we make
it our own for ever: but if our practice follow not our Masters instruction,
we soon forget it: so is it here: see James 1. 23. 24.

Christian that intends to come to this happy estate, must continually meditate
in the word of God: that is, he must hear, read, think of, speak and
practice this word frequently, at all occasions, not neglecting any
opportunity: sometime he cannot hear, but then he may read; sometimes he may
not read, but then he may hear: sometimes neither of both, but then he may
think of it, recall it into his memory, and even digest it: sometime he has
fit opportunity to speak of it, conferring with others, when none of the
other can be used. All these have, or ought to have their seasons.


For the former, we must set out some times for them: but in practice no time
omitted. This part of meditation in the word must be without intermission. Thus
are we commanded; Read all the days of thy life, Deuteronomy. 17. 19. Rehearse them
continually: Talk of them sitting down, rising up, lying down, walking
abroad. Deuteronomy. 6. 7. Meditate day and night, Joshua 1. 8. Hear as newborn
babes, 1 Pet. 2. 2. Do and keep them all the days of our life, Deuteronomy. 6. 1.
2. Thus likewise the Ministers are commanded, to be instant in season, out of
season: 2 Timothy 4. 2. In the morning to sow their seed, and in the evening not
to cease. Eccle. 11. 6. Our reason also will persuade this frequency and
continuance. For, 1. We know not which the Lord will bless, which shall
prosper, whether this, or that; or whether both shall be good a-like. We know
not the way of the Spirit. Eccles. 11.5. 6. 2. We are very forgetful in
nature, even in civil affairs; but much more in spiritual: you have
forgotten the consolation, Heb. 12. 5. The Israelites forgot the works of God.
Psalm. 78. 11. 42. The very Apostles very forgetful. Mat. 16. 9. 3. We are dull
of hearing; hard to conceive these spiritual lessons. Heb. 5. 11. The Apostles
perceived not the miracle of the loaves. Mat. 16. 9. when Christ spoke most
plainly, they understood him not. Luke 18. 31, 32, 33,34. Look as a man
traveling in a journey, howsoever for a night he takes up his Inn, yet if he
do not continually go on, and in the morning set forward again, he cannot
come home; so here much more. Had the Israelites returned to Egypt, had they
sat down in the Wilderness, had they not in due season still made on: they
could not have come to the Land of rest and promise.


Reproof.
1. Here is condemned that obstinate and wilful conceit of men, who dreaming of
many other Guides to a blessed estate, are wilfully resolved to resist this
truth, that God has given them his word, to be his only conduct to
happiness. There is a cursed disposition in our nature, whereby we are prone
to r^sist the holy Ghost, speaking in his word. See Esaias 63. 10, Act. 7. 51.
This rebellious affection our Savior noted in those Jews, John 5. 43.
I am come in my Fathers name and you receive me not, if any come in his own
name him will you receive. When any lie is brought to us by Satan, the world,
or our deceitful hearts, how easily is it entertain^d? little persuasion needs
to draw it on: (as) that God will be merciful, even to those which add
drunkenness to thirst: (see Deuteronomy. 29^19.20.) that by our good meaning and
honest intent we shall com^ to heaven; that in gross ignorance, neglect, and
contempt of the word, we shall be saved: such ^ies easily find an open door in
the heart of man, soon enter, and settle there; so that it is impossible
almost to drive them thence. But when God tell us; There is no name under
heaven by which thou can be saved, but only by Christ; Acts 4. 12.
there is no other means to make Christ thine, but only by faith: nothing can
work faith but hearing the word; let argument be heaped upon argument, proof
upon proof; make it never so plain, that now the conscience is utterly
convinced, yet are men resolved to stand out, and deny the conclusion. The more
fool any man is, the more conceit has he of wisdom in himself; hence it
is, that the wisdom of God is despised in the eyes of a car^all proud man.
Suppose any of these men were to travail a long and dangerous journey, of
which he knew not one step: if then a friend should tell him; I have a servant
thoroughly acquainted with every foot of that way, who will bring you thither
safely; take him along with you, and use him on this occasion: who would refuse
such a favor? how thankful would we be to the Master? how careful to follow
this Guide? how much would we make of him? But when the Lord our best friend,
gives us his word, the only Guide, to conduct us to himself, and in himself
(who is both the way, and our happiness at the end of it) we cannot be persuaded
to make any, or at least any right use of it: we think we can tell the way as
well as he, though indeed we never knew, nor trod any one step in it; and in
this our wilfulness we go headlong to our destruction.

God himself has sanctified for the hearing of his word, is it carefully
observed and spent in this employment? As any man is more vile and abject, so
does he more vilely esteem, and cast behind his back this commandment of
God. Pro. 8. 33.
Who accounts himself a servant to Christ, bound to wait upon the posts of
his doors? Who thinks himself blessed that he may hear him? Ier. 2.31.
Do not men say as those Israelits, We are Lords we will come no more at
thee? Were it a matter of profit or merriment, men could not be kept nor staved
off from it. Certainly men in this openly show, that they have less faith then
the Devils. For even these cursed spirits both know the necessity of the word
preached, and are persuaded that by it men attain a blessed estate: but these
brute beasts (and far worse) give no credit to God himself, professing to them
this truth.

So also the reading of the word how is it slighted by men? Who sets out a
time, and resolves to spend it in this duty? Alas! it is shouldred out by
every idle occasion: some have farms, some have bought oxen, some are married;
any frivolous excuse is good enough; the common plea is business. One has a
great charge, and family he must provide for it: another is taken up with
public affairs; he can spare no time: a third is a poor man, lives by his
labor, he can hardly get himself bread, etc.

God. Thou followest thy public business: why so? Perhaps thy Prince
commands and expects it. And is Gods command of no force with thee? Thou art
a poor man, need drives thee to work for thy living; and art thou not more
poor, and beggarly in spirit? and will thou not supply thy necessity? Thou
must provide for thy family: why so? God commands it: and does not the same
God command thee to read his word, and exercise thy self in it? Is it not a
more evident token of an Infidel to neglect the labor in thy heavenly, then
in thy ^arthly calling?

2. Can business excuse thee? Is then the word of God Christianity, pleadest
thou have no leisure, by reason of other employments, to busy thy self in the
word of God.

Deuteronomy. 17. 19. C^rtainely the more business thou have, and employment in
earthly matters, the more need have thou of conversing with the word, as being
thy Guide, directing thee how to pass through these cares with a good, clear,
and cheerful conscience, as also a means to make all thy affairs to prosper.





But there is something to be gotten by diligence, and labor in our earthly
callings.

Prove. 13.4.
True: The soul of the di^^gent shall have plenty: But what? Is there nothing
to be gotten by this spiritual diligence? by a frequent conversing with God in
his word? no riches? no honor? or pref^^m^nt? Is Christ no riches? is it no
honor to be the Son of God? an heir with Christ? And is not this obtained
by the word, and by it only? Search all the earth, and see if thou can find
one faithful Christian, who when thou have gott^n all the world before thee,
will change the least portion of grace gotten in the use of the word, for all
thy honor and wealth.

For that other part of meditation most properly so called, that is
recollecting, and recalling to ^ur minds what we have read or heard, (which
settles the other, and is as the covering this good seed in our hearts, and
hiding it up for fruitful practice) it is hardly thought on. How few account
it needful? how very few that practice it? For the most part; as soon as men
come out of the Church, they fare as boys, that come out of School. The
younger sort fall to sport and play; the elder to confer of some weekly
matters; and thus if any of that good word clea^e unto them they cast it out,
and give it up as a prey to the Devil. Surely, as those greedy and noisome
fowls wait upon us in our seed times, and lie by shoals upon our Lands to
devour the good seed, which is cast into the ^urrow; so these foul spirits
then especially by legions, wait, and watch us, when we come to this seed time
of eternal life: and being full of envy and malice, labor with all their
craft either to turn away our ears from it, or else by vain thoughts or
other id^e matters to steal it away from us, that we may be wholly barren and
unfruitful. Now then how lamentable is it to see men so careful in this
earthly seed, which sustaines their temporal life and estate, so very
careful, that they set up s^arcrowes, they watch their lands, they have
children with clacks and slings to fright the ravening foul, and keep off the
vermin: but for this heavenly fruit, wher^by they enter and grow in life
ete^nall, they are wholly careless^ of it: some by sleep and drowsinesse invite
the Devil to come upon them: some by stubbornes and stonines of heart join
with the Devil to keep it out from the soul, ^specially by neglect of
meditation they betray themselves, and even offer up this precious seed to that
foul Spirit.

they laugh and despise, but teach not the ignorant. Have they servants grossly
blind, so let them lie: they will never offer to bring them out of this
darkness: nay even wi^es and children they instruct not: hence God curses
them with eye-servants, untoward and froward women, disobedient children. If
they see a Brother sin, do they apply a seasonable and loving reproof or
admonition? when they see men over-seene in drink, hear others swear; do
they reprove the offender, that he may be found in the faith? No such matter.
They make themselves merry with such enormous sins by which God is made angry,
and his wrath provoked; by which they evidently discover themselves, that they
are not seasoned with any one grain of true and saving grace, which is as a
leaven spreading, and catching like fire, ever communicating it self, as it
has power, to any with whom we live and converse. If we see a man able
(though not bound to it) neglect a common work, we will think and judge
hardly: and how are we to be blamed, who neglect this common work belonging to
all Christians, especially being bound to it as well in charity to our
Brethren, as by the evident and peremptory command of God, Levit. 19. 17. When
we see any dejected with the sight of sin, we will either jest at it, or
persuade him it is melancholy, draw him to company, so to drive out the work
of Gods Spirit with some work of Satan. Thus we are so far from provoking
such as go slowly by exhortation to mend their pace, that rather we discourage
them in their beginnings, and by opposing our selves would stop and turn them
back to their former deadness. Oh! if men, especially those who are of more
knowledge, and greater place, would join in this work of God with his
builders, how fast would the Temple of the Lord rise, and go forward? how
blessed would this Nation and Church be? But now when the Minister is forsaken,
and left alone to all this business, having so many lets and opposites, it is no
marvel if the building go on very slowly. But let us take good heed to our
selves: mark the cheerful disposition of the people toward the rearing up the
Tabernacle. Such was their willing liberality, that Moses was enforced by
proclamation to restrain their readiness in offering. Compare Exodus 35. 5. 6.
21.22. 23. with chap. 36. 5. 6. How shall they condemn this generation who
utterly withdraw their hand from this holy work, and will not so much as lend
us a copy of their countenance, toward the rearing of Gods living Temples.

How lewdly do many neglect the practice of this divine law? Certainly as any
duty is more for Gods honor, Romans 8. 7. If God command any thing, be it
never so easy or delightful, it is hated: so the Sabbath: but what he
forbids, be it never so grievous, they will do it: as kill themselves;
sacrifice their children to Devils.

Very many are open Rebels, and though they are called, and would be counted
Christians, yet resolutely refuse to yield subjection to the law of Christ: and
will not stick plainly to proclaim it. Ier. 44. 16.17.
The word which thou have spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will not
hear it of thee, but we will do whatsoever thing goes out of our mouth: and
so palpably do they trangresse, that when they have sworn obedience and
profess it in general, they will utterly deny it in the particulars: compare
Ier. 42. 5. 6. with that 43. 2. 4. especially where they are crossed in those
things, which their own wicked hearts have determined. Others are not so open,
but will make good shows in civil, nay perhaps (outwardly) religious
carriage; yet are but hypocrites; of whom our Savior speaks Mat. 7. 26. They
are no better then very Idiots, they would attain and possess the house not
made with hand, but lay no foundation. Christ there distinguishes the
faithful from the hypocritical hearer, and seeming Christian: look on them
with a less heedfull eye, both will seem alike, both as well builded houses;
but one with a foundation, the other without it: now that ungrounded building
may stand, till a tempest come, but no longer. Thus here, an hypocrite will
repair to the word as readily, will sit as orderly, seem as greedy in outward
attention as the best: but he never lays the foundation by digging out his
own earthly heart, and settling there that corner stone, by denying himself
for Christ, and renouncing his own will and affections.

Exhortation
3. Stir up thy dull heart, and quicken it to all diligence in attending upon
the word of God, plead no excuse, but remember the command of God: Be swift
to hear. Be not a forgetful hearer. Iam. 1. 19.25.
Thirst, as a newborn babe for the sincere milk of the Gospel, to grow by
it. 1 Pet. 2. 2.
The maine argument and motive impelling to this duty, is here expressed; This
shall bring thee to happiness: thy thoughts, thy actions look all this way:
did thou think any thing more helpefull to this end then other, thou
would use it: believe God in his word, who assures thee that this meditation
in his Law, shall certainly effect it for thee.

Add to this, the danger of thy neglect. Thou shall find no favor from God in
that evil day, if thou despise this duty; remember, Pro. 28.9.
He that with-draweth his ear from hearing the Law, his prayer shall be
abominable. Mark. 4.24.
The same measure thou give thou shall receive: see Prove. 1. from the 24. to
the 29. verse; neither does he threaten this recompense only, but certainly
effects it: read Zachar. 7^ 11. 12. 13.

But what means should we use to bring our hearts to this duty. 1. Remove
that pride of heart, and conceit of being increased in goods, and wanting
nothing: Rev. 3.17.
for the full stomach despises an honey comb: Pro. 27.7.
See Jeremy 13. 15 2. Remove all worldly thoughts, clear thy heart from those
thornie cares, when thou enterest into the house of God. 3. Further thy self
by earnest prayer, frequently calling upon God, (from sense of thine own
wants, and confidence of his supply) for his powerful assistance in his own
holy Ordinance.

Psalm I. Verse iij. And he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of
water, that brings forth his fruit in his season, his leaf also shall not
wither, and whatsoever he does shall prosper.
LOOK as men, confident that their wares are good which they would vent, will
not stick to give us a taste, nay call and invite us to assay their wine or any
such commodity; or rather, as a friend who having purchased a goodly seat, and
desires to join some dear friend or brother as purchaser with him, will first
propound it in general, and commend it as worth his money, and after parcel
it out in the particulars; so here the Pro^het, or rather Christ in him, having
in the first word of this Psalm orderly set before us in general, and more
confusedly that end of man, which by all is desired, and then described the
way, which leads either from it, or to it; now more distinctly discovers the
particulars of this happy estate, that he may more strongly incite our slow
feet to run in this way, and so attain our desires. 1 Cor. 2. 9.
Now because the things which God has prepared for them that love him, eye
has not seen, ear has not heard, neither have entered into the heart of man:
hence the Wisdom of God descending to our weakness, has expressed them to
us: 1. by a comparison, such as being very familiar, and in every eye might
work the better upon the beholder. And because it was impossible in any one,
or very many similitudes to set forth all the particulars of this blessed
condition, he instanceth only in some, such as are eminent, and such as when
they are well considered are most fit to work upon our affections, and fasten
them unto it.

First therefore he lays out this happiness by a resemblance of a plant;
which he describes by some circumstances.

2. By some effects or properties; A tree not wild, but husbanded, planted, and
(as some render it) transplanted.

3. By the place where it is seated, by the rivers of water. The effects are
likewise two; 1. fruitfulness; 2. a perpetual flourishing.

The sense then is. As you see a tree, dug out of a barren and thirsty
land, transplanted to a fat, and fruitful soil, and rooted by a running
water, is even laden with choice fruit, and keeps it self in a flourishing
estate; so is it with those, who having forsaken the dry wilderness of sin,
where they either walked in the counsel of the ungodly, stood in the way of
sinners, or sat in the seat of the scornful, and are now by the hand of
that great Husbandman transplanted, and seated by those fountains and rivers
of his word, they grow fruitful in grace, and are entered into an
inde-flourishing estate, that neither their profession, nor fruit shall fade,
till they attain to the fullness of happiness with Christ in glory. Secondly
the Prophet describes this happiness, by one especial part of it: whatsoever
he does shall prosper.

From the similitude two propositions may be gathered: the first from the
circumstances.

Proposition
He that forsakes wicked ways, and delights and meditateth constantly in
the word of God, is like a tree planted by the rivers side.

The second from the effects.

He that forsakes the way of sin, delights and meditates in Gods word, is
like a tree which brings forth fruit in season, whose leaf shall not fade.

In the former three things must be unfolded. 1. what kind of tree is here
intended. 2. in what respect the faithful are compared to a tree planted. 3.
what it is which answers to the rivers of water in this similitude.

For the first; The kind is set down (in general only) a tree; but by all
probability the Palm Tree especially intended. This may appear 1. by some
circumstances from this place: 1. because (as Pliny affirms) the Palm
delights in running waters; and desires continually to drink; 2. because the
fruit of the Palm is ever in waxing: some budding, while others are growing,
and while these grow, others ripen: so that they are three years before they
come to any perfection. Lastly the leaf of the Palm withers not, but
continues green, even in winter. 2. In other places we find this comparison
more plainly specified: The righteous flourish like the Palm tree. Psalm. 92.
12.


For the second, in what regard the faithful are thus compared, is very
plain. Trees are planted, either by being wholly removed from one place to
another, or when a sience is cut off from one stock, and grafted into another.
Thus in the Scripture we shall find, that men are taken out of the world, and
removed to the house of God; and especially we shall often read the similitude
of grafting applied to the Saints; because growing naturally in the first Adam,
we are cut off from that wild stock, and are implanted into the second ^dam,
Christ Jesus.

3. Lastly waters may be here taken for the word of God, the water of the
Sanctuary: Ezekiel. 47.
such as is drunk down into the soul by the ear. Esaias 55.1.3. 10.11.
So again Apollos is said to water. 1. Cor. 3. 6. John 7.38.39
Again water may here signify the Spirit; not as there is in water a power to
wash, and cleanse, (as sometimes it is taken) but as moisture is an especially
principal of life: the word, and Spirit being to a Christian, for eternal
life, as moisture to a plant or palm. So the sense of the point is:

Whosoever forsakes the way of wickedness, and constantly delights in the
word, and meditates in it, is like to a palm, which a man transplanteth into a
fertile soil, he shall be nourished with those pure rivers of the Sanctuary:
he shall be watered by the Spirit of grace.

Proof. Ier. 17^ 7. 8. and Romans 11. 23. As for grounds, we shall not need to
insist on any. Sufficient is it to name those, which the Spirit himself has
mentioned; the bounty and goodness of God. Romans 11.22. Apply this 1. for
Instruction.

Instruction.
1. As a tree transplanted, or a sience grafted into a new stock, is altogether
altered in the quality, so whosoever is ordained to a blessed estate, must
be, and in due time is wholly changed, and entered into a new condition, much
differing, nay indeed quite contrary to the former. This alteration is
expressed in Scripture many ways: sometime we are commanded in plain words to
be changed or metamorphosed (as Romans 12. 2) even molded or stamped; and so to
be fashion^d after the image of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. So likewise that word
which is used most commonly for repentance, as Mark 1. 15. signifies a change
of the mind, that as repentance is the first evidence of our happiness, so it
consists of a through alteration both of the inward and outward man. Thus
also by metaphors, and many full similitudes it is frequently described by the
Spirit. The former estate of man is called darkness, the new light: Ephe. 5.
8.
so that as palpable as the change is from night to day, and as contrary as
darkness is to light; so is it here.

Now this darkness intends. 1. A gross ignorance of God, and of his will,
which is the cause of all misery. For as to know God is the only happiness,
and nothing else worth the rejoicing; Ier. 9. 23. 24.
it is eternal life: Ioh. 17.3.
so ignorance of God must of necessity be misery, and death eternal. Thus
the Apostle describes this difference plainly. 1 Cor. 2. 14. 15.
The natural man does not, cannot discern the things of God, as being
spiritually discerned: the spiritual man discerns all things.

2. Darkness is taken in the word for that sinful filthiness, which
abhorres the light: and for all manner of hateful and abominable iniquity:
see Ioh. 3. 19. called therefore the works of night, and of darkness. 1
These. 5. 7.
So again the Spirit resembles this estate to a new man and a new creature.
Romans 13^ 12. 13^
Ephe. 4. 22. 23. 24. Colos. 3. 10. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Gal. 6. 15. Ephe. 5.11. 12.
For as when some excellent Artificer has framed a statue of gold and silver,
and employing all his cunning has made it goodly and beautiful to the eye, if
by any mishap if fall, is broken and defaced, he causes it again to pass
through the fire, and casting it into the former mould, brings it out perfect,
and as, or more fair then ever. So when the Lord saw us (whom he had formed
after his own image) by our fall brui^ed, broken, and altogether deformed, he
melts us again, and renews his glorious likeness upon us: so that now we are
not the same men, or creatures which we were before. But as that frame of the
workman, when it is broken, is the same for substance, but in shape contrary:
so here, the bodies and souls are the same in their essence, but altogether
contrary in quality. So likewise this difference is resembled to life and
death Colos. 2. 13. Ephe. 2. 1. 5. Now therefore as the same body, when it is
dead, has no s^ns^ in it, or motion belonging to life, but rots, stinks, and
is most loathsome; so that men not only stop their noses, but shut their eyes,
and even tremble to behold it; but being alive, was moveable, sensible,
amiable, and exc^eding beautiful, even to ravish the eye: so that state of
sin, that body of death, from which we are changed, if we could thoroughly
look into it, is more foul, and loathsome then any corporal pollution: but
that life of Christ more lovely and ravishing, then we in this glimmering
light can possibly conceive and imagine.

But to pass by very many similitudes, none is more frequent then this of
grafting: And as grafting is double, either by implanting a base sience into a
noble and generous stock, or letting a good and pleasant sience into a base
and sower stock: so in this spiritual planting, we shall find sometime the
stock to be Christ, ( the true vine, and natural Olive) sometime our cursed
nature is compared to the body of tree, and the word of God resembled to the
graft, as Iam. 1. 21. so then as a wild olive grafted into a true, is partaker
of the sap, and fruit of the good Olive, and is utterly changed, and becomes of
another nature and taste; so when we are grafted into Christ, we receive all
spiritual influence from him, whereby ws are fruitful: for without him we can
do^ nothing John 15. 5. Likewise as when a good graft is let into a wild
crab-stocke, the sience so alters and sweetens that sower and harsh juice of
the stock, that the fruit becomes altogether contrary to the former, and is
very pleasant: so when the word is grafted into us it so changes our
affections, and all the inward man, that we bring forrh (clean contrary to our
corrupt nature^) the pleasant fruit of righteousness. There must be
therefore, and certainly is, a change in man before he can attain any
happiness What it is, may be gathered by that which has been spoken, and
specially from this comparison: for when we transplant any tree, we do it to
this end, that we may enjoy better fruit of it, as disliking that which is
natural to it.

To open it yet morefully, the former similitudes excellently set it out unto
our eyes. As first that metaphor of light, that by nature we are even
naturalls, or mad men, in respect of spiritual understanding: having the eye
of supernatural reason in the knowledge of God quite put out, and in the stead
of that lightsome eye representing spiritualll things, an hellish, dark, and
divelli^h eye, full of lies, succeeds it. The loss of the former necessarily
inferres ignorance of good; the other presents to us evil in the form, and
appearance of good; As fools, by want of natural wisdom, know not the worth
of things excellent, and by a childish folly esteem highly of vain, useless,
and unprofitable things: or as mad men, that have no knowledge of their friends
but esteem them enemies, and desperately in spite of all good counsel, run
into any danger, or mischief: so senseless man hating indeed God himself,
and all the means and offers of life, willingly follows the Devil through
sin unto hell; can discern no goodness in that which is truly good, but
seems to see much content in vanity; and that which leads him to destruction.

In a word before our transplantation our fruits are described by the Spirit,
Gal. 5.19.20. 21.22.23.
namely adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, Idolatry,
withcraft, hatred, variance, emulation, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies,
envyings, murders, drunkenness, revilings, and such like: after our
implanting we may see the spiritual fruits set out in the same place: love,
joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperanee, and such like: see also 1 Cor. 6. 9. 10. 11. Necessary is this
change, seeing we are all naturally accursed, but without it there can be no
passage from cursing to blessing, from one contrary to another. Again God the
Father has decreed for the honor of the Son, that all nations shall be
blessed in him, and none saved but by his name; that he shall be the head of
every creature; Now then we must of necessity be cut off from the first Adam,
before we can be grafted into the second Adam, and cannot be blessed in him,
till we be grafted into him.

2. Whosoever forsakes his sin, and with delight meditates in the word of God
day and night, that word shall be to him as water to a plant, it shall
continually nourish him in the life of grace, and that gracious and holy Spirit
shall as a River feed and sustain him in this blessed life, that he may
continue and daily increase in this spiritual fruitfulness. This is here
evidently a^firmed by the Psalmist; often and strongly confirmed by other
Scriptures, and the examples of the Saints. Ioh. 5.24.
He that hears me has everlasting life. Psalm. ^3.2.
He makes them to rest in green pastures, and leads them by the still waters;
They shall be as a watered garden, and like a spring of water, Esaias 58. 11.
whose waters fail not. Ier. 31. 12.
And again, Their soul shall be as a watered garden. Certainly that holy
Spirit himself enters into us by his word. Gal. 3. 2. Acts 10. 33.44 And even
hence is it, that the Spirit compares the word so often to seed, and food: as
the means whereby life, growth, and strength spiritual is given us. Every
several creature has his peculiar nourishment, but this only is the food
which nourishes the new creature to life eternal. True is it of the bodily,
much more of spiritual life, that man lives not by bread only, but by every
word that comes out of the mouth of God. Thus when the Thessalonians received
the word, not as man's, but Gods, it was effectual, and wrought mightily in
them. ^ These. 2.13. Thus whenever the Prophet^ found himself dull,
heartlesse, and dead in performance of any duty, he had recourse to this word,
and found quickening grace. Psalm. 119. 50.93. And indeed as every creature has
his force and work by Gods appointment and ordinance, and not by any thing of
it self, and therefore works only to that end, which he has set out for it;
so this word is by him ordained to this purpose, namely to give and maintain
spiritual life, and hence it powerfully works, and misseth not this effect.
Manifest is it, that in the word written, the image of the essential word,
even of Christ is engraven and figured by the Spirit of God; and evident, that
our souls are as wax, liable to any impression good or bad. Now then when
that blessed Spirit applies this word to our hearts, having before prepared
and fitted them for it, and often by delight and meditation renewes this
impression; he will bring in us, still continue, and daily renew the same
form and image in our souls.

rivers of water. Standing waters will soon be corrupt, stink, and become
unhealthfull, and noisome to the body; but running waters are ever sweet and
wholesome. Standing waters will dry up and fail, but the Rivers (fed with
living Springs) continue and endure, even in heat and drought; Such as
forsaking this word, follow their own devices, are like those who make pits,
and forsake the rivers: their pits yield unwholesome and poisonous waters, and
soon are dried up and fail; but he that cleaues to the word, and Spirit
working in it, shall be certain to find health and continual supply. This
comparison is used by the Spirit Ier. 2. 13. Observe those words in the
Prophet, Ezekiel. 47. 8. 9. 11. There we shall perceive, that those running waters
of the Sanctuary are very healthful, but when wretched men mingle them with
their own mire, their own muddie brains and inventions, they shall be as
salt pits, not healed. There is no doubt but these waters are the Apostolical
doctrines, delivered by them first in preaching, secondly in writing: This is
that wholesome doctrine so often commended to the Ministers of God. 1 Timothy 1.
10. and 6. 3. 2 Timothy 1.13. Tit. 1.9. and 2. 1. So likewise it continues and
stays by us: when this seed is sown it abides in us, 1 Ioh. 3. 9.
It shall not be taken from us. Luke 10. 42.
Mark the covenant of God. He puts his law into the hearts of the faithful,
and writes it in their inward parts, so that this law shall not be razed out,
nor the Covenant broken, as the former, but such a fear of his name there
settled, that they shall never depart from God. Read Ier. 31. 33. and 32.40. It
shall be as a living fountain in the heart, springing up to life eternal. See
John 4. 14. and 7. 38. 39.

The word of God is an immortal seed, and abides for ever, 1 Pet. 1.23.^5
not as earthly seed, which when it is sown, and is fruitful, dies, and
emptieth it self, to fill up the ear: but this still continues and is a
living root, ever sending forth the fruits of spiritual life,: Men perish,
the best of men faile^ The very Prophets, which are vessels bringing this word,
are (as speaks the Apostle) earthen vessels, 2 Cor. 4. 7.
and are broken: but the word which they bring surviues them, and thousand
generations after them. Read Zach. 1.5.6. To shut up this point: for
continuance both of the word and Spirit, we have that faithful promise made to
our head. Esaias 59. 21.
As for me, this is my covenant with them says the Lord; My spirit which is
upon thee, and my words which I have put into thy mouth, shall not depart out
of thy mouth, and out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy
seeds seed, says the Lord, from henceforth, and for ever.

Examination.
2. Try here thy estate; search and consider what interest thou have in this
blessed condition of the faithful. If thou belongest to the Paradise of God,
thou art planted, thou art transplanted. Since Adam was rooted out of it, never
any man grew there, but was translated, cut off from the old, and grafted into
a new stoc^e. Thou ar^ wholly changed, art a new man, a new creature, renewed in
thy understanding from darkness to light, renewed in thy conversation,
walking not in deeds of darkness, but the paths of light; not in gluttony and
drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, strife, and envying Romans 13.
12. 13. Ephe. 4. 18.
If thou lie in ignorance, thou have not the life of God. 1 John 5. 19.
If thou lie still in wickedness thou art yet of the world. But do thou
find the word of God spring in thy heart? do thou feel that holy Spirit
continually sending forth those streams of grace, nourishing thee to life?
then have thou right to this happy estate: but take good heed least thy fal^e
heart beguile thee: perhaps some fits and pangs of conscience have for a season
made thee more temperate, more careful of duty to God and man; This may be in
an hypocrite, and was in those false-hearted Jews: Psalm 78. 34. 35.36.
When God slew them, then they sought him, then they remembered God was their
strength: but they did but ^latter and dissemble. Thus their children, Ier. 34.
10. 11. compared with 21. 22. verses.
when the fear of the Babylonians pressed them, they obeyed; as soon as they
departed, they repented of their obedience, and returned to their sin: but
the faithful have this water of life flow in them, nay in the day of tentation
they fail not, but then often abound more plentifully then at any other time.
It is recorded of Jordan that even in harvest he over-flowed all his banks:
Josh. 3.15.
so is it with those waters of the true Israel of God, they flow even in the
time of heat and drought; in trials of affliction, even the most fiery trials,
the word and Spirit leave them not, but with more full tides water and comfort
their souls. Thus was it in Job; thus with this Psalmist: see Psalm. 119. 92.
143. As the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also
abounds by Christ. 2 Cor. 1.5.
Know then, that as long as we retain the old leaven, loving the world, and
cleaving in heart unto it, and the sinful profits, pleasures, and affections
of it, we have no sign of this happiness in us. If this blessed word and
Spirit do not flow into us, wash out our uncleannes, drunkenness, covetousnes,
and all such corruptions; nay if that holy Spirit leads us not forward into the
good way, and causes us cheerfully to go on in every path of holiness, we
have no title to true blessedness.

Reproof.
God, and now as ignorant: they come to Church, they hear the word, but the
Prince of darkness holds their eyes, that they should not discern the light
of God. Others perhaps attain more knowledge, but walk still in darkness:
the same cursed ways they followed before, they still go on in them: they were
swearers, cursers, Sabboth-breakers, drunkards, covetous oppressors,
extortioners, railers, unclean: so remain they still, and increase: perhaps
somewhat changed, but for the worse: one sin for another: one Devil cast
out, and seven other entered: dead were they in nature, dead in sins and
trespasses, and what now? but more rotten, and stinking; the very worms of
hell crawling upon them, and eating their souls. Before they neglected
goodness in themselves, now they despise and deride it in others. When they
are called to come out of this miserable estate, and the Spirit in the
Ministry of the word cries aloud unto them: Turn you, why will ye dye? they
desperately answer, not in their hearts only, and in secret, but openly in
their rebellious actions, nay some impudently in their words; Ier. 18. 12.
Surely we will walk after our own imaginations, and do every man after the
stubbornness of his own wicked heart. Oh woeful, oh miserable, and desperate
estate! when we read of those poor wretches possessed with legions of Devils,
Mat. 8. 28.
carrying them from Cities, the company of their friends, Mark.5.
and all living men, to the dead, there to lodge in graves, beating and
striking themselves with stones, and breaking all bonds, we even tremble to
think of their fearful estate: But we are blind to see our own misery;
nay though we cannot but see it, here pictured out unto us, we have no sense of
it, who once thinks with himself; Is not this my condition? Am I any thing
better? How many unclean Spirits possess this miserable soul and body? A
spirit of ignorance and blindness (even the Prince of darkness) holds my
understanding captive in the chains of darkness; A spirit of profanesse
possesses my heart, and prisoneth it in unbelief, benumbes it with security
and deadness; A lying Spirit holds my tongue, and makes my mouth a very shop
and forge of slanders and reproaches against the Saints of God, and his truth;
A spirit of blasphemy possesses my lips, and thence continually shoots out
lewd and horrible oaths against heaven. A spirit of covetousness, a spirit of
drunkenness, a spirit of lust, and uncleanesse, a very hell is in this
wretched heart. These cursed spirits cause me to break all bonds of sense,
reason. religion, of duty to God, and man, and carry me headlong from my
friends, to mine enemies, from the land of the living, to the chambers of
eternal death: They use mine own hands against my self, and make every
member a weapon of unrighteousness against mine own soul and life, nay
against God whose love is better then life. And now see yonder the Lord Jesus
offers himself unto me for my salvation: Shall I be worse then that
Daemoniake? Shall I not fly to him for succor? Nay he invites me, and shall I
refuse him? Alas! we have no sense thus to put on our souls; but while the
strong man holds possession, all is at peace.

Sabbath, and those holy duties belonging to it, even the service of the most
holy God, and think nothing else of it, but of a custom and common use of
men. As many who come to the Courts of earthly Lords for fashion, and fear of
amercement, or some like respect; so do most Christians draw near to the
Courts of the Lord of heaven; many seldom, nay most never considering the
cause of this Ordinance, either why, or by whom it was commanded. Surely if
only our service, and homage (which thus we acknowledge) should call for it,
and there were no other end, but only the honor and glory of our Creator,
and Redeemer, were not this sufficient, nay abundant to draw us to a diligent
performance of this duty?

He^ has made us the most excellent creatures upon earth, and out of the dust
has promoted us to this dignity, redeemed us from a woeful captivity, into
which we were fallen by our own folly in us, and our rebellion against him:
and would not this challenge a much greater matter at our hand, then to come
into his presence, there to honor him, there to hear him inform us in his
will, and to put up our complaints and petitions to him, by which we
acknowledge him our Lord and Sovereign? which indeed is rather a great
privil^dge, then any burdensome service. But when our profit is joined with his
glory, and as he receives some honor from us, so we receive infinite blessings
from him; when our necessity (if we have any sense of it) the most mise^able
poverty of our souls, so many grievances, nakedness, blindness, nay a very
hell upon earth thrusts us forward, and tells us to our face, there is no
help in us, but points us out to him, and to his Courts, which he has made
his Storehouse, there to cover our filthy nakedness by putting on Christ, so
glorious clothing, there to give light to our eyes, there to pour out to us
the great riches of his grace, there by waiting on the posts of his doors to
make us blessed and happy; In a word, by observing a temporal rest of grace,
to bring us to his eternal rest of glory: what contempt of God, what cursed
Atheism, nay what spiritual madness draws away our hearts from this duty?
It is indeed no marvel to see a fool, or distracted man neglect those
persons, and duties in which consists their well-being: for the cause is
evident, the want or deprivation of that reason, which should guide them in
such actions; but to hear a man confess, my experience teaches me, that all
earthly things (so far as I have enjoyed them) are vanity and vexation: the
Scripture teaches me, that there is no happiness, no nor content for man, but
only the enjoying God, who is indeed the only supreme good; I cannot enjoy
God, nor ever see him with comfort, but only by holiness: Heb. 12. 14. I
cannot attain to holiness, but only by the truth, which is the word of God:
John 17. 17. and above all things I desire to be happy; to see now this man
despise the word of God, and set more light by it then by his old shoes, how
can we wonder enough at such a disposition? Ier. 2.12.13.
Oh you heavens be astonished at this, be afraid and utterly confounded says the
Lord: for my people have committed two evils, they have forsaken me the
fountain of living waters, and dug them pits, even broken pits which will
hold no water. What creature (even the heaven it self) may not wonder, and
tremble to think, that those who profess themselves Gods people, and confess
him their fountain of all life and comfort, should yet forsake him, even in
those Ordinances, whereby as by pipes, he conveyes his grace, and imparts
himself to them, draws them home, and unites them to himself, and should
cleave unto their vanities, which their own sense and experience will tell
them are but mere deceits, and lies promising much happiness, performing all
misery; here vexation, hereafter damnation.

Consolat.
4. The beginning, weak, and distressed Christian has here an handle offered
him to take hold of comfort, and apply it to his troubled soul. Many a
weakling, who sees in himself nothing but a delight in the law of God in the
inward man, and rather a desire, then a power to meditate in it, is not a
little grieved, yea amazed. He looks into his soul, finds there many sinful
infirmities, nay fleshly rebellions against the Spirit, standing out, and not
yielding to the law of God; sometime leading him captive to the law of sin;
and in this particular, although he find a thirst of the word, before he come;
comfort and delight in hearing, yet both when he is in the house of God, many
times distractions of vain thoughts withdraw his ear; and when he is gone,
waut of memory makes the word nothing so fruitful as it should be: and to
weigh down all this evil, he sees no other good, but only his delight in the
law of God, and some fruits of it, as lamenting his sinful estate, wrestling
against his cursed nature; and hence he is not a little troubled, and many
times grievously affrighted.

But know 1. it is thus with Gods dearest children, as with the Apostle. He
could not do the good thing he would. That measure of obedience in hearing,
and doing the will of God, which he desired to give, he could not give it: the
evil which he would not do, he did: perhaps vain thoughts in hearing God,
and speaking from him, and such like sinful infirmities feign he would have
utterly cast off but could not: he saw much misery in his nature, sinful
rebellion against the law of God; to answer all this, he found nothing but his
delight in the law of God, yet was he a most dear child of God, and in an
happy estate.

2. Remember that where once the Spirit has made a channel to convey into any
heart his word and grace, he never leaves it dry. This good part shall not be
taken from thee: Luke 10.42.
This seed shall remain in thee: 1 Ioh. 3. 9.
This water shall spring to everlasting life. John 4. 14.
Remember that promise Esaias 59. 21. and wait upon the Lord with patience. As
the Minister is commanded to suffer in preaching, 2 Timothy 4. 2. so you in
hearing Heb. 13. 22. and to bring forth fruit with patience, Luke 8. 15. How
long does many a good Minister preach with diligence, before he sees the least
hope of fruit? At length some few blades spring up here and there: why then
should thou expect seed time and harvest all in a day? Consider the
exhortation James 5. 7. The Husbandman waits for the precious (yet
corruptible) fruit of the earth, and has long patience: should not thou with
more comfort and patience wait for that incorruptible and heavenly fruit
promised in fullness to those that hunger for it? Do thou then find that good
seed cast into thy heart? Do thou feel it begin to root it self in a
constant delight? Does it send forth any fruit, and show it self, though yet
weakly? Remember thy harvest is but in the blade as yet, and thy faith a grain
of mustard seed, the least of seeds, but when once grown, the greatest among
herbs. Mat. 13. 32.

Exhortation
5. Let us be exhorted to forsake this barren and dry wilderness, where no
water is, this accursed estate of sin, and come out to this land flowing with
milk and honey. Leave this Egypt, the place of bondage and oppression, and
come out to this true Canaan.

And for motives, consider the di^ference betwixt these conditions and estates
of men, excellently resembled in (those two types) those two Countries so
contrary, Egypt and Canaan. Read it set out to thee Deuteronomy. 11. 10.11. 12.

2. Consider the disposition of every creature; No man will refuse to flit from
a dwelling, in which he sees and finds many discommodities, to a place where he
shall enjoy an happy estate, and live in health and plenty. If thou desire
to know the means; it is by receiving the word grafted with meekness Iam.
1.21. Now this meekness is that Christian virtue which proceeding from
humility, and being opposite to frowardness and stubbornness of heart,
bends, and bows our souls in all gentleness to the yoke of Christ, as
acknowledging him the just Commander, our selves his subjects and servants.

Proposition 2.
Proposition
The second proposition in this verse drawn from the properties, is;

He that delights and meditates in the word of God day and night, is like to a
tree that brings forth fruit in season, whose leaf shall never fade.

In which are two especial things, making up and accomplishing the happiness
of the faithful soul, which seeks the Lord in his word: 1. The effects and
fruits following this planting and watering: 2. The perseverance or continuance
in this estate.

The effects are two; 1. in this life the fruit of grace: 2. in the other the
fruitio^ of glory. For I take it as certain that the Spirit here intends
both: as well because glory is the especial part of our blessedness here
described; as also because this bringing forth fruit in season will rather
agree to that perfect fruit which we receive in glory, then the other. No
sooner is the tree transplanted, but fruit instantly follows; but the
perfection and full ripeness of it is not here gathered, but hereafter in
heaven. Some here resemble faith to the leaf, but that being the special
fruit of grace, cannot fitly be thus compared. The purpose of the Spirit
without all question, by the never-fading leaf, is to express the
ever-flourishing estate, and life of the godly. It is not therefore necessary
to descend to any particular, and in this similitude to liken any one thing in
the faithful to this leaf, but sufficient, that as the tree whose leaf is
ever green, continually flourishes and even in the midst of winter lives and
prospers; so the godly in the most troublesome storms of all trial and
tentation, shall p^rsevere in this spiritual life, and even then shall suck
that heavenly sap from Christ, and openly flourish in an holy profession.

Now I see not any difficulty in these words, but only it may seem
doubtful, in what sense these f^uits of grace and glory are said to be
produced in season. For that of glory, the season is only known to God, Acts
1. 7.
who has put the times and seasons in his own power, and brings forth this
fruit in some sooner, in some later, as seems best to his own wisdom: only
this may be observed, that as the Palm^ ripens his fruit not suddenly, but
is three years (longer then any tree) concocting and mellowing it, before it
come to full maturitie; so it pleases the Lord not instantly to ripen this
fruit of his Spirit, and perfect us in complete holiness, but often by a slow
progress, and no hasty growth brings us to that supreme happiness and full
perfection.

For that other fruit namely of grace: ordinarily it is interpreted, as opposed
too those to hasty fruits, which suddenly ripening, and before due time, are
of no use but sour and unsauorie: of which we use to say in the proverb;
soon ripe, soon rotten. Leaving to every one his own sense, so far as it
is not repugnant to the rule of faith, I do not willingly consent to this
interpretation. First because I cannot easily believe, that any spiritual
fruit can either spring, grow, or ripen too soon; and am persuaded, that it is
the proverb of Satan hatched in hell, A young Saint, an old Devil. Secondly
because even that ca^kasse of faith, which is in hypocrites, Mat. 13.21.
who are the stony ground, is but a blade, no fruit; a blade without a root,
as is evident in the parable. I would rather ^nderstand it as thus intended. As
there are many fruits of the Spirit, so are they not all produc^d at one time;
some presently show themselves, but other some spring not till a long time
after: only the seed, and root of them is in the heart, but the fruit
appears not, and yet in due time the fruit shall follow. The sense then is
this;

He that delights and meditates in the word, shall not only fructisie in
grace, and attain in good time every good gift of the Spirit, but shall
certainly in Gods season grow to a further degree of ripeness, and at length
to a full maturitie, and glorious holiness, and this fruitful and glorio^s
estate shall not decay: the fruit of grace shall not utterly perish, but shall
surely end in endless and perfect glory.

See for proof Ierem. 17. 8. Proof.
Thus when the word is rightly heard, fruit follows Luke 8. 15. no less fruit
springs from this seed then life, yea everlasting life, John 4. 24.

John 15. 16.
The grounds or reasons may be: 1. The grace of God in electing: you have not
chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained, that you should bring forth
fruit, and your fruit shall remain.

2. The blessed Spirit working in it. Gal. 5.22.

3. The nature of the word, which God has made to be as seed: 1 Pet. 1.23.
now every seed has a virtue and force to produce the like.

4. The material and maine cause is the root that bears us, even Christ
Romans 11. 18. see John 15.4.5. Look then as the tree, such is the branch: thus
the Lord Jesus being full of grace, which was dealt unto him not by measure,
John 3. 34. distributes to every one, which is grafted into him that measure
which is requisite for that part, which he holds in his body: John 1. 16. Ephe.
4. 16. And seeing himself, being risen from the dead dies no more ( Romans 6.
9.) he gives this never-fading life to those who are his members, John 6. 37.
56. 57. 58.

Instruction.
Learn then here for instruction, that it is altogether impossible, that soul
should be barren in spiritual fruit, which delights and meditates in the word
of God. Now as in earthly, so in these heavenly fruits, there are many kinds,
and every kind diversified into other. The chief of the spiritual are
godliness, righteousness, and sobrie^ie. In godliness sundry and diverse
particulars; some which we receive and return not, some which we both receive
and return. Of the first sort the chief is peace, a fruit wonderfully
pleasant. I have read of some fruits which have so affected the taste, that the
whole body has instantly felt a sudden alteration, and even shook and
shuddered with the delight it received. Sure I am, no fruit in earthly Paradise
could compare with this peace. Oh when an afflicted soul, which has been
long schorched with that hellish flame, the sense of Gods wrath for sin,
drinks down this peace in a full draught of that blood, which is drink
indeed, Ioh. 6.55.
it is impossible for any man to utter, nay to conceive the content it enjoyes,
but only those, who by experience have felt it. How sweetly do they rest (as
newborn babes) in a delightful cradle of heavenly ease and tranquillity,
leaning themselves, as the beloved Disciple, on the bosom of Christ, while
glorious Angels sing about them, Peace on earth, good will toward men? Luke 2.
14.
Another of those fruits is joy, springing from the former, nothing inferior,
nay above the other. It is unspeakable and glorious. 1 Pet. 1.8.
It remoues all sense of corporal evil, changes scourges, rackings, and all
manner of torment; so that as things very tart and bitter, by being boiled in
sugar, become very sweet and delightful: so all these grievances seasoned by
this overruling joy are wholly altered, and the most extreme pangs are turned
into ease and pleasure. Oh how the soul by it is delighted, ravished, and even
here on earth, transported for a time into a third heaven? In the second kind
are knowledge, love, fear of God, faith and delight in him, with many other.
In righteousness, brotherly love, patience, gentleness, goodness, and many
such like, coming from the same stock. In sobriety, temperance in meats, and
drinks, modesty in apparel, and moderation in all bodily comforts and
refreshings. Now in none of these is that soul barre^, which effectually
converseth with the word of God; Tit. 2^ 11.12.
For the grace of God which brings salvation, teaches us to deny ungodlines
and worldly lusts, and that we should live godlily, righteousty, and soberly in
this present world.

Let us descend to the particulars. 1. Peace is brought home to us by the word
preached: Ephe. 2. 17. 2 Cor. 5. 19. so likewise joy instantly follows the
word, and accompanies it, and enters with it into Cities, Families, and the
hearts of people: see Acts 8. 8. 39. and 16. 34. John 15. 11. So also for the
knowledge o^ God, it comes only from the word, and our exercising our selves
in it; hence called the word of knowledge. 1 Cor. 12.8.
Thus the Scripture of the Prophets made known the mystery of Christ, but
much more clearly the preaching of the Gospel: Romans 16. 25. 26. see John 17.
6. 7. 8. Thus meditation in the word teaches us the fear of the Lord Deuteronomy.
17. 19. and 31. 12. 13. So to love the Lord is the maine lesson, which is
continually pressed upon us by the word, and which enters with it where it is
effectually received: see John 15. 10. so Faith comes by hearing, and hearing
by the word. Romans 10. 17.
And when we delight in the Sabbath, we come to delight in God, Esaias 58. 13.
14. Thus brotherly love, and all the fruits proceeding from it, come by the
word 1 These. 4.9. Thus likewise that sobriety and temperance in the use of the
creature, is taught us by that word, and he that is taught as the truth is in
Jesus, cannot live wantonly, Ephe. 4. 19. 20. 21. So when the Gospel had a
right passage in the Colossians, it was fruitful among them, and all that
heard it: see Colos. 1. 6. He that hears and understands the word will be
fruitful: Mat. 13. 23. Sure it is, that every natural cause will bring forth
his ordinary effect, if it be not overruled by some higher power; or hindered
in working by some defect in it self, or want of some help necessary to
concur with it. Now then this seed of Gods word being his power to salvation,
and used by his Spirit not only as seed, but as water, nay as fire also, to
ca^l forth ^he virtue of that which is sown; being assisted by such an
Husbandman, who both knows how to use it; and can resist all impediments,
cannot but yield that fruit which he intends and appoints. Esaias 55. 10. 11.
John 15. 1. 2. The^e is no study but will to a man very dull (if he employ his
time much in it) bring some profit: certain therefore it is, that the heart
which with delight, and continual meditation does exercise himself in that
word, which God has given to be his wisdom, to train us up in the right
knowledge of God, and in the practice of a Christian life, will bring us,
though in nature dull of hearing, and very fools in understanding, to some
good measure of knowledge, and by continual use increase that wisdom, which
it has begun to work in us. Psalm. 19. 7. and 119.98. 99.

Palm, let us especially learn in this similitude, that as the fruit of that
tree is some years before it come to perfection, and is much longer ripening
then any other: so the fruit of the Spirit does not presently attain to
maturitie, but very often incr^aseth very slowly, and is long before it come to
that full growth and perfection, to which it is ordained: in which respect the
Kingdom of God is compared to a grain o^ mustard seed, the least of seeds,
and the greatest of herbs; the beginnings of it are but weak, Mat. 13^31. 32.
and yet by little and unsensible degrees it grows to wonderful strength,
even in this life: see also that parable Mark.4. 26. 27. 28. Surely the
Husbandman waits for the precious fruit of the earth, Iam. 5.6.7.
and has long patience for it, See Gal. 5. 5.
until he receive the former and latter rain: well therefore may we wait
upon our God, and expect his leisure with patience for the fruit of heaven, The
Apostles had faith to forsake all and follow Christ; yet when they had long
followed him, and had seen his glory in so many miracles, so powerful
preaching, nay even simple in it own shape, and much excellence upon the
mount, they had but little faith: when we hear the Prophet David after so long
study in the law, still call for knowledge, and opening his eyes Psalm.
119.18.27, when we see the Apostle profess, Phil. 3.13.
that he had not attained, but follows hard, this truth is manifestly cleared
unto us. Let none marveil at this, for we see the like in all creatures; As any
is more excellent then other, and longer lived, so is he more slow in growing
and attaining his perfection. Those beasts which live but a shorter time,
sooner come to ripeness; but as man is far beyond them, so is he more slow
of growth: and even in man we may observe, that in the beginning, when they
lived eight or nine hundred years, they slowly attained to ripenes and full
age, and were commonly an hundred, or sixty years, before they had any
children. Genesis 5. Seeing therefore this new creature is far the most excellent,
and of long life, even for ever and ever, we cannot wonder if it come on in
some very slowly. Again as any creature receives and digesteth more or less
sustenance, so is it more or less speedy in growth: now the word of God which is
the nourishment of the new man, is both ministered and received neither in
frequency or quantity as the corporal: One meal or two a week, and even
then we are dull of hearing: yet further, there are many impediments as in the
earthly, so in the heavenly growth: without, the Foul of the Air, those
cursed Spirits hind^ing by all means, and snatching like Harpies our food from
our mouths: within, thorns and briars, and heart too hard at the softest.
These are great impediments to our spiritual growth, but this is sure, that we
shall grow; A Palm the more it is pressed, the more it will spread itself.

3. He that thus with delight meditates in Gods word John 17. 8. with the 22.
verse of the same chapter. The same is confirmed by all those places of
Scripture, which pronounce the man blessed who hears the word of God, and
keeps it: for the blessedness of man consists in this glory, which God
vouchsafes his chosen. And although we are in some measure blessed, who in
this life enjoy the favor and presence of God dwelling in them, yet could this
be divid^d from the other, that estate were not completely blessed: and indeed
the very end why God gives his word to man is, not to lead him some part of the
way, but to bring him home to himself, and to go along with him till he be
perfected. Ephe. 4. 11. 13. But the perfection of man consists especially in
this glorious estate; the full happiness of man stands in being as like unto
God, as his nature will permit; like in soul by a perfect holiness, like in
body by being conformed to the body of Christ. This condition we obtain by
the word, which even here for the present begins to form our souls to this
image, and every day more, and more renewes us after the same Image.

Christ, namely that great privilege of the faithful, that they shall never
fall from this blessed estate, into which they are entered by the word of God,
but shall continu^, and increase till they attain that perfe^t and endless
beatitude. This perseverance as it is here more obscu^ely figured out by the
leaf never fading, so is it elsewhere frequently cleared, and more plainly
expressed, then can with any face be denied. Of many places I will choose out
some few, yet su^ficient to persuade such as will not be contentious. Psalm.
92.12.13 14.
Such as be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the courts of
our God, they shall bring forth fruit in old age, they shall be fat and
flourishing, to show that the Lord is upright and faithful. Where the Prophet
does not only in v^ry plain words a^firme this truth, but gives an excell^nt
r^ason of it: So likewise Psalm. 125. 1. and 84. 7. Pro. 4. 18.
Again the way of the righteous shines as the light that shin^th more and
more until the perfect day. So the Prophet sette^h down this continuance, as
a diff^rence between the old and new Covenant. Ier. 32.40.
He that hears my word, Ioh. 5. 24. John 10 27. 28. John 15. 16.
and b^leeveth in me, has everlasting life and shall not come into
condemnation: and again My sheep hear my voice, and follow me, and I give
them everlasting life, and they shall never perish: I have ordained that you
should bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain. Many such places
might be alleged, but these are sufficient for those that love the truth.

The foundation also of this perseverance, upon which the Spirit in the
Scripture lays it, will further confirm it; For 1. it is the condition of the
Covenant made in Christ: see Esaias 59.21. 2. God is faithful and upright, and
able to make it good Psalm. 92. 15. so Heb. 10.23. and John 10. 28. 29. They
must be plucked out, if ever they come out of his hands. 3. The intercession
likewise of Christ, as for Peter: Luke 22. 32. so for all the faithful, Romans
8. 34. Now he is ever heard Ioh. 11.42. This perseverance in the new Covenant,
purchased for us by the blood of Christ, is a most glorious prerogative of the
faithful, beyond any thing in their creation: then had they life given and
immortality, but not settled upon them; only promised, and that upon a
condition, which they might, and soon did break. Note, that not only Christ
wrought salvation for us, but works us for it: 2 Cor. 5.5. and not only keeps
the heritage for us, but us to it.
But in this are we wonderfully happy, that God has in Christ given and sealed
to us everlasting life, which therefore cannot fail, because it is no longer
in us, but in him. Had we chosen him, our sickle nature might soon have
repented, and gone back: but he has chosen us, who cannot repent. Had our
life been laid up in us, we should quickly have lost it^ but it is laid up
with Christ in God; where no thief can dig through or steal, where it
cannot corrupt. Look as it is with children that are heirs, yet under-age,
and their parents living, they cannot be cheated of their inheritance, nor
make it away; 1 Pet 1.4.5.
because the right is in another; Colos. 3. 3.
so the children of God have no other right to Gods Kingdom but by Christ, and
their right being in him cannot be lost. To Adam was given (says Augustine)
power to persevere if he would, De correp. and gra^. 11.
but not will to do what he might, but to us who are grafted in by faith, is
given both will and power to persevere.

But some perhaps will say, if a man cannot fall from this grace, then although
we should shake off all fear and care of God, we should still continue in
his favor. Nay this doctrine (say the Papists, and others) opens a wide gate,
and intiseth us to all sinful liberty.

No such matter. For 1. Ier. 32.40.
God therefore has not given us power of continuance, that we might be without
his fear; but therefore put into us his continual fear, that we might
continue. We could not live in him without his fear: therefore that we might
for ever live in him, he puts such a fear into our hearts, which might wedge
us fast, and bind our inconstant hearts in his Covenant: especially let us
observe, that not the gifts only, but the very person of the holy Ghost abides
with the faithful, as an earnest of our inheritance, Ephe. 1.13. 14.
until the redemption of the purchased possession. Now the blessed Spirit is
not only to the faithful a seal and earnest, fully to assure, and make over
to them the heritage of glory, but he is there a Lieger for Christ, holding
possession for him, and keeping us for him until coming. Even as a seal in
Covenant or earnest is not only an assurance to me of the buyars good intent
and meaning, but a fast bond to assure him his bargain.

2. Is there nothing to maintain this godly fear but loss of glory? will
only dis-inheriting affright an ingenuous ch^ld? nay the very frowns of his
Father, and fear of chiding (much more severer correction) will hold him
strongly enough in that filial awe, which is due to his parent: and shall not
the fear of Gods anger, hiding his face, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27.
shall not his threatening word, at which the hearts of his children melt like
wax, nay shall not his rods so many, so smarting hold our slippery necks in
his yoke, from such a desperate and final contempt of his authority? see Job
33. 16. 17. 18. and Psalm. 89. 31. 32. 33. To conclude, how shall he run into
all disorder, whose steps are ordered by God? Psalm. 37. 23. how shall he lose
his way, whose ways are preserved by God? Prove. 2. 8. and to whom purposely is
given wisdom, and knowledge to keep him in the good way, and to deliver him
from evil ways, and evil men. Pro. 2. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14.

Examination.
Try we here whether we are transplanted from our native soil, that dry
wilderness of sin, into the Paradise of God. They that are planted in the
house of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of the house of our God: Psalm
92 12. 13.
they shall be fruitful etc. Look now into thine heart, and consider what
fruit thou find there. Does that peace of God rule in thy heart? Have thou
stricken a covenant with the Lord? Art thou washed in the blood of the Covenant,
and so have received reconciliation? This is a sure fruit of thy
transplantation. But take heed least thy peace be with Satan, and thy covenant
with hell: if thou art at peace with the world, and the world with thee; if
thou art in league with sin, thou have no peace with God.

2. See where thy joys are seated. If thy joy have the root in the Spirit, it
is busied in spiritual objects. Observe then what is that which stirs up thy
heart to rejoyce^ if the love of God to thee in Christ, if the love of thy
soul to God, if other gifts of the Spirit, if the promises of God in Christ
applied and brought home to thy heart by faith, this joy is a fruit of the
Spirit: but if thy joy be earthly, so art thou: if thy joy sinful, thou art no
other: thou rejoycest because the world comes in upon thee, it makes thee to
smile to see the world smile on thee: thou rejoycest when thou do evil, and
when thou prosperest in the evil which thou do, thy joy is sensual and
divellish. Thus is it in the rest. Do thou cry for knowledge? do thou blow
up thy love to God? laboring to fasten thy soul to Christ in that fear, the
bond of our covenant? Do thou sigh and groan under the burden of unbelief?
Do thou stir up thy soul to hold Christ, and rest upon him? Do thou
bring on thy soul to delight in the Lord? These are the fruits of the Spirit,
the contrary certain signs of a natural man. So is it in those fruits of
righteousness and sobrietle: If thou find thy soul make on in this way,
all is well: but if thou flatterest thy self in thy sin, if thou live in
thy unrighteousness, in intemperance, thou can not inherit the Kingdom of
God.

Reproof.
1. Those are here censured, who give no credit to this testimony of God, that
by a constant delight and meditation in the word, they shall assuredly be
fruitful as well in grace, as in glory. Neither are Papists here only to be
abhorred and accursed, who revile and blaspheme this holy word, openly and
commonly a^firming, that the reading it by ignorant men is dangerous, the way
to make them heretics, as the Rhemists say, and all the whole Rabble of them:
(without fear giving the lie to the Spirit, Pal. 19.7. and 119^ 130.
who testifies that it gives wisdom to the simple) Nay further write, that to
give this general liberty to people of conversing with the Scripture is to
show our selves friends to heresy, that it is pernicious and impious. But our
careless Professors, negligent in this duty, are here to consider their folly
and hypo^risie, dissembling with God and man, professing that with their mouth,
which is far from their heart: For ask them; do you desire to be fruitful
in grace and glory? Truth will make them confess the one^ and shame the other:
and do you believe God witnessing, that by delight and meditation in the word
of God you shall attain this fruit? this they dare not deny: and why then do
you not use this means? why are you so negligent and averse from this practice
that you cannot be drawn to it, that so many exhortations have been spent in
vain upon you? Is not this most gross hypocrisy? Should a man make solemn
protestation of earnest desires to do us good; yet if some easy means were
showed him of doing what he promises, and he neglects them, will not every man
know his former words were nothing but complement and dissembling. And is it
not so with these, who affirm that they indeed desire to be fruitful in
grace, but yet when the Lord propounds so easy a way through his blessing to
obtain it, neglect this means, and go on in a contrary course? Oh this is
not our practice in earthly affairs and profits. The Husbandman upon hope of
fruit will take sore pains and tarry long: the Merchant will venture life and
goods upon likelihood of increase; Men will labor hard in studying Physic,
Law, or other Arts, by which they may reap knowledge and profit in those
sciences. Had therefore thy heart received this truth of God, with as much
faith as the Devils, that thou thoughtest it true, and then there were grounded
in thee, a desire of this fruit, it were not possible, but thou should set
thy self to this endeavor, especially knowing the fruit is everlasting and
glorious, and the means easy and certain.

Lord so often, and almost continually compare them to fruits, but to teach us,
that they must have time to grow up and ripen. Now then as he would show no
little folly, who as soon as his corn is put into the ground, expects it
should presently be fit to reap: so men show more passion, then wisdom, who
are ready to repine, that the graces of Gods Spirit are not grown, and come to
maturitie in them, when indeed they have had no time for this fullness of
growth, and are yet but newly en^red and grafted into Christ: Es^y 28.16.
He that believes will not make hast^

This over-hastinesse in setting God his time for accomplishment of his
promises, is presumptuous, and proceeds from unbelief and impatience. Faith
breeds patience: we must not therefore limit the holy one of Israel, Psalm.
78.41.
but wait upon the Lord. We our selves will make our children attend upon our
leisure, especially in those gifts which are of any moment, because our
experience teaches us when it is most fit for us to bestow, and when they can
best use them. Eccle. 7.11.
Be not thou therefore of an hasty spirit. But much more are those to be
rebuked, who when they perceive a man turned from his former course of life,
and now to frame his heart and actions to his profession, they instantly expect
an Angelical purity in such, and an heavenly estate without sin or blemish.
Hence is it that if they find any the least infirmity, they presently break
out into tauntings, not only of the person but the profession, and into
revilings, no better indeed then blasphemies against the Lord, and that holy
calling which themselves profess. In the mean time, like gross hypocrites
they neither do, nor will see their notorious dissimulation and the foul
deceitfulness of their own hearts: for themselves live in sin, delight in
sin, resolve to go on in gross sins; and though there be nothing in them
like a Christian, yet will they be called and counted Christians.

3. Here are refuted and reproved Papists, and all other Christians, who deny
the perseverance of the Saints; and affirm, that even those who by a true
faith are entered into Christ, and are now in the Covenant of grace, may yet
fall back again, and become utter Apostates from the truth of grace which
they have received, and so finally be damned. This error (a rag of
Pelagianisme, newly washed and worn by the Papists) confuted and condemned by
the primitive Church, and especially by that learned Saint Augustine, is so
palpably contrary to this and many other Scriptures, that it cannot be defended
without manifest and gross impudence, and contradiction to Christ and his
Spirit.

But they object, to what end are those many cautions in the word: 1 Cor. 10.
12.
Let him that stands take heed least he fall. etc.

We must know for answer, that this Scripture speaks only to such as think
they stand; and indeed such warnings of God are not only given, that we may
know there is a possibility in man (as of himself) to fall, but for diverse
other ends.

1. Some of them are spoken not of utter or universal falling from God, or
from faith, but into some sin; no^withstanding which fall, he may still
retain communion with God, and faith in Christ, unless we think, that every
minute the Saints are out, and in with God.

2. Such warnings are given to humble us, by knowing that not only our lapsed
nature, but even in this new life of regeneration there is a power utterly and
finally to fall away^ (much more in this, then in that state of innocence) so
that our standing is only by the Covenant of God, his mercy and truth: that we
continue in this grace is not from any principle in us, but from that
infallibility of God^ grace, sea^ed up in his Covenant.

3. Such admonitions are means, whereby the Lord exciteth our hearts to
watchfulness, and all other duties by which he has decreed to support us, nay
whereby we a^^ upholden. For when God commands to stand fast, he gives power
to stand as he commands. As in the word of Creation, when the Lord commanded,
Let there be light, there was light; so in our renovation, what he commands
in his Elect, he performs, and makes his word powerful to actuate what he
persuades.

Again they object many passages of Scripture; They have made shipwreck of
faith, etc.

Know that in faith there are many things. 1. A knowledge and profession of the
truth: 2. A consent to that doctrine; both being actions of the understanding:
3. There is an action of the will, which not only chooses Christ as a great
blessing, (so may a reprobate, who has set his heart upon the world) but as
the supreme and only blessedness, in whom alone without any addition, he is
happy, and therefore rests upon him, and acquieteth himself in the enjoying
him. The other two are often called faith, and are in part (yet not without
that third action of the will) that true faith, whereby we live in Christ: but
the other separated from the last, are but the Devils faith: now this may be
lost without any prejudice to this cause.

But further they say (as did their Predecessors the Pelagians) this is a key
to open a way to all licentiousness. Epist. Prosp. ad August.


Answer them (not only as before in the fourth Instruction, but) 1. That there
is no doctrine which crooked men may not pervert to wicked ends. 2. Deny that
there is any just cause for a reasonable man to take liberty from hence of
sinning. Should a weak man know, that by eating this or that meat he should
not dye, but yet be grievously sick, and lie in much and long torment; were
not this sufficient to keep him from eating it? But as he of whom the Poets
write, that was made of mortal immortal, yet subject to disease, being
wounded with a poisoned dart, earnestly wished a possibility of dying; so let
us know, that the stings and sorrows, and many most smarting effects of sin
are such, that they will sufficiently fright the faithful from falling back,
and revolting to sin, though they know they shall not be utterly or finally
cut off from Gods favor. Romans 6.7.
Beside how shall they which are dead to sin, live yet therein? 1 John 3. 3.
nay where this hope is ( which makes not ashamed) there will follow a
continual purifying and cleansing from sin.

Consolat.
Let every weak soul apply this sovereign medicine to it self; thou shall
not utterly fall away; the same God who has called thee, 1 Cor. 1.8.
and begun this good work i^ thee, shall perfect, and continue it to the day
of the Lord Jesus. Philip. 1.6.
Thou shall be preserved blameless unto the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ.
1 These. 5.23. 24.
For faithful is he that has promised who will also do it. Be not too much
discouraged with thy slow growth: for know he surely grows, who fears that he
stands at a stay, and is jealous of himself, and of his deceitful heart. The
sense (with grief) that thou so little thrivest, is an evident sign that thou
increasest. Ground therefore and stablish thy soul on the truth of God; and
remember his promise: Esaias ^4. 10. 11.
The mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall
not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed says
the Lord, that has mercy on thee, oh thou afflicted and tossed, etc.

Exhortation
Labor for those never-fading fruits, and give no rest to thy soul till thou
have obtained them. Oh how is it, that we are so slothful in matters
concerning our eternal happiness? If we plant an Orchard, how diligent are we
by all means to fill it with the best and choicest fruit? if a garden, we will
be sure to get the faire^^ flowers; if we desire increase of Cattle, sheep,
bullockes, horses, etc. we will dearly buy, and by price or friends labor to
stock our selves with the best breed: Shall we suffer then our souls to be
barren, or be content with those wild grapes, Esaias 5.2.
those rotten figs which the Lord abhorres, Ier. 24.2.
and will c^rtainely set our teeth on edge? Use for motives to stir up thy
heart, and to plant it with this good fruit: 1. The remembrance of the
excellency of it, and that it is natural to desire things excellent. 2.
Consider that they are more easily obtained then the other. Conscionably use
the means, 1. the word; 2. prayer. Be thou swift to hear: Pray continually,
Iam. 1. 19.
and thou shall surely find thy soul to prosper, 1 These. 5.17.
and to be as a watered garden, full of that fruit, which cheereth God and man.

Proposition 3. And whatsover he does shall prosper.
In these words the Psalmist propounds the most general part of that
happiness, which God without fail bestows on those, who meditate with
delight in his word; namely, prosperity, amplified by the generality of it:
Whatsoever he does shall prosper. Hence arises the third Proposition:

Proposition
Whosoever with delight meditates in Gods word, whatsoever he does shall
prosper.

Now there is no word which needs explication but this of prosperity. And
prosperity is nothing else, but that success in our ends which we desire, and
by hope expect: when therefore we purpose any action to some good end, and we
see our affairs sort to that end, or better then we hoped, then this action is
said to prosper. But observe that in prosperity either in the whole estate of
man, or in any one particular action, is required not only the attaining some
one (the immediate or middle) end, unless we reach to the principal and
supreme. As for instance; Suppose a man sowes much, that he may reap and enjoy
abundance of fruits, he desires abundance that he may rest and be merry: if now
he attaines his hopes in receiving plenty, and obtaines not this rest and joy,
he cannot be said to prosper in this action. Thus that rich man's superfluity
prospered not with him Luke 12. 19.20. The Israeli^^ longings satisfied
abudantly, yet cannot be said to prosper with them, Numb. 11. But if we miss
of the immediate, and attain the supreme end, our actions prosper: for he that
fails of plenty, but is filled with rest and joy, prospers in his purpose.
Prosperity therefore may be considered either absolutely in the general, and
whole estate of man, or in particular when we enjoy our hopes in some or many
ends, which we desire and propound to our selves.

The sense then of this proposition is; Whosoever delights and meditates in the
word of God, whatsoever he sets his hand unto shall surely have success,
in working for him that which he desires and hops, at least in the maine
and general, if not in the less and particular ends.

Proof.
For confirmation of this point, read Josh. 1. 8. Let not this book of the Law
depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein day and night, that thou may
observe and do according to all that is written therein; for then shall thou
make thy way prosperous, and then shall thou have good success. and 1 King. 2.
3. Take heed to the charge of the Lord, to keep his statutes and
commandments, that thou may prosper in all that thou do, and in every
thing, whereunto thou turnest thee.

Grounds.
The reasons or causes of this success may be either in the word, or in God. In
the word, because it points out and leads us in the way, and only means of
good: and is that Guide, which will direct us in the way to the end of it, if
we follow it to the end.

Instruction.
2. In God: 1. His grace and truth, whereby he purposed, promised, (and will
perform it) to give assistance and show all favor unto such. 2. His infinite
wisdom and power, ruling and overruling all creatures, and subduing all
things to himself, being able, nay continually using to bring light out of
darkness.

Oh! that men would learn from hence this certain truth, that wheresoever the
word of God is rightly entertained, peace and prosperity (as necessary
attendants) surely follow it, whether into any house or Country. Read the
history of the Scripture, and you shall ever find, that as long as religion
was in truth maintained among any people, and the word of God set at liberty,
so long that Nation prospered. Thus when Hezekiah, Vzziah, and diverse other
Kings were careful to restore the truth, and to advance the faithsull
Ministers of God, and settle them in their function, they prospered
wonderfully: see 2 Chronicles. 26. 5. and 30. and 31. chapters, especially the last
verse of the 31. chap: In all his works etc. he did it with all his heart,
and prospered: see also Hag. 2. 19. 20. and indeed that whole prophecy is
altogether aimed to that end; namely, that the people may see their error in
neglecting Gods house, and building their own; for all that time they
prospered not: but after, when being admonished they set themselves cheerfully
to build the Temple, the Lord turned his hand, and made them prosper. The whole
chap: Deuteronomy. 28. is spent in this subject. But what need we travail to foreign
Nations for witness to this truth, when our own Land even in our time, is a
strong confirmation of it? To pass by the unspeakable miseries of this Land,
since that time (wherein Popish ignorance began to creep upon it) by Picts,
Danes, Normans, and our own civil arms: observe but the reign of two
Sisters. The elder being a Papist, married a Popish, but a potent Prince,
over-threw the Gospel, persecuted the Saints, and burned many: She reigned a
short time, lived ingloriously, dyed in great discontent, lost her Territories,
extremely impoverished the Land, so that her Successor found neither Armor,
Navy, nor any defense for the Kingdom, no not so much as any treasure to
supply so many wants: Her younger Sister succeding seemed to be left as a prey
to any neighbor Prince, who would first invade her. But no sooner did she
(which presently she did) set her self, and employ her Scepter to promote the
Gospel, and root out Popery, but all the blessings of a Nation were powered
upon her; and though she were all alone, without any Associats, yet God made
her a great helper to all her neighbors, and terror to her enemies; insomuch,
that the most potent Monarch of Christendom was utterly foiled by her, and
brought into great streights and di^ficulties: and so palbable even to the
enemy was the blessing of God, that the proud Spaniard could not refrain from
upbraiding Christ, that he was turned Lutheran. The same is Gods dealing in
private with any house or person: for God is always the same. And surely this
is the promise of Christ, who when he sent his Ministers to preach the Gospel,
commanded them to impart peace to any City or house into which they entered,
and assures us, that where they are rejected, it shall be more tolerable for
Sodom and Gomorra: but the contrary shall follow on the contrary entertainment
Luke 10. When the ways of a man please the Lord, he will make all his enemies
at peace with him. Pro. 16.7.


John 14.27.
But does not Christ a^firme, that he leaves not the worlds peace with the
faithful?

The Lord does not there deny to give peace, but affirms he gives it after
another manner then the world. Worldly men wish their friends prosperity, and
perhaps would, but cannot give it; and if they do, it lasts a short time:
but Christ gives it effectually, and keeps it to them. This text much
confirms this point: but yet further;

Do we not see many true servants of God, who tremble at his word, live not
prosperously?

I answer: No; if we weigh well what is prosperity, and then compare their
estate with it. They live in honor or riches; it may well be so; but honor
and riches are no part of prosperiti^; and but by accident, no helps toward it.
For 1. They are vanity and vexation of spirit, how then can they be any part
of prosperity? 2, Eccles. 5. 12.
Riches and honors are often reserved to their owners for their evil. No
qnestion these things are to a man, as a sail to a boat, if the sail be too
great, it sinkes the vessel, but when it is fitted in a just quantity, then
it causes a swift and safe passage. Thus we often see, when God gives a man
riches, honor, etc. in great quantity, but not grace, and wisdom to manage
this estate, they are in continual danger by every blast to sink into some
mischief. Prosperity therefore is such an estate, when all things together
work for the best: now this estate is promised by him that cannot lie, to all
them that love him Romans 8. 28. And observe that God always thus works: Joseph
is sold into Egypt, and made a Bondman, but prospers in the house: is put in
prison, but prospers there: is brought out unto Pharaoh, prospers with him: is
preferred to great dignity, prospers in that; and becomes a means to save
much flesh. Daniell is taken, carried captive, and made a servant to an
Idolatrous Prince; prospers and finds favor with the chief Eunuch: prospers
with Nebuchadnezzar: is accused and cast into the Den of Lions, but prospers
in all this; for all these things tend to his advantage with God and men. Yea
so mightily does God work for them, that even sin also through his grace
works for their good. 2 Cor. 7.10. 11.
Sin works godly sorrow, godly sorrow care etc. What thankfulness, love,
nay labor of love and diligence to please did the sin of Mary Magdalen, and
Paul work in those Saints? This then is a sure truth: where the word is
received with obedience, prosperity certainly follows it.

of it self is evil, yet as it is sanctified to those who love God, it cannot
be reckoned among evils, but rather blessings. Psalm. 94. 12.
Blessed is the man whom thou chastisest O Lord. Iam. 1. 2.
Count it ex^eeding joy when you fall into diverse tentations. Romans 5.3.
We glory intribulation. Paul esteems the fellowship of Christ his
afflictions above all earthly things, so that he accounts of all other things
as dung and loss in comparison: Philip. 3. 8. 10.
sorting this fellowship with the knowledge of Christ, and the virtue of his
Resurrection.

For enlarging this point a little further, let us consider 1. What success or
good it brings in to us. 2. How being evil in it self, it is turned to our
good.

It is a means of good, 1. by preventing evil: 2. by working out for us
things profitable.

Job 33.19. 20^ 29. 30.
It prevents destruction of body and soul; Man is chastened with pain upon his
bed, and the multitude of his bones with strong pain, so that his life
abhors bread, and his soul dainty meat: Lo all these things works God
with a man oftentimes, that he may bring back his soul from the pit, etc.
Thus God commands earthly Parents; Pro. 23.13.14
Withold not correction from the child, if thou smite him with the rod,
he shall not dye: Thou shall smite him with the rod, and shall deliver his
soul from hell: so also he practices with his own children.

And as it prevents destruction, so also sin the cause of it, and keeps us
from our own wickedness; It works many good and profitable things in us. By
afflictions we are partakers of the holiness of God, and this bitter root
shootes forth the pleasant fruit of righteousness. Heb. 12. 10. 11.


The sap of a Crab-stocke of it self is sower, and distasteful: but when it
is digested in a good sience, it makes the fruit so much the more pleasant. It
breeds patience Romans 5. 4. It purges from sinful evil without, and within,
Prove. 20. 30. and this knew that holy Patient, Job. 23. 10.
He tries me, and I shall come forth like gold. Look as silver and golden
vessels if they gather rust, must be rubbed with something which is rough and
harsh before they can be cleared; so is it with these precious vessels. It
teaches us the way of God, and puts us into it: Psalm. 119. 67. 71. and as
it helps us in all grace, so it furthers us in glory: see Mat. 5.11.12. 2 Cor.
5. 17.

But how comes it to be good unto us, which is so evil in it self?

1. By the overruling hand of God, who brings light out of darkness, good
out of evil. 2. By the correcting nature of grace, which not only tempers the
evil, and noisome quality of it, but makes it medicinable and wholesome.
Hence where this grace does not overruled the cursed nature of affliction, it
brings forth murmuring, as in the Israelits, falling away more and more, Esaias
1. 5. and open blaspheming, Revel. 16. 9. So that as in many Antidots the hand
of a cunning Apothecary tempering some poisons, and correcting them with other
ingredients, makes a most wholesome receipt; so the hand of God seasoning
afflictions with grace, brings them to be of great use and profit to every
Christian. But beside all this good which it brings with it, it self also (as
sanctified) is an evident testimony of our adoption, that we belong to the
Lord; Heb. 12.6.7.8
who corrects not bastards, nor suffers any child to be uncorrected. In all
which respects, it may be justly accounted not only a means to further and
prosper us in our hopes, but not the least part of our prosperity.

3. Prosperity and success comes not from any other cause, but from God. For
howsoever it pleases the Lord these parts whereby we work, nor by them effect
any thing without him. It is nothing therefore in man, neither in body or
soul, which can bring about his hopes and purposes, but only the Lord works
according to his pleasure all in all things. This as it is intimated by the
Psalmist, when he a^firmes that the man who departs from evil, delights and
meditates in Gods word, shall every way prosper; so is it in many other
scriptures confirmed; Deu^^ 8.17.18
It is the Lord (not our own might) which gives us power to get wealth. The
blessing of the Lord makes rich, and he adds no sorrows to it. Pro. 10. 22.
Honor comes not from East, West, North, or South, but God is Judge, who
makes higb and low. Psalm. 75.6.7.
Therefore he promises these things to those who honor him, 1 Samuel 2.30.
withholds them, or rather heaps on them disgrace who dishonor him. Thus even
in these meaner blessings, which earthly men call and account prosperity, the
Lord has the chief hand and work, much more that true good, Genesis 39.2.
(in which consists our only happiness) is wholly framed and ordered by him.
The Lord was with Joseph, and he was a man that prospered; 3. 23.
and so palpable was this work of God, that even his heathen Master could not
but discern it: and the Iayler himself easily observed it. Now then if God
causes men to find favor in the eyes of men, as Genesis 39. 21. so that even
wicked Ahab makes Obadiah, who greatly feared God, Governor of all his house 1
King. 18. 3. how much more is it he alone, who causes us to find favor in
his own eyes, in whose loving favor is all our happiness?

Object.
But even wicked men the enemies of God, and his truth prosper.

Of this we shall speak more fully hereafter: for the present this may
suffice; Answ.
They obtain many things which they aim at; but the maine, to which they
intend all the rest (namely to be happy) they never attain, but lose all their
pains and labor.

To conclude this point; As all good gifts come down from the father of
lights, so especially eternal life, without which no man can be blessed, is
the gift of God, Romans 6. 23. Now therefore as a statu^ of man, when it ^tands
far off, or when we are in the dark, may easily seem to be a very man,
though it has nothing indeed of a man but a show, and some outward
proportions; so rich men, and such as flourish in this world, seem in carnal
eyes to prosper; but try their success, and bring it to the touchstone, and
you shall find it nothing but a deep misery, clothed with a show and idle
o^tentation of happiness. The Heathen are the best witnesses of this truth;
Thus Dionysius the Tyrant fitly described his estate, so much praised by his
flatterer Damocles, by placing him in a chair of state, furnishing a table
with all delicates, commanding many noble Attendants to wait on him, he had
wine, music, and what his heart could wish; in the mean time a sword hangs
over his head, held up by a weak thread, and ready to fall upon him. Thus
another rightly answered a flattering Courtier, who therefore accounted him
happy, because he wore the Diadem, that if he knew how many cares were tied up
in it, hardly would he stoop to take it out of the dirt. And surely whosoever
is most enamoured on this painted happiness, and prosperity of wicked men, if
he seriously consider what vexing cares usher it, what vanity accompanies, and
what misery follows it, he would not a little scorn to employ any of his
desires or endeavors about it.

Examination.
2. Here also is fit occasion of t^yall; If thou art of the number of the
faithful, thou shall prosp^r; now then examine whether all things work
together for the best to thee; Does every thing help thee onward to God? when
a man gives up himself to the Lord in his word, every thing shall draw us
nearer to him, even affliction and trouble, Psalm. 77.2.3. Nay even hypocrites
at such times come in and approach unto him: A man in danger will catch hold of
any thing, especially they will cleave to those whom they most trust. Thus
prosperity and blessings work thankfulness: Psalm. 103. 1. 2. 3. and make
them study for recompense; Psalm. 116. 12. In fear they cleave to him by faith
Psalm. 56. 3. In grief they seek to him the only Comforter. The word when it
promises draws them, when it threatens humbles and drives them to grace and
mercy: nay even sinful actions enforce them to God, begging pardon, and when
they have obtained it, knitting their souls to him in ardent love: sinful
infirmities fill them with hung^r and thirst of him, their righteousness. Psalm.
16^ 5. and 119. 57.
And this is the cause, why they call God their portion, because wholly resting
on him, they make all other things but means to enrich themselves in him, and
get into his favor. Now then try here thy estate; thou find^st many troubles
in the world; do they wayne thee from this bewitching life, and draw thy
thoughts to a better world? Thou art faint with sickness; do thou find that
as the outward man perishes, so the inward man is renewed daily? Thou enjoyest
health, and other blessings: do they work upon thy heart to kindle more zeal
to God, more love to his name, and children? do they quicken thee to
thankfulness? thus do all things work on those whom God has loved; at least
do thou find in general, that though some things hinder, yet when they all
meet together, they work to the best for thee? yea even sin it self makes
thee 1. see thy corrupt heart and sinful nature; 2. provokes thy love to thy
gracious Father, who pardons so many offenses, and whets thee to all
thankfulness, and love of Christ who has satisfied for thee: so that because
much is forgiven thee, thou love much; does it more fill thy heart with
loathing sinful filthiness, and thy self for it? awake thee to more care and
watchfulnes, and lastly weary thee with the loathsome company of it, that
thou desire and criest to be delivered from this body of death? If thou
find these fruits, thou may comfort thy self in the Lord, for he that
thus works for thee and in thee, has ordained thee to life. But if thou
find that outward prosperity blows up, and bladders thy heart with pride,
that thou despisest God in his service, that it works thee to more security
and carnal liberty; if thou find that trouble, sickness, etc. bring forth
impatience, blaspheming; or although for the present it work a little, and by
the smart of the conscience, and agonies terrifying the soul with present
judgment, stir up thy heart to promise reformation, and a better course of
life, judging, and condemning thy self; yet upon recovery thou fallest back
again to thy former vomit, thou art not in the number of those who fear and
love the Lord, and for whom all things shall work for the best.

Reproof.
1. Those blasphemers of the Gospel are here condemned, who impute evil, and
the sins of men to the word of God, upbraiding the Professors of it in any
affliction with the love and meditation of it. Look out and behold the ways
of men, what multitudes tread in this path? How common yet is the blasphemy of
ignorant, and and wilfully blind people, who never blush to think, and speak
it openly, that it was never a good world, since there was so much preaching;
that when there was less preaching, then was more doing; nay even the greater
ones, although their knowledge, and shame of men makes them abstain from
blasphemies so gross and senseless, yet they regard it in their hearts as
little as the other: for they are ready to laugh at those, who in confidence of
Gods truth take this course to prosper: and themselves despising this mean
(appointed and blessed by God) as altogether un-effectuall, betake themselves
to contrary practice, by wicked policies, bribes, fraud, oppression, and such
indirect and ungodly means to attain their ends, and prosper in their
designs. Psalm, 14.6.
They shame the counsel of the poor, because the Lord is his refuge. Do not
many learned in the Ministry, despising the frequencie of preaching, neglect
it in their own practice, condemn it in others? And can any of these from his
heart believe this truth, so palpably delivered by the Spirit in this place,
that the man is blessed who day and night meditates with delight in the word of
God.

Now as Popish ignorance in the understanding, and heathenish profaneness in
the heart, are the cause of the former, (see that example of the Israelits Ier.
44. 17. 18.) so carnal security and wordly wisdom joined with much contempt
of the wisdom of God, is the root of the other. Verily even hypocrites yea
gross and palpable hypocrites, such as Herod (who as a Fox casts out stink
before him, and may be found and traced by his smell) even such can hear the
word, come to it frequently, sit attentively, and by continuance in hearing
have their brain and understanding printed with the form of that h^ly
doctrine: nay they can invite others to hear, and call them on to this duty:
see Mark.6. 20. Romans 2.20. Ezekiel. 33. 30. 31. Such therefore as these, are
farther off from the Kingdom of God, then the grossest hypocrite. But the
truth is, that the fault why the world is so naught, is in the hearts of this
people resisting the word, and shutting it out, not in the good word, which
soon would make them good, if they would as well obey as hear it. Howsoever;
these ignorants speak by rote of things they know not; for had they known the
former times, and could compare them with these present, in no sense could they
prefer those times before these: but it is with these men, as with unhappy
boys, which excuse their loite^^ng and trou^ntly disposition in learning, by
the unskilfulnes, or some such thing in their Teacher.

Christians ought not only to know, Mat. 10.29^ 30.
that the providence of God over-seeth, and over-ruleth all things, so that a
sp^rrow, or hair of our heads cannot fall to the ground without him; but to
remember it continually^ and so to speak of his providence and of all actions
directed and governed by it, as he may have glory. This is a gross taking of
Gods name in vain, to ascribe any work done by him to the creature, and even
giving away his glory to man, or to an Idol of our own devising: when
therefore we see success go along with us in our affairs, we must look up
to his hand and into our own hearts: now in us we can find no ground of this,
or any other mercy; in God therefore we may see his grace, that free love
without any desert, nay beyond and contrary to our des^rving, and so not only
(as Jacob) acknowledge, Genesis 32. 10.
I am less then the least of thy mercies: and with David, 2 Samuel 7.18.
What am I that thou s^ouldest bring me hitherto? Lament. 3.22.
but with the Prophet, it is thy mercy that we are not consumed. Oh in those
wonderf^ll and most gracious deliverances of this Kingdom from the cruel
invasion of foreign ^nemies in 88, and hellish conspiracies of domesticke and
native Traitors, beheading and maiming the whole body with one blow, how have we
admired and extolled the wisdom and valor of some men? how little thought or
spoken of Gods mercy? how slightly regarded the strong God of our Salvation?
Alas! men are so far from this Christian practice, that they have nothing
almost in their mouths but fortune; sometimes they praise, sometimes they
detest and curse their fortune: which either they conceive to be a chance
without the providence of God, and so set up an Idol in their hearts, and are
worse then heathen; or else, to be that hidden providence of the Lord, working
beyond their power of discerning, and then who sees not how fearfully they
blaspheme, and how far they are from any show of Christianity.

I am cast out of the sight of thine eyes. If we are a little troubled,
especially if we find some sinful infirmity get ground, we are ready strait
to conceive, 2 Pet. 2 9.
God has forsaken us: but know, and remember God knows how to deliver out of
^entation. Certainly should the Lord leave the disposing of such things to our
discretion, we should not a little hinder our own good, and obscure his glory:
Should Joseph, Daniell, and those three royal young men have set the time of
their trouble and deliverance, how would they have hindered both Gods, and their
own honor? The children of Israel, if they might have shaken off the
tyrannous bondage and oppression of Pharaoh at their pleasure, how should God
have been glorified among the Heathen by all those wonders, or they confirmed
in the knowledge of Gods power and providence? Follow therefore the direction of
the Prophet, Psalm. 37. 5.
Commit thy way unto the Lord, and trust in him, and he shall bring it to
pass: and of the Apostle, Philip. 4.6.
Be nothing careful, but in all things let your requests be shown to God in
prayer.

Consolat.
4. Whosoever has given up his ear and heart to God in his word, may hence
draw wonderful and unspeakable comfort, He shall prosper in all his ways:
and whereas he has bent himself now to travail in the search of happiness,
and to that end has chosen this only Guide, he shall not fail to attain his
desires and hopes, but all things shall work for him; for he that has
promised is true, and able to subdue all things to himself. Mark all the
Saints, and consider Gods dealing with them in this kind. Their examples and
experience will cry out unto thee; 2 Chronicles. 20. 20.
Put your trust in the Lord, and you shall be assured, believe his Prophets,
and you shall prosper. Ier. 22.15.16.
Did not thy Father eat, and drink, and prosper, when he executed judgment
and justice, when he judged the cause of the afflicted and poor he
prospered, was not this because he knew me says the Lord? Settle this then
in thy heart, the Lord promises, and the Lord shall make it good.

Exhortation
5. Let us then be exhorted in the words of God himself to Joshua. Josh. 1.8.
Let not this book of the law depart out of thy mouth, meditate therein day
and night, that thou may observe and do all that is written therein; or of
this dying Prophet to his Successor, and Son Solomon, 1 King^2.3.
Take heed to the charge of the Lord, to keep his testimonies and
commandments as it is written, etc. Say unto the Lord; Oh my Savior, have
thou made thy yoke so easy, and thy commandments so far from grievous? and
shall not I take it joyfully upon me? have thou promised prosperity and
happiness to all that bear it? and should I refuse it? Say unto thy soul;
ask and enquire of the Saints, and with one voice thou shall hear them
testify: Thy word is more sweet then honey, more precious then all riches, more
necessary then our daily food; the joy and rejoicing of their heart, a rich
portion helping thee to that most rich inheritance of glory, a joyful Guide,
leading to joys unspeakable and glorious, and shall not I cleave unto it, that
I may prosper? Let great men seek wealth by oppression; the meaner by fraud
and imposture, flatterers by fawning, Epicures by surfeiting in riot and
pleasure; but oh my God I will follow thy way in thy word: look my soul,
look unto that Guide, and depart not from his direction, and it will cause
thee to prosper, and conduct thee to that eternal rest and peace, the end of
all thy ends, and the only true prosperity.

Psalm I. Verse iiij. The ungodly are not so, but as the chafe which the
wind drives away.
TRue is it, that one contrary will not a little illustrate another; In
colors, when black and white; in our estate when misery and felicity are
compared together, their proper nature will more evidently appear to any who
will heedfully observe it. Therefore when in the former verses the Spirit had
set out the godly, both in their course and success: in these verses he
describes the condition of the wicked, that so both their estates may more
clearly be discerned by those, who will with any diligent eye consider it:
aiming both to this end, that as the happiness of the one might allure and
win us to the same practice, so the misery of the other might affright and
drive us from the evil way. This misery of ungodly men is lively pourtrayed,
and set out to the eye from the contrary; and 1. By negation of all that
blessedness mentioned in the former verses, in which the godly are instated by
the Lord, even in this present life: 2. By a contrary curse; and that curse
expressed 1. by a comparison of chafe, 2. by the consequent and conclusion of
all wicked courses in the 5. verse.

The negative argument propounding the contrary estate of wicked persons,
includes all these Propositions.

1. The Spirit and Prophet affirms, that a wicked and ungodly man is not
blessed. 2. The same Spirit concludes, that a wicked man is not a planted and
watered tree. 3. The Prophet testifies, that ungodly persons are not as a
fruitful tree, ever flourishing. 4. The Lord by the Prophet assures us, that
an ungodly man shall not prosper in all his ways.
The first then is this;

Proposition
The Spirit and Prophet affirms, that a wicked and ungodly man is not
blessed.

The words have before been opened sufficiently, and the meaning of them is
briefly this; Whosoever delights not, nor meditates in the word, but rather
with pleasure follows the counsel of ungodly persons, walking in their
disobedience and scorning; neither is, nor can be happy in this estate.

Proof.
The proof is evident, and frequently confirmed: there is no peace says the
Lord to the wicked, Esaias 48. 22. and again 57. 21. And the curse continually
applied to them in Scripture.

Grounds.
The grounds are: 1. the justice of God, who cannot by any means clear the
guilty, 34. 7. The Lord is known by the judgment which he executes, the
wicked is snared in the work of his own hands; Psalm. 9. 16. 17. Upon the
wicked God shall rain snares, storms, and tempests. Psalm 11. 6.

2. The very nature of blessedness; for blessedness is that estate wherein we
enjoy good without evil, or at least a measure of good out-weighing evil: but
wickedness considered of it self, without the punishment due to it, is to a
man such an evil as weighs down any good he possesses in this life: as
being most cont^ary to his nature in which he was created, and to his end unto
which he was ordained.

Instruction.
Learn here 1. That the happiness of man consists not in the fruition of any
one, or all outward blessings; nay some inward, and some spiritual also may be
cast in to a wicked man, and he still continue most wretched: Should riches,
honor, power, glory, pleasure, be all heaped upon one man, in that measure
his own heart desired, should wisdom, courage, health, strength, beauty,
and other such endowments of body and mind be added to the other, nay the word,
Sacraments, and some illightnings etc. be adjoined, all these could not make
up this blessed estate, nor seat this man in a throne of happiness:
necessarily this follows; for all these things may belong to a man drowned in
sin and hellish wickedness, who contemnes and hates the word of God, and God
himself, and therefore cannot be blessed. But because this truth does not
easily sink into flesh and blood, it will be needful as well by evident
testimony of God to confirm it, as by reason also and experience to settle it
in our minds.

First therefore God testifies of these things, that they are not worthy our
rejoicing. Ier. 9. 23. 24.
Let not the rich man rejoice in his riches, nor the strong man in his
strength, nor the wise man in his wisdom, but let him that rejoices rejoice
in this, that he under stands and knows me: where purposely the Lord
chooses out such blessings, as being of all natural things most excellent,
comprehend the rest. By riches (which are most embraced by earthly men) he
intends all the goods of estate: in strength all bodily; in wisdom all gifts
of the mind are included: yet in all these we may not rejoice or glory, but
only in the knowledge of God. Many spiritual gifts may also be annexed to the
former, as some knowledge, some kind of faith, baptism, whereby we are entered
into the Church, yet all these meeting in one man cannot give him this
happiness. Simon Magus believed, was baptized, Acts 8. 13.23.
yet still was drowned in the very gall of bitterness. No testimony can be
of more or equal force then that of Solomon, whom God purposely called out
from the sons of men, as the foreman of all the Jury, to give in his verdite
concerning this truth. He was the wisest that ever lived, the Commander and
Sovereign of a great Kingdom, wonderfully rich, gave his heart to pleasure,
joy, and all outward blessings, Eccles. 2.3.
till he might find out that good of man. Now after he had passed through all
outward good things, and had tasted the uttermost sweetness of them, the Lord
brings him forth as the most able Judge and witness, and by his mouth gives us
to understand, and leaves it upon record to all ages, that they are all vanity
and vexation of spirit: and that the fear of God, and walking in his
commandments is the All of man. Eccles. 2. 17. and 12. 13.

Certainly, if any outward thing could make blessed, then as that woman in the
Gospel, Blessed were it to be the Mother of him, who is the Father of all: to
bear him, who bears up all things by his mighty word; to nurse him, who
nourishes every creature. But even of this the wisdom of God a^firmes, Luke
11.28.
that they rather are blessed, who hear the word of God and keep it: on which
words rightly builds that holy Father Augustine; De sanct. virgin. cap. 3.
Mary therefore was more blessed by receiving the faith of Christ, then
conceiving the flesh of Christ: her motherly neerenesse had nothing profited,
unless sh^e had more happily borne Christ in her heart, then in her womb. And
again; In Johan. tract. 10.
My mother whom you call happy, is therefore happy, because she kept the word
of God, not because the Word in her was made flesh.

Now as the Lord himself is a witness beyond all contradiction; so even
reason it self (especially as it is settled upon confessed grounds of the word)
will further convince our understanding, and enforce our judgment to witness
this truth.

For first, whereas it is known and acknowledged by all, that because the
soul is immortal, and the body mortal, there must be a double life of man,
one present while the body and soul are conjoined, another to come after that
separation: whereof the former is short, a span, a vapor, appearing for a
moment; the other lasting and everlasting: and again, that both of these have
certain peculiar blessings annexed, which make that estate comfortable and
pleasant; it cannot be denied but that these fading things perishing in the
use, can by no means help us in that other estate, which is for ever: and
howsoever they may be some poor comforts and refreshings to this momentarie
life, yet to that other they are altogether dead. Now as we neither do, nor
can account that man rich, who dwells in a fair house, but yet a Farm; has
much cattle, money, and goods, but another man's; and at the years end must
be turned out naked without a ragge to his back: so all these temporal
blessings cannot make us happy, because howsoever we have a short use of them,
yet it is manifest that as we came in, so shall we go out of the world naked,
and stripped of all earthly goods: and not only the things themselves, Psalm.
146.4^
but all our thoughts about them peris^ utterly.

Secondly; Those things cannot of themselves bless us, which unless they are
blessed by some other, fill us with curses and bring us to destruction. But
thus is it with all these, 1 Timothy 4. 4.5.
they are sanctified by the word and by prayer: and again, Tit. 1. 15.
To the pure all things are pure, but nothing pure to them that are d^filed and
unbeleeving. Eccles. 5.12.
Do not we see by experience that riches turn to the hurt of the owner; see
also Prove. 1.19^ Consider it exemplified in that wicked Ahab, and Naboths
vineyard 1 King. 21. Thus also honor to those who by want of grace dishonor
God, is a burden which presses them body and soul to utter ruin, as we see
in Jeroboam and all his Successors. So we find that strength, beauty, health
work to the destruction of the owners by intemperance, wantonness, murders,
oppressions: nay even wisdom it se^e in Achitophel wrought to the ruin of
himself and many others.

Lastly; Those things cannot make a man happy, which neither are any part of
our supreme good, nor yet singly or jointly of themselves any helpers to
advance him to that highest good, unto which he is created. But all these
things are no other. For first they are all desired for some farther end, and
no man does or can rest in them: and the highest good is the divine and
glorious conformity to God, which is not helped forward by any of these.
Earthly riches are commonly snares to inveagle and entice us from him; but of
themselves neither they, nor any such as they, help us to enjoy him: only as
they are sanctified by grace and overruled by it, they give some opportunity
to express our love to him in his Saints. 1 Cor. 1. 20.
Even our wisdom in this case is folly and enmity, and must be utterly cast
out, Romans 8.7.
and we become fools, 1 Cor. 3. 18.
before we can enter into this estate. Thus both God himself, and our reason
also will readily testify unto us, that there is no happiness in any outward
blessing.

Gods Law: Gal. 3. 10.
and cursed is every man which continues not in all things which are written
in the book of the Law to do them. And whereas misery consists in the
deprivation of good things, and pressure of evil, evident is it, that sin of
it self is a mere privation of all true good belonging to man, and the
greatest evil that is or can be to him. For that good of man, which enobles
him above the common rank of ordinary creatures, is holiness and
righteousness, that image of God in which we were created: now sin is the
privation of holiness, as darkness of light. Do but consider what is the
excellence of man exalting him above other creatures. Other creatures have
strength and continuance, as stones; some have life, as trees; some a soul,
sense, and motion, as beasts; some singular understanding and knowledge, as
Devils: yet a man may excel them all: if his excellency stood in strength and
durance, the very stones went beyond him: if in life, many trees would justly
claim prioritie: if in sense, dogs, eagles, apes, yea spiders were more
eminent; if in understanding, he were inferior and worse then those cursed
spirits, the worst of creatures: yet the faithful apparently excel all these;
there is nothing therefore but holiness whereby he out-goes other creatures.
Now sin is the privation of this holiness; nay not only a mere privation,
(as darkness of light) but a de^truction, as ruin, of an house, or death, of
life. Again, sin it self is the greatest evil, the most filthy and
detestable evil of all the world: the abominable thing which God hates Ier.
44. 4. continually therefore compared by God to things most abhorred; to
clutterd blood, to mire and mud, to a vomit: so loathsome, that if it were
possible fully to eye the filthiness of it, it would infinitely, amaze and
affright us. Certainly when in our measure we are enabled by the Spirit with
open eyes to behold it, we loath and abhor it, and our selves for it, Ezekiel.
36. 31. Job 42. 6.

But in nothing may we more clearly perceive the horror of sin, then in
that comparison so often us^d by the Spirit, where this spiritual death is
resembled to the bodily, Romans ^. 24.
and called the body of death. For look as a living body graced with fit
proportions, and natural colors, Romans 7.24.
full of spirit, is an amiable and lovely object to a bodily eye, which yet
when the soul is departed, and has been some little time in the grave, is a
loathsome fight, so that they, who before doted on it, now tremble to behold it:
so where the blessed Spirit quickens the soul of man, and fills it with the
life and beauty of God, how glorious how ravishing is this sight to a
spiritual eye? but when the spirit of man lies dead in sin, buried in lust,
what can it differ from a Devil incarnate? neither is it only in it self very
evil, but a fountain streaming forth all manner of evils. First, it remoues
all good things; as 1. the fountain of all good, God himself: 2. all those
blessings which flow from him: as temporal Ier. 5.25. Esaias 24. 5. Esaias 59.2.
spiritual as was evident before, yea eternal Romans 3. 23. Secondly it heaps
on us all evil, death of the body and all the sorrows which attend it. Romans
5.12 Lam. 3. 39. But in nothing more evidently appears the cursed and filthy
nature of sin, then in the infection of it, and means to purge it: the
contagion of it spread into the whole generation of man, and one sin
committed by one has brought forth a world of sin and sinful men, that the
very foundations and originalls of man's generation are unclean, and make every
one unclean that touches them; it defiles our very prayers and makes them
odious. Pro. 15. 8. and 28.9. and turns a Saint, nay an Angel into a Devil.
Again no other means to purge it but the blood of Christ, Levit. 15.
and that applied by no other hand but of the Spirit.

But some will say ^ sinful men neither see nor feel any such misery: they
live merrily and in all jollitie.

That they neither see nor feel is it any marvel: for first they have no
eyes to see: Deuteronomy. 29. 4. nor sense to feel Ephe. 4. 19. 2. To a corrupted
taste sin is as a sweet poison, pleasant in the mouth, but in the stomach
deadly: it is as riotous spending, which is not felt instantly, but with
delight; yet in time presses, and breaks our backs with debt. 3. As those
herbs of Sardi which killed with laughing: so sin does not only with grief
and torment bring men to destruction, but with mirth and dancing. Lastly, in a
natural heart sin is in its native country, and natural place; now a
stranger is soon observed, but natives seldom regarded: nothing is burden
some in its own place: a little water in a vessel will soon weary us, but a
whole River when we are in the midst of it, and under it, is no load. But if
we observe the faithful, we shall soon perceive, that although very little
of this sinful filthiness remain in them (in comparison of others) yet do
they see it with much grief, and feel it with extreme loathing: as Psalm. 38.
3. 4. 5.

God, and our reason.

1 Pet. 2. 14.
Thus are they called the children of the curse, and the children of wrath:
Ephe. 2.3.
Read Deuteronomy. 28. from the 15. verse to the end. Romans 3.16.
Revel. 3. 17. Destruction and calamity is in their ways.

For our reason, as it confesses there is a soul, so can it not deny, but
that the loss of it, though with the gain of a world is a great misery. Now
every wicked man wilfully loses his soul, and casts it into utter
perdition: Romans 6.23.
for the reward of sin is death. 2. What estate can be more miserable and
cursed, then to be delivered up to the power of such an enemy, who mortally
hates us, and with all his might seeks our utter destruction: But every
sinful man is in the possession of Satan, to be kept in chains of darkness
to everlasting perdition: Ephe. 2. 2.
he rules in them, and wholly swayes and carries them with greediness to
torment of body and soul without end or intermission. Nay even without the
word, our reason will acknowledge the wicked man, the only miserable man; For
even Heathens have concluded, that no man can be happy before his death, and
how should a wicked man be happy after death? Even the best of his life is
spent in vanity and much vexation of spirit, and is continually subject to
many other evils, so especially to the fear of death: his greatest pleasures
are soon loathsome, and (as the Be) honey in the thigh, a sting in the tail:
Does he fill himself with choice of dainties and rich wine? it breeds
headache, cruditie in the stomach, and at length scorning the greatest
rarities. Is he seated high? the more is he subject to all blasts of envy, of
those that are under him, and lightnings of those that are above him. Is he
rich? what misery to get it? what fear to lose it? what grief to forgo it?
To conclude; If a wicked man be poor and bare in this life, no man will say
he is happy: if he be rich and lives in pleasures, so much more obnoxious is
he to all misery: the loss of all such things being certain, and the time
uncertain when we shall loose them.

Object.
But their condition seems altogether contrary.

Answ.1. It does not seem so to those who with the light of the Sanctuary
look upon them Psalm. 73. 17.
no not to the eye of reason, for natural men have seen, and confessed their
misery. 2. Things are not always as they seem. A man noble in birth, great
in possessions, bravely attended, and faring highly, but guilty of treason,
may seem a happy man to a fool, but wise and understanding men know well that
he is in a miserable condition.

Reproof.
1. Now then if thou find this folly in thee, so common among men, to seek and
esteem earthly things as those chief blessings in which consists our
happiness, check and chide it, and thy self for entertaining it: Surely if
Christian religion had not taught men their folly, and spiritual wisdom made
them see their error, yet the common understanding of a reasonable creature,
and the mistress of fools, (as some call experience) would discover how vain
and senseless is their opinion and practice. For how should that give us rest,
which is never at a stay in it self, but ever ebbing and flowing? How happens
it that when these things increase, thou find thy self no happier then
before? why do thou call him (and miscallest him not) a miserable man, who by
base sparing treasures up abundance of earthly riches? Oh that we would open
our eyes! Are not our hearts held with strong witcherie while we thus dote?
The Apostle affirms them bewitched, Gal. 3. 1.
who forsake the Gospel to follow the Law: But is not he far deeper in this
error, who forsakes God for Mammon, Christ for the world, and in the mean
time profe^seth himself a Christian? The Ethike and Ethnike Philosopher fitly
describes the nature of these things, when he compares them to instruments and
tools of an Artificer: which, if they are too little are of no use, if too big
are a burden. Certainly it is not in vain that the Wiseman prays as well
against riches, as poverty, for he plainly discerned, that without sanctifying
grace, poverty does not more easily drive to unlawful courses, to impatience
and stealing, then do riches to pride, presumption, and security. Even
Heathens taught only in the school of nature, shall condemn Christians; for
I never heard of a learned Heathen, no not the Epicure, who shamed not to place
his happiness in things mere earthly.

But some will say; God forbid, that we should seat our happiness on earth,
or any thing on earth: nay we know well that there is no happiness but in
heaven with Christ, Colos. 3.3.
for our life is hid with Christ in God.

Now if our actions did answer our words, all were well: But if this were true,
how is it that all our cares and endeavors with so full a stream empty
themselves into this world, and so little of our labor, or rather none at all
runs this way? If Christ be our life, why is not our heart with him? to love
him, desire him, and long for him? how is it possible we should be coldly
affected to those means which bring us to him, and knit our souls in union
with him? men will ride and run through ill ways and weather to Faires and
Markets, where they have any hope, though no assurance, to meet with a good
bargain: but is there in them any such earnestness in matters concerning
their eternal life? God has appointed his Sabboths as Faires and
Market-dayes, Esaias 55.1.
and proclaims them: Hoe every one, come, and buy, you that have no silver,
etc. here is assurance of spiritual profit, but men will not step out of
doors to it. Esaias 30.9.
Are they not then lying children? open dissemblers with God and men, when they
will be called Christians, profess their life is with Christ, and that here
(as all the Saints) they are but strangers, and sojourners? Know assuredly,
that he which is indeed a member of Christ, thirsts and longs for him with
great vehemence: Psalm. 84. 2.
and therefore longs for his Ordinances, and is even faint for them. And as the
faithful desire him, so do they wait and seek for him in his ways. Esaias
26. 8 9.
Remember then, that neither this estimation, nor pursuit of temporal things
which we see ordinarily in the world, can stand with a Christian profession.

God in holiness, neither learn to abhor the pollution of soul and body,
whereby sin deformes and defaces them. Surely as the person of our Savior,
so much more that image of his in holiness finds no favor in a carnal eye,
they see no form in it, why it should be desired. As Amnon, thou can view
the flower of grass (fleshly beauty) and admire it, it ravisheth thy eye,
enflameth thy heart, thou can sue, woo, pine for it; but that beauty of
heaven in the face of Christ, more bright then the Sun, darting the beams of
it into a gracious heart, and thence reflected, and brightly shining in holy
actions, we regard not. A wry mouth, a squint eye, a splay foot, a black and
sootie skin we abhor; but the distortion of sin, a filthy tongue, an
envious eye, an evil affection, and the very image of Satan in hellish
darkness never troubles us. Whence is this, God has not given us an eye see
unto to this day. Deuteronomy. 29.4.
Oh if a gracious heart is ravished with the beauty of those feet which bring
the Gospel: Romans 10. 15.
what kind of heart have thou, which is not moved with the very face of
Christ, shining in his own holy example, and in the practice of his Saints? If
the faithful complain of pollution, not only in themselves but in their
righteousness, Esaias 64. 6.
We have all been as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness as filthy
clouts: where are thine eyes, w^o can see no filthiness in thy heart, and
practice over-growne with all wickedness, no nor in thy sin and rebellion?
But if this want of heavenly light be fearful, what then is hellish
darkness and eye of the Devil, whereby men see such loveliness in sin,
and esteem nothing so pleasant and amiable as an uncontrouled course in lusts?
verily they are nightbirds, that can discern no light but in darkness. The
bodily eye abhorres the Devil in any shape, (should he appear as an Angel of
light) if he were known: but the souls of men delight^ in all his uglines;
for let him dress himself in sin which is his only deformity, he is most
welcome and ^it for their company. If Satan offers himself to a drunkard in
his pots, he goes down merrily; If he appears to a covetous person in the
shape of gain, nothing more welcome; If he looks on a wanton in a lovely eye,
how amiable is he? nay let him come in his own shape to a malicious man,
cluttered in blood, as a murderer from the beginning (and shows himself in
his own colors) which is the very shape of the Devil, he is entertained
greedily. Certainly even witches themselves seem better then these, who
desire not the company of Satan but in the shape of their familiars, but these
men like him in his most native and uglie form. Surely as in poverty,
nakedness, and such like evils, madness whereby men have no sense of them,
is rather an addition then a remedy; so when we are spiritually poor and
naked, it is a great weight added to our misery, that we are altogether blind,
and discern neither any filthiness in our estate, nor goodness in the
contrary. Oh therefore if thou esteemest it as a joyful and happy condition,
that without check thou can delight in drunken fellowship: if thou can
bless thy self in thy unlawful courses, and despising in thy heart (as thou
countest it) the miserable condition of those, who calling him Father, that
without respect of persons judges according to every man's work, pass their
time here in fear (1 Pet. 1. 17.) applaudest thy self as the only happy man,
who followest thy lusts in all their commands, know thou art in a spiritual
frenzy: Satan has gotten possession of thy heart, and holds thine eyes that
thou should not see, nor seek salvation.

count those blessed who are proud, and them that work wickedness, and such
as tempt God: Mal. 3.15.
for looking only on things present, and considering even them only by their
sense, they are ready to condemn the generation of Gods children, as being
often under the rod, and to magnify their own estate, and others like
themselves who live at ease. But had they ever been in the Sanctuary of God,
and there beheld the end of these men, they would soon change their thoughts.
How suddenly are they destroyed, perished, and horribly consumed? Psalm. 73. 19.
True it is, that the wicked can discern the death of the righteous to be
happy, Numb. 23.10.
and can wish it, but he will not see his life to be so; the reason is, because
he lives to sin, and knows not the life of righteousness; and hence though
a legion of Devils possess his heart, and bursting all bonds of piety carries
him headlong into destruction, yet he feels no misery in all this. Do we
think that a swearers or cursers mouth is not inhabited with a devil of
blasphemy? Does not an unclean spirit dwell in wanton and adulterous eyes? Is
not the throat of a drunkard held by a Devil of excess and surfeting? Does
not a Devil of profaneness possess thy heart, when thou neglectest God in
his Ordinances? a Devil of pride keeps the soul of him which is filled with
despising of God and man, jesting, mocking, and skoffing at religion, and even
at God himself in it? Do but observe the difference of men. Some feel a
great burden of sin, and cry out of it Psalm. 38. 4. some feel a great
burden in the law of God, and cast it from them Psalm. 2. 3. some feel the
yoke of Christ sweet and pleasant, and are wonderfully delighted in the word
of God: others find the service of sin delightful, full of pleasure and
sweetness, and are carried headlong in it: some thirst for the Lord, his
righteousness, and the means which bring them to it; Others long to fulfill
their lusts, and drink iniquity like water. Now how easily may we here see
what is the reason of all this: They are two differing, nay contrary creatures,
the one light, the other darkness, the one dead, the other living: the one
all earthly, the other heavenly, the one flesh, the other spirit.

Exhortation.
3. Hearken therefore to those frequent invitations: Let the wicked forsake his
way. Cast away from you all transgressions, Ier. 18. 11.
Ezeck. 18. 31. Let not sin reign in your mortal body that you should obey
it in the lusts thereof, Romans 6. 12. And consider 1. that the wrath of God is
revealed from heaven upon all ungodliness Romans 1. 18. so that though hand
join in hand the wicked shall not go unpunished. Pro. 11.21.
Again, thou can not possibly obtain what thou seek, that is happiness,
so long as this companion is with thee: A man cannot be established by
wickedness; Pro. 12. 3.
for our wickedness shall correct us, Ier. 2.19.
and our backe-slidings shall reprove us: but every man shall eat the fruit of
his own way, and be filled with his own devices: Pro. 1.31. 32.
for even ease slays the foolish, and his prosperity is his destruction.

Proposition 2.
The second Proposition in this verse is;

Proposition
The Spirit affirms the wicked not to be as a tree planted by the rivers of
water.

The words have been opened before: verily in nothing does the Palm resemble
a wicked person, but their contrariety is evident. The one is ever, the other
never fruitful; the one flourishes, the other perishes in winter; the one
thirsts after living springs, the other abhorres the waters of life.

For proof of this point, Proof.
although very clear in it self, and frequently confirmed, read Ier. 17. 5. 6.

And in testimonies the grounds must be, Grounds.
first the truth of the matter: and love of the truth in the speaker. Now the
holy Ghost is the Spirit of truth, who infallibly knows and constantly
testifies all truth: John 15.26. and 16. 13.
especially being sent by the Father and the Son to bear witness of the
truth, and to lead us into all truth.

Instruction.
1. Seeing we are here taught, that wicked men continuing in their sinful
estate, are not transplanted, nor granted, but still remain in the old soil
of the earthly Adam, and in their wild Olive: we may thence learn, that no
wicked man has any right or claim to Christ, nor any benefit from his
resurrection, death, intercession, or any other his works to salvation, so
far forth as he is such, and so continues. The faithful and godly are
transplanted into the house of God, grafted into Christ, and from him draw the
nourishment of eternal life, that precious sap springing from his death, and
killing sin in them, so also from his resurrection quickening and strengthening
them in the life of God. But the wicked not so. Therefore our Savior excludes
them from his prayers, and confineth the fruit of his death to his sheep:
John.17.9. John 10. 15. John 17.19.
He sanctified himself for them, which are sanctified by the word. He came
indeed to be a Savior, but to his own people: Mat. 1. 21. see also John 8.
21. 23. 24^

Sense, reason, and experience will confirm this. For first it is apparent to
sense, that as a tree draws no juice from any soil but that only in which it
is rooted, nor a twig can have other sap, then that which it receives from the
root, to which it is united: so worldly wicked men, being still rooted and
defixed in the world, and being not united to Christ by faith, nor transplanted
into the house of God, can have no other affections or actions then are in the
wicked world: they cannot have that life which springs from Christ alone.
Again even reason will confirm it. For when through the intercession of some
special Favorite, satisfaction is received, and pardon proclaimed to all, who
renowncing their rebellion, and laying down their arms, come in, acknowledge
their fault, submit themselves, and give their oath of allegiance; those have
no benefit of this pardon who perform not these conditions, but continue in
their treason: thus our reason will assure us; that the faithful, and they
only, turning from sin, and subjecting themselves to the word, have benefit
from the death, life, and intercession of Christ. And will not our experience
also testify it? For what fruit has he of Christ's death, whom we see live to
sin? Romans 6. 2. 7. 8. what benefit of his resurrection, who has no life of
the Spirit? what good by his intercession, which are condemned with the world?
see Psalm. 9. 17.

God does not profit the unfaithful, and wilful sinners, such as go on in
their sin. They may hear, know, and understand what is spoken, be able to
discourse of it, and dispute by it, but it brings home no life to them, no
saving grace. Heb. 4.2.
The word does not profit them because it is not mixed with faith. Look as in
earthly treasure, we may see great sums, hear the ring of it, see it told
out, know the worth, and quantity of it, nay hold it in our hands, and carry
it to others, yet be no whit the richer by it, unles we own it our selves, and
purse it up to our own use: so in the riches of the Gospel, wicked persons may
hear, read, discern the particulars, and excellency of it, convey it to
others, and be themselves poor, and naked. Men may fit at table, see much
variety of meat, smell it, know the sweetness of it, taste the goodness of it,
but if they do not swallow, reteyne, and digest it, it profits nothing. Thus
many sit as the people of God, have some savor, and smacke of some grace, taste
the good word, but casting it out again, and not incorporating it into their
souls by an unfeigned faith, and through obedience, it does them no good. So in
that parable, where the Lord compares the word to seed, Luke 8.
the wicked are resembled to such grounds, as are either stony, and resist it;
or haunted with ravenous fowls which devour it, or over-runne with thorns
and briars which choke it. And as moisture is sucked and drawn in by the
roots of tr^es pl^nted by the rivers, but a stone though whelmed in water, yet
is wet only in the superficies or outside, but within is as before it was; so
the heart which is prepared for the word, drinks in this water of life,
prospers, flourishes, and grows fruitful by it, but a wicked man though he
may seem to have his outside washed by it, yet it never sinkes into his
heart, nor soakes into him.

The reasons of this are manifest. 1. There is no passage for the word to enter
into the hearts of wicked men; an hard fore-skinne stops up the doo^e, that the
word should not get in: see Ier. 6. 10. Their ears are uncircumcised, and they
cannot hearken; in which respect that phrase of boaring the ear is used by
this Prophet Psalm. 40. 6. There is a deadly feod and open war betwixt the
word and the wicked. It will not spare them, nor they it; it is a word to
wound, a mighty weapon to subdue them, accuses, reproaches, vexes them; they
abuse, reject and slander it: hence the Minister is of all other most hated and
opposed by them, reviled, and contemptuously abused and abased. Compare Ier.
15. 10. with 18. 18. Nay the word is so far from bringing them life, that it
hurts and kills not of it self, but through their default; 2 Pet. 3.16.
They pervert it to their own destruction. For as good meat breeds good
nourishment in a good, but noisome humors in an ill stomach; so the word is
the savor of life to the Elect, b^t to others the savor of death. When a pipe
lies in a clear fountain, it carries along the pure waters to the cisterne,
which thence are distributed to every office i^ the house: so a sanctified ear
conveyes the word to the heart, which thence is sent forth into every action.
But, as when wholesome water is brought into a filthy pit, the stinking slime
infects it with a noisome and poisoning quality: so when that pure and
precious word, the water of life, enters into a wicked and rebellious ear, it
proves deadly, (and as Physic that never works) the destruction of him, who
taking it into his understanding resists it, and suffers it not to work upon
the will and affections: see Ezekiel. 47. 11. The rain which falls from heaven,
and waters the earth, brings out both good seed and weed with it, so the
word does not only nourish good things, that are planted in us, but
accidentally through the perverseness of men (sometimes their mis-construing,
sometimes their opposition, lusting against it) produces their filthiness,
and consequently works their perdition.

Reproof.
1. Now here is fit occasion to rebuke that presumptuous conceit of wicked
persons: who being still natural men, and in nothing changed from their first
estate, yet make full account to find mercy in Christ, and never question,
nor indeed try their hopes of salvation by him. God forbid (say they) that
every ignorant person should be damned.

God is more merciful then so, more gracious, then you would make us believe.
True it is, God is more gracious and merciful then either we can utter, or
they conceive. And that his infinite grace has he especially declared in that
wonderful expression of it, John 3. 16.
giving his son to sinful man, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish but have life everlasting. But his mercies are not disposed according to
mensfansies: but according to his own will, and wisdom. And he has
su^ficiently op^ned this dispensation of his grace, that all men might take
notice of it. True also that God has given Christ; but only to believers,
neither ha^h any man any interest in him, or right to that atonement made by
him, but only by faith in him; Christ is received by faith John. 1. 12. and
continues in us by faith, Ephe. 3. 17. therefore by faith in him we have life,
Gal. 2. 20. and whosoever gives not him that obedience of faith shall not see
life, but the wrath of God abides on him, John. 3. 36. But knowledge must go
before faith, and obedience will surely follow it: we cannot believe what we
know not, therefore hearing is necessary: and not every hearing, but hearing
Gods word preached by his messengers, makes Christ known to us, and so works
faith. Knowledge is the first step to eternal life, John 17. 3.
so that we are strangers to the life of God through ignorance Ephe. 4. 18 For
how should Christ, who is light, have fellowship with darkness, and not expel
it? And obedience does infallibly attend this saving faith; called therefore
the obedience of faith. Romans 1. 5. and 16. 26. see also Romans 6. 17. Hence
salvation in Christ is only given unto those, who obey him. Heb. 5.9. and the
ignorant, and disobedient utterly cut off from all hope 2. These. 1.9. Certain
also is it, that God offers grace to sinners; nay gives eternal life to
sinners, and promises pardon of sin, but only to those who take hold of
these offers, and turn away from sin by repentance, forsaking the world, and
their own ways, and cleaving to the Lord, walking before him in all
uprightness, and holiness: but utterly denies his mercy to all such, as
neglecting his offers of grace, refuse to turn, and to be purged from their,
filthiness. The 18 Chap. of Ezekiel: is wholly spent in this subject: especially
observe the 20. 21. 22. 23. 30. 31. verses of that Chap: so also Ezekiel. 24. 13.
Deuteronomy. 29. 20 Exodus 34.7.

when he has done all, he is an unprofitable servant. Luke 17. 10. For when
he considers the lively, and quickening power of that immortal seed, the
labor of Gods husbandmen, nay of that great Husbandman him self, the dewes,
and seasonable waterings of his holy Spirit, the long time he has been under
this tillage, and compares with these the little fruit, which he has brought
forth, he will soon discover, and with great sorrow lament his barren heart,
and acknowledge the cursed soil of his unfruitful soul: yet may we comfort
our selves in that promise of Christ, that where there is any true fruit, John
15. 2.
that branch shall not be cut off, but purged that it may bring forth more
fruit. But how woeful is their condition, who when they have long enjoyed those
holy ordinances of God, continue still unmoved from their first estate, and
will be no other, then they were at first: How did the word find them?
ignorant of their duty to God, and men, themselves, and others. And how are
they now? more ignorant, and careless then ever, wilfully blind, and walking,
even desperately rejecting the light, which is offered unto them.

Oh! that we would consider our own ways in our hearts. Do we now give up
our selves to the service of Christ, in setting out some time for private
prayer, and meditating in the word of God, more conscionably observe the
Sabbath, and the times, and places of publik prayer, and hearing the word? Do
we now learn to detest intemperancie, and weyn our selves from excess? Have
the poor learned of the Apostle, let him that stole steal no more? Ephe. 4 28.
Are the rich instructed that they trust not in uncertain riches, but in the
living God? 1 Timothy 6. 17.
In a word, have we learned to speak every one the truth to his neighbor? to
think and speak the best? to bless, to do good, and that for evil? Alas
where do these fruits appear? Now br^thren, do not we know, and profess
the necessity of these duties? Has not the word plainly discovered them to
us? and even broke open our shut eyes, that we could not but discern them?
and yet what are we the better in our practice then before? Remember the
parable of the fig tree. Luke 13. 6. etc. Well may it be, that the Lord will a
little longer continue this means of salvation unto us; the word of his grace;
but if we continue in our barrenness, he will certainly cut off such
unprofitable branches, John 15. 2.
and not suffer his Church to be encumbred with us. But how deadly, and
desperate is their estate, who grow worse and worse? who turn the grace of God
to wantonness, and pervert the Gospel to their confusion, more sharpning
themselves to every evil way? The more means is used, the more they fall off
Esa. 1. 4. 5. and Ier. 9. 3. see the threatening which follows. Certainly this
is the condition of very many: They grow every day more shameless, and open in
the^r sins. Drunknesse, and that which follows it, whoredom, nay
blaspheming God, despising men after Gods image, lies, slanders, fraud,
oppression, and all manner of wickedness increases, and what can ensue but
destruction of soul, and body? be not deceived thy self wilt not endure a
ground, which after much cost, and labor brings forth nothing but beggerie.
Read therefore, and remember, and lay to heart what that great Husbandman has
determined concerning such grounds Heb. 6. 8.



Verily as some men (who seem ridiculous to the wise) though they have found
neither health, wealth, nor pleasure in their dwelling, yet are wedded, and
even glued to it, as being the place of their birth, and the house of their
Ancestors: so we may see men besotted in the world, and still cleaving to it,
not because they find any real delight, profit, or content in it; nay they
see every day more vanity in their labor, more trouble and vexation grow on
them, but they are borne and bred in it, and the custom of their Forefathers
carries them down in the stream of worldliness.

Look into the history of the old Testament, and we shall find, that while
Gods people claue unto this word, and departed not from it so long they
prospered, and enjoyed all the blessings of a Nation; but when they despised
this word, and rejected it, many afflictions and troubles consumed them; and
when they finally persisted in the contempt of it, they utterly perished and
were confounded. God had planted their souls by these rivers of ^ife, and
their bodies in a Land flowing with milk and honey, the glory of all lands.
Ezekiel. 20. 6 but when they l^ft the first, he cast them out of the second; and
sure is it, that we can live no longer in Parad^se, then we cleave unto the
Lord in his word: the word of God may justly plead with foolish men, as God
himself in his word; Mica. 6.3.
O ye people what have I done to you? Surely I brought thee out of Egypt, etc.
Me has God ordained as a storehouse, and full fountain, whence he will
supply all thy wants: would thou enjoy t^mporall necessaries? Mat. 6.33.
Seek first Gods kingdom, and all these things shall be cast in to thee. 2 Timothy 3. 15.
Want thou spiritual wisdom? I make wise to salvation. Esaias 50.4.
Art thou in sorrow? I am a word of refreshing to the w^ary Art thou heavy?
Psalm. 119.50. Psalm. 119 93.
I comfort thee. Art thou dull? I quicken thee. Deuteronomy. 32. 47.
Art thou dead in sin? I am thy life; I am an immortal seed 1 Pet. 1. 23.
Art thou in state of damnation, and know no way out of it? Romans 1. 16.
I am the power of God to salvation. Esaias 55.3.
If thou will plant thine ^are by me, I will bring in life to thy soul. Hear,
and thou shall live. I will bring in all blessings; Pro. 8.33 35.
blessed are they that hear me: but if thou sinnest against me, thou hate
thine own soul, and all that forsake me, love death.

Exhortation
Let us seat our souls by these waters of life; be not foolish: consider that
the wisdom of God calls thee as fast to this duty, as thine own flesh
from it: show now thy self to be a Christian in following Christ and his
advice. John 5. 39.
Search the Scriptures in them you think you have eternal life: if thou
deniest not all the world, and thine own self to follow Christ, Luke 14.26.
thou art none of his. If thou art therefore the servant of God, (as his
servants) cleave to his word Psalm. 119. 31. choose it as thine inheritance,
Psalm. 119. 111.

Remember for motives to provoke thee to this duty; 1. The practice of all wise
men, who if they may choose their dwelling, will look first to health, and
with it (if it may be) profit and pleasure. This affords thee all: and hence
is it, that never any forsook it, who were once thoroughly seated by it. 2. The
infinite commodities which we shall reap from thence, and many inconveniences
following upon the rejecting of it before mentioned. And remember how steadie a
comfort it will be to thy soul, as at all times, so especially in the evil
day, when thou can say with that holy Patient, Job 23.12.
I have not departed from the commandment of his lips, and have esteemed the
words of his mouth more then my appointed food. And as the Prophet, Ier.
15.15.16.
Remember and visit me, for thy words were found by me, and I did eat them,
and thy word was to me the joy and rejoicing of my heart.

Proposition 3.
Proposition
3. The Prophet affirms, that an ungodly man is not like a tree fruitful in
her season, and ever flourishing.

The words have been sufficiently opened before: we must remember, that by
fruit here is not only meant the increase of grace in this life, but of glory
also in the life to come. And indeed even these of grace differ from those of
glory rather in measure, then in kind: the first being yet in growth and
un^ipe, the other perfect and mature: surely the highest pitch of man's
happiness even in glory consists in his perfect conformity to the image of
God, by seeing him as he is: some other complements are added, but this is the
substance: and this estate of grace is but a conti^uall reforming, 2 Cor. 3.17.
and transforming more and more to this image, by beholding him in that mirror
of his word.

So the sense is; The Prophet affirms, that the ungodly man never attaines
either any true saving grace of Gods sanctifying Spirit in this life, or that
perfection of glory in the life to come; but whatsoever he see^es to have
falls and perishes.

The proof is here sufficiently cleared, Proof.
and may be further confirmed concerning grace; Psalm. 36. 1. and 10. 4. 13.
thus in duties to God, they have no fear of God, but are full of Atheism,
and contempt of God: for righteousness see Psalm. 10. 7. 8. 9. for glory see
Psalm. 9. 17. how far from flourishing and continuing in it, read Psalm. 37.
35. 36.

Grounds are here, as before; partly that knowledge which he had gotten in the
Sanctuary, partly love, desiring to turn men from death and destruction, to
life and salvation: the first gave him power to discern; the second will to
speak this truth.

Instruction.
1. It is altogether impossible, that ungodly or wicked persons such as follow
evil counsels, stand in the way of sinners, sit with scorners, neglect the
word and meditation in it, should be ^ruitfull in grace, those saving and
sanctifying gifts of Gods Spirit. This truth as it is evidently affirmed by the
Prophet, so has it a cloud of witnesses to ratify and confirm it: Es^y 26.10.
Let favor be showed to the wicked he will not learn righteousness: in the
land of uprightness he will deal unjustly, and will not behold the majesty
of the Lord. Ier. 13.23.
Can the AEthyopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots, Ephe. 2. 1.
then may you also do good, which are accustomed to evil. 1 Cor^ 2. 14.
They are dead in sins, cannot perceive, cannot repent, cannot believe. Romans
2.5.
Therefore the Lord compares them to such grounds, John 12. 39.
as either betray, resist, or choke the seed. Luke 8.


Reasons further to assure this point, are many and evident. For 1. These
graces do not, n^y cannot spring from nature, but are planted by Gods Spirit,
and called his fruits Gal. 5. 22. Now not the Spirit of God, but the Spirit of
rebellion works in the disobedient, that Prince of the air Ephe. 2. 2. And
certainly as the sower first with the plough cuts up the weeds by the root,
before he casts in any good seed into the land; so this great Husband man
mortifies in us these earthly members, before he creates the new man: he
therefore that continues still in his wickedness, cannot have this fruit of
the Spirit.

Secondly, True saving grace as it is planted, so is it nourished by the word
of God; It is a right hearing of the word, and receiving it with obedience,
which makes us fruitful: Romans 10.17.
Colos. 1. 5. 6. Faith comes by hearing. The word sanctifies, Ioh. 17. 17. and
indeed is the very seed of those fruits Luke 8. 11. Now then, as since the
curse which the Lord laid on the earth we find by experience, that our grounds
without tillage and seed bring forth no other fruit but weeds, and nettles,
briars, thorns, and thistles: so even reason will teach us, that since the
curse has devoured our Fathers, we cannot without this spiritual tillage and
seed of Gods word be fruitful in this harvest: for God has appointed seed for
every fruit, and although he can, yet will not work without it, where he gives
it: now we know that wicked persons have no love to this truth, hate it, reject
it, and will not yield their strength unto it.

Thirdly, The heart of a wicked man so far forth as it is wicked, is
incapeable of these fruits of holin^sse; for whereas all these graces consist
in subjection and conformity to the law of God, our flesh cannot be subject
to this Law, Romans 8.7. It is with our barren nature as with some hungry soiles,
they must be mended, nay new molded before they can be fruitful; that salt of
the Sanctuary must be cast into us, (as into the waters of Jericho) before we
can be healed. Look as that water received into the suspected wife, if she
were defiled, entered into her bowels and rotted her, if innocent, hurt her
not, but made her fruitful. Numb. 5. 27. 28. so this water which we drink in
the house of God, when we receive it into a polluted soul, works to our
destruction: but when we (cleared by our high Priest and by him justified)
receive it with a pure affection, it fills us with the blessed fruit of all
holiness.

Fourthly, Wheresoever is this spiritual life of holiness it washes and
clenses, it will not suffer any sinful wickedness to dwell peaceably in the
heart, much less bear rule or have dominion there. Gal 5.17.
The Spirit lusts against the flesh. The strong man is cast out by the
stronger, Luke 11. 22.
and his goods spoiled. They therefore who live in rebellion, under the
dominion of sin, where wickedness keeps quiet possession (as it is in all
ungodly persons) cannot possibly have any fruit of the Spirit. For as where
health and life by receipt of some good Physic begin to grow more strong,
there nature wrestling with the disease works to cast out the sick humor; so
when the death and resurrection of Christ are effectually ministered unto us,
this life of God being planted in us, struggles against this death of sin,
and will not cease till it have expelled this hellish infection.

Lastly, wickedness is that quality which is altogether contrary and
irreconcileably adverse to these fruits of the Spirit, and therefore
wheresoever predominant, keeps out and drives away that by which it self is
^tterly destroyed. Now in every wicked man sin has the upper hand, whence
they have their denomination; the kingdom of God cannot be settled in the
heart so long as sin and Satan have the scepter. But, as when Ierobam had
usurped the Kingdom over the t^n Tribes, he would not suffer the sons of
David, or any of their favorers to stay in his jurisdiction, and was jealous
of every occasion which might give them any hope or advantage to return to the
Scepter, and for this cause cast out the Levites and worship of God, least the
people by such means might have been drawn from his obedience: so where
wickedn^sse has dominion it keeps out the Kingdom of Christ, resists the word
of the Kingdom, and is jealous of every occasion which might bring in the
government and dominion of the Lord Jesus.

God in his word, and embrace the ways and counsels of the ungodly, should
enter into the glory of God. This the King of glory often avo^cheth. Mat. 7. 21.
Not they that say Lord, John 3. 5.
but they that do the will of the Father, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven. Rev. 21. 27.
Unless a man be borne again of water and of the Spirit he cannot enter
into Gods kingdom. There shall enter into it no unclean thing, etc. see also
1 Cor. 6. 9. 10^ Ephe. 5.5. 6. And our reason will manifestly confirm it,
especially helped by Gods Spirit. For; Hab. 1. 13.
First, God is of pure eyes and cannot behold wickedness, but is a consuming
fire to such. Deuteronomy 4. 24.
Look as in God is unspeakable mercy and grace, which has opened a way by
faith and repentance to this his kingdom through Jesus Christ, so likewise is
in him a most pure nature, infinitely averse, nay adverse to all sinful
uncleanness, a righteousness which cannot justify the wicked, and revenging
justice persec^ting the disobedient sinner, and eternally punishing unrepentant
wickedness. Thus he makes himself known to us Exodus 34.6.7. Nahum. 1.3.2
These. 1.7. 8. 9. Secondly; The wicked follow such guides, and go on in such
ways as are altogether opposite to this kingdom of God: they follow the
world, the flesh, and the Devil, carnal, worldly, and devilish men in the
ways of rebellion, which lead to destruction: thus they are here, and every
where described, and when they are called to the narrow gate, and the old and
good way, they desperately refuse to walk in it. Pro. 1. 31.
Now every one shall eat the fruit of his own ways. see Romans 3. 16. Pro 5.
22.
His own iniquity shall take the wicked, and he shall be holden in the cords
of his own sin. 3. The glory of Gods kingdom, which we shall enjoy with
him consists principally of righteousness, holiness, and joy of the holy
Ghost Romans 14. 17. And these in their perfection make up the especial part of
our blessed estate. But these are infinitely and unreconcileably contrary to
wickedness, and cannot possibly stand together. Fourthly, Whosoever enters
into the Kingdom of God must pass through Christ, who is the door, and the
way: neither is it possible to come to salvation by any other name, or means.
But the wicked have nothing in Christ, no part or portion; he prays nor for
the world, but for the faithful, John 17.9.17 22.24.
that they may be where he is, and the glory which God has given him, he
gives them: nay they have no faith, by which only they are entered into
Christ, seeing faith purifieth the heart. Lastly, Holiness is necessarily
required to that glorious vision of God, whereby consists our perfect happiness
not only as a condition, but as that nature which enableth us to see him. The
superior and transcendent nature cannot be perceived by the inferior; a
beast may see the shape, but not the reasonable nature of a man, whereby he
far surmounteth such creatures: a bodily eye neither does nor can perceive
spiritual substances, not so much as the soul which dwells with it, and in it,
and by which it sees whatsoever it sees. Now holiness is that nature of God
in man 2 Pet. 1.4. which gives him power to behold God in his divine nature:
and it is confessed that wicked persons are altogether void of holiness, Heb.
12. 14.
and that without holiness no man shall see God.


Ier^ 2. 13.
They forsake the fountain of flowing waters, to dig themselves pits which
will hold no water. Luke 8. 18.
Whosoever has (says our Savior) to him shall be given; nay, he shall have
abundance, and whosoever has not, from him shall be taken even that which he
seems to have: and therefore adds that caveat, Take heed how you hear. Thus
D^mas at length was discovered 2 Timothy 4. 10. As pits get in a little water in
the time of rain, which when hot weather comes, is instantly exhausted and
dried up: so these men take in some of the word, but not the fountain it
self, the whole word. Mat. 18. 7.
Necessarily must offenses come^ yea to this end, that those whom God approues
might be known, 1 Cor. 11. 19.
and others also might be laid open: certain it is that no hypocrite does
constantly delight in the whole word, or meditate in it, nor entirely give up
himself to it. For either because it is new and fresh, they rejoice in it for
a season: Mat. 13, 20. 21. John 3. 35. or because their hearts are parched and
tormented with the t^rrours of the Law, they will then desire this water of
life (as when men are in a fit of an Ague) but after the fit is off, nothing
regard it. Thus was it with Pharaoh, so with Zedikiah Ier. 37. 17. And that
little which they receive of it, they do not receive with sincere affection as
the word of God, but keep themselves free from it, where they list, yielding
some obedience in some particulars, nay indeed not at all obeying, but rather
following some natural inclinations of restraint put into them by God. Thus
do we see some of them at this day plainly uncasing themselves, and
professing Christ live like beasts. Others when they have for some sinister
ends (as Demas) followed the truth for a time, fall clean off revolting either
to Antichrist, or to the world in covetousness and notable profanenes. But
many as the Jews in John Baptist, can for a time rejoice in the Minister and
the word, while they are fresh; or as Herod, till they come cross of them; but
being not planted by the rivers of water, (only for some respects using a
while, but not constantly conversing with the Gospel) in a short space they
wither and fall from their profession.

Reproof.
1. Here first may those wilfully and even desperately blind persons be
censured, who being sunk in a deep security against the light of Gods word,
and their own reason, will persuade themselves and presume, that although they
grow old in their wickedness, and live in open, gross, and filthy sins, yet
have they faith as good as the best, as true a love to God as any of them all,
a strong hope of their salvation; they have as much fear of God and more then
these sermon-men, etc. Now as a man, who being to travail by night in a
dangerous way, where on the right and left hand are many steep rocks, and
fearful downefalls, should yet refuse a skillful guide with a lantern or
torch; and further because he would not see his danger, would shut his eyes and
wink, were but a fool, worthy to be begged, and no better then a mad man;
and though he should boast much of his skill and knowledge in the passage,
that he could blinde-fold, and in the dark go as safely, and come as secur^ly
to the end of the way, as he that journyed at midday with open eyes, this
bragging would make him but more ridiculous in the eye of any reasonable man:
such are these. God has given them the lantern of his word, and direction of
his most wise Spirit to guide them, the way is dark, if they stray but a
little on the right or left hand, they are dashed in pieces against the
stumbling stone, and fall into perdition: but they refuse the word, hearken not
to their own reason, but following their sense, like bruit beasts, wilfully
proceed till they fall headlong into everlasting destruction both of body and
soul: would they take the word along with them, they would soon perceive
their wilful error: That would tell them; Faith purifieth the heart. Acts 15
9.
Every man that has this hope purges himself, as he is pure. 1 John 3.3.
Purge out therefore the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump. 1 Cor. 5.7.
It will teach us; This is the love of God to keep his commandments. 1 John
5.3^
If any man love me, he will keep my word. John 14. 23.
The fear of the Lord is to hate evil. Prove 8. 13.


Our reason (if we would open the eyes of it) would show us, that when we
trust upon any for matters of great importance, and have hung our hopes upon
him, we will set our selves to please him, and will do nothing which may
kindle his anger, and breed disl^ke of us: that if we love and fear our
Prince, we will live in his subjection, and obedience to his laws: that if
our children love and fear us, they will observe what we command, and deny
their own wills to content us: Now what pleases our Lord? Mica. 6.7. 8.
Will he be pleased with thousands of rams? will he be pleased with saying
Lord, Lord, and calling our selves his servants? He has showed thee oh man,
what is good in his sight, and what the Lord requires of thee; surely to do
justly, to love mercy, and to humble thy self to walk with thy God, to do
the will of thy Father in heaven: Mat. 7. 21. That humble and subject denying
thy self, (that is) thine own wisdom to b^e governed by his word, thy lusts
to be ruled by his will, this is that which God delights in. Now then, when
men will fol^ow their own conceits, and deceits in matter of religion, without
the word; when they will walk after their own hearts, when they cannot be
brought to forsake so much as open, gross, and palpable sins, known, and
confessed, but still walk in them; is this to walk with God? or can any man
who has any light from God in his word, nay from his own reason, not see here
his wicked and deceitful heart that persuades him all is well, when he is yet
in the very bond of iniquity and gall of bitterness.

God: There is no question, they think, and say, of all this; well: what is
the ground of this so strong confidence? Certainly it is a Castle in the air,
without any foundation; but only a presumptuous conceit of an idle brain: Had
the Spirit planted in them this persuasion, the flesh would lay battery to it,
and labor to weaken it, objecting an hundred fears, and shaking it with
wavering: nay the Spirit also would make this advantage of the enemy, to use
more diligence to make their calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.8.9. 10.
by fortifying that which is weak, and adding grace unto grace. Luke 11. 21.
But this is the device and work of Satan, that strong man, who having
possession keeps all in his peace. The Devil having got them in this his
cradle of presumptuous security, rocks them in sleep of sin by this
pleasing dream: and were their eyes never so little open, that one spark of
spiritual light might enter, they could not but see how they are besotted: For
ask them; Is not eternal life the gift of God? They cannot deny it. And on
whom does he bestow it, but on his faithful servants? And how do we serve
him, Luke 2. 74.75
but in holiness and righteousness? Do you thus serve him? Is swearing,
profaning the Lords day by doing our own will, neglecting, nay despising the
word, Sacraments, prayer public and private, are these any parts of holiness?
Is lying, railing, cursing, spightfull dealing, stealing, etc. any part of
righteousness? Do you not live in these or some of these sins? do you
keep your mouth as with a bridle? fear an oath? detest a slander as well as a
slanderer? Do you tremble and rejoice in the word? do you continue in prayer?
etc. Here they have no other refuge, but those miserable fig-leanes, which
cannot hide their nakedness. Are you (say they) without your faults? we
cannot be Saints on earth, etc.

To reply to these poor shifts. No man lives without sin, but thousands even
all the faithful liu^ not in sin, they serve not sin in the lusts of it,
Romans 6.14.
sin has not dominion over them; they follow it not with greediness, the
least sin of infirmity, even deadnes and dullness of spirit in Gods service is
a burden intolerable, and a body of death to them, much loathed and lamented:
they neither make a practice of any known sin, nor defend any committed: they
excuse not themselves by others faults, but accuse, judge, and condemn
themselves every hour in the sight of God and men also when there is just
occasion. Understand then thou vain man, that the God of glory opens his
kingdom to those, Rom 27.8.
that seek glory by continuance in well-doing, howsoever they are weak and
imperfect: but to those that disobey the truth, and obey unrighteousness,
shall be indignation and wrath. And know there is as much difference between
thee and many Christians, in whom there is yet much remainder of sin, as
between a day in which are many clouds, and night where there is never a
star: between life in an Infant, yet weak, and death in a rotten carcass.

Again; can thou not be a Saint? but know that God gives this glory to none
but Saints. It is the inheritance of the Saints, Colos. 1. 12. None shall see
God without sanctity. Heb. 12. 14. All the members of Christ's Church are
sanctified, and Saints, 1 Cor. 1. 2. Thou art not chosen to salvation but
through the sanctification of the Spirit. 2. These. 2. 13. and elected to the
portion of sanctity, before the inheritance of glory. Ephe. 1. 4. Oh, but the
mercy of God is infinite; True: But alas! what claim have thou to his mercy,
who go on still in wickedness, and wilt not be reclaimed? Those that fear
the Lord, mercy embraces them on every side: but those that provoke God with
their vanities, forsake their mercy. Io^a. 2. 8.

Proposition 4.
Proposition
The Psalmist affirms, that the wicked shall not prosper in their actions.

The words have before been sufficiently unfolded. The proof is also plain,
and very often repeated. Proof.
Observe but that one Psalm. 37. and especially in it the 9. 10. 14. 15. 17. 20.
35. 36. 38. verses.

The grounds likewise have before been delivered; Grounds.
Read the 73. Psalm, wherein the Prophet lays down the means whereby he
came to know the misery of wicked men, whose estate before he had so much
admired.

Instruction.
1. Howsoever to a carnal eye and sense, the estate of some wicked men seems
glorious, yet as well reason, as much more the word of God, will openly
discover their misery and woeful condition. Thus the Wiseman speaking by a
far greater (even the infinite) wisdom of God testifies. Eccles. 8.12. 13.
Though God prolongs a sinners days, yet it shall not be well with the wicked,
he shall be like a shadow because he fears not before God. See Esaias 65. 20.
The whole chapter almost of Levit. 26. from the 14. to the 40. verse, and
Deuteronomy. 28. from the 16. to the end, stand up as witnesses at large to this
truth. Compare with those threatenings the issue following: Lay down that
commination first, which we find pronounced against this people when they had
asked a King 1 Samuel 12. 25. Read the story of Gods people and observe their
prosperity, when enjoying religious Princ^s they kept the Ordinances of God,
and squared their practice to his laws: and the great calamities which fell
upon them, when they by the mis-leading of wicked Kings, fell off from the
worship commanded by God, to follow their own devises. What infinite
mischiefs and vexations oppressed them in the times of Rehoboam, Iehoram,
Ahaz, Manasseh, and such other? When the ten Tribes fell away from the true
worship of God, and polluted themselves with the Idols of Jeroboam; mark how
the Lord followed them with continual scourges, grievous troubles and
afflictions, until they were utterly consumed. Do but compare 1 Chronicles. 21.5.
with 1 King. 20. 15. And how easily shall we there see, how the body of this
people stricken by God with an hectike fever, or consumption, languished and
decreased, and at length became a very small and poor people. And no marvel
if they soon decayed, for in one battle against Judah they lost five hundred
thousand chosen men. 2 Chronicles. 13. 17.
Compare with this, that spoken in particular of a wicked King, Ier. 22. 30.
and 2 Chronicles. 24. 20. Reason also will evidently confirm this truth.

For 1. Prosperity consists not (as we have seen) in any particular
success of some one, or m^re ends; but of that general end of all our
particular actions: and maine scope of all our endeavors: which if it be
frustrate, makes us the more unhappy. For the more we have prospered in some
intentions, and so now accounted our selves certain, and almost in possession
of our wishes, the more grief will ensue, when we see our selves (contrary to
our hopes and expectation) carried back again, and now farther off then at
first. Now we know that blessedness is the supreme end of all our labors;
which no wicked man can possibly obtain, as being neither to be obtained in this
life, where the best estate of man is full of vanity ( Psalm. 39. 5.) and much
vexation: and less in the other life, where they have no hope.

2. Prosperity and success cannot but in reason proceed from one of these
originals, either God, Fortune, or our own wit and counsel: Now for the
counsels of men the Lord evidently and frequently witnesses, Psalm. 9. 15.16.
and 7. 14.15. 16.
that the foot of wicked Counselors is taken in their own net, and are
snared in the works of their own hands: when they have conceived mischief,
and traveld with iniquity, they bring forth a lie: for he thinks to entrap
others, but he falls into the ditch and pit which himself has made, and his
mischief returns upon his own head. As for that Idol and vain name of
Fortune, reason will hiss it out of the stage of the world, and all action.
God then only gives success and prosperity, who hating the wicked, will not,
nor indeed can suffer them to prosper; howsoever he may in his infinite
wisdom give them leave to enjoy some success in their affairs, to their
destruction and his glory.

3. Lastly, reason can see the unhappiness of those, who having restless
designs and projects all their day^s, at the end of their lives cannot but see
all their labor vain and frustrate. Prove 10. 2.
The treasures of wickedness profit nothing.

It will not be unfit to insert here that discourse of Cineas an heathen
Orator. For when Pyrrhus King of Epirus was solicited by some people of
Italy, to be the head of their league against the Romans, while he sat
musing on these affairs, Cineas his great Favorite came in upon him, and
desiring to be acquainted with his thoughts, to which he was never made a
stranger: Pyrrhus gives him notice of this embassage, and yet his purpose was
to join with this people against the Romans, and doubted not but to prevail.
The Orator demands if he should have the better, what would he do then; He
answered, that then Sicilie, and Sardinia would be soon at his command. The
other consented, but still ask^d, what then should be done; Hereplies, that
th^n Afric could not hold out, but might easily be conquered. But Cineas
still pursues him with the old question, what he would do then; He again
answered, that when all these Countries were subdued, Graecia would soon be
brought under his yoke. But being again demanded what he purposed to do
then, he apprehending the Orators intention and smiling replied; Then Cineas,
we will rest and be merry. The Orator wisely answered, that may you do now,
without all this danger, and trouble to your self and others.

Certainly this Heathen by the light of reason easily saw, and excellently
taught the miserable folly of wicked men, who projecting beyond the Moon, and
vexing themselves and thousands others by their wicked ent^rprises, at length
with long fishing catch a frogge, and attain no more, then what they might
have long before enjoyed, with less labor and trouble to themselves and
others. Esaias 57. 20.
The wicked are like the raging sea, that cannot rest, and yet when his breath
departs, Psalm. 146.4.
and he returns to his earth, (if not before) all his thoughts perish.

Gods wisdom in the word, are very foolishnes, and nothing else but idle
dreams of a sottish brain; Esaias 29. 16.
your turning of devises shall it not be esteemed as the potters clay. 1 Cor.
3.19.
The wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. Prov^ 12. 3.
A man cannot be established by wickedness. 1 King. 11.38. 1 King. 12. 26. 27.28.
That devise of Jeroboam, refusing the advice of God by Abyah, not suffering
the people to carry their sacrifices to Jerusalem, and there to worship, 2 Chronicles. 11. 14. 15.
thrusting the Priests and Levites out of their possession, as favorers of the
kingdom of David, and with them Gods worship; was in the sight of man sound
policy, but being opposite to the word, was, and so proved the notablest folly
in the world, and wrought the contrary end, not the establishing his house and
kingdom as he intended, but the utter subversion of it. 1 King. 21.
The subtle plot of Iezabel for compassing Naboths vineyard (who by painting
her face, had learned to color her foul murder with shows of piety)
cloaking perjurie and blood under the veil of religion, fasting, and Gods
honor, carried a good show in the eye of man, and prospered in the immediate
end, but not in that which she pu^posed: ir was the ruin of herself and the
whole family. Achitophels counsel was very crafty, but it snared his own
neck in an halter. Nay even some of Gods children when they have forgot
themselves, and leaving this rule of piety, searched out wicked policies, have
been brought to much trouble by it; as Abraham endangered his wives chastity
by his equivocation. David heaped up many mischiefs on himself and his family
by covering his adultery with murder; and Iehosaphats politic marriage for
combining those two sister Kingdoms, proved the greatest affliction that ever
that Kingdom tasted. Neither is it possible it should be otherwise: for First,
in all motions the third follows the second, and the second the first: And in
the heavenly revolutions, though the spears of the stars in their proper
motion bend from west to east, yet because the first mover is swiftly carried
from east to west, these also being drawn along by it in their daily motion,
proceed from east to west, though in their yearly motion they are moved
contrary: so howsoever the hearts of men, being prone to all wickedness, in
their own intentions are inclinable to all mischief, yet because the most just
God sits at the stern, and directs all the enterprises of all creatures, and
carries all their actions to his own ends, hence is it, that they cannot
accomplish their own purposes, nor bring their devises to effect. Secondly;
Certain is it that the Judge of all the world cannot do any thing unjustly,
nor suffer evil; Pro. 21.39.
Now there is no understanding or counsel against the Lord, therefore though
many devises are in the heart of man, Pro. 19^ 21.
yet Gods counsel shall stand. And it is ce^taine that God resists the
^roud, 1 Pet. 5. 5. musters all his forces, and stands in battle-array against
them, as it is in the original: see also Esaias 8. 9. 10. and Psalm. 9. 15. 16^
especially Psalm. 33. 10. 11. when all the world, Princes, and people banded
themselves, and assembled against the Lord and against his Christ, the Lord
derided all their counsel, broke all their opposition, Psalm. 2.4 5.6.
and in spite of their resistance set up his King upon Sion: not by an army,
or by strength, but by his Spirit, choosing the foolish, and weak things, Zech
4.6.
even a few fishers, armed with no other weapons, but the net of his word
(contemned as folly among men) to confound the wise and strong, and to bring
every thought in subjection to Christ. Thirdly: As is the s^ed, such must be
the fruit; if then the counsel be evil, the effect and success of it cannot
be good to any, and commonly is worst to him that conceiues it. Gal. 6. 7. 8.
Hos. 8.7.
He that sowes to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption. They that
sow the wind, shall reap the whirl wind: so that even the experience of all
men has brought it to a proverb, Evil counsel heaps most evil on the
Counselor. Witness that infamous conspiracy of Papists, the most bloody,
crafty, malicious, and every way devilish counsel that ever the world heard,
which though so long carried with admirable secrecy amongst so many, yet was
the ruin of the Complotters, and the everlasting shame of that Satanicall
Synagogue: who have in an high measure justified it, in canonizing an hand so
died in blood, and so deep in this savage enterprise, and have fitted a
strawie Saint to a religion of stubble; yet thus far may he well be called
a Martyr, that he is, and ever shall be a witness to this truth, namely, that
the whore of Rome is bloody, impudent, and ashamed of nothing; and how well
Antichrist agrees with Satan, who was a murderer from the beginning.


Job 21. 7. 8. etc.
for wicked men prosper in these things, Psalm. 73 12.
yet no wicked man has here prosperity, Ier. 5. 28.
as here is affirmed, and has been many ways proved. For as man consists
as well of soul as body, so his prosperity is as well of the soul, as body.
3. Job. 2. Nay because the soul is the most principal part; hence prosperity
of body, without that of the soul cannot make a man prosperous. A man of
excellent stature, proportion, and beauty, but a fool is no excellent man.
And as in the body if some limbs are well formed, others deformed, he is not
said to be of a comely body; so this lesser prosperity without the other is
nothing. Prosp^ritie therefore esp^cially consists in the welfare of the
spirit, when it is in Christ who is the life and salvation of the soul, then
it prospers when ^t grows in grace, when it increases in spiritual riches,
then that person prospers: but indeed a man who has Christ, wants nothing, for
he is all in all; but he that is not in Christ, is in want of al things;
everything being but a snare to him, see Psalm. 69. 22. Joseph indeed was a
prosperous or luckie man, because first his soul was knit to God, and so God
blessed him in other things. Surely he that enjoys Christ, all other things
make up his prosperity, even poverty and any evil of this life.

Reproof.
1. Here is rebuked that folly of men, who desiring to prosper, yet wilfully
take the way which leads to destruction, and turn out of that path, in which
God has promised to give them what they seek: see Esaias 30.15.16. The in^inite
examples in the word, and experience by which we cannot but see how miserable
the estate of wicked men is, nothing moves them, never opens their eyes to the
light of the word, or their own reason; only led like beasts by their blind
sense, as they esteem him happy who has the world at will; so they account
him miserable, who is at any time streitned in temporal blessings. This is
with them the only blessedness, that they may do and have what they list,
this the only misery, that they want their will, and cannot have to satisfy
their lusts. Thus they do not only condemn the generation of the just, and
the children of God, but the only begotten son as miserable, and ^xalt the
wicked and such as contemn God: yea most foolishly beguile and betray their
own souls into the hand of the world, to which they have wholly given up
themselves. Certainly this is the disposition of carnal men, falsely called
Christians, that never thinking of the providence of God, supplying every
creature, they are carried down in the violent stream of worldly lusts, and
plunging their souls in the cares of it, make it all their study, spend all
their time, and consume their life to provide and lay up for themselves and
others that belong unto them. As for the other life, they dream it comes of it
self without seeking, and that it will meet or overtake them at the end; And
building upon an imagina^ie mercy of God, such as they conceit, not such as
God has expressed in his word, think they cannot miss of immortality and
glory, specially if they do not live in open, gross, and palpable sins.

Gods wisdom must be reproved; Look to all kinds of people, we shall soon
perceive this Atheism in contempt of Gods counsel and wis^dome, to be spread
over all sorts, as Statesmen who frame their policies according to the rule of
that wretched Machiavell, and count it a silly thing to take their direction
from God in his word, or from the practice, rules, or axioms of state,
delivered there in the examples of David, Solomon, etc. to whose counsels if we
should compare the policies of this age, they will easily appear, especially
in the success, to be but apish toys, and even ridiculous shadows of
policy. Who could think it possible, that men professing Christianity,
should refuse to take advice from Christ in his wo^d, and should follow the
practice and rules of Master Nic. Machiavell? If we look to Scholars, even
those who have given up their names to Christ in the Ministry, how many shall
we see drowned in humane learning? But howsoever no man will d^ny that helps
of the tongues, art, and such studies may be, and are in their measure very
profitable and needful; yet that these should take up not only the greatest
time in the study, but all the pulpit, is so absurd in reason, but especially
such a paradoxe in divinity; and above all, such a dishonor to the Spirit,
that certainly it discovers much Atheism, and contempt of Gods wisdom.

For even among us (to reserve their place for the Papists) the infinite and
ambitious allegations of Fathers, Schoolmen, Rabbis, Poets, and all manner
of humane testimonies, and especially with all this, the rare and thin
citation of the word, shows at the best much foolish ostentation, and little
desire of setting up the cross of Christ in the hearts of the hearers:
certainly he is blind and has little experience, who has not observed that
studies of Divines entered upon Schoolmen especially, and other humane (though
Ecclesiastical) Authors, but without any constant meditation in the word, and
a ground taken from thence, has been the Mother and Nurse of so much error,
Popery, Arminianisme, and such sects. Thus is it with the meaner sciences.
Every Tradesman has his mysteries, so contrary to the mystery of godliness,
that every one may see there is a general departure from God and his wisdom;
and every idle brain preferres his own wit as a better help to prosper,
then the rule of God. This folly is the more sottish, because none of them dare
deny, but that God is more wise then man, that his providence is over all to
reward every man according to his works.

Exhortation
3. Oh! that men would therefore be persuaded to decline those bypath, in
which seeking prosperity, they are sure to miss it, and indeed so seeking,
eschew and fly that which they seek; and to search for it in those ways
where it will infallibly meet them. Art thou a Statist, and stand before
Kings? advise with that great King, prefer not Machiavel before Solomon, nor
the infamous practices of profane and miserable Borgi^, before the prosperous
and succeeding counsels of blessed David. Ar^ thou a Scholar, and aymest at
the Ministry? enter thy studies in the word, and learn to be acquainted
with the Scriptures from a child, so shall thou prosper in divine knowledge;
and follow rather Paul, the scholar of Christ, then the school of Antichrist.
Be not such a fool as to lay the grounds of divine knowledge in humane
Authors. Art thou a Tradesman? whatsoever thou art, know that fleshly wisdom
is enmity to God, that frauds, lies, and worldly practices shall not prosper:
assure thy self, Pro. 21.6.
that gathering treasures by a deceitful tongue, or any other evil means, is
vanity tossed to and fro by them that seek death. Arm thy self against
worldly and fleshly wisdom, by a serious and frequent meditation; Mat. 6.33.
1. of Gods promise: Seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness,
and all these things shall be added unto you. 1 Timothy 4. 8.
Godliness is profitable unto all things, having the promise of the life that
now is, and that is to come. 2. Remember the infinite wisdom and providence
of God, who cannot but compass his ends. 3. The active power of the Almighty,
Psalm. 135. 6.
who does whatsoever he will in heaven and earth. Mat. 24.35.
4. His infallible truth that cannot lie or deceive. Heaven and earth shall
pass, but not one word that he has spoken.

Proposition 5.
In the second part of this verse, the Prophet sets down the cursed estate of
the wicked, by a plain but excellent comparison of chafe, driven with the
wind, where the proposition is evident, namely;

(...)roposition
The Spirit, and the Prophet by the Spirit affirms the wicked to be as chafe
driven with the wind.

For opening the words, consider what is this chafe, and what is the
resemblance between the chafe and the wicked, and also what answers in this
comparison to the wind.

1. This word chafe does not signify the husk covering the grain, of which
though there is not much, yet is some use; but that dust, which by beating of
the corn rises from the chafe, those a^omes (as we may call them) or motes of
the chafe, which are altogether unprofitable, and which we fan out and cast
away.

2. But what is the resemblance between them?

Not to be curious. 1. The chafe grows up in the same field, and is brought
home into the same barn with the wheat: so wicked hypocrites are in the same
visible Church, and are mingled in the Congregation of the Saints.

2. The chafe and wheat are both beaten with the same flaile, and the wheat
purged by it, but the chafe turned into dust and filth: so the wicked and
saithfull are partakers of the same gracious word, and rods; and the Saints are
indeed refined, and cleansed by it, the wicked grow worse and worse.

3. This chaffe-dust is profitable no way, noisome many ways; it hurts our
eyes, spreads our garments with filth: thus there is no good to be reaped from
wicked persons, but much hurt: they will hinder us in our light, they will draw
us to defile our garments.

4. Every Husbandman will separate in his time the chafe from the wheat: so
will Christ make a separation between the Goats and the sheep.

5. Lastly, in that separation the chafe is destroyed and consumed; so in that
day of the Lord the wicked shall be burned with unquenchable fire.

3. The wind in this similitude is compared to the judgments of God, either
in this, or in the other life: in this, afflictions and troubles without and
within; in the other, their final condemnation.

So that the sense is; Howsoever wicked men are in the Church, partakers of the
same ordinances of God, yet receive they no profit by them, but become
altogether unprofitable and noisome, therefore God will in his time separate
them, and cast them into utter perdition of body and soul.

Proof.
Proof: See Psalm. 35. 5. Esaias 17. 13. Ier. 15.7. Mat. 13. 12.

Grounds.
Grounds are 1. In God; He sees not as man sees, but beholdes the heart; 1 Samuel 16 7.
and therefore that which is highly esteemed by man is despised by God. Luke
16.15.


2. In the Prophet; his knowledge gotten in the Sanctuary, which we have so
often mentioned.

Spirit to chafe, or dust of chafe, so in that whole chapter Ezekiel
resembled to the wood of an unfruitful vine, which cannot so much as make a
pin to hang up any vessel: and by our Savior to a tree that bringing no fruit,
cumbers the ground. Luke 13.7.
They are altogether unprofitable Romans 3 12. In respect of God they bring to
him nothing but dishonor. Ezekiel. 36. 20. Romans 2. 24. In respect of any country,
they are the very banes of common wealths; not only by infecting whole
countries with corrupt manners, as scabby sheep, but plucking the wrath of God
upon it. Ier. 5.7.9. Thus wicked Princes, and namely, Jeroboam brought infinite
plagues upon that people. Joshua 7.
One Achan can trouble all Israel, pernicious are they to the families in which
they live, as was that Achan, and infinite others, nay to their own both
souls, and bodies. Pro. 11. 5. 6. The very earth as it was at first, so since
is often cursed for them. Esa. 24 5.6. Psalm. 107.34. The very earth is defiled
by them and i^ sick of them, till it has spned them out Levit. 18. 25^ 27.
28. It is also apparent in reason; For 1. Who ca^ think it possible, that he
should be good to any other, who is altogether evil in himself, and for
himself? or should bring any profit to any, who is wholly unprofitable? 2. The
curse, and vengeance of God cannot but continually follow him, and wait upon
him, that as a blessing comes in with a righteous Joseph, so with wicked Ahab,
and his society a curse may come to a good Iehosaphat. 2 Chronicles. 19. 2.3.
3. As their company is very infectious, so our nature very catching.

God: neither indeed is there any thing, which justly breeds, and bringes
contempt upon a man but sin, neither any man, or creature so base, and
contemptible as a sinful, and wicked creature. Look as brass, or copper
mingled with gold, tin, or lead with silver makes it base, so that it is
rejected, and will not go current: so does the wickedness of a man, or
nation: see. Ier. 6.28. 29. 30. Ezekiel. 22. 18. Psalm. 119. 119. They are
reprobate silver, brass, tin dross. Nay even holy men (how much more the
most holy God) can account wicked men vile, and despise them in that respect.
Psalm. 15.4. Hence are they called Bastards. Heb. 12. 8. and continually
compared to the most abject, and loathsome creatures. To dogs, and swine 2.
Pet. 2.22. to Serpents Psalm. 58.4. their heart to a raging sea, foaming out
mire. Esa. 57. 20 their throat is an open sepulcher belching out stink, and
rottenness: Psalm. 5. 9. Nay indeed to very dung. Mal. 2. 3. and mere
corruption Psalm. 5. 9. Evident reason will further confess, and confirm this
truth For baseness is nothing else but a degeneration, or fall from that
excellency, which is native to any creature. Thus coins are said to be
embased: or men when they are cast down from any dignity, or honor, which
formerly they enjoyed. Now wicked men are wholly degenerate from that exellencie
of their creation, being borne Sons of God, and dejected themselves under not
only other creatures, but the basest of creatures, Satan, and worse then any
creature, Sin it self: being once the rulers over all the creatures, and now
become vassals to their own filthy, and noisome lusts. In which regard it is
manifest, that every creature (the wicked Spirits only excepted) is far more
noble then a wicked man. Certainly in the ^oad, and Serpent, there remains
yet that sense and life in which they were created: But man is altogether dead
and rotten, in respect of that life of grace, in which he was made, having lost
not only the noble sense of spiritual seeing, but that necessary sense also
of feeling: altogether senseless in that life of holiness, in which he was
formed at first, and conformed to God. 2. No circumstantiall accident, or
quality, but such as are inherent can debase, or vilify any substance. Gold
were it covered all over with dirt, not the less precious: but any mixture of
baser metal makes it of less worth. Thus neither poverty, contempt of men,
weakness of body, are any just causes of despising, in all which estates we
read of heathens honorable in the eyes of their coaevals, and many Christians
glorious in the eyes of God, and men: But sin being once rooted in man, is
such an inherent quality, as eats out of him whatsoever is perfectly good, as
holiness: perverting the best natures to most evil; It strips the body of that
glory, and maiesticall beauty in which it was framed, and covers it with
shamfull nakedness. It robs the soul of all those glorious endowments, with
which it was gorgeously apparelled by the Creator, and brings upon it a most
miserable poverty, and loathsome deformity. Certainly as wilful rebellion
against an earthly Prince, taints the blood, and abases the whole stock,
making them of noble vile, of rich poor, so that they instantly lose all
civil privilege, and preferment, so the treason, and rebellion against the
King of heaven by sin, casts man down from that height of dignity, which
he enjoyed in his service, and only by his favor, to the lowest, and basest
degree of all the creatures.

by man; yet the judgments of God will surely find, and single them out, and
bring them in due time to utter confusion. This is here somewhat darkly in a
comparison, but very strongly confirmed, when they are resmbled to chafe
before the wind: for as the dust of chaff^ lies safely with the good grain,
while it is not moved and stirred, but when it is fanned, or the wind let in,
it presently is scattered and pe^isheth: so the wicked in the day of peace,
till the Lord arise^h to judgment, lie secure, and seem to prosper, but when
the Lord takes his fan into his hand, and purges his floor, how suddenly
are they consumed? Read Ier. 30. 23. 24. Amos 9. 9. 10. Esaias 41. 15. 16. Hosea
13. 3. Psalm. 92^6.7. and 140. 11. Look as dogs pursuing an Hare, or Dear,
follow incessantly, and though they fly from one starting hole to another, yet
never give over till they take and destroy them: so shall the judgments of God
pursue the wicked, and though they seem to escape some evils, yet shall they
certainly be followed till they are utterly consumed.

Thus when Ahab had sold himself to do wickedly; first a long drouth and
famine finds him out, starts, and pursues him: when he had escaped that, the
sword follows him: when there through the mercy and long suffering of God
calling to repentance, he had gotten the better, and now by wicked policy had
settled his kingdom, and made way to his tyranny in the blood of Naboth, the
fearful threatenings of God overtake him, and fill his soul with fright and
horror: when he now through a fained repentance had winded out of that
misery, yet the vengeance of God so closely hunted him, that in spite of all
warnings, he falls by the sword of the Syrians, the dogs lick up his blood,
and eat up all his family. Thus Iehoram son of Iehosaphat (2 Chronicles. 21.)
being a wicked King, is first put up by the Edomites, then hunted by the
Arabians, lost his goods, his sons, his wives: lastly a sore and tedious
disease overtakes him, and at length pulls out his very guts with grievous
torments: and the reason (a most necessary and infallible cause of this effect)
is that justice and office of God, being Judge of all the world.

Examination.
2. Take hence a sure trial of thy estate. Thou art borne under the Covenant,
and in the Church; but know the chafe springs and ripens with the grain: thou
art a member of the visible Church, the chafe is brought in with the corn:
thou enjoyest the means of eternal life, the word, Sacraments, rods in
afflictions; but the chafe and wheat are beaten and sifted together. But
therefore passing by such common works, which agree as well to the reprobate
as to the godly, examine and try how these ordinary means work upon thee, and
what effect thou see proceed from them. The flaile beats out the corn, and
the fan purifies it: if then thou art one of those, whom that great
Husbandman will gather into his Granaries, the word of God shall separate thee
from the heap of worldly men; and it, together with the fatherly chastisements
of God, shall continually purge and cleanse thy heart from the sinful dross
which is in it. If then thou find the word, and these rods thus to work on
thee, thou art safe: Do thou then every day see more cause of dislike in thy
self, in thy ways? learnest to abhor thy self, deny thy self, judge thy
self? Do those chastisements of God weane thy heart from the vanities of this
life, and the flatteries of this world? so that thou accountest all things dung
in comparison of the knowledge of Christ, his death and resurrection working in
thee the death of sin, and life of grace. These are good signs of life and
health: when the wind blows, do thou not fli^ out of the floor, and
embracest the world? Look to thy self, and be not deceived with th^se
ordinary notes common to good and bad.

the dust of chafe, then the corn: and will not be persuaded to come out of
that cursed condition. How many are there who flatter themselves in their
ways, until their abominable wickedness be found out by the judgments of
God? They give up their hearts to the world, follow the sinful profits and
pleasures of it, and will not be persuaded to delight in the word of God, or
the good way pointed out by that word; as long as they feel not the curse,
(and alas how should they feel, being past all feeling?) they despise the
threatenings of God, and lie down in their mire, which not only fills them
with filth, and prepares them to endless misery, but defiles the land, and
brings a curse upon all that are near them.

Gods Spirit, Pro. 14. 7.
Depart from the foolish man, when thou perceivest not in him the lips of
knowledge, they are deaf and stop their ears. Thus we see many ignorant
souls continue in Babylon, till they partake of her plagues, and bring an old
house (as we say, and they felt) upon their heads. And many simple people
frequent idolatrous houses, of Papists, till at length by Gods just judgment
they are snared. Will men yield to the voice of God, Pro, 23.20. and 4.14.15.
Keep not company with drunkards? Do they presently obey the heavenly
warning? do they not despise these admonitions not of man but of God; ask
them, what profit have you by such company? what credit? do you not sometimes
fall into many inconveniences temporal and spiritual by this society? Can
you be in the fellowship of the Saints, and of God through Christ, when thus
your heart cleaves to wicked sinful persons? Have you any right to that holy
Hill, when you make much of a man vile, unprofitable, and noisome, and the
righteous is contemned in thine eyes? Psalm. 15. 4. nothing awakes them.

3. That stiff unbelief of heart resisting this evident Wisdom of God
witness to us, Pro. 12. 26.
the righteous man is more excellent then his neighbor: do we seal to this
testimony, that it is true? when we hear the Lord speak so contemptuously of
wicked persons, that they are dogs, swine, dross, filth, corruption; do our
hearts answer, truth Lord, and humbling our souls with that Cananite, confess
our selves no better in nature, so abhor our own filthiness, and
uncessantly bless that glorious Savior, who has washed, cleansed, and changed
us to his glorious image? Oh! how few stand thus affected? witness our common
behavior: for are we down the wind, straightened in a low, base, and
despicable condition, and are there any means offered to rise, and prefer
ourselves? who does not instantly apprehend and pursue them, be they difficult,
be they dangerous, be they almost desperate, venturing our lives by sea, by
land to attain to a better estate, though in hope only? we will often put our
lives in venture, when our hopes are but in peradventure. Are we now got up
unto some comfortable or honorable place? do we know that by want of such or
such observances we shall quickly fall again; but stand and increase by
performance of some no hard service: who neglects it? What Farmer observes not
a good Landlord? what Courtier doubles not his diligence to a bountiful
Prince; that he may still enjoy his favor? But now turn your eye upon the
behavior of Christians; the Lord tells us, thou art as base in thy nature as
the earth thou treadest on, as the dung thou scornest to tread on: it is sin
makes thee thus base and abject. Desire thou the true honor and dignity of
my kingdom? know they certainly attain, that constantly seek it: Romans 2. 7.
10.
If by continuance in well-doing thou seek glory, honor, and immortality,
thou shall reap eternal life. To every one that does good, shall be honor
and glory: but to the contentious, and disobedient to the truth, Romans 2. 8.9.
and obeying unrighteousness, shall be indignation and wrath: Tribulation and
anguish upon every soul that does evil. Now when so gracious means are
offered, who takes hold of them? who gives up his soul to obedience of this
truth? who withdrawes his heart from the subjection of sin? by this we
manifest our gross unbelief and contempt of God, and his word.

God denounced in his word, till they over-take and attach us. Is God gracious?
Jude 4.
we abuse his grace to wantones. Is he patient? Eccles. 8. 11.
we abuse his patience to hardness, and encouragement to sin. Is he silent
expecting our return? Psalm. 50.21.
we abuse his silence to blasphemy, and think him like our selves: nothing
moves us till we are arrested by the judgments of God. Oh how far are we
from that melting heart of good Josiah? we can hear thunders of the law with
less fear then boys their own squibs and crackers; we can see the rods of
God on every hand of us, and ^^ver fear the same punishment, although we are
even in the same, or some worse sin.

Exhortation
Oh then let us be stirred up to abhor this sinful vanity, which turns us
into chafe, and exposes us to certain perdition. Say, oh say to thy soul:
Do thou carefully provide against disgrace and contempt of this world, do
thou cast about and find out an hundred devises to under-prop my credit and
dignity on earth? and what? will thou suffer me to fall into eternal shame,
and confusion? It is sin, it is only sin which can debase me; poverty,
reproaches, despising of men cannot vilify me, but in the sight of fools; but
rather enobles me in the sight of God, Angels, good (nay even heathen) men.
Bend then all thy forces against sin, and never let that find any grace or
favor in thine eyes, which heaps upon thee all disgrace and scorn in the
eyes of God. Destroy it which else certainly will bring thee to destruction.
Use therefore carefully the means; Let that sword of the Spirit be ever
drawn in thy hand to cut off this corruption, which else will certainly cut
thee off from GOD himself, and all his blessings for evermore.

Psalm I. Verse V. Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, nor
sinners in the congregation of the righteous.
Here the Prophet further aggravates the cursed estate of wicked persons, by a
double consequent certainly attending them. 1. They shall not stand in the
judgment. 2. They shall not stand in the congregation of the righteous. Whence
arises this conclusion.

Proposition
The ungodly shall not stand in the judgment.

Little explication shall need: who were the ungodly was before opened: The
word strictly taken is confined to the breach of the first table; and in this
place, though I would not absolutely restrain it to that sense, yet it is very
probable, that it does here especially point out such as neglect God in his
worship, 1 Timothy 1^ 9.
and the word sinners, the unrighteous; 1 Pet 4.18.
they are joined often: certain is it, where ungodliness is rooted, there
unrighteousnes flourishes, and where unrighteousness is fruitful,
ungodliness is there deeply grounded.

2. Judgment is double, either in this life or the other: the temporal
judgments see described, 1 Pet. 4. 17. Psalm. 82. 8. and 96. 13. For he
comes, for he comes to judge the earth: and is either exercised in the
inward court of the conscience, or in the outward by afflictions. Secondly, the
judgment of that other life, is called the general judgment, and the
judgment of the great day, ( Jude 6.) the judgment after death, Heb. 9.27.

3. To stand in judgment, is a phrase of speech signifying to overcome, or to
be clear when we are judged: compare Romans 3. 4. with Psalm. 5. 5. So the
Latins say, that a man falls in judgment, when he loses the day. So then
they shall not stand in judgment, is all one as if it were said, they shall be
cast in judgment, yea cast down for ever and shall rise no more.

The sense then is: Such as are without the fear of God, and care to please
him, as Atheists, hypocrites, both when God rises here to judgment, either
sitting in their conscience, or dealing with them in outward things by
sickness or the like; and especially when he calls them to that great and
general Assizes, shall utterly fall and be swallowed up in condemnation, and
finally be cut off, and receive their portion with the Devil and his Angels.

Proof.
Proof. Psalm. 7. 11. 12. to the 17. verse, and 9.16.17. Pro. 19.29. Nothing is
more common in the Scripture, then the denunciation and execution of temporal
and eternal judgments upon ungodly and wicked persons.

Grounds.
The grounds may be manifest to children: for this falling in judgment, or
condemnation arises necessarily from these two causes; 1. the guilt of the
person judged appearing upon sufficient evidence: 2. the uprightness of the
Judge pronouncing sentence according to the fact. Now ungodly persons are not
only guilty, but the evidence palpable; for ungodliness, despising God, his
word, worship and service, is that rebellion and treason against the King of
Kings, compared to witchcraft and Idolatry: 1 Samuel 15.23. and the evidence
undeniable; 1. the conscience accusing, 1 John 3.20.
Romans 2. 15. 16. and with it God the faithful witness, greater then the
conscience. 2. The Judge inflexible to any partiality. Romans 3. 5. 6. and 2.
11. Pro. 17. 15.

Instruction.
1. Howsoever flesh and blood dream of immunitie, and impunitie, and
presumptuously counterfeit a mercy in God swallowing up his justice, yet is it
impossible, but that there should be a judgment wherein men should receive
according to their works. Eccles. 3.17. and 11.9.
And as among men there are Sessions and Assizes, some days more general for
all, some more private and purchased sittings: so shall we find that God has
sometimes a Iayle-deliverie, when he enters into judgment with some particular
Nations, or persons, besides that great and terrible day of the Lord, when all
creatures shall be called to reckoning, see Psalm. 7. 11. Prove. 11. 21. 31. Ier.
25. 29. 1 Pet. 4. 17. 18. The general deluge of waters swallowing the old
world, and that more particular and fearful vengeance of fire and brimstone
drinking up the five Cities, and the private destruction of Jeroboam, Ahab, and
their families; and infinite other precedents, are abundant witnesses of this
truth.

But do we not see wicked rebels often flourish, and live in wealth and
prosperity, yea die also and are buried peaceably, and pompously?

Answer: To remove this stumbling stone; Certainly if the godly be here judged,
much more the wicked; and if David and other Saints are corrected, no doubt but
the reprobates are here also afflicted: for although their especial judgment
is to come, yet now they go not free without the whip. Eccles. 9 2.
All things come alike to all; when the righteous be scarcely saved, where
shall the ungodly and sinner appear? 1 Pet. 4.18.
which is spoken of temporal judgments, as manifestly appears by the former
verses: see also Pro. 11. 31.

1. Therefore even those, who most seem to flourish, have often some scourge,
which wholly distasts all their pleasure, nay many times some little cross
(hardly so to be called) embitters all their abundance, that they live in it
without joy, or comfort. Do but remember Ahab so vex with Naboths denial,
that all his Kingly delights could yield him no content. And look on Haman so
troubled with the stiff knee of Mordecay, that all his preferment, and favor
with the King nothing availed him. Ester. 5. 13. we see not the heart of any
of these, nor know where they are pinched: we perceive some of them live in
great plenty; But neither life, nor health, nor content consists in abundance:
we see some of them laugh, Pro. 14. 13.
but even in laughter the heart is sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is
heavines. Certain is it that the nature of man takes more pride in building,
planting, purchasing, then content, or joy in any of these things, when we
enjoy them. And I know, that Solomon, when he had tried all earthly things
found in them nothing but vainity, and vexation. The certain knowledge of
death, and ignorance, what should become of his soul after death, forced the
great Emperor to sigh, and lam^nt his poor estate. Animula vagula, blandula
quae nunc abibis in loca? Poor wandering soul, what place now remains for
thee? Oh think how deeply this thought must wound a worldly Christian, who
has so much Christianity, that he knows an hell, and so little faith (nay no
faith) that he cannot expect heaven? who desiring and enjoying his portion in
this world, can look for no other in the world to come, but that of the rich
Glutton ( Luke 16. 25.) Thou in thy life time receiuedst pleasure, therefore
now art thou tormented? verily were there no other affliction for these men,
but this very thought, it were sufficient to distaste a whole world of pleasure,
and earthly riches, which any man can enjoy in this present life, and to make
him in his own feeling most miserable, who in the eyes of carnal men appeers
very happy, and glorious: and as that Philosophical Poet writes: B^ethius.
If any man could look through their skin, and outward dressings, he should
soon perceive these great commanders, the greatest slaves to the most base,
and cruel masters, even their own tyrannising lusts.

2. Whatsoever they enjoy as good, is not given them as good by God. The Lord
bestows good things upon the righteous for their good Deuteronomy. 13. 9. yet deals
not so with wicked persons. But what 1. Sam. 18. 21.
Saul most lewdly did, that does God most justly. He gives many good things to
be as snares to ungodly men. Psalm. 69. 22. Nothing indeed is good, further
then it is sanctified by God; what good did the Quayls to the Israelits, when
they were sent in w^ath, or Saul who was given in anger? who desires any honor
from the King with his displeasure? But above all the rest, the last trencher
for the reckoning spoileth all the feast: and the very thought of the same
makes the meat bitter as death. For that general day, when all creatures shall
be assembled to the great judgment, it has infinite witnesses: I will cite
only some. Before the flood Enoch (in the infant-world) foretold it. Jude 14.
15. In the law this Prophet, as here, so Psalm. 9. 16. 17. In the Gospel they
are infinite. Th^s the Apostle 2. Cor. 5, 10. and the Judge himself Math. 25.
31. to the end of that chapter: as verily as Christ is already come in
humiliation to be judged, so shall he come in glory to judge: neither will I
stand further to prove a thing confessed, and with reason confirmed by the
heathens. Only let us note, that as all things shall be framed to the infinite
comfort of the faithful, so to as much terror to the ungodly. The Judge shall
be their Savior, their witness the same Judge, and their own peaceable
conscience: the sentence, Come you blessed: the earth the place of all their
sorrow burning, and heaven open to entertain them into the everlasting
habitations of glory. On the other side all compo^ed to the affrighting of the
wicked. The Judge that Lamb whom they so despised, now the Lion of Judah: The
witness he, and their own stinging conscience: the earth where they placed
all their hopes, consuming; the prison even hell gaping, and the executioner
ready to carry them to that Tophet prepared of old, burning with fire and
brimstone.

God the wicked shall fall: that is, howsoever before his abominable
wickedness be found out, he is full of jollitie and pride, yet when once he
is touched with the whip, his heart melts away, his hopes perish, his
countenance falls, and all his pride and pomp sinkes as low as hell. That even
the temporal judgments thus strongly work upon them, see Job.8. 13. 14. and
11. 20. Pro. 10. 28. Consider Cain, Genesis 4. 6. 13^ and Ahab, 1 King. 21. 27.
Belteshazzar, Dan. 5. 6. Oh how approved a truth is that, Pro. 28. 1.
The wicked fly when none pursues, but the righteous is bold as a Lion. While
the furnace is heating seven fold, and the Soldiers stand ready to bind
those royal young men, when the Kings countenance was chang^d with fury, then
did their hearts flame (as the furnace) with zealous courage, and with faces
hardened they could tell the proud King to his face; Dan. 3.17.18.
Our God can, and will deliver us from thee, but if not, we will not serve thy
Gods, nor worship thy golden image. For they, knowing that when they are weak
in themselves, 2 Cor. 12 9^ 10.
then are they strong through the power of his might, who delights to glorify
his power in infirmity, can strengthen themselves with an invincible
confidence; Psalm. 27.1.2.3.
The Lord is my light and my salvation, the strength of my life: of whom then
shall I be afraid? Psalm. 46.2.
when the wicked mine enemies came about me, etc. though an host pitched about
me, I should not be afraid. We will not fear though the earth be moved. 2 Timothy 1. 12. and 4. 18.
I know whom I have believed. The Lord will deliver me from every evil work.
But when such storms arise on the wicked, they are done; their heart is in
their heels: and we shall hear them as Numb. 14. 2. Would God we had died
in Egypt, or in this wilderness, would God we were dead. 1 Kiug. 22. 25.
They shall run from chamber to chamber to hide themselves. For the last
judgement^ that then they shall fall and perish, is more manifest and confessed
then needs any proof. Rev. 6. 15.16.17. The reas^n is evident: of the former,
because, as when a lame man's staff is taken away, he cannot but fall, so
wicked men forsaking the fountain of life, and trusting in pits, when now they
are dry, their hopes are utterly lost. Again, they have no right to any good
thing, but are as thieves, who while they are in their woods and coverts,
frollicke, but when apprehended, they are utterly dejected. For the other the
truth is, there is nothing left for comfort, but all without and within are
full of infinite horror.

Reproof.
1. How fearful then is that infidelity and security of men denying this
truth, and therefore never preparing for that day? Some are so fast a-sleepe,
rocked by the pleasures and delights in the flesh, and so ravished with the
dreams of sensuality, that they neither can, nor desire they could awake:
some so plunged in profits, either the swe^tnesse of gain so bewitching, or
worldly cares so possessing head and heart, that they have neither power or
leisure to think of this, or any thing else belonging to their eternal good.
True it is, that especial warning is given concerning these things, Luke 21.
34. 35. Mark.13. 33. and the mischief following foretold us there by the
Judge, but all the senses are so busied abroad in the world, that there is none
at home to answer him. Should any friend thus call to us, nay any man in the
way, Take heed to your selves, whatsoever we were doing, we would look about
us and consider the danger; but, as if our Lords warnings were only of course,
we take no care of them, or of our selves. How woeful will be the end of this
drowsinesse? how fearful our awaking? For what will you do now in the day of
your visitation, and destruction which shall come? To whom will you fly, or
where will you leave your glory? Thou who have spent all thy time in vanity,
what will thou do in the day of visitation, of thy sickness and trouble, when
thy pleasures fall like dry leaves in Autumn, and all worldly commodities and
comforts stand by mute, and all amort? Then thou will cry; Pro. 5.12. 13.
How have I hated instruction, and mine heart despised correction? and have not
obeyed the voice of them that taught me, nor inclined mine ears to them that
instructed me? Especially when by some smarting blow the Lord has slayed off
that skin of thy conscience, so that now with infinite torment thy hellish
sins like a worm gnaw and eat into thy soul: when thou see the armies of
thy rebellions, more frightfull then so many hellish fiends, mustered up before
thine eyes, and all armed with fiery darts kindled by Satan, invading on
every side, and wounding thy naked soul; and worse then all this, the fiery
wrath of God, and terrors of the Almighty to fall down upon thy head. Then,
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the wrath to come? Then
the Minister must be sent for, then the word read and applied; then oh! that I
could hear, oh! that I could believe, oh! that I could pray: oh for a drop of
faith, of repentance, of mercy! But then who can know whether God will hide
himself, whether the word shall profit, or his ear be stopped to thy petitions?
Then shall thou see in his colors, and hear with unspeakable affrighting,
that cursed Satan tell thee out of the book of truth, Psalm. 32. 6.
In the great water floods, they shall not come near him. When you stretch out
your hands I will hide mine eyes, and though you make many prayers, I will not
hear. Esaias 1. 15.
He will tell thee, remember how long the Lord has sought thee: sometime he
commanded in the thundrings of the Law; sometime he entreated in the still
voice of the Gospel; but thou despisedst both. Remember how long he patiently
has waited for thy returning, but thou have contemned the long-suffering of
God calling to repentance, and hardened thy self in thy rebellion. Remember how
graciously he stood knocking at thine care, to enter into thy heart, but thou
had barred the entrance, and set it open for the world: then entered I in, and
have there kept possession to this hour. Know therefore thy Savior is gone,
thy time is past, and mercy is now out of season, and the judgments of God,
and beginnings of hell have taken hold of thee. But above all the rest, in that
last and terrible day of the Lord, whither will thou turn thee when thou shall
hear; Take that slothful (much more that lewd and rebellious) servant, and
cast him into utter darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeths.
Where will thou seek for help? from the world? It is all on fire, and all thy
works wherein thou delightedst. In thine own heart? there thy conscience has
already kindled the fire of hell. In the Saints? those thou derided'st on
earth. In the good Angels? they defy thee as the enemy of God, and vassal of
Satan. In the evil Angels whom thou served'st? they wrought thy damnation, and
are thy tormenters. In that merciful Savior? the date of mercy is out, and
this is the day of judgment, vengeance, and recompense. 1. Thy consorts are
witnesses against thee. Thy conscience confesses guilty. 2. The heavens shut
thee out, which thou in thy life neglectedst. Hell stands open for thee, the
Angels detest thee, the Saints, even thine own Father, Mother, and children
abhor thee, the frowns of that angry Judge strike through thy soul with
infinite horror; and which is most fearful, the gracious Savior of all the
world laughes at thy destruction: and thou shall hear him, who has so long
besought thee in vain to be reconciled to him, openly sentence thee, Mat.
25.41.
Depart from me thou cursed into everlasting fire prep^red for the Devil and
his Angels. Mat. 7.
After that sentence what can thou say for thy self? what excuse can all the
world yield thee? will thou say? Lord, Lord have not^ I professed thy name? was
I not baptized? have I not in thy name prophesied? but thou shall hear; I know
thee not, depart from me tho^ worker of iniquity: thou careless servant
neglecting duty, thou curser, thou swearer, thou Sabboth-breaker: what? will thou plead for further audience? why then did not thou give audience? Alas!
thou can not plead that worst of a fools excuses, to say, I had not thought;
for he will tell thee to thy face, I foretold thee of this day: I warned thee
again and again, I hid nothing from thee of all that thou see and feel,
but testified it to thy face; I will not hold thee guiltless. Thou will not
be able to say so much as, Lord have mercy upon me, for if thou should,
thou should soon hear a bitter answer^ with what face do thou now call
for mercy? Thou had no mercy on thy self; I offered thee grace, I
importuned thee to receive it, I even thrust mercy upon thee, but thou
waitedst upon lying vanities, and forsook^dst thine own mercy, Ion. 2. 8.
Thou had no mercy on my members, abused'st, reviled'st, spoked'st of them
the worst of evil, and discouragdst them all thou could. Thou shewedst me no
mercy, thou piercedst, crucifiedst me, thou trampledst my blood under thy
feet. Oh how shall we then cry for sorrow of heart, and houle for vexation of
mind! Job. 3.
Esaias 65. 14. Let the day perish wherein I was borne, why died I not in the
birth? why did I not give up the ghost, when I came out of the belly? Cursed
be the day that ever I was borne: O that my mother had been my grave. Oh that
I might once live again, oh that at length I might die, oh death, oh anguish,
oh hell, oh infinite torment without measure, without end! Oh that now there
were an heart in us to consider our latter end. 2 Cor. 5.11.
We knowing the terrors of the Lord, desire to persuade you, and we are made
manifest to God, oh that we were also made manifest to your consciences, that
you might be worthy to escape all these things ( Luke 21. 36.) that you might
lift up your heads with joy at that day, that we that sow, and you that grow,
we that reap, and you that are reaped, might rejoice together.

Exhortation
Let us therefore be exhorted to fasten first in our memory, then in our heart
this great and terrible day of the Lord. Let us set open our ears to those
heavenly summons, and know that it is not in vain that our Judge, who desires
to be our Savior, so often warnes us to take heed. Bind it as a sign upon
thine hand, and set it as a frontlet between thine eyes; make thy soul to be
affected with it, that thou may fear, and depart from evil, and turn this
terrible day to thy comfort and everlasting happiness.

Consider for motives, first the great consequence depending on it. It is not a
light matter, that little concerns thee: but thy life, or death, thy
unspeakable happiness or misery (and that not for a day, but for ever) which
then is in action. Now in great affairs we never content our selves with any
measure of diligence: how shameful and full of unbelief then is this
negligence?

Secondly; It is impossible to keep our feet in the right way from error, if
we have not this often in remembrance: for, as there are infinite ways
mis-leading us, so there is no means better to direct us in the right way,
then by remembering our end.

But how should we fasten this day in our hearts?

First by faith, persuading our hearts that this is truth, and to that end
observing, not only the frequent testimonies of the Lord in the word, but also
the assent even of our reason, and the confession of our conscience, scoring up
our faults against that day. Even the heathen themselves upon firm and
undeniable grounds have built this conclusion; now indeed when we believe it,
and have brought our hearts to yield unto it, we shall not easily forget it.
Secondly; Labor by prayer for sense and feeling of the Spirit, that God would
take out this security and awake thy sluggish heart to wait upon him, and
expect his coming.
Proposition 2. Proposition
The sinners shall not stand in the congregation of the just.
For explication of the words, who are to be accounted sinners was before
delivered page: 45. namely such as live in any open and notorious breach of Gods
commandment.

Secondly; The Congregation signifies here a certain Assembly or society of
men gathered together, and so intends nothing else but the Church. Now the
Church is diversely taken: sometime for the Catholic Church, that is, the whole
body of Christ, comprising in it all the faithful, from the first to the last
member of his mystical body living in the world. (Thus you will find the
word taken, Ephe. 1. 22. 23.) sometime for some member of that body,
distinguished according to diverse respects incident to it: thus the Church is
divided into the triumphant, which reigns with Christ in heaven, or militant,
which fights under his banner against sin, the world and Satan here on earth.
The militant Church has many subdivisions, and is either visible in several
Congregations, professing openly the name of Christ; or invisible, which are
the faithful in those Congregations, confessing also in heart the Lord Jesus
and his truth: who although (as men) are visible, and may be discerned by any
bodily eye, yet as the faithful, and truly sanctified, cannot ordinarily or
generally be distinguished from many hypocrites living with them in the same
assemblies. So likewise the visible Church has many branches: some greater as
of a whole Province, so we distinguish the Greek and Latin, East and West
Churches; some lesser, as the Church confined to any one City; the Churth of
Rome, the Church of Corinth; and some private, shut up in one family, see Romans
16. 5. Philem. 2. There is also a distinction of a true Church, which continues
in all fundamental truth delivered by Christ and his Apostles; or false, which
declines to some heretical doctrines, and departs from the foundation, either
from that rule of faith or manners: Thus as the Marcionits, Arrians,
Macedonians, etc. erring in matter of faith concerning the Godhead or manhood
of Christ, or concerning the blessed Spirit. So the Nicolaitans maintaining
filthy and promiscuous lusts, were false Churches, howsoever they were sound in
diverse other points of Christian doctrine. Now the Congregation here mentioned
cannot be stretched to any other, but either the invisible, or tryumphant
Church.

3. Lastly the just are those Saints of God, which being justified by the blood
of Christ, are also sanctified by his Spirit.

So the sense is. Howsoever here on earth wicked Atheists, heretics, and
hypocrites may come in sheep clothing, and not only creep into the flock,
but also rule and tyrannise in the visible Church, yet as they are no members
of the true invisible Church, so when that great Shepherd shall separate the
goats from the sheep, these wolves in sheep clothing shall be uncased, and
cast out into their own place with dogs.

Proof. Proof.
Mat 25. ver. 31. to the end. Revel. 21. last ver. and 22. 14. 15.

The grounds are 1. In the nature of sinners; Grounds.
Truth and lies, virtue and vice cannot stand together. As therefore in the
creation there was a separation of light from darkness, so in this perfect
renovation.

2. From the nature of the Judge, who is of pure eyes and cannot endure sin,
but is a consuming fire to such.

3. From the time; It is the season when Christ shall wipe off all spots and
wrinkles from his Church, but these are spots and blots in the Assemblies. 2
Pet. 2 13. Ephe. 5. 27.

Instruction.
Here therefore is manifestly taught us, that no sinner that is, no man living
in wilful sin, and maintaining it in his practice, is, or can be a true
member of Christ, or his Church, but indeed a very spot, and blot in it. Tru^
is it that as a field is called a corn field, where there is much and perhaps
more weed then good grain, and a heap of corn, where there is more chafe,
not from the greater, but better part: so a Congregation where many Atheists,
and hipocrites are mi^gled with the faithful is called a true church, though
indeed those are but as ill humors in the body, rather griefs, then any parts
of it. 1 Ioh. 2. 19.
They were not of us, they were not all of us, see Math 7. 23. Hence called (as
before) spots and blots. The reasons also, confirming this truth, are apparent.
For first every member is, and cannot but be of the same nature with the head:
monsters are they, which have the head ^f one kind, the body, or any member
of an other, the head of a man, the foot of an ox. But the nature of Christ
is the divine nature, pure, and holy, fre^ from sin, therefore also his
members have by in fluence from him been changed into the same divine nature in
that they fly the corruption which is in the world through lust, 2. Pet. 1. 4.
see also Heb. 7. 26. Secondly he cannot be a member of Christ, who by the
ordinances of God powerfully working on him by the Spirit, is not renewed, and
changed. He that believes, and is baptized, is saved, but he that believes
not is damned. We are buried in him by baptism; Mark.16^ 16.
the Gospel preached begets us in Christ: Romans 6 4.5.
But the Gospel, and baptism where they are made effectual by the work of
the Spirit cleanse, 1 Cor. 4. ^5.
and wash from sin, and bring to us that sanctification, whereby we are
purged. John.15. 3. Ephesians. 5. 26. Thirdly sin does not only separate from God^
Esa. 59. 2. but when it is in dominion, divides us utterly from the government
of Christ, makes his sweet, and ^asie yoke gri^vous, and loaths^me. If we are
members of Christ he is our head, and King, but where sin has dominion,
Christ his scepter has no place.

Christ, of which Christ has given us warning Mat. 7. 15. and the Apostle Act.
20.29. 30. yet they shall certainly be uncased, not only in the final
judgment, where their hypocrisy shall be stripped nak^d before all the world,
and their filthiness bared to every eye, but here also, so far, that the Elect
of God shall cle^rely disc^rne, and avoid them as Math. 7. 16. God will lay
open their falsehood, and discover their dissembling, see Ierem. 29. 20. 21. 22.
23. Neither is any thing in scripture more evident, then this dealing of the
Lord, who whenever such Foxes have entered among his people, has stirred up
some eminent person, and filled them with singular gifts to resist them, least
the faithful might be deceived, and drawn away by their hypocrisy. Thus God
opposes Moses, and Aaron against James, and Iambres: Elias, and Elizeus
against the Pri^sts of Baal: I^remiah against Hananiah, Ahab, and Zedekiah;
Christ and his Apostles against the Scribes, Pharisees, and Jewish false
teache^s. Thus afterward as haeretikes began to spring in ^he church, h^
raised up many faithful pastors to cut down their lies, and display their
hypocrisy, which is evident in the story of the Church: and eminent this way
was that holy Augustine, who was called, and indeed was the mall of heretics.

The reasons also are clear and plain: First and esp^cially, the love of God
to his Church, who as he has sent his son to bring them out of the power of
darkness, and the shadow of death, so also has given his Spirit to guide and
lead them into all truth, and his word as a touchstone to try these spirits
whether they are of God.

Secondly; The vigilancie and care of those whom God has set as watchmen, who
being not hirelings but faithful Pastors, do not fly when they see the
wolf, but give warning to the sheep.

Thirdly; There is a spirit of discerning, Philip. 1. 10. which God poures out
to the faithful in diverse measures according to their place which they hold in
the body of Christ: to some more, to some less, to all some; so that even
babes to whom S. John writes, may try the spirits whether they are of God. 1
Ioh. 4. 1. For even these, comparing the doctrine of these hypocrites either
with the Scripture, or the rule of faith written by God in their hearts, and
finding the disagreement can refuse and abhor it, see 1 Ioh. 2. 19. 20. 21.

Refutation.
Here is offered a very fit occasion to lay open the hypocrisy of that false
Church, and her apostacy which challenges to be not only the true, but alone
Church and Spouse of Christ, True it is, that as the body of that Antichristian
Synagogue is covered with sheep clothing, so the head has put on the front
of the Lamb, Rev. 13.11. but indeed the body when it is stripped, easily
discovers it self to be the beast, and the head when it speaks in the
doctrine proclaims the Dragon. You shall know these false Prophets which come
in sheep clothing by their fruits, Math^ 7. 16.
that is by their teaching, which is the proper fruit of a Teacher. They teach
perverse things says the Apostle, ( Acts 20. 30^) to draw Disciples not after
Christ, but after themselves. How by their traditions and vain inventions they
have made the word of God of no effect, may appear by these few points of
their religion.

But first let us remember that Piety consists either in inward or outward
duties to God: the one being as the soul, the other as the body of religion.
Of the first those are principal, knowledge, love, fear of God, faith in him,
and his word. Of the second, Prayer, hearing the word, administration of the
holy mysteries, and right observation of the Sabbath. Now how grossly the
Papists in their doctrines have perverted all these parts of Gods worship, may
very briefly appear to them who will duly consider it. For knowledge, they
deliver that hellish proposition, Ignorance is the mother of devotion, to which
their other doctrines and practice are squared; laboring to hold the minds of
their people in gross darkness, and therefore not only forbidding on great
penalties the common acquaintance and use of scriptures, but affirming, that he
is a friend to heretics, who maintains an ordinary reading of Scripture: T.
W. against Doct. White and S^aplet. rel^^, cap. ^. qu^ 3. art. 4.
nay that it is pernicious and impious. For love, they have utterly broken the
bond of spiritual marriage; First by that Saint-adoration, deifying holy men,
and allowing them Altars, prayers etc. Secondly, also by their digressing and
wilful departing from the word, and Ordinances of Christ, which is a manifest
breach of love: Ioh. 14. 24. For the fear of God, (the very bond of our
Covenant, Ier. 32. 40.) first they have made it in vain by the traditions of
men, Esaias 29. 13. Secondly, in place of that filial fear (knitting our souls
to him in reverend love) they plant an hellish fear of God in the hearts of
their people, to be afraid to approach unto him by prayer, as being a great
King, and a rigide observer of all that is amiss. For faith, they have wholly
unsinued it, not only in teaching faith (and prayer of faith) to creatures, as
a right object of both, but delivering no other faith, then that which is
common to many reprobates and Devils.

For that second kind, their invocation of Saints, asking of them, whatsover a
creature should ask of God: the neglect and contempt of the word, setting up
against it, the false light of their traditions, perverting the Sacraments,
despising the Sabbath (a sin so notorious among them and maintained) make
evident what religion they profess, and whence they had it. But especially
observe their rejecting of Christ in all his o^fices, as King as Priest and
Prophet, (allowing him indeed the names) but det^acting in effect the power and
exercise of these digniti^s from him. For first, whereas the Lord God has
given us only Christ to be his King over us, the head and Monarch of his
Church, Mark. 10.42. 43.44.
( Psalm. 2. 6. Ephe. 1. 22. 23. Col. 1. 18.) and absolutely interdicted all
^itles, 1 Pet. 5.3.
and exercise of Lordly authority to his very Apostles; they do not only
ascribe full power to the Pope over the universal Church on earth, nay under
the earth also (namely that which they dream to be in a purgatory) yea even
of that which is in heaven, (for So Clement 5
they take upon them to command Angels:) but also call him openly (and
justify those titles) the head, the Monarch, and Spouse of the whole Church.
Nay says Bellarmine; Bellar de eccles. lib. 3. c. 5.
He is the supreme head, to give outward influence of doctrine, faith, and
Sacraments. Secondly; for the Priesthood of Christ, they abase that perfect
sacrifice, and whereas the Scripture so highly prefers it before the
Leviticall, they as low depresse it by the same argument^ namely the frequent,
and indeed infinite repeatings of it; and to supply it, they add their own
satisfactions and merits, whereby they remove temporal punishments, and have
invented a new sacrifice of Christ, unbloodie, and a new priesthood of
Masmongers. Thirdly whereas Christ is our only Prophet, or Teacher Mat. 23. 8.
so that men and Angels are accursed who bring any other doctrine, they have so
tied the ear of the Church to the tongue of the Pope, that they do not only
ascribe unto him an u^erring power in teaching, but most brasenly affirm,
Bellar. de Roman^ Pontif. l. 4 c. 5 p. 804
that if the Pope should err in commanding vices, or forbidding virtues, the
Church were bound to believe that vice were good and virtue naught. So is their
practice: for whereas God pronounces surfeting and dru^kennesse to be sins
excluding from life: they affirm that eating of flesh in Lent, though in all
sobriety, is a greater sin then it: the breach of the Popes more heinous
rebellion^ then the breach of Gods commandment. Thus to burn in lust is a
filthy and hateful sin in the sight of God; they teach that marriage in a
votarie is greater: so that when God commands, they which cannot contain let
them ^arrie: this command of God in their votaries they call and maintain a
sin, a very great sin: so to live in burnings in a vota^ie (which is a
foul sin in Gods account) is not only with them an holy estate, but full of
merit and super^rogation. Thus their doctrines (the f^uit of false Teachers)
discover them: so that (those blind ones, from whom the God of this world has
concealed the ^ight of the Gospel, excepted) every one sees through their
gross hypocrisy. Certain is it, that all those doctrines wherein they differ
from us, have neither su^ficient ground from the scriptures (but are devises
and traditions of men) nor have any aim to the glory of God, but wholly tend to
the advancing of the Pope, and enriching his Treasury and Clergy.

Reproof.
Here that blockishnes of people, some hellishly ignorant, some obstinately
wilful is to be rebuked, who though they live in open, and confessed sins,
and rebelliously maintain themselves in that course, neither reforming, nor
purposing to reform themselves, nay hating, and scorning the name of
reformation, so desperately impure, that they laugh out the name of purity,
yet still suppose themselves members of Christ, and such as shall stand in the
Congregation of the just. There are many who imagine themselves free from those
gross, and apparent sins of the time, or at least from that measure which
they see, or suppose to see in others, and consider themselves in the
f^attering glass of their own partial opinions, as being no common
drunkards, swearers, whoremasters, thieves, oppressors, nay keeping their
Church well, living honestly among their neighbors, and by them esteemed, and
called honest men, hence think all safe, though in the mean time they live in
many actual sins, both of commission, omission, yea such as are palpable.
For ask even one of these. Indeed I perceive you do not fill your mouth with
the grosser oaths, nor abuse the wounds, blood, and body of your Savior to his
dishonor, as too many, but do you not swear at all? Do you not use the
Mass, our Lady, your faith, and troth in oaths? Well now; And has not Christ
commanded, Swear not at all? Is not this then a confessed breach of Gods
commandment, and do you not live in this, and refuse to be reformed? So
again. I see you are no common dru^kard, to abuse your self (as many do) who
are every week, and most days in the week distempered, and are turned into
beasts with drink. But do you not spend too much time in the Alehouse? do
you not ordinarily drink more then is su^ficient? nay tipple when you have no
need at all? But especially if you question them in sins of omission. Do you
not leave undone many necessary duties? do you not continually neglect
reading, and private meditating in the word? do you not let pass private, and
Household prayers, and the like? Above the rest, negligence in performance of
duty they account as nothing: as demand of them, what zeal have you in
prayer? what hnnger for the word? what diligence in service? what thirst of
righteousness? what longing after God? They cannot deny that they are very
deficient, nay indeed that they have no sense of these things. And alas! do
thou not know, that sentence is past for sins of omission? Mat. 25. Do thou
not know that the curse belongs to those, who do the work of God negligently,
Ier. 48. 10. But what marvel if these flatter themselves, when even the most
enormous livers sing peace to their own souls, and make no doubt to go to
heaven through the midst of all profaneness. For ask them; Is it not sin to
break the Sabbath, to do thine own work upon Gods day, to absent and
withdraw thy self from the Assemblies? Is it not sin to swear, to curse,
to rail, to slander, to speak basely of those that desire to fear the Lord?
what wretch can deny this, who yet practices it continually, and foully scorns
to amend and repent, or to hear of repentance, but hates his reprover, and
dete^ts any admonition, though spoken from the mouth of God?

Exhortation
Learn here to know thy estate and thy self, and shake off that security of
men in a matter of such importance: go upon sure grounds, and such as cannot
deceive thee, And for motives remember; First; That a wiseman will be
diligent to know the estate of his flock, and of his herds: Pro. 27. 23.
a man that is careful to thrive in the world, must often cast up his account:
and is it not more needful to know the estate of thy soul? Secondly; Thou
know not how suddenly the day of thy account shall come, or whether then
the Lord will give thee any leisure or heart to do it, or whether he will
then suffer thee to come nigh him.


But what means are to be used?

First, learn not to trust in thine own heart, Ier. 17. 9.
for it is deceitful above all things. Remember Prove. 12. 15. and 14. 12. The
way of a fool is right in his own eyes, but he that hears counsel is
wise. Secondly, take the word of God in thine hand, Heb. 4. 12.
and apply thy heart to that rule: It will discover thy heart to thy eyes, for
God has purposely given it to this and: It is a discerner of the thoughts, and
intents of the heart.

Psalm I. Verse VI. For the Lord knows the way of the righteous, but the way
of the ungodly shall perish.
IN the former verses the Prophet having discovered the good and evil way, and
the issue of both; now in the conclusion by a necessary argument confirms all
that truth, and gives an evident reason, why the godly who seek the Lord in
his word and ways cannot but prosper and be blessed: and the wicked that
despise God, and walk after their own lusts cannot but come to confusion:
namely, because God knows the way of the righteous, and the way of the ungodly
shall perish. The first proposition is.

(...)roposition
Because God knows the ways of the righteous, therefore shall they prosper
and be blessed.

Two words must be opened, first what is meant by the way of the righteous;
secondly what kind of knowledge is here intended.

For the former, though there is here a double figure, first a metaphor, where
the soul directing the continual course of our actions, according to the rule
of God is resembled to the body, walking in some tracke, or path, and a
metonymie, where the way is put for a continual walking or stepping in the
way, yet is so ordinary, not only in the Scripture commonly used by the
Spirit, but in our speech to compare the life, or practice of any man in any
trade temporal or spiritual to a way, and so to call it, that it shall need
no further labor in explication.

The other, what this knowledge is in God, has more difficulty and needs more
unfolding; Knowledge, ^s it is very frequently used in Scripture, is not
confined to the und^rstanding, but more largely extended to other faculties of
the soul, even the will and affections. In which general acception it may be
described, that action of any of the reasonable faculties, namely
understanding, will, or affection, whereby that faculty apprehends any thing
and applies it self unto it. For look as in the bodily senses they are then
said to hear or see, when the object of the ear and eye entering into them is
by them apprehended and applied; For example: The ^are is said to know what is
spoken, when it apprehends the words, and applies it self in the faculty of
hearing unto the voice: the eye to know the color, which it lets in, and
exercises it self in beholding: so when the understanding, will, and
affections busy their several offices in applying their powers to any thing,
they may not be un^itly said to know it. Now therefore as when the
understanding apprehends any intelligible object, and applies the faculty of
discerning unto it, it is said to know it: so when the will whose o^fice is to
choose or refuse, See Amos 3. 10.
applies it self to the object in choosing, then the will may be said to know.
So likewise we may say the affections know that which they love or honor.
Thus man is said to know God, 1. when the Lord having revealed himself and his
will in his word, the understanding (applying it self to this object, and
receiving into it self this revelation) perceiues it. Thus it is used Psalm. 9.
10. They that know thee will trust in thee, etc. Thus it is said, The heathens
know not Gods judgments, as being never revealed to them, nor they perceiving
them, Psalm. 147. 20. 2. When he chooses the Lord to be his God; So 1 Chronicles.
28. 9. Know the God of thy fathers, that chose him, and set him up in thy heart
to be thy God. 3 when he loves and fears God. Thus the sonns of Eli are said
to be wicked that knew not God. 1 Samuel 2. 12; and sometimes all these included
in one, as John. 17. 3. This is life eternal to know thee the only true God,
and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ: that is, to know thee with the
understanding, and Jesus Christ by conceiving those things which are revealed
of God the father, and the Lord Jesus Christ, to know with the will, and
affections by chosing, and loving thee, testified in all obedience, is life
eternal. Thus likewise God is said to know men, or the ways of men, not only
because he knows, and searches the heart, and understands the thoughts Psalm.
94. 11. but because he chooses any people Amos.4. 2. and because he loves, and
delights in any: Psalm. 144. 3.

Thus then is the sense of the words. Because God seeth^ choseth, and loves
the ways of a righteous man, therefore he shall prosper, and be blessed.

Proof.
The point is evidently here a^firmed, and will further be cleared in that which
follows.

Grounds.
So likewise the grounds are apparent, 1. In God, 2. or opposite creatures. In
God his infinite power, in the enemies their subjection, and weakness. For lay
down this first as a confessed truth: God sees, chooses, loves the ways of
righteous men, secondly he is of infinite power, doing whatsoever he will in
heaven, and earth. Thirdly no creature able to resist, and hence necessarily
will follow this effect, therefore shall they prosper, and be blessed.

Instruction.
1 The Lord understands, and sees all the ways of righteous persons:
whatsoever duty they perform in obedience to any of his commandments, though
in secret, and in the heart, he discerns and will reward it openly Psalm. 139.
1.2. 3. 4. Math. 6.4.6. 1. Cor. 4. 5. Heb. 4.13. Much, and every way profitable
use have the Saints made of this truth; hence some have fenced themselves from
many tentations, and kept their hearts whole and sound, Joseph ( Genesis 39. 9.)
having his eye on the eye of God, preserved his body from his Mystres unchaste
allurements. Some have hence learned to deny themselves, and to prefer the
rebuke of Christ before all earthly treasures, as Moses. Heb. 11.26. But of
especial use is it for consolation, as well against tyrants, and bloody
persecutours, as Psalm. 35. 13. 14 15. 17. 22. 24. as against terrors of death.
Thus Hezekiah held up his head, and lifted up to God a confident, and
effectual prayer even after the message of death, Esa. 38.3. How great a
comfort would it be to a servant or child, when he had offended, or failed in
duty, that his master or Father could see the unfeyned sorrow of his heart, or
could discern how strongly he desires to do stronger service? This
comfortable advantage have all the Saints: they serve such a Lord to whom they
may truly (as David) say, What can David say more unto thee? for thou Lord
know thy servant. 2 Samuel 7.20. or as Peter, Thou know that I love thee,
Ioh. 21. 17. And indeed how should it be otherwise? Psa. 94.9. 10.
He that planted the ear shall he not hear, and he that formed the eye
shall he not see, he that teaches man knowledge shall he not know? How is
it possible that the Creator should not know the creature? Pro. 16.1. 2.
He in whose hand are the preparations of the heart, and the answer of the
tongue, he who pondereth the Spirits, how should he be unacquainted with any
thing in man. Secondly; As the Lord is every where present, is not, nor can be
excluded from any place, the heaven of heavens cannot contain him, 2. Chron.
6. 18. so is he especially present with the faithful. God dwells in the
humble: Christ dwells in the faithful, Ephe. 3. 17. Esaias 57. 15.
They are the Temple of God, and the holy Ghost dwells in them. 1 Cor. 3. 16.
being even the soul of their soul, quickening them John 6. 63. freeing them,
and bringing to liberty, 2 Cor. 3. 17. teaching, and prompting them, Ioh.
14.26. and strengthening them, Ephe. 3. 16.

Lord chooses out the righteous for himself, and their paths for them;
preordaining, setting out, and preparing their way in which they shall walk,
and ordering their steps in that way. Psalm. 4. 3.
The Lord chooses the godly man: God will teach those that fear him the way
which he chooses. Psalm. 25. 12.
See Ephe. 2. 10. where we easily perceive, that as God culls out the
faithful, Esaias 30. 21.
so does he set out all their works for them, and prepares them, not only
laying down this way plainly in his word, but writing it in the hearts of his
people, giving them also the will and deed: see Esaias 26. 12. As he does not
create them to be idle, or viciously employed, so he purposely makes them
new creatu^es, that they may walk in newness of life. This that they may do,
he ordains good ways and sets them out for them, and leads them along to the
end, having prepared both the way and end for them. Look as a wise loving
father considering his childs disposition, appoints, fits and trains him to
some calling which he thinks well of, and in which he may prosper: so the Lord
having graciously called any to his knowledge according to his own love and
wisdom sets out and makes ready for them that which he knows most fit and
convenient. And necessarily is it that the Lord should effect this for his
children. For; Iere. 10.23.
First, The way of man is not in himself, neither is it in man to direct his
steps. If the^fore they had no better Guid^ then themselves, they could not
prosper in their ways. Secondly, There are so many difficulties, snares, and
stumbling blocks in the way laid, and hid by Satan and his instruments, that
they must needs fall, unless the Lord should bear them up and sustain them.
Thus he prepares the way, streitens the crooked turnings, and smooths the
roughness, Luke 3. 4. 5. and puts under his hand, when they are ready to
fall, Psalm 37. 24. Thirdly, Satan and his followers, principalities and powers,
and worldly governors are their professed enemies in this journey, resisting
them in all good actions, and fighting with all their armies to stop, and
hinder them that they may never enter into the land of promise, Zach. 3. 1.
Ephe. 6. 12.


3. The Lord does love and honor not only the persons with an everlasting
love have I loved thee, see Pro. 15. 9. and Psalm. 37. 23. 24. The Lord loves
the way of the righteous, though he fall he shall not be cast off. Ier. 31.
3.
So likewise he honors those that honor him, 1 Samuel 2. 30. Romans 2. 10. Psalm.
147.11.
Such honor have all his Saints. The reason of this is plain and necessary.

First, God is himself infinitely righteous, and therefore cannot but love and
honor righteous ways and persons: Psalm. 33.4. 5. Nothing is a more effectual
motive of love, then the likeness and neerenesse of quality and studies: even
neerenesse of blood yields to this, and stronger amity has been contracted
by likeness of manners, then by any other respect. Secondly, Righteous persons
and ways are the principal works of God; we are his new creatures, and all
our good works are wholly framed by him: He makes us know what is good, he
gives us a good will to good, and then perfects it in good actions. Now God
loves all his works. If we look over all the holy histories, we shall find
this truth wonderfully confirmed in the dealing of God with his people:
especially in that of David, who being after Gods heart, and bending all his
study to magnify the name, and advance the worship of God, was again
magni^ied, and much loved and honored, see 2 Samuel 7. 8. 9.
God is the cause of their bless^dnesse, it evid^ntly follows, that as sure as
God knows them, and all their ways, so certainly shall they a^taine the
state here mentioned and promised, Psalm. 112. 1. so Mat. 5. 3.4. 5. 6. etc. As
therefore Isaac speaks concerning Jacob, I have blessed him, therefore he
shall be blessed, Genesis 27.33. Or as Jacob of his beloved Joseph, Genesis 49. 26.
The blessing of thy father shall be stronger then the blessing of mine elders;
unto the ends of the hills of the world shall they be upon the head of Joseph,
etc. so much more strong, much more lasting are the blessings of God upon his
beloved children: for who shall or can curse where God has not cursed? Number.
23.8. such places are infinite; especially observe that sentence, Prove. 3. 13.
Blessed is he that finds wisdom. Consider the words before, and following^
the meaning is; As a Merchant who by continual travel and traffic, has
found and gotten for himself much gold and silver, and all manner of earthly
goods, is already rich, and in the supposall of earthly men well to pass, so
that man who has labored in the word, and trading with it, has attained that
true wisdom consisting in holiness, is blessed in his work: see Iam. 1. 25.
And the same reason setleth this their blessedness: for the Lord is
unchangeable, his seeing them, loving their ways is unalterable: therefore so
must their estate be, which (as before is manifest) fades not, 2 Timothy 2. 19.
The reasons also manifesting this truth are diverse, as; First; That absolute
decree, promise, and truth of God, which every where he has published in his
word, who cannot lie or dissemble, and will not reverse any thing he has
spoken. Has he said and shall not he do it, Numb. 23. 19. Secondly; That
constant and unchangeable love of God, Ioh. 13. 1. who repents not of his
gifts, Romans 11. 29. but bestows one that he may make way for another, and
delights to heap upon him abundance, who has received any grace, Mat. 13.
12. Blessings (indefinitely) are upon the head of the righteous, Prove. 10. 6.
Thirdly; That permanent grace of God, that remaining seed, 1 Ioh. 3. 9. which
according to the tenor of the new Covenant is not fading nor subject to loss:
They shall not depart from God, and therefore received that last bond of the
covenant, Iere. 32.40.
the fear of God, which endures for ever, Ps. 19.9. Certain is it that as
worldly man thirsting for gain, when he has betaken himself to some good
trade, and finds it sweet, is now and every day more eager of the world then
before: so where God has seasoned the heart with this spiritual and heavenly
covetousness of the world to come, the riches of grace and glory, the more he
employeth his labor in Gods ordinances, and faithfully seeks, the more
according to Gods promise he finds; the more he finds, the sweeter still it
feels, and this sweetness is a more sharp spur to his hungry soul: hence he
is whetted more earnestly to pursue, hence the more he obtaines; and grows
every day more blessed.


Reproof.
1. Now therefore not only wicked and profane persons are here reproved, such,
who because they have not God before their eyes, think not that God has them
in his eyes; such as say, God has forgotten he hides away his face, and will
never see: such as despise God, and say, he will not regard: Psalm. 10. 11. 13.
such fools, as confess God made their seeing eyes and hearing ears, yet
think he never sees nor perceiues: see Psalm. 94. 7. 8. 9. But as these, so
many other holy and faithful Christians are here to be chidden, who are often
deeply plunged into many bottomless tentations, and even swallowed with
grief, because they forget this comfortable truth, and do not consider in the
evil day, that the Lord has seen, and written up for them all their labor
of love: he has recorded and keeps tale of their sighs, and bottles up
their tears as a memorial for them. For in the cloudie and dark day, when
Satan draws their eyes wholly either to the sinful actions which they have
committed, or to their sinful affections yet remaining, and fighting, and often
prevailing in them, they make no question but God sees all their misdeeds and
sins, but that the Lord should behold their spirits sighing under the
burdens, groaning under this oppression of Satan, that he should in mercy,
compassion, and love behold the wrastlings, struglings, and the bitter grief
of their hearts thus yoked with the body of death, they utterly forget. But
because they despise their own poor and weak endeavors, as being low in
their own eyes, they suppose they are also despised by God. This we must
carefully amend, and fasten this truth in our memories, that the Lord cannot
despise his own work in his creatures, but sees and perfectly knows all the
thoughts of our heart, so that our desires thirsting for his righteousness,
and our cries calling out to be delivered from this woeful yoke fellow of
sinful corruption, are all heard and noted by him.

Reproof.
So likewise are here many to be rebuked, who make no good use of that doctrine
so plainly, and comfortably laid down by the Spirit, and frequently handled in
the scripture, namely the election, and predestination of the Saints. Some are
so impudent, that they would wholly silence this truth, not considering, that
things revealed belong to us and our children. Deuteronomy. 29. 2^.
Some even devillishly blaspheme it, as a dangerous, and desperate doctrine,
which drives men to hell, and desperation. Others eschew it as a rock, and
dare not touch, or meddle with it: and very few who make right use of it.
Certainly as it is very full of use for the faithful for humiliation, as
remembering that God chooses their persons, yet not being, before they are
called, before they know him; that he predestinates all their works for them,
and orders them to their hands, that he gives will and deed, in a word, that
he foresees us, loves us, out of his love prepares us for grace, and then
gives it, when he has fitted us for it, and all this without promeriting, nay
any concurrance on our part, that after he works in us, and perfits what he
begins, and crowns what he has perfited, and for our consolation, that it is
not in him that wills or runs, but in God that shows mercy, and not for
our righteousness, but because he has chosen, us, that his purpose according to
election may stand not of works, but of him that calls: Romans 9. 11.
so is there great use of it in wicked persons, for warning, and caution.
Neither can I see how any desperate person can pervert this, but in the like
manner he may abuse any other doctrine to his destruction; as the Papists this
day abuse that point of justification by faith, and not by works, and many
other: we must therefore not only retain this truth, but apply it to that end
for which it was given by God, making our calling and election sure.

Lord does love and honor the persons and ways of godly men) is here
reproved. Hence might wicked men tremble to see how hateful and abominable
their ways and persons are in his sight, who can recompense, and surely will
reward them according to their works. And how justly might thousands of
Christians tremble, when they see their affections in this particular so
contrary to Christ? For they account basely of those whom God honors, hate
those whom God loves, show to them all contempt and malice in reviling,
slandering, or any abuse that they can or dare offer. What member of Christ art
thou, who despisest such as thy head has crowned with his heavenly Kingdom?
How far from a Christian, who have no love to such whom Christ has loved
beyond his life? So also by forgetting this lesson many deprive themselves of
much comfort. For how much joy might the weak Christian gather here, if he
did continually remember; He that has given me an heart to love him, he first
loved me, he has set his heart upon me for good, and therefore has drawn me
from my wicked and vain conversation to serve him? and if he has loved me
when I was an enemy, will he forsake me now he has seasoned my heart with
some measure of love, and desire of his service? What a cordial would this be
against all the revilings, contempts, and despitefull usage of the world? we
are therefore much to blame, that we make no better use of a truth so full of
profit and consolation.

Comfort.
Hence may the faithful soul in any necessity and upon all occasions draw
endless comfort. How did this hearten David in all persecution of Saul, and
slanders of his enemies? Psalm. 18. 10. etc. Psalm. 7. 3. etc. yea indeed in all
his trouble: nay when he found his tongue unable in that duty of thankfulness
to pour out his heart (2 Samuel 7. 20^) this yet offered him much consolation,
Thou Lord know thy servant. The like see in Jeremy in much tentation, and
many grievances, Ier. 12. 3. Especially remember Job, who when he was
assaulted on every side, without and within, his friends accusing him of
hypocrisy and fighting craftily against his faith: the enemy bringing all the
terrors of God in a full army against him, and making him possess the
iniquities of his youth: yet could uphold his soul, and keep it from sinking
in this storm with the remembrance of this truth, and strongly applying it to
his heart, found powerful consolation in this; He knows my way and tries
me. That excellent Apostle persecuted by bloody Infidels, Job 23. 10.
Jews, and Heathen, slandered, and wronged by false Brethren, nay too little
esteemed by his own children in the Spirit, accounted the offscouring of all
things, could fully satisfy his own soul, and comfortably wait on God on
this knowledge, God was his witness: 1 These. 2. 13. and could therefore ^light
that censure of man 1 Cor. 3. 3. 5. We should therefore apply this for
comfort, when we are reviled as hypocrites by the world, or inwardly accused by
Satan, that God sees and will judge; when we are despised by men, that God has
chosen us; when we, and our actions in Gods service are hated and abased, that
God has loved and honored both.

Exhortation
Labor for such ways as are acceptable to God, such as he has chosen, and
commended; such as he loves, and honors. For motives, oh remember thy heart
is very deceitful, and will easily blind thee with counterfeit shows, and
false hopes if thou look not very narrowly to it. Learn therefore of this
Saint to consider thy paths, and with have putting away delays, to turn thy
feet into the ways of God. Psalm. 119.59. 60.
Say with thy self; All the ways of man are clean in his own eyes, Pro. 16.
2. and 21.2.
but the Lord weighs the spirits: Every way of man is right in his own eyes,
but the Lord pondereth the hearts. Now what shall it profit me, if I as those
vaunting Pharisees justify my self, when the Lord knows and condemns me?
what good shall I reap from man, that my actions are highly esteemed in the
world, when they are abomination to God? Luke 16.15.
Let me never forget that there is a way seeming right unto man but the issues
thereof are the ways of death: think with thy self what horror will assail
and daunt thee in that day, when having securely trusted in thine own heart
and ways, thine eyes are at length opened to see thine error, that thou and
all thy works are hated and detested by the Lord. Consider what infinite
comfort and joy will spring in thy heart in all estates, yea the most
afflicted, when thou can say in truth, that thou have tried and weighed thy
paths before they come to that great trya^l, to be pondered by the Lord; and
have unfainedly taken up those ways, and walked in them uprightly with thy
best endeavor, which God himself has chosen and set for thee, and will accept
in his mercy. Learn therefore to trust in the Lord with all thy heart, Pro.
3. 5. 6.
and lean not to thine own wisdom: in all thy ways acknowledge him, and
he shall direct thy ways.

Proposition 2. But the way of the ungodly shall perish.
In the former words the Prophet gives an infallible reason why the faithful
shall prosper in their ways, and be blessed: here also he uses a necessary
argument, why the ungodly cannot have good success, nor ever attain to
happiness. Now how soever he leaves out the Antithesis or opposite axiom to
the former, God knows not the way of ungodly men; yet is it here without
question to be understood. I will therefore handle it fully, and annexe the
cause with the effect in this entire proposition.

Proposition
God knows not the way of the ungodly, therefore they and their ways shall
perish.

The words have been before sufficiently cleared: as well who are the ungodly,
what also is meant by their ways is evident enough; their thoughts, counsels,
enterprises, nay also their outward dignity, glory, authoriritie, etc. So
likewise what this knowledge is may be easily discerned, namely, the Lord
indeed knows to take notice of them for their confusion, but to approve or
respect them knows them not. Lastly, that is said to perish, which attaines
not the end to which it is aimed, but comes to nothing.

The meaning is; The Lord also sees all the devises and plots of wicked persons
rejects, despises, and hates them, and their ways, therefore they shall
certainly be destroyed and consumed.

Proof.
Proof. Mat. 7. 23. and 25. 12. Psalm. 9. 17.

Grounds.
Grounds, as in the former proposition so here, are; First, the overruling
power of God, who does whatsoever he will. Secondly, the weakness of his
enemies, not able to resist, Psalm. 110. 1.
as being (even the proudest of them, and most rebellious) ^his footstool.
Thirdly, his infinite justice, which cannot hold the guilty innocent, Exodus
34. 7.


Instruction.
1. Whatsoever is in the wicked, whatsoever belongs to them, or is done by them,
is rejected, despised, and even scorned by God. For their persons; Psalm. 2. 4.
and 5. 5.
He that dwells in heaven shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in derision.
The fool shall not stand in thy sight, thou hate all them that work
iniquity. Pro. 3.34. Pro 10. 3.
With the scorner he scorneth. For their estate; He casts away the substance
of the wicked: for the lust of the eyes, the pomp and splendor of the wicked,
and the pride of life is of the world; hateful therefore to God. Nay if we
look to their religion, it is a burden, and hateful: Esa. 1. 13. 14.
Incense is abomination to me, I hate your new moons, etc. their sacrifices
abominable: their best works b^t glittering sins, Pro. 15. 8.
as says truly that good Father: in which respect our Savior a^firmes, Luke
16. 15.
that which is highly esteemed among men to be abomination in the sight of
God. Hence God more commends a poor child, then an old King which refuses
admonition. Verily even in that most meek Lamb of God, Eccles. 4. 13.
we cannot but see a wonderful hate and scorn of reprobate wicked persons,
even of those which were most magnified among men, either in regard of their
temporal or spiritual estate. How contemptuously does he speak of Herod?
Luke 13. 32.
Tell that Fox: how sharply and bitterly does he abase the Pharisees? Mat. 23.
from the 13. verse to the 34^ especially in that comparison verse 27. where
they are resembled to white graves, swarming with worms, and stinking with
rott^nnesse. Above all the rest, how zealous an indignation does he express
verse 33. you serpents, you generation of vipers, how should you escape the
damnation of hell?

The reasons also necessarily concluding this truth are evident: for if we
consider the ungodly either in their persons, estates, or actions, there is in
them all the true object of rejection, hate, and sc^rne: and if we look upon
God, as he has described himself in his word, we cannot but see in him those
excellent properties, which necessarily thus work upon such an object. For what
is the object of rejection but evil? Now the ungodly are evil in their
persons, states, actions; There is no good in them, Romans 7. 18. but a
continual course of evil, Genesis 6. 5. So what is the object of hate but
contrariety? And wicked men are in all things contrary to God; contrary to
his holiness, he light they darkness: he infinitely pure, they wholly and
extremely polluted: contrary to him in his rule and government, ever resisting
and rebelling. What is the object of scorn, but folly and proud beggerie? Such
are all the wicked: continually called fools by the wisdom of God, and most
justly; for certainly naturalls are not so sottish in things temporal, as
they in spiritual and eternal. They are beggars, having nothing but alms
from God, not a bit of bread, not a mouth to put it in; yet so brutishly proud,
that they despise the Giver, Heb. 1.13.
Psalm. 10.4. Now in God there is an infi^ite pureness, goodn^sse, Pro. 15. 8.9^
wisdom, and majesty, in whose eyes therefore such persons, and all their
ways cannot but be abominable.

Psal^ ^3. 18. 19^ 27.
Thou have set them in slippery places, and castest them down into desolation.
How suddenly are they destroyed, perished, and horribly consumed? Lo they that
withdraw themselves from thee, shall perish; see Job. 21. 17. 18. and Ier. 17.
5^ 6. For their thoughts, counsels, and enterprises, Psalm. 33.10
The Lord breaks the counsel of the heathen, and brings to naught the
devises of the people. His braeth departs, he returns to his earth, and his
thoughts perish. Psalm. 146^4^
so likewise see Esa. 8. 9. 10. For their pomp, honor, and glory, Psalm. 49.11.
12. 17.
They think their houses shall continue for ever, and call their lands by
their names, but mad shall not continue in honor: he is like the beasts that
die. He shall take nothing a way, when he dies his pomp shall not desend after
him. Esaias 54.14.
Hell has enlarged it self, and has opened his mouth with out measure: and
their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp, and he that reioiceth among
them shall desend into it. Nay all their hopes die with them. When a wicked man
dies, all his hope perishes. Pro. 11.7.
This truth is very frequently exemplified in the scripture: especially in
those wicked Kings, and many other persons: see also Ier. 22. from the 13.
verse to the 20. Consider the rich man in the Gospel. Luke 12. 18. 19. and 1
These: 5. 3. Herod in all his pomp is smitten, and dies eaten with lice Act. 12.
23. Reason also will strongly back this truth.

For first the very nature of all these things is earthly, and therefore turning
again to earth 1 Pet. 1. 24. made to perish, and perishing in the use. The
uery use of life, and all things perteining to it consumes it, so that the more
it grows, the more it decreases. Now the life of a wic^ed man, and all that
belongs to him, are ea^thly. There is no price to make it li^e for ever. Psalm.
49. 8. 9. were there nothing then to further it, did not the vengeance of God
wait on it, it would fall of it self.

Secondly as their persons, so their counsels, and enterprises, and all their
authority is set against God, and are contrary to him, now two contraries
cannot consist together, but one shall fall: but as God himself lives for
ever, so his counsel shall stand for ever Pro. 19. 21. and Ier. 44. 28. Ezech.
1. 6. And evident is it, that their wisdom is enmity with God, it cannot
therefore but perish. For as when an earthen pot will dash it self against a
rock, or an iron uessell, it will soon be cracked, and broken. So when we
earthen worms fall upon this stone, Math. 21. 44.
we shall be broken, and on whomsoever it shall fall, it shall grind him to
powder; see Psalm. 2. 9. It is therefore impossible there should be a God, and
that ungodly persons, counsels, and actions should prosper: but seeing God his
counsel, decrees, and honor must stand, theirs must fall. Haman, and Mordecai
cannot stand together, much less God and ungodly persons. They are but as a
potters vessel, and he crushes them with a scepter of iron, they cannot
therefore but be broken in pieces.

Reproof.
1. Here may we admire, and detest that strong folly of men, which desire,
reso^ue, and delight to be in their society, and condition which is thus
hated, rejected, and scorned by God. For do they not know that wicked persons
living in open rebellion against the laws of God, are by God rejected, and
hated? are they ignorant, that they live, and so purpose to live in this
estate? they can deny neither: yet shall no persuasion bring them out from
their resolution, but thus they have, and thus they will continue. They hear
the threatening, and thundering word of God. Pro. 15. 8. 9.
The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to the Lord, and all their ways.
Pro. 11. 20. 21.
The froward in heart are abomination to the Lord therefore though hand join
in hand, they shall not be unpunished. They hear their own sou^es testify,
while thou live in this rebellion, neglect, and restraint of prayer, contempt
of the word, breach of the Sabbath, swearing, lying, drinking, thou art a most
accursed creature. They hear the g^acious promise of God, Ezekiel. 18. 23. 31.
I Have no desire that the wicked should die, shall he not live if he return
from his evil way? and that loving invitation. Why will you die? yet are they
so bewitched with the harlotry of sin, and so besotted in their misery, that
neither Gods word, nor their own reason can persuade them to forsake their
confessed, but pl^asing death, and misery, for a confessed life, and
happiness. This wretched behavior has no other fountain, but either
Atheism, or unbelief. For either they deny God in their hearts, or at least
(which is all one) fancy him idle, and not regarding, without any care or
providence; or else they give no credit in heart to those threats and promises
of God. Certainly many delude themselves with a conceit of mercy even in the
highest rebellion, and especially with the thought of turning at better
leisure; nothing doubting but that if they have time to say, Lord have mercy
on me, all will be well with them. In humane affairs, because the displeasure
of the Prince is as the roaring of a Lion, hence whatsoever may bring them into
disgrace, they will carefully avoid, and if they have incurred his anger, what
will they not do to appease his wrath, and procure his favor? But their
contrary behavior to God, cannot but argue a contrary persuasion.

2. The vain labor of worldly men hunting so hotly and eagerly pursuing
wicked Mammon. It is wonderful to see the brutish, nay more th^n beastly
sencelesnesse of professed Christians this way, with what incredible pains and
delight they follow after the fading world: If either the word had not made
them know, or their own experience confirmed to them the vanity and vexation
of all earthly things; if they knew not they should carry nothing away with
them, there might be some show of excuse in such people: But when they deny
not that truth; yet to take such pains for a fading, vexing vanity, which
even now in it self is nothing worth (but in the eyes of fools,) and
instantly will be nothing at all; is more folly then can suit with a
reasonable creature. For to seek and search for wicked riches and pleasures,
that is, to pursue our own destruction, what madness is beyond it? what
marvel to see a fool, child, or Lunatike to delight in some hurtful thing?
Alas they want the use of that reason which should direct them! But for a
creature able to use his reason, for a Christian that enjoyes the light of
understanding, nay of the word and Spirit, thus to do at, it passes the
conceit of a man how they should be wrought to it. Can any man plead
ignorance, and say? Pro. 23. 5.
I knew not that I should forsake this life, and the appurtenances of it; I
knew not that riches have wings as an Eagle: I knew not it was as a spiders
web? Esaias 59. 6. Job 8. 14. 15. that my honors, profits, pleasures should
perish, and all my thoughts and labors vanish like a cloud? What Christian but
must confess? I know that good men shall leave an inheritance to their
childrens children, but the riches of the wicked are laid up for the just. Pro.
13. 22.
If the wicked heap up silver as the dust, and prepare raiment as the clay,
he may prepare it, Job. 27.16.17
but the just shall put it on, and he shall divide the silver. The riches of
vanity shall diminish: Pro. 13. 11. Pro. 21.7.
Nay the happiness of the wicked shall destroy them: yet will they by fraud,
cousonage, oppression, lies, perjuries, and all manner of wickedness, labor
to enrich themselves, and be loaded with thick clay. How true and fearful
is that saying, Pro. 21.6.
That gathering of treasures by a deceitful tongue is vanity tossed to and
fro of them that seek death. Our experience of Gods curse upon such wicked
substance has begotten a proverb, that ill got goods never prosper: yet as if
joy, comfort, life, and happiness wholly consisted in earthly things, so do
men run and poast after them.

Exhortation
To shut up all in a word of exhortation: use all diligence, and labor to come
out of this cursed estate. I do not wish thee to look out, and long for
happiness: nature, and self love will enforce this desire; and thou can as
well remove hunger, and thirst from thy body, as this wish of happiness from thy
soul. But as thou desire to be blessed: so seek it in the right way.
Hearken not to ungodly counsels: give no credit to the vain persuasions of
unexperienced guides, never acquainted with true blessedness, or the way that
leads to it Trust in the Lord thy God: 2 Chronicles. 20. 20.
and thou shall be assured, believe his Prophets, and thou shall prosper. Say
to thy soul: Art not thou spiritual and immortal, and are not all these
things in this world in which ungodly persons place their happiness, carnal,
sensual, and perishing in the use? and is it possible that an immortal Spirit
can be blessed by enjoying things fleshly and fading? Does not thy excellency
consist in likeness to thy Creator and Redeemer, and in his divine nature? and
how then should sinful men, and counsels, directing thee, or rather plunging
thee in the mirie ways of worldly Mammon, wicked riches, advancements, and
pleasures, bring thee to this thy happiness. When I hear or read of an humane
creature mingling himself with a beast, I disdain, loath, I detest his
filthiness; and account him for the greater beast of the twain, eve^ an
abominable monster. If thou then an heavenly and glorious substance shall dote
upon earth and dung, can thou esteem thy self any other then a prodigy, or
monster in nature? Oh then learn with an holy disdain to scorn, that thou in
thy understanding, will, and affections, should be wholly employed in the
world, and settled on earth, where thou have no mansion. But follow thou the
conduct of this experienced Guide the holy Prophet, and that more perfect
Leader the most holy Spirit. Set and settle thy affections upon these things,
which will deserve them. Turn the stream of thy covetousnes to covet
spiritual gifts. 1. Cor. 14.1. Take off thy ambitious desires from the world,
and let this be all thy ambition, 2 Cor. 5. 9.
that both dwelling at home, and removing from home, thou may be acceptable
to him. Is there not another world, another life, another food, raiment,
treasures, another inheritance, another Lord of all flesh, and spirits: who is
over all, and in all. Is not his love better then life? Psalm. 63. 3. And are
not all these spiritual, immortal, and glorious? were it not madness then in
thee, being an immortal spirit, to forsake all these, and cleave to earth? Is
not Christ thy life, nourishment of thy life, thy meat, and drink indeed? Is
not he thy glorious covering? Oh then put on the Lord Jesus, and take no
thought for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it. It is thy Saviors voice
which invites^ and calls thee, John 7. 37. John 4. 15.
If thou thirst come to me and drink; and will thou not answer with that
woman, Lord give me of that water that I may never thirst? Skin for skin,
and all that a man has will he give for his life, let therefore this life into
thee: Gal. 2.20.
Live by faith in the Son of God, who will live in thee. Hide up thy life
with Christ in God, that when he appears thou may also appear with him in
glory. Colos. 3.3.4.


And to this end remember-he has given thee his word to instate thee in this
happiness, to be a light to thy understanding, a rule to thy will and
affections; to guide, and never leave thee, till it bring thee to blessedness.
It is that which will nourish thee in it: 1 Pet. 1. 23. and 2. 2.
that which will build thee up, and give thee an inheritance among those that
are sanctified. Acts.20. 32.
Oh then hold thine eyes, thine ears, thy heart close unto it, Josh. 1. 8.
to read, hear, meditate in it day and night, so shall thou prosper in all thy
ways, so shall thou grow up like a flourishing and fruitful Palm, planted by
the Rivers of water, and be blessed for ever.

(...)

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A
Page. AFflictions: How they are a means of good unto us. Page 163. 164.165.
An examination of our profiting by Afflictions. p. 167.168 A reproof of such
as vpbraid the Children of God in and for their Afflictions. 169. Comfort to
the Afflicted, in that their estate. 172. Atheism: An vnreverend estimation of
Scripture, is a sure sign of Atheism and Infidelity. p. 11. Attention: The
words Author should raise us to Attention. p. 9.
B.
Barrenness: It cannot be of Spiritual fruit, where there is Delight in, and
Meditation on the word. 145. We ought to consider of our Barrenness. 194.195.
Baseness: There is nothing but Baseness in wickedness. 221. Beginnings: The
Beginnings of delight in Gods law^ is a comfort to Gods servants. 140. Beauty:
The wicked cannot discern any Beauty in Holiness. 185. Blessedness: Its
description, and whence it follows. 1. 2. No sailing to its Haven without the
Word. p. 2. This Blessedness, discovered more fully by elegant similitudes. 18.
19. 20. The word Blessed, yet more fully unfolded. 20. That the Elect of God,
not only shall be h^reafter, but are already Blessed. 28. Repentance is the
way to Blessedness. 48. D^light in Gods law brings Blessedness. 89. That a
wicked man is not blessed. 175. Blessedness: Wherein it consists not. 176.
Reasons for it. 178.
C
Chafe, what and wherein the wicked are resembled thereunto. 219. Chang^, a
reproof of such as change not, or if they do it is for the worse. 136.137.
Christ: a complaint, with an answer to that complaint of all discouragements,
of following Christ. 10.11. Christian: how a weak or distressed Christian is
to be handled. 34,35. Company: vide Fellowship. Whosoever desires to be
happy, must avoid the company of the wicked. 26. How far the company of
the wicked must be necessarily avoided. ibid and 27. Congregation: what the
word signifies. 2. Contrite: comfort for the contrite. Counsel: what it
signifies. 21. Wicked Counsel will not be wanting as long as we live in
this world. 22. A caveat for such as give ungodly counsel. 34. The inevitable
mischief of such as follow the counsel of the wicked. 240. Curse: nothing but
sin and wickedness can bring a curse. 179.
D
Darkness: what it does most commonly intend or imply. 129. Death: how the
spiritual death is resembled with bodily. 108.109. Delight: Delight in Gods
Law brings blessedness. 89. And sweetness. 96. We must be so delighted in the
law, as by it to be refreshed. ib. Reasons to enforce this affection of delight
in the Law. 97 What a temporary delight the wicked have in the word. 99 A
pressing to this delight. 106 Where there is delight in, and meditation on the
word, there can be no barrennes. 145 Delight in the word brings not only grace
but glory also. 149 And prosperity. 160.161 Deny: how men deny God in his
word, how in their works. 103 Devil: he is a cunning fowler. 22.23 Doing,
that is the fruit of the good seed of Gods word. 114 115 Hearing and doing
must go together. ibid
E
Edification: we must so have the word in our selves, as to edify others
also. 113 Elect: the Elect of God not only shall be hereafter, but are ^lready
bl^ssed. 28 A reproof of such as make no good use of the doctrine of Election
and Predestination. 259 Estate: A twofold knowledge by which we may judge of
our Estate. 54.55 Evil: The heart of man is not only prone to evil, (...)
resolute in it. 47
F
Faithful: They can never fall finally. 149 Vide fall. The faithful must not
limit God his time for the accomplishment of his promises. 155 Fall: The
faithful can never fall finally. 149 This is strongly, sweetly, and soundly
maintained. 150 An objection answered. 151.156,157 Comforts against that
uncomfortable doctrine of Pelagius. 158 In all the judgments of God the wicked
shall fall. 234 Feeling: How sinful men feel not their misery, with their
woe therein. 181 Fellowship vide Company. p. 26.27 Follow: A sweet
encouragement to follow such a Leader or Guide as Christ. 10 An answer to such
discouragements as may dishearten us herein. ibid Fortune: The folly of laying
good and evil success upon the shoulders of Fortune. 170 Fruit: When the word
is rightly heard, fruit follows. 144 Reasons of it. 144.145
G
Glory: The wicked shall never enter into Glory. 202 Reasons. 202.203. God: How
he is denied in his word, how in our works, 103. 104 Grace: Its resembled with
salt. 24 Grace is communicatiue. 39 Growth in Grace is not presently perfected.
154 Grace does not, neither can spring from Nature. 200 True saving Grace as it
is planted, so nourished by the word. 200 The heart of a wicked man so far as
it is wicked, is incapable of the fruits of Grace. 201 Grafting: How used, and
what is employed by it. 131 Signs of being truly engrafted into Christ.
132.133 Growth: A full growth of grace is not gotten as soon as it is planted.
154.
H
Happiness: Whosoever desires to be happy must avoid the company of the
wicked. 26 Reasons for it. ibid Must delight in Gods Law. 97 How to know
whether we be entered into that way of happiness 98 It is the word of God that
makes men happy. 109 The happiness of man consists not in any one outward
blessing. 176 Reasons for it. 178 Hearing: A reproof of our negligence in
Hearing, in that we consider not, that God speaks by his Ministers. 15 The
danger of not being diligent in hearing. 16 A persuasion to this diligence.
ibid Hearing and doing must go together. 114.115 Of our strange neglect of
Hearing, with an answer to those frivolous excuses which men make for the same.
118.119. 120 When the word is rightly heard, fruit follows. 144 Holiness: The
wicked cannot discern any beauty in holiness. 185 A wicked man so far
forth as he is wicked is incapable of the fruits of holiness. 200.201 Where
true holiness is, it will not suffer wickedness to dwell in the heart
peaceably. 201
I
Ignorance: Wilful stubbornes is worse then gross Ignorance 50.51 How hereby
a man may judge of a knowing Papist. 52 Ignorance expressed by the word
darkness. 129 Infidelity: An vnreverend estimation of Scripture is a sure
sign of Infidelity. 11 Judgments: The cursed security of our sluggish
nature will never tremble at the judgments of God, until they attach us. 227
The ungodly shall not stand in judgment. 229 The signification of the word
judgment. 230 The judgment of the wicked. 231 In all the judgments of God
the wicked shall fall. 234 The fearful security of such as prepare not for
the judgment Day. 235.236.^37 Motives to mind that Day. 239 Just: Sinners
shall not stand in the Congregation of the just. 240 Proved. 241
K
Knowledge: What knowledge is said to be in God. 252 The sweet comfort of Gods
knowing us. 261 We should labor for such ways as those, by which God may
know us. 261.262
L
Law: The Law of the Lord how taken. 88.89 Delight therein causes blessedness.
89 The Laws sweetness. 94 A censure of such as find no sweetness in the Law.
105 A pressing motive to take delight in the Law. 106 Leaf: The life of the
godly is expressed by the never-fading leaf. 143 Learn, Man is ind^cible,
till God does teach. 6 Life: The word is compared to many things tending to
life. 110 The Ever-flourishing Life of the godly is expressed by the
never-fading leaf. 143
M
Meditation: What it signifies? pa, 107 Reasons pressing Meditation on the
word. 116 Means to make our hearts fit for Meditation. 124. 125 Mercy: Gods
mercies, are not disposed according to man's fancies. 193 Mock: vid: Scorn:
How God is mocked both in his word, in his works, in his Saints. 74 75. and^.
Mocking: what a high degree of sin it is. 77 A sharp reproof for mockers.
79. 72 It is devilish profanenes, and how it appears. 83 The fearefulnes of
the sin of mocking of the meanest of Gods ^^nisters. 84 Wherein the Papists
mocking of God and Religion, appears. 85. 86
N.
Nature: Grace does not, neither can spring from nature. 200 Natures cursed
security, in that it will not tremble at the Judgments of God till they
attach us. 227 Neglect: Of our neglect in hearing the word, with all the
frivolous excuses made for the same. 118.119.120
O.
Outward: The happiness of man consists not in any one outward blessing. 176
P.
Palm Tree: what, and why the godly are compared to it. page 128.129. As the
fruit of the Palm Tree is long in growing: so the fruits of the Spirit, come
not presently to maturitie. 147 The wicked are in nothing, like the Palm Tree.
189 Confir^ed by Reason. 190 Papists: Their abominable abuse of Scripture.
11.12.13 A rule whereby to judge of a knowing Papist. 52 Wherein the Papists
mocking of God and Religion appears. 85.86 A layi^g open of the hypocrisy of
that false Church of Papists. 145 How they subvert the inward and outward parts
of Gods worship. 245.246.247. Perseverance: Stubborn perseverance in a wilful
course after warning from Gods word, is a state far worse then gross
ignorance. 50 A refutation of the opinion of them that deny the perseverance
of the Saints. 155 Objections thereof answered. 156.157.etc. Plant: The
examination of our plantation and transplantation in Gods Garden. 135.152
Policy: No Policy can prosper without counsel from the word. 212 Reasons.
213 Practice: It is the fruit of that good seed of Gods word. 114 115 Reasons
why hearing and practice must go together, 115 Preaching: It being true and
sound, ought to be received with reverence and subjection, above any word or
Law of any creature. 91,92, etc. Promise: The faithful must not limit God his
time for the accomplishment of his promises. 155 Prosperity: what it is. 159
Whom it shall follow. 160 161 Objections on instances against the prosperity
of the godly. 162.163 How the wicked prosper. 166 The ungodly do not always
prosper. 198.199 Reasons. 200 The wicked are but woeful in their most
prosperous condition. 209 Reasons to confirm it. 210.211 What prosperity it
i^ which evil men so hunt after. 214 A reproof of such as desire prosperity,
and yet take the way that leads to destruction. 215 An Exhortation to take the
right pathway to prosper. 216 Psalm: This first Psalms Sum. 3 With its
division into general parts. ibid David, and in him the Holy Ghost is the
Author of this first Psalm. 4 Proved by reasons. 5
R
Repentance: It is the only way to blessedness. 48 Repentance defined. 49 The
manifold change that is in it. 49.50 A sweet comfort to sinners in their
penitent estate. 86 Resist: Two kinds of Resisters of God and his word, one
open, another private. 56 Diverse instances of stout Resist^rs of Gods word,
60.61. Their wickedness that resist the word. 117 Resolution: That the heart of
man is not only prone to sin, but resolut^ in it. 47 Righteous: what is meant
by the way of the righteous. 251 The Lord chooses out the righteous for
himself, and their paths for them. 255 Reasons for it. ibid, etc. The Lord
loves not only the persons of the righteous, but their ways also. 256 Their
infallible happiness. 256 The endless comfort which the righteous have of this,
that God kn^weth them. 261 We should labor that he might so know us. ibid
S
Sabbath: Sabbath Breakers reproved. 138 Saints: A Saints estate blessed even
in his rebukes. 29 His estate at the worst is most happy. 29 30 He is all
glorious within. ibi^ The trial of being a Saint. 32.33 Salt: Grace fitly
resembled to Salt. 24 Salvation: the words power to Salvation. 108.109
Scripture: An vnreverend estimation of it, is a sure argument of Infidelity
and Atheism. 11 The particulars wherein Papists despitefully speak against
the Scripture. 11.12.13 Scorn: Scorner: What is meant by these two words. 69
How God is scorned in his word, in his works, and in his Saints. 74.75.76
Scorning, what a high degree of sin it is. 77 Seat: what is meant by the word
seat, and phrase of sitting. 68 Security: It must be shaken off. 249 The
means how. 250 Self: a gentle reproof of such as are strangers to themsel: 13
How Pharisaicall most men are herein. 14 Sickness: It and sin resembled. 71
Sin vide wickedness. Sinners, the diverse acceptance of the word. 45 The
heart of man is not only prone to sin, but resolute in it. 47 Degrees of sins
and sinners. 70 Sin and sickness resembled. 71 Heinous sins do heavily
infect. ibid One sin is a step to another. 72 Examples of this. 73.74 A
sweet comfort to sinners in their return by repentance. 86 Nothing but sin
brings a curse. 179 The woeful senselesne sof such as feel no burden in the
weight of sin. 187 Stand: what is signifies. 45 Subtlety: The Devils
subtlety described. 22.23 Success: The folly of such as lay good and evil
success on the shoulders of Fortu^e. 170 Sweetness: The Laws sweetness. 94
A censure of such as find no sweetness in the Law. 105
T
Teach: Man is indocible till God does teach. 6 How God does tutor us in his
Teaching. 8 A sound and sweet method of Teaching. 31 Temptation: A pretty
description of the Devils subtilties in his Temptations. 22.23 Tree: the Godly
that delight in, and meditate on Gods Law are compared to a tree planted by the
Rivers side. 127.128 What Tree is there meant by the Psalmist. 128 How, and why
the Godly are compared to the Palm Tree. 128.129.
V
Understanding: What our Understanding is by the word, and what without it. 6.7
Ungodly: vide wicked. That they are not blessed. 175 They do not always
prosper. 198.199 Unprofitableness: It ought to be acknowledged even in the
best. 194
W
Walking: the metaphorical word walk, what it signifies, 20. Water the word
compared not only to water, but to Rivers of water. 134 Wickedness vide
sin. Wicked: Whosoever desires happiness, must eschew the company of the
wicked. 26 How far the company of the wicked must necessarily be avoided.
ibid The inevitable mischief of such as follow the counsel of the wicked.
43.44 That the wicked are not blessed. 175 Every wick: man is a cursed
creature, and a wretched man. 182 Though their condition seem altogether
contrary. 183 The wicked can discern no beauty in holiness. 185 The wicked
are nothing like the Palm Tree. 189 The word profits not the wicked. 191
Reasons of it. 192 The wicked shall never enter into glory. 202 Reasons.
202.203 A faithless persuasion of the wicked, that they have faith, 205.207
The wicked woeful in their prosperous condition. 209 Wherein the wicked are
likened to chafe. 219 They are good for nothing. 220 Base in the eyes of God.
221 Though the wicked prosper, yet Gods judgments will find them out, and so
fall on them. 222.223 A reproof of such as will not be winnowed by the wind of
Gods word from their wickedness. 222.223 The wicked enjoy good things, but not
for their good. 233 In all the judgments of God the wicked shall fall. 234
They a^e despised of God in what ever belongs to them, or is done by them.
263.264 Notable grounds and reasons for it. 264 265 The Uses of it. 266
Wisdom: All the wisdom of the world without the word cannot prosper. 212 A
reproof of such as prefer their own wits before Gods wi^edome. 215 Word: It
is the way to blessedness. 2 A confutation of Popery, for making the Law no
perfect rule or direction. 100 How God is denied in his word. 103.104 The word
is sharp. ibid A reproof of such as find no sweetness in the word. 105 The
words power to salvation. 108.109 It only makes men happy. ibid The word is
compared to every thing tending to life: 110 Of our study that should be in
the word. 111 It is the most excellent object that is. 112 We must so have the
word in our selves, as thereby to edify others also. 113 A reproof of our
neglect in reading and hearing of Gods word. 118.119. The word is not only as
water, but as River of water: with the meaning of it. 134 When the word is
rightly heard, fruit follows. 144.145 The word profits not the wicked. 191
Reasons of it. 192 A due censure of such as converse not so much in the word,
as to feel the sweetness thereof. 196 The rejecting thereof by any person or
people consumes the^. 197 Motives to make us clea^e to the word. 198 All
wisdom without the word cannot prosper. 212 World: The vanity of worldly
minded men. 268 The way to get out of worldly mindedness. 269 Worship: A
reproof of that common sin of devised worship. 102
FINIS.

