A MEMORIAL of the famous monuments and charitable almesdeedes of the Right
worshipful Master William Lamb Esquire, sometime Gentleman of the Chapel,
in the reign of the most renowned King Henry the eight, etc. And late Citizen
of London, and free of the Right worshipful company of Clothworkers: deceased
the 21. of April. An. 1580.

Recorded in print, according to the tenor and truth of his last will and
Testament by Abraham Fleming.

SACRIFIZIO AGNELLO SALVAZIONE MVNDO



Tobit. 4, 1^* G(...) of thy bread to the hungry, and of thy garments to them
that are na^ed: and of all thine abundance give (...).

VIRTVTE * DVCE. W L COMITE * FORTVNA.



A memorial of the famous monumentes, and charitable almesdeedes of the Right
worshipful Master William Lamb Esquire, etc.
Give me leave (good Christians) to commend to memory the notable acts and
famous monuments of a right Gentleman, loved in his life, and lamented at his
death: whose praises to suppress with silence, sithence they are deserved and
not sought, it were a wrong, as I judge in conscience, which the very
Monuments of memory were usual among the Heathen.
Heathen would not once conceive, much less commit, if they had been (as we
are) eye and ear witnesses of his meritorious deeds. Give me leave (I say)
for the glory of God, and the memory of the Gentleman, to report unto the
world, or at least to the people of this land, not the visions of a vain head,
not the sudden devises of an unstaid brain, not the rash rimes of a running
pen, not the bold babbling of an imagined lie, not the cunning conueiance of
a wanton toy, etc. but The Argument of this small pamphlet.
the determinations of a devout mind, the precise purposes of a settled heart,
the commendable works of a liberal hand, the very certeintie of an undoubted
truth, which is worthy, not to be printed in white and black, but to be
graven in Marble with letters of gold, in the memorial of him after death,
whose deeds did sufficiently advance him in his life.

A great matter, and of more importance than the common sort of people can
conceive, to undertake the blasoning of so The memory of whom shall never die.
virtuous a man's manifold benefits* wherein as I want wit to write as he is
worthy, so I lack skill to dispose and order the sundry circumstances, which
offer themselves to my barren invention, touching his last will and testament.
There are missing in me the meetest means in this matter, quickenesse of
capacity, smoothness of speech, ripeness of judgment: I Presupposed
impediments concerning the writer.
am a stranger, or rather a nouesse in affairs of the world, unacquainted
with the trades of men, as called to a more solitary life: which (besides
other unremembered) are impediments, whereby I shall seem so much the more
insufficient to accomplish this enterprise, by how much I am to complain of
the want of knowledge and experience. Again, my method will be more marked,
for his sake concerning whom it is purposely penned: and in some thing wherein
I think my self not to have offended, I may do amiss, and so incur
controlment. For where many eyes are fixed, many faults may be found: and
many minds may soon judge where a thing may be amended.

But I, though not cunning, yet careful to deliver in due order According to
the tenor of the Testators own last will and testament.
the truth of this Gentleman's almesdeedes: beseech all such as shall pervse
this pamphlet, not so much to descant upon the writers rude and unpolished
report, as looking for some deintie devise to tickle their itching ears: but
to behold with earnest eyes the Testatours bountiful bequests, which as they
cannot, being so charitable, but smell sweet in the Lords sight, even so they
deserve Two necessary things wished.
a pithie commemoration, which I would to God I were able to compass: and (if
it could be) an effectual imitation, which the Lord God work in the hearts of
all them that are wealthy.

To come therefore to our purpose, a custom it has been both ancient and
famous, not only among Pagans, with whom in deeds of devotion I intend not
to deal, but also among people fearing God, and addicted to the extolling of
his name, that the notable acts of such persons as were singular, should not
sleep in oblivion, but by one monument or other made immortal. Hereupon some
by one Profane writers verify this matter.
solemn ceremony, some by another, had that honor and renown done unto them
after death, by some notable devise of man, were it either workmanship of the
hand, or invention of the head, which did as it were revive, and restore them
again to life. Among all the rest, passing over a multitude, we shall see,
even in the sacred Scriptures, that the holy Ghost has vouchsafed some such
special and sovereign dignity, as to have The memory of whom is
everlasting.
their names registered even in the Bible, their virtues extolled, their deeds
advanced: partly that the remembrance of them should never die, and partly to
be prouocations unto us to walk worthy of our calling.

This to be a truth, the very touchstone of truth does testify. For, there
is none so ignorant, but can quickly call to memory, where mention is made of
Eight triplicities of notable and famous men.
Enoch, Noe, and Abraham: Isaach, Jacob, and Joseph: Moses, Aaron, and Phinees:
Iosue, Caleb, and Samuel: Nathan, David, and Solomon: Elias, Elizeus, and
Ezekias: Jeremy, Ezechiel, Zorobabel: Neemias, Sem, and Seth, etc. holy and
approved men in the eyes of the highest: and commended in Scripture, some for
their faithfulness, some for their meekness, some for their wisdom, some
for their innocence, some for their valiantness, some for their riches, some
for their glory, some for one blessing of God, and some for another.

Wherein Observations to be noted.
is to be observed, first the love of God toward his elect, in that he
vouchsafes his servants so notable a register: Secondly the rare virtues
wherewith they were endued, deserving immortal memory: Thirdly that the
wicked are not recorded, but for the reviving of their reproach: And fourthly
that the remembrance of both, might breed in us a desire to do well, that
good may grow thereby: and a detesting of the contrary, which commonly
brings shame.

The The offense of Cain made his name odious.
name of Cain, or the report of his deeds, are they written to his
commendation? Nothing less. For as the offense which he committed was heinous,
so is his name odious. As well then are the wicked recorded, as the righteous:
that by a view of eithers life, our election might be the better grounded. Few
fathers that love their children, will baptize them by the name of Absalon, of
Achitophel, of Hamman, of Judas? And why? Because the course of these men's
conversation was so accurssed, that they became abominable whiles they lived:
and though their bodies in tract of time putrified and waxed rotten, yet the
holy Ghost by committing their acts to memory, has doubled their infamy.

So then the sequel of all is this, that Both good and bad registered in the
Bible.
as well the wicked as the righteous have their remembrance in Gods book: but
in contrary respects, the one to become more famous, the other more infamous:
the one more beloved, the other more hated: the one more honored, the other
more abhorred: the one more followed as commendable, the other more eschewed as
condemnable. What praise has the proud Pharisie by his memorial in the
Gospel? His hypocrisy turns his glory into shame. What renown the rich
glutton, what fame the thriftles servant, what advancement the unrepentant
thief? The Not without the grace of God.
Publicane was justified, poor Lazarus glorified, the trusty servant
rewarded, the sorrowful thief received, and all this appears manifest in the
volume of the Bible, as monuments which no age, no time, no season shall consume.

Do you not remember, that the holy Ghost speaks of a covetous miser, a
wretch, a worldling, one that very buisily occupied his head about enlarging
his barnes, that his soul might be more merry in the midst of his
abundance: not mindful in the mean space of the This night they shall fetch
thy soul from thee.
shortness of his journey? Believe me, this is written no more to his
commendation, than the pretended innocence of Pilate in condemning Christ, is
noted to his honor. And now to rich men I must direct the sum of all my
speech: for having to deal with the distribution of riches, how can I omit
such a needful common place?

It is a sore saying of S. James, which he uses to the wealthy of the world,
A hard reckoning for rich men.
Go to now ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall come upon
you. Your riches are corrupt, and your garments are moth-eaten. Your gold and
silver is cankred, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you, and shall
eat your flesh as it were fire, etc. The place is known. They are bitter
words of S. Paul, touching the same matter, that Such as will be rich fall
into tentation and snares, and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which
drown men in perdition and destruction. For the desire of money is the root
of all evil, which while some lusted after, they erred from the faith, and For
they are never at quiet in themselves, neither in soul nor body.
pierced themselves through with many sorrows. But a sharp sentence against
such is that of our Savior Christ, uttered not with a naked and bare
pronuntiation, but confirmed with an oath: Verily I say unto you, that a rich
man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven. This is made more manifest
by a comparison of impossibility, in the words following, It is easier for a
camel, (or a cable rope) to go thorough the eye of a needle, than for a rich
man to enter into the kingdom of God. And therefore the good counsel of our
Savior is to be taken in due and acceptable time, To lay up treasures for our
selves in heaven, where neither moth nor canker corrupts, and where thieves
neither dig through nor steal.

And the example of the young Gentleman mentioned in the Gospel, being a rich
heir, and in possession of much land, is no less to be marked, Riches an
enemy to the salvation of the soul.
who after he had been instructed what to do toward the attainement of
eternal life, was likewise exhorted, if he would be perfect, to sell all that
he had, and to give it to the poor. But the hearing of this unsavory doctrine
stoong him at the heart as loath to buy the ioies of heaven with the loss of his
temporal treasures: whereupon he went away sorrowful, as unwilling to make so
hard a reckoning.

This is a thing not only worthy rehersall, but also remembrance: and not
only remembrance, but also consideration. And though they are but words, yet
they have their As proceeding from christ and his Apostles.
weight, they have their truth, they have their certeintie. For heaven and
earth shall pass, but one word of the Son of man shall not pass, as our
Savior testifies of himself. And therefore, will rich men live in Gods love,
and die in his favor? Then let them be merciful, as their heavenly Father is
merciful. Will rich men be at peace with God, and his son Christ? Then let
them follow him, who said, that Except they forsake wife, children, kindred,
house, lands and life, they are not worthy to be his disciples.

Will rich men so die, that they may live in the Lord? Then Good counsel for
the rich.
let them be charitable and pitiful, liberal and bountiful: for the riches
wherewith they are blessed, though theirs in possession for the time of their
life, yet let them know that the Lord will one day look over his accounts,
and call them to a reckoning. God forbid that rich men should despair of their
salvation, because they are rich. Abraham was rich, yet was he faithful: Lot
rich, yet righteous: Tobie rich, yet merciful: Job rich, yet innocent: Zacheus
rich, yet bountiful. And therefore, as in former ages, it has pleased God,
with his blessings temporal to knit assured hope of life eternal in the
hearts of his chosen: so there is no cause of mistrust, but that the Lord Some
rich men Gods servants.
has reserved unto himself a remnant of rich men, in these latter days,
though dangerous, whose light shining to the world, and their good works
plentifully employed to the benefit of the comfortless, provoke every
godly disposed person to glorify our Father which is in Heaven.

A rare testimony hereof may be seen in this famous City, even at this
instant, in Master William Lamb Esquier.
a notable Gentleman, whose good deeds bare witness of his Christianity in his
life, and shall continue the memory of his charity after death. Of whom,
because it is a travel purposely undertaken, I must speak that to his
commendation, which he deserves. And though I cannot apply my pen
sufficiently to express his praise: yet by the commemoration or recital of
his benefits, every indifferent reader will soon gather what is due to such
a singular Gentleman.

And first, to touch the Learning a ready way to honor.
instrument of his advancement, learning I mean, I will say no more than I
have laid before me in writing, and may boldly exemplify: that the
knowledge and understanding wherewith the Lord vouchsafed to replenish him,
removed him from a mean estate, to a worshipful calling: from the Country, to
the Court: where being placed even in the Chapel, to serve his sovereign
Lord Master Lamb in favor with King Henry the eight.
King Henry the eight of immortal memory, of whom he was well liked, and
beeloued, he spent his time appointed in such seemelinesse as might be thought
requisite for his degree and person.

And remembering that learning brings preferment, yea even to them which are
but basely borne, as it pleased God to move him by his good and gracious
spirit, he proved himself by testimonials of his doings, a lover of learning,
and a favorer of every honest profession. For in the town of Sutton Valens
in Kent, this worshipful Gentleman at his own costs and proper expenses
erected a The erection of a Grammar school and necessary allowance to the
Master and Usher.
Grammar school for the education of youth in the fear of God, in good
manners, in knowledge and understanding.

He also weieng with himself, that The labourer ought of right to have his
hire: And that, No man goes to war of his own proper charge, besides other
commodities which he thought meet and necessary, has allowed the Master
twenty pounds, and the Usher ten pounds, from time to time, as either place
shall be supplied by succession, for their yearly stipends and perpetual
pensions. To continue the rehersall of his good deeds in Sutton aforesaid,
note his tender and pitiful heart toward the poor, for whose sustentation,
maintenance, and relief, he has Alms houses built for the poor.
builded six alms houses for the impotent* and has given six pounds to be
yearly paid unto them for their necessary provision. Moreover, besides this
charitable deed, to keep still within the compass of Kent, mark the
singular love which this Gentleman did bear unto learning, for the furtherance
whereof, and the more encouragement of poor scholars, he has given to the
school of Maidstone, Allowance for poor men's children to be kept at school.
ten pounds a year for ever, with this caveat or prouiso, that need^e men's
children should be preferred to the enioieng of this singular benefit.

Here you see, in the County of Kent, the monumentes which this worthy
Gentleman has left behind him: and now be you judges, whether these so godly
and charitable works of Christianity, deserve not a more permanent memorial
than pen and ink can perform. There remains behind a remembrance of other
his notable acts, which as they are not to be omitted, so it is to be wished
they were accordingly followed.

That this Gentleman had not only a regard for the seede-plots of learning,
to have them watered with the springs of his bounty: but also a provident eye,
and The Co^monwelth remembered.
a careful heart for the profit of the Common-welth, the particulars following
substantially do prove. For, seeing in his life time, the decay of sundry
trades, the ruin of diverse occupations, and other inconveniences, which are
like to grow to the undoing of a multitude, except by policy they be
prevented: of a mere affection (if I said fatherly I were not controllable)
he has freely given to A relief to poor Clothiers in diverse place:
the poor Clothiers in Suffolk: to the poor Clothiers of Bridgenorth in
Shropshire, and to the poor Clothiers at Ludlow in the said County, three
hundred pounds, to be paid by even portions, to each several town of the
said Counties, one hundred pounds a piece, for their supportation and
maintenance at their work and occupation.

Furthermore, the well of his well-doing not yet waxing dry, but yielding
liquor of relief very largely, has watered other places. For, as the
Country, so likewise the City, (this City London the better by Master Lamb.
I mean of London) has cause, yea just cause with open month to magnify the
goodness of God, so mightily working in this praise worthy Esquire. The
memorable monuments, which shall live when he is dead, and shall flourishe when
he is rotten, are witnesses of the love, which he being a Citizen bare unto
this City.

For, let us begin with the A remembrance of Holborne Conduit founded and
finished in Anno 1577.
Conduite which he of his own costs, not requiring either collection or
contribution, founded of late in Holborne, not sparing expenses so it might be
substantial, not pinching for charges so it might be durable and plentiful,
as they can testify which saw the seeking of the springs, the manner of making
the trenches, the ordering of the pipes, lieng in length from the head, to the
said Conduite, more than two thousand yardes: and finally, the framing of
every necessary appurtenance thereunto belonging. Besides this, The wast
water at the bridge running at the Standart.
means is made, by a Standart with one cock at Holborne bridge to conueie the
wast, which does such service, the water thereof being both sweet, pleasant,
and wholesome, as neither rich nor poor can well miss. Which great work as he
advisedly attempted, so he commendably finished, having disbursed thereabouts,
of his own costs and charges to the sum of fifteen hundred pounds.

And yet further note the wisdom and providence of this Gentleman, who
considering that the right use of a good thing might cut off Provident
considerations.
many occasions of unthriftiness and idleness, and knowing that we are placed
in this world to follow the vocation whereunto we are called: besides that,
seeing the hardness of this age wherein we live, that many would work if they
had means, many neglect and care not for work though they have means, some
would willingly withstand poverty if they might, some had rather beg and do
worsse than give themselves to labor, has been thus beneficial to Poor
women benefited by the Conduit.
poor women that are glad to take pain, as to bestow upon them a hundred and
twenty pales, wherewith to carry and serve water: an honest shift of living,
though somewhat toilsome.

Note also with this charitable disposition for the establishing of the right
use of his Conduit, his Christian heart wholly He was very devout and religious.
given to contemplation. For he was not only careful that it should go well
with the body, but also mindful of the safety of the soul. Which to be
true, I fetch my confirmation from his own person, whose daily custom it was
to meditate upon a Prayer book, called A prayer book, called Lambs Conduit of
Comfort.
The Conduit of Comfort, published under his name: that with the water thereof
his soul, as with the other his body, might be refreshed. The benefit of
which book, being bought for a little money; he was willing should be general,
even as the Conduit which he founded not several but common.

To descend and come down to other his almesdeedes, you shall understand,
that he being a member of the Right worshipful corporation and society of
Clothworkers, The Right worshipful Clothworkers remembre^d.
was not forgetful of that Company, unto whom he has given his dwelling
house in London, with other lands, and tenements, to the value of thirty
pounds, or thereaboutes, by them to be thus bestowed: to wit, for the hiring of
a Minister to read divine service thrice a week, that is, every Sunday,
Wednesday, and Friday throughout the year, in the Chapel or Church
belonging to his house, called by the name of S. James in the wall by
Criplegate: and for four sermons there yearly to be made Allowance for four
yearly sermons.
and preached, a competent allowance.

Out of which sum also of thirthie pounds, it is provided that a deduction be
made by the said Clothworkers, for apparelling of twelve men, and as many
women, in form as follows: that is to say, to every one of the Every poor
man and poor woman a shirt a smock, a gown, and a pair of shoes, etc.
twelve men one freeze gown, one locorum shirte, and a good strong pair of
winter shoes: to the twelve women likewise one freeze gown, one locorum
smock, and a good strong pair of winter shoes, all ready made for their
wearing: remembered always that they must be persons both poor and honest,
unto whom this charitable deed ought to be extended.

Provided also, that the execution hereof be done the first day of October,
orderly from year to year, for ever, whiles the world does last. Moreover,
he has given to those of his Company four pounds freely, not for a time,
but perpetually: and thus does his bountifulnes many ways appear.

To S. Giles without Criplegate benefited.
the parish of S. Giles without Criplegate, he has given fifteen pounds to
the belles and Chime, having meant (as it seems if they had taken time) to be
more liberal in that behalf. And surely I commend his deed, for it is as
v^^eete a thing for a steeple to lack a bell, as for a bell to want a clapper:
and yet for so saying I pray you think me not superstitious: I would be loath
to deserve that suspicion. The Relief for the poor people.
p^^re of the parish aforsaid, by their relief in his life time, secretly
ministered, have just cause to lament the loss of this right bountiful
almoner. For by his means their succor was the more: now it is to be feared
it will be so much the less, by how much it may be supposed he increased their
relief.

This Gentleman's distributions are so diverse, and so many, that the rehearsal
of them requires a large discourse. It is well known, and that can the
worshipful company of the M. Lambs love to the worshipful Stationers.
Stationers witness, that this Gentleman, for the space of these fourteen or
fifteen years, whiles he lived, was pitiful to the poor of the parish of
Saint Faiths, and other parishes: in which said parish Church, every Friday
ordinarily throughout the year, distribution was made of their allowance by
the hands of the said worshipful Stationers, to whom that charge was and is
committed: namely, to twelve poor people twelve pence in money, and twelve
pence in bread. Neither is this charitable deed laid a sleep, but Perpetual
provision for the poor.
continued even to the worlds end, for the perpetual succor of the poor and
impotent, a legacy of six pounds, thirteen shillings and four pence,
allowed to that end, the bestowing whereof is in the hands of the said
worshipful society of Stationers.

As for Relief for Christ's Hospital.
Christ's Hospital, unto the which he has proved himself a fatherly
benefactour, toward the bringing up of the poor children, he has given six
pounds, which they shall enjoy for the term of five hundred years. Moreover,
(mark the rare liberality of this virtuous Gentleman) he has given to the
said Hospital one hundred pounds in ready money, A purchase for the said
Hospital.
wherewith to purchase lands, that their relief, by the revenues of the same,
might be perpetual. A notable deed, and an undoubted work of perfect
Christianity.

As for S. Thomas Spitle in Southwarke, toward the succor of the sick and
diseased, he has Relief for S. Thomas Sp^^tle.
given four pounds yearly, and for ever: so that we may see in all his
proceedings with what mercy he was moved, with what pity pricked: and
finally, in all respects how godly given.

And here by the way it is to be noted, that whereas it is recorded in the
summarie of English Chronicles, that he gave to the hospital, commonly called
The Sauoy, founded by K. Henry the seventh, to purchase lands for the behoof
of the said hospital, one hundred pounds in money: The Chronicler
notwithstanding is excuseable by reason.
it is nothing so. For his beneficence toward that hospital was staid, not
through any default in him, but because such agreements could not be concluded
upon, as he reasonably required. Wherefore his contribution that way ceased,
sore (I dare say) against his godly will. Thus much I was desired to speak
touching that matter, to the intent that nothing but plain truth might be
reported, with the contrary whereof he was not a little offended.

And although offenders deserve rather to be punished than favored, whereupon
by politic government it is provided, that their bodies apprehended, be
committed to Prisons for offenders.
appointed places of emprisonment: yet this good Gentleman remembering that the
holy Ghost wills us not to withdraw our hand from any of our brethren in
distress, considering that charity should not be parciall but indifferent,
has for the Relief for poor prisoners.
relief of the poor prisoners of the Two Counters, of Newgate, of Ludgate, of
the Marshall seas, of the Kings bench, and of the white Lion, dealt very
bountifully, and discreetely: giving unto the Two Counters, six pounds to be
paid unto them both by twenty shillings a month: and to the other prisons
above mentioned, six mattresses a piece, the whole number being two dozen and
a half. In consideration of which A charitable work in deed.
charitable deed, how deeply they are bound, if they have any sparkle of
grace, to thank God for his goodness showed unto them by the ministry of this
Gentleman, all the world may perceive.

It were injury offered, to let slip unremembered his mindfulnesse of poor
maids marriages: and how willing he was to help them, it appears by his
good gift of twenty pounds to be equally divided among Marriage money for
poor maids.
forty such in number by equal portions of ten shillings a piece: with
this caveat, that these poor maids so to be married, should be of good name
and fame: wherein mark how in all his bequests, wisdom is joined as a
yokfellowe with his bounty.

Lastly, and for conclusion, this discreet Gentleman, carried away with the His
love toward his servants.
zeal of a good conscience, tendering the state of his servants, left them
also at a reasonable good stay. For besides their half years bourd freely
given and granted, he has been beneficial to them in diverse other respects,
which I pass over unremembered. But alas! these sorrowful servants do not a
little lament the loss of so loving a Master. I omit the hundred and eight
freeze gowns ready made, which he bequeathed at his funeral to poor people,
both men and women: with the dispersing of the remnant of all his goods after
his burial, where need and reason require.

And thus you see what monuments this Gentleman has left behind him, to bear
witness to the world of His faith was fruitful.
the fruitfulness of his faith: which if (as Saint James says) it may be
judged by works, and that it is a dead and a barren faith which declares not
it self by deeds: then the sequel may be this, that the faith wherewith he
(of whom we have written) was endued, shows it self to be the same faith
which is wished, and I would to God were in the heart of every Christian.

Notwithstanding An Apology or defense of Master Lamb his religion.
which works of compassion proceeding from this notable Gentleman, some in
relieuing desolate widows, some in succouring fatherless children, some in
comforting impotent people, some in providing for poor prisoners, some in
supporting decayed occupiers, some in amending honest maids marriages, some in
susteining his household servants, etc. plentifully declared in the time of his
life, and abundantly expressed after his death: a number there are, that
wanting discretion, bear small good will to devotion, which in their privy
whisperings and open meetings, call this Christian Gentleman's religion in
question.

Touching which suspicion, as not grounded upon any probable cause, that it
may be utterly suppressed, and no longer undeservedly conceived: I will render
good reasons, and so discharge him of that Papisticall opinion, whereof many
lacking the light of judgment, and indeed scarce Christianly affected,
partly supposed, and partly reported he was a favorer. Reasons touching the
sincerity of his profession.
First, the rule of Saint Paul is right, and cannot break square, that Faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Both which means this
Gentleman using, it is not to be doubted that he wanted the principal.

That Master Lamb a hearer of Gods word read and preached.
he was a hearer of the word preached, it is apparent by experience. For he
has been seen and marked at Powles cross, to have continued from eight of
the clock, until eleven, attentively listening to the Preachers voice, and to
have endured the end, being weak and aged, when others both strong and lusty
went away. As for the time that was to spare before the Sermon began, he spent
the same in reading some part of the holy Bible.

And seen Master Lamb given to devout prayer.
at little Saint Bartholomewes devoutly following that godly exercise, he has
not had his eyes occupied in gazing about the Church: but his mind meditating
upon heavenly mysteries, he has been noted zealous and earnest in prayer.
Again, if the quiet and peaceable departing of a man out of this life, be a
blessing of God, and an argument of his love: and that the course of a man's
conversation be tried by the day of his death: if a quiet conscience, if desire
to forsake this world, if steadfast belief in Christ Jesus, and other fruits
of Christianity may be taken for the testimonials of a man's religion: then,
not mine, but the report of Master Nowell Deane of Powles, and Master Fox
visited him in his sickness.
reverend, learned, grave, and wife* Preachers, shall be sufficient
confirmations in this behalf: and to their judgment and knowledge I appeal.

Touching his A Lamb he lived, a Lamb he died.
departure out of this world, it was godly: even as his conversation was
honest: and as he fell to the Lord, so no doubt he shall rise to the Lord at
the last day, and receive his reward with the faithful and trusty servant in
the Gospel, to whom it was said, Come and enter into thy Masters joy, etc. He
made no reckoning of his merits, he harped not upon the good deeds which he
had done, he pleaded not his own justification by works: but by Faith the
ladder to life.
faith in the blood of Christ he excluded all such extraordinary means to
come unto God, and dieng in hope to inherit heaven and heavenly joys, nay
assured in spirit that his portion was there reposed, he surrendered his soul
to the Lord that gave it, and so ended the days of his pilgrimage here on
earth, in the year of his age M. Lambs age, and the Executors of his last will.
fourscore and five. Of whose last will and Testament, Sir William Cordell,
Master of the Rolls: and Sir Rowland Hayward, Justice of Peace and Quorum,
two very wise, wealthy, ^ight worshipful, and in all respects sufficient
Gentlemen, are Executours.

Having thus run his race, and fought a good fight to his no small
commendation, his soul I hope reposed in Abraham's bosom, a place of peace,
rest, quietness and tranquillity: his body intumbed and laid asleep in a
fair large vawte in S. Faithes under Powles, I will draw to an end of this
discourse: recording nevertheless unto you, an I exemplified the same my self:
so did I also the other memorial.
Epitaph which I find graven in Brass or Copper upon the stone of his
Sepulcher, which bearing no date, I cannot directly set down how long it has
continued: but by probable conjectures it may be thought, that it has been
there any day this fourteen or fifteen years: for so long at least his alms
has been given in that parish Church, in manner and form aforesaid.

But first you shall hear a remembrance of his person, graven also in metal,
and fastened in the wall, the tenor whereof follows in three seuens.

William Lamb, so sometime was my name,
Whiles I alive did run my mortal race,
Serving Master Lamb advanced to worship.
a Prince of most immortal fame,
The eight Henry, who of his princely grace,
In his Chapel allowed me a place,
By whose favor, from Gentleman to Esquire,
I was preferred with worship for mine hire.
With wives He was thrice married as may appear by the record.
three I joined wedlock band,
Which all alive true lovers were to me,
Ione, Alce, and Ione, for so they came to hand,
What needs praise, regarding their degree?
In wi^elie truth none steadfast more could be,
Who^ though in earth deaths force did once disseuer,
Heaven yet I trust shall join us all for ever.
O Lamb of God, which sin did take away,
And as a Lamb wast offered up for sin,
Where I (poor Lamb) went from thy flock astray,
Yet thou (good Lord) vouchsafe thy Lamb to win,
Home to thy fold: and hold thy Lamb therein,
That at the day when Lambs and Goats shall sever,
Of thy choice Lambs, Lamb may be one for ever.
Under He would have the poor praise God for his provision.
which remembrance I find two verses more added, containing a petition with an
iniunction of duty to the poor, who weekly received their allowance at the
hands of the worshipful Stationers, to whom he bearing great affection, and
having also no small affiance, made them his disposers or stewardes in that
behalf. The verses are these.

I pray you all that receive bread and pence,
To say the Lords prayer before ye go hence.
The Epitaph enigmaticall, which I find graven upon the stone of his Tumbe, are
short, sweet, pithie, and worthy to be considered. For they contain a lesson
which the wisest may learn, and a meaning for most men to mark. It is a
speech Prosopopoicall, as if he personally spoke unto us alive, to put us in
mind by his example, of our transitory state. The verses are these.

As I was, so are ye:
As I am, you shall be:
The verses upon his Tumb-stone are not so well in my thinking: That I have,
that I gave,
That I spent, that I had.
It may be they were disordered: for there is no rhyme, though there be reason.
That I had, that I gave:
That I gave, that I have:
Thus I end, all my cost:
That I left, that I lost.
And thus having said what I can, but not so much as I might, I leave this
right worshipful Gentleman as I found him, a Lamb of the Lords fold, his
soul feeding (I doubt not) upon the Manna of immortality, whereof our good
shepherd Christ make us all partakers: and send us more such loving Lambs, not
in name, but in quality: and lessen the number of ravening wolves, for with
such the world does swarm.

To knit all up therefore in a The conclusion commendatorie.
short conclusion, I commend to the rich of this world, this Gentleman's
memorial, as a mirror or looking glass of a right bountiful almoner. He
made not his money his God, but some part thereof in his life, some after his
death he appointed to be distributed, in such sort as you have heard reported,
for the maintenance of learning, for the profit of trades and occupations, for
the benefit of the Commonwealth, for the relief of the distressed, for the
comfort of poor prisoners, etc. which almesdeeds of his are put up together in
a pursse, and shall be repaid him with millians of increase.

To For he only is to be glorified.
God therefore let us give glory, who of his goodness has wrought so many good
works by the hands of his servant: and we beseech him, of his mercy, to
reform the hearts of the wealthy, that they seeing a pattern before their
eyes, may endeavor to do as he has done, An admonition to the rich.
knowing that they have not in this life a continuing city, but that there is
an hour set and limited, they know not how soon, when they shall be sent for
upon a souden, and so of necessity, carieng nothing away with them must leave
all that they are worth to the possession of others.

Godliness is great riches, if a man can be content with that he has. I say no
more, but the Lord make us A Christian wish or desire.
poor in spirit, so shall we be sure to die rich at our departure, and to rise
rich at our resurrection: which he grant for his sons sake the price of our
redemption, Jesus Christ the righteous, to whom, with the Father, and holy
Ghost, be all honor and glory everlasting. Amen.

FINIS.
Imprinted by Henry Denham, for Thomas Turner, and are to be sold at his shop
at Guild Hall gate.

(...) 1583
THurs^day the 23 day of Iun* (...) the year of our Lord 1583, vp^^ the even
of the glorious S. John Baptist, the Marquis Santa-cruz* departed out of the
river of the City of Lisburne, with five great ships called Gallions, and
two Galiazes, twelve Gallyes, 30 big ships, 12 Pataxes, and 15 Zabras, 14
Caruels of Portugal, and seven flat bottomed barks to land people: and in all
these ships were 8976 soldiers, Spaniardes, Almaynes, and Italions of the
company of the masters of the field, Do^ Lope de Figueroa, Don Francisco de
Bobadilla, and Don Iuan de Sandouall: And he that was Coronell of the
Almaynes, was the Earl Geronimo de Lodron: And the Italions upon the charge of
Lusio Pinatelo: and over a company of Portugals, was Captain Don Felix de
Aragon And there were of Mariners 3823: so tha^ there was in all 12799, and 50
particule^ Gentlemen, and 86 others retained amongst them, and they had six
months vittayles. And at such time as this army did set sail, and was going
forth to the Sea, the ship called Santa Maria del Socorro, did strike upon
the catchippes against cast Calls: in the which ship was the company of Don
(...) de Cordona, and were constrained there^^ to return again into their
Port. And Sunday being the 26, for that the time and weather did seem to be
pleasant and cal^^, the Marquis was fully resolved, and did determine to send
the twelve Galies before, in the charge and government of the Captain Diego de
Mediano. And Monday being the 27 day, the Vdder of the ship called Santa
Maria de Acosta, did fall from her, for that it was not well set: and straighte
way they took out of her all the people she had, and put them into the
Pataxes and carried them ashore: and so all the army did follow their vyage,
with very scase winds, all upon the Bowlyne, till it was Wednesday the 17 of
July, that they did discover the Island of S. Mighel. And upon the Thurseday
Don Iorge Man^^que, he that was general ouerseer of all the ^^st and army,
went before in a small Pyn^^se for to view the company of the Master of the
field Augustine Inigues, and to ordain his imbarking in the twelve Galleys
which arrived there the fifth day of the same month, at the city of Punta
Delgada. And to ordain all the Artillery and Moiles for to draw and carry them,
with munitions and other necessaries belonging: and likewise to make in a
readiness the barks and other things fit for the vyage. All the whole
Navy was turning at sea with calmes and winds that came of the Island, and
could not by any means come to an anchor, in which time the Viseadmirall did
gather together all the rest of the Navy, till the thirteenth of the month, at
whithe time they came to an Anchor at the town of Villafranca, and city of
Punta Delgada, in sight and distaunce the one from the other four leagues. And
from thence the Marquis did pass in one of the Galleys unto Punta delgada, to
understand the state of the Island, as well as the imbarking of the 2300
Soldiers, which they found in the muster of the company of Augustine
Iniguez. And because that the wind was contrary, he stayde his going till it
was thurseday the 22 of Iulye, and came thither with all the whole Navy
together on the Saturday, being the 24 of the said month, at nine a clock of
the day: and came to an anchor in the play of the Town of Sansebastian of the
Island of Tercera, nigh unto the Artilery of the Forts, who did shoot many
Canons at the Galyon wherein the Marquis was, and likewise at the rest of the
Nauye as they entered in, for that the Island was fortifyed round about with
Fortes and Trenches, and very much people to defend them. And straighte way
the Marquis did send a particular soldier with a Trumpet, to offer unto the
Frenchemen and Naturalles the pardon and grace that he would give them of their
lives and goods as captain general: And to give unto the strangers shipping
and leave for to depart with their Ensigns, Armor, Drum, and Flute: and he
carried with him the pattents and pardons in writing, the tenor and form
whereof is as follows.

DOn Albaro de Bacan, Marquis of Santacruz, Commendador, Mayor of Leon,
Captain general of the Navy and army for the King Don Philip our Lord, To al
the^ that be dwellers, inhabitants, and abiders in the Island of Tercera, and in
all other places thereto adjoining, as well strangers as naturalles: It is well
known to all, that his catholic Majesty, that being, and as he is, natural
successor of the Kingdoms of Portugal, the Jndies, Orientalles, and of all
the Islands and other parts comprehended in the Crown: and so he ought to be
acknowledged and obeyed, for to be Sovereign King and Lord, of all the
naturals of these kingdoms: but forgetting their duetye herein, and far from
this acknowledging, there be some of these said Islands that has admitted into
their company, people which does not only differ from them in nature, but
also in customs and religion, and has conspyred against his royal Majesty,
and has fallen into the danger of Crimen laesae maiestatis, divine and
humayne, worthy of exemplar punishment: yet for all this, ^is catholic
Majesty being moved with a christian zeal, and using his accustomed cleme^cy
in the service of God our Lord, and in all that in him lies to avoid effusion
of blood, considering that daily increases obstinacy and disorder, besides
the offense that they do unto God, by the great insolence of the Rebels, and
disobedience unto his Majesty, and unto his high name. And for that it is a
thing which touches the ryall conscience, the brevity to put remedy herein,
and to take away before our eyes this lively example of disobedience, for that
he has procured by all means possible to put remedy therein: and now last
of all using all benignity* his Majesty does give and grant grace unto all
the dwellers and inhabitants in the said Island of Tercera, and unto all the
rest he does give general pardon, and jointly grants with their lives,
security of all their goods and Cattels, and assuring more besides this, that
they shall not be sacked nor spoiled in no kind of manner, but rather shall be
defended in all their doings with great quietness, upon condition that
without making any resistance, they will reduce themselves, and be subject and
obedient unto him, as unto their natural Lord and King, suffering and
permitting to disimbarke (...) all the people that does come in this (...)
Navy, or so many of them as I shall think best. And moreover and besides all
this, in the name of his Majesty* I do offer unto all French^men, and unto
all other strangers, of what state and condition soever he be, that will depart
out of this Island, and go to his own country, or whether soever his
pleasure is, I will let him depart liberally and clearly with all his goods and
armor and apparel, and likewise I will give them shipping if that of their own
propro^er will, they will yield and surrender up all the fortes that is in their
power and charge, wholly dis^a^paring the said Island* And I the said Captain
general, in the name of his Majesty, and by his ryall word, do promise no
perform and keep this public pardon, in all, and for all, for that it is
the determined will of the king our Lord that it should be so observed and
kept. And here I do make protestation, that if you do not keep fulfill, and
obey all that is herein contained, but do persevere in your obstinacy, and
forcing to go forwards with your desperate intents, your fault will be the
greater, for that it does proceed of his own good will, and not by any force
or constraining done herein, ney^her by fear or any other thing that might
disturb him, but your ill purpose against your natural king. And I using the
power which his Majesty in this case has granted unto me, from this time I
do pronounce the^ to be enemies and rebels against their king, and Traitors
subject unto the pain which they shall suffer: and here I do protest, that
all public harms, chastismentes of blood* fyres, deaths, destructions, and
deuastaciones yt shall be done upon all the^ that does not come to acknowledge
their obedience unto his Majesty, but persevere in their obstinacy, that it
be not imputed unto his ryall Majesty nor unto my charge, but imputed unto
the default of those that be the rebels: And for the justifying hereof, and
confusion of their evil and perpetual dishonor, I do make them this
commandment, for that they may remain and live with the time to see a great
demonstration of mercy and Justice.

Made in the Gallion the Admiral of this Navy, called San Martin, being at
the Tercera the 23 of July 1583.

Don Albaro de Bacan, At the commandment of his Lordship. Andres de Morales.

The which pardon they would not admit, but answered them with very much shot
of Cannons and harcabuziers. And the better for to justify them in this case,
they sent unto them two Portugals, which they had taken in the Island of San
Mighel, of the^ which was sent to spy out the Fleet, by Manuel de Silua in a
small bark, by these they sent the security, and never heard any more of
them. In this time the Marquis in person did go and view all the Island, and
had with him other particular persons such as were ingenious: and in the mean
time the Masters of the field, captains, and Ensign bearers, did in diverse
parts sound to armor in the night, with the Galies and other vessels that
went with owers procuring for to disquiet them. In the end after that they had
taken the judgments of those which had seen the view, and being fully
resolved, they entered into counsel, and concluded to give the assault and
enterprise in a narrow gut or creek which was eaten with water like unto a
haven, and was called of the Milles, almost a league from the place where we
were at an anchor, and two leagues from the city of Angra, and a league from
the village of the Play: so that on tuesday the 26 of July at 3 of the clock
in the morning, the Marquis did depart with the Galies, carrying forwards as
well as he could, the great barks, Crares and Pynises, who by reason that
they had so much people in them, they could not profit themselves of their
owers, for they carried at their first disimbarking 4500 soldiers, of the
company of Don Lope de figueroa, and of these captains, Augustine de Herrera,
Lazaro de Isla, Pedro Rosado, who was wounded with a Harquebuz shot, and dyed
in the City of Angra, Miguel Ferrer, Diego Coloma, Don Iuan de cordoua, Miguel
de Benesa, Don Bernardino de cunniga, Sancho de solis, Don Iuan de Viuero and
his Ensign bearer, Alonso de Xeres, (which was one of the two Standard
bearers, that did place the Ensigns upon their Fortes and Trenches) and Pedro
de Santisteuan, who had a Harquebuz shot in his leg, in whose company went
these particular Gentlemen: Don Hugo de moncada, Don Godofre de Mendoca, Don
Pedro Henriquez, Don Luyz Venegas, Don Aluaro de Beneuides Bacan, Don Iuan de
Granada, Mercelo Caracheolo, Don Geronimo capata, Don Bernardino de Mendoca,
Don Diego de baca: and the Master of the field, Don Francisco de Bobadilla:
with the Cap^aynes Don Antonio de Pasos, who was the first that went upon the
Trenches and Fortes: Captain Castellani, Iuan de Texeda, who did use the
office of the high Sergeante in all the companies: Diego de Cardinas, Soto
Mayor, Bustamante de Herrera, Iuan Fernandis de Luna, Diego de Ouiedo: And with
them went these Gentlemen, Don Philip de Cordona, with the master of the field
Don Francisco de Bobadilla, with them that went first: and Don Alonso de Rosas,
Do^ Gonsalo de Gueuara, Don Fra^cisco de Benauides, Don Antonio de Solis, Don
Fernando de Toledo, Don Francisco de Guzman, Don Geronimo de Virues, Do^ Iuan
de Butro^, Don Iuan de Pisa, Don Francisco de Aronda, Don Pedro Enriquez, the
Captain Melchior de Esparca, and the Master of the field Augustine Inigues de
cerate: with the Captains Diego Xuarez de salazar, Don Christoual de Acunna,
Don Iuan de Castillio, Don Fernando de Viuanco, Antonio Flores, Pedro Ximenez
de Eredia, Christoual de Paz, Francisco Calderon, Hernando Pacho, Pedro de
Angulo, and the Ensign bearer Xaramillo, who was one of the first that put up
their Ensign in their Trenches: And Gentlemen, Don Garcia de Cotes, and Don
Iuan de Sandoual, under whose charge are the sixteen companies of Portugalles
with their Captains, Geronimo Frances, Manuel de Vega, who received an
Harquebuz shot in the Trenches, Antonio Serrano, who also had a harquebuz shot
and a prick in his thigh, Diego Valiente, Don Iuan de Mendoca, Don Iuan de
Medrano, Sancho de Bullon, Don Iuan de Lanuca, Don Sancho de Escobar, Don
Esteuan del Aguila, Iuan de la rea, Francisco de la Rocha, Martin de Herrera,
and with them these Gentlemen: Don Pedro Ponce de Leon, Do^ Iuan de castelui,
Don Francisco de Borja, Nofre de Bernegal, (who was the first that was slain)
Don Bartolome de Maya, and the Earl Geronimo de Lodron, with these Captains:
The Earl Nicolo de Lodron, the captain Carlos, the captain and chief
Sergeante Curcio: and adventurers, Don Francisco Perenot, come^dador de
Sparragosa, of the order of Alcantara, Mos de la Mota: And Lucio Pinatelo, with
the Italions, and the Captain Fray Vicencio of Afflicto, both of them were
wounded with Harquebuziers: and adventurers, Miguel Caxa, a Gentleman of
Naples, who being in a bark, he was wounded with a Harquebuz shot upon one of
his arms, and Don Felix de Aragon with the company of Portugals, who was
wounded with two Harquebuz shot, one on his shoulder, and an other on his
thigh, and they slew his Ensign bearer, and wounded his Sergeant, and Don
Cristoual Nieto, who was wounded likewise with two Harquebuz shot, And at four
a clock in the morning at the break of the day the Marquis did enter with his
Gallye and had with him Don Pedro de Tolledo, Marquis of Villa Franca, and Duke
of Fernandina, Don Lope de Figueroa, Don Pedro de Padilla, Don Iorge Maurique
general ouerseer: Don Cristobal de Erasso, Do^ Iuan Manrique, Don Luys de
Sandoual, Don Alonso de idiaquez, Don Luys de Boria, Don Pedro Ponce de Leon
Brothers son unto the said Marquis, Don Antonio Enriques, Diego de mira^da,
Iuan de Vrbina, Iuan Martines de Recalde, Don Antonio de Portugal in the same,
in the sight of the Mill to give assault against the forts and trenches, and
put themselves with the whole body of the Galley, where as they did receive
much shot both of cannons and muskets which they did shoot from the
bulwarks, then straightway the Galley began to batter and overthrow the
Artillery of the enemy, and all the rest of the Galleys as they did draw nigh
did give the battery, so that with the battery of the Admrial Gally, and of
all the rest, the other Barks went a shore and did land people upon the sides
of the fortes, and overthwart the trenches, although it was done with great
difficultnes and labor, and the soudiours did get up in parts and places that
was very aspar and received great repulse of hargabusses and muskets: but in
the end they did get both the fortes and trenches which the french Soldiers
had upon their charge, with their captain Borgonion, a person of whom they
had a great opinion amongst the^. And straighte way the Marquis went forth
in a small bark, and in an other small bark went forth the Gentlemen that were
with him in his Gallye, and making an end of the first disimbarking a Land,
they took the mou^tains and hills of all parts, and did ordain Don Lope de
Figuereo general master of the field that he should frame the camps with
their wings, with Hargubuziers and Muskets, so that our people of the maine
ward did get upon the enemy. And those which were in the foremost wings, was
Don Pedro de Toledo, and Don Pedro de Padilla wtth other Gentlemen and Captains
that were of the company of ye first disimbarking, so that betwixt them they
began to charge many skirmeges till such time as they put themselves three
quarters of a leage from the Sea side, whereas was the whole force and strength
of their Army, always skirmeshing very valiantly, charging and receiving, so
that our people did win and lose a place which they had for their security,
in such sort, that it was needeful that the Marquis, who was in the face of his
army, to put himself forward two times for to courage and animate the
harquebuziers. And at this time the second disimbarking did ioin with the
first, at the which Don Iorge Manrique ouerseer general, returned and made
them to come forewardes, with six Pieces of ordinance with the which they shot
at their eenimies, likewise all the rest of munitions vittals and water for to
refresh all the people that was skirmishing, for that in those parts there was
none to be had but must bring it from the ships, by which disimbarking they
were strenghthened with these Captains, Rodrigo de Vargas, Miguel de Oquendo,
Marolin and Carlos, So that they were continually fighting in the face of the
Armies, and the enemy had eight pieces of Artillery with the which they did
shoot at our people, making there assault in strange manner, with much shrikes
and showtes as though they would join together: So in the evening they did
gather together to the number of a thousand kine or cattle wherewith they did
procure to break our array and order, and the Marquis did command the
sargentes Mayors to give order unto the wings of ye Hargubussers that they
should not shoot of a piece at the cattle, but that they should make them
way without putting them selves out of order, and after that they were passed
by they should trim them selves again as before. There was hurt of our part
in this skirmish to the number of three hundred, and slain threescoore and
ten, and by one Portugal on horseback which did pass into our Camp, they
did understand that amongst their enemies there were very many slain and
hurt, amongst whom was the Liefetenaunt of Manuel de Silua, his brothers
son, and certain french captains, so that they as well as the Portugals,
were with a gallante resolution for to fight one power to an other, and would
not harken unto the pardon and grace which the Marquis did grant unto them,
and was presented unto Manuel de Silua, by the two men which the Marquis did
send unto them, as before is said, so that it went evil with them in these
skyrmeges and other attemptes, although there was entered to succor them a
thousand five hundred frenchmen, and was general over them the Commendador
Mounsieur de Chattres, cousine unto the duke of Joyosa, and brother in law unto
the most christian king of France, besides more the^ a thousand that were
there before, so that with them, and the Natural of the country, they were
nine thousand fighting men, and they were all very well encamped, and in good
order like soldiers. And that night our army was in good array, and had well
fortifyed the wings of our Harquebuziers and muskets, and did found to
armoure: so in the morning at the break of the day, they returned unto their
skyrmishing, and our enemies did discharge their artilerie, and our army did
still get more and more, and the wings were still skyrmishing, in such sort
that they did take away the water from the enemies, and straight ways they did
win their Artilerie, and the village of San Sebastian, which was mayntayned
and kept by their army, and they fled away unto the mountains, and when our
host had broken their ca^pe, they took their way to the city of Angra* And
the Marquis did send the galies, that they should assault the Navy of
Frenchmen and Portugalles that was within the Port: and so the whole camp did
enter into the said city without any resistaunce, and he did grant them the
spoil for three days, and they did open the Prisons, and took out of them
all such as were there for bearing favor unto his Majesty, and are these
that follows.

All such Spanyardes as were Prisoners.
JVan Augustine de Auila was taken Prisoner a year past, coming for Factor to
S. Mighell.

Domingo de insauraga, which came a year paste from the fyrme land in the
Ship of advise.

Iuan de iada, one that came in the same ship. Diego Garcia whom they took
coming in advise to Don Pedro de Valdes. The Ensign bearer Carrion. The
captain Iuan de Aguirre, the sergeant Gutierrez, Iuan Lopez. Catalina and
Eluira Gutierrez, her Daughter with three sons, that came from Florida in the
ship of insauraga, and to the number of thirty Spaniards which they made to
work in the Fortes.

Portugals that were in prison.
The captain Antonio Rebelo, Pedro Ya^nez Curado, Antonio Mendez, Domingo
Ralon, Iuan Aluarez, Antonio Goncalez, Luyz Goncalez, Francisco de Roche,
Benito Mulato, Pedro de Las Vinnias, Iuan Domingues, Constantino Machado, Bras
Noguera, Gaspar Delos Reyes, Diego Perez, Antonio Correa Pisanso, Diego
Aluarez, El Licenciado Iuan Luys homo, Iuan Yannez, and Frutuoso, sanchez of S.
George.

So likewise the Galies entered into the Port of the City of Angra, and did
take all these ships following.

Relation of the Ships and other Vessels which they took of the French army
which brought succor to the^ of the island of Tercera, who was Captain
general over them all the Commendado^ Monsieur de Chattes: and also of the
Navy that Don Antonio had, who was captain general over them, Man^^el
Serradas a Portugal and natural of the Yland of Madera: and was the same that
did sack Cabo Verde and Arguin.
THere were in the port of the City of Angra, 12 french ships great and small
of al sorts. 2 English ships and 1 Hulk. There were of Don Antonio his ships to
the number of 16 small and great, Caruels and others, which were at Cabo Verde:
captain general over them, Manuell Serradas, Portugal, all these ships
does amount to the number of 31, and had amongst them 91 pieces of Artilerye,
of cast iron and brass. This being done they sent unto the castle of the
city, and unto their houses of munition, and unto all the Fortes round about
the Island, and they found in them all this ordinance and munition as follows.

In the Castle called Sansebastian.
One Cannot of batterye, of brass: one Culuerin of brass of 21 palms or
spannes: two demi Culuerins of brass: two Sacars of brass with their
Chambers: one demye Cannon of brass: five Pieces of iron, and one little
piece: one Cannon of brass broken in the breeche. All these said Pieces were
in the carriage, and ^ad al things in a readiness belonging unto them.

Three hosheads of cannon poulder: 18 bals of wild fire: 270 shot of iron:
four and thirty pellet of stone. One iron bar: 5 Pikes: a carriage with his
wheels without a piece: more, 15 stone balls: seventeen charge of stones.

Relation of the Fortes which were from the city of Angra unto the Forte
called the point of San Mateo, and of all the Ordinance that were in them.
THere was found in the Fort adioining to the city, in the skirte of Bra^ill
called San Benito, one great murderer of brass to shoot stones, in his
carriage, and had the Arms of Portugal on it: one piece of cast iron, which
wayed 12 kyntals, in his caringe: one other piece of cast iron of the same
bigness without carriage: one base of brass with ye arms of Portugal, of
seven kyntals, with chambers: one demye Cannon of brass for stones, with the
Portugal arms: one piece of cast iron, of 11 kynt. in his carriage: two and
twenty balls of stone for the Cannons, and twenty of iron.

What was found in a trenche adjoining unto the same Forte.
A piece of cast iron of 7 kynt. and 24 pound in his carriage.

In the Fort called San Antonio, which is upon the point of the Brasill.
One demye Culuering of brass, with the arms of France, full of flower
Delyses, of 36 kintals, and 22 pound: one piece of brass to shoot stone, with
the arms of Portugal in his carriage: one Sacar eight square with the arms of
France of 19 kyntals: one demye Sacar of brass of 10 kyntals 64 pound, in his
carriage: one demye Sacar of brass of 10 kint. 20 li. in his carriage: 1 piece
of cast iron of 15 kintals in his carriage: two other pieces of cast iron of 13
kint. a piece in their cariages: two Bases of brass very big, with their
chambers: threescore shot of iron: twenty cloven shot of lead, ten chains,
twenty great balls of stone, two half terses of powder, other six horse load
of sacks of powder.

In an other fort called the cimbrero.
One Sacar of 15 kintals 48 pound, full of flower deluses, three pieces of cast
iron of the same bigness with their carriages, one falconet of bras in his
carriage with two cha^bers, one hundredth and threescore balls of iron and six
charges.

In an other fort called the Fanaes.
One piece of cast iron of five kintals in his carriage, an other piece of
cast iron of 7 kintals 20 pound in his carriage, one other piece of cast iron
of 13 kintals.

In an other fort called O alcaide.
One Sacar of bras eight square full of flower deluses of 18 kintall with a
new carriage: two pieces of cast iron ye one of 18 kintals and the other of 17
kint. with new carriage and their chargers: eight and thirty shot in all.

In an other fort called the Ladera de Pero goncalez.
Two pieces of cast iron of 10 kintals a piece with their new cariages.

In a small fort called La huerta del Bachiler Rubio.
Two pieces of cast iron of 7 kintal a piece in their carriage: one base of cast
iron with his Chambers: certain balls, with their chargers and skowrers.

In a trenche called P^mbado.
One piece of cast iron of 10 kintals in his carriage.

In an other for called the Prayna.
Three pieces of cast iron of 10 kintals and 30 pound a piece in their
cariages: two double bases with their chambers: fifty balls of cast iron, and
10 cloven shot.

In a trenche which is hard by the other forte.
One piece of cast iron of ten kintals with ten balls, with his chargers.

In an other fort called the Azogu^.
Two pieces of cast iron of 10 kint. 30 l. a piece in their carriage: one other
piece of cast iron of 9 kint. 20 l, in his carriage* two bases of brass of 149
li. a piece, with crowns and half moons upon them: 115. shot of cast iron:
100 lead shot for the bases: 10 cloven shot: 12 balls of wild fire.

In the last fort that was visited called San Matheo.
Two Falcons of brass with their chambers: three pieces of cast iron in their
cariages: two pieces of cast iron broken: two hundredth shot little more or
less.

In the Trenches about this forte.
One Piece of cast iron of a 11 kintals in his carriage: one other Piece of 7
kintals in his carriage: one base of brass, with the arms of Portugal: one
other Piece of cast iron of a 11 kint. in his carriage: twenty iron shot.

Relation of the fortes that is betwixt the City of Angra, unto the point of
the Village of the Play and all the Artillery found in them. In a Trench
that is right against the Ylandes.
TWo Pieces of cast iron in the cariages, and with their chargers.

In a fort called San Antonio de P^rto Judio,
Two Pieces of brass, the one of 25 kint. 43 ll. with the arms of the Turk
and of France and the other eight square with the same arms in their
cariages: one Piece of cast iron of 10 kintals in his carriage: one other Piece
of cast iron of 8 kintals 75 ll: one other Piece of cast iron of 11 kintals in
his carriage: one hundredth shot.

In the fort called El Pico de Saluador Coello.
One Piece of cast iron of 18 kintals: one other Piece of cast iron of a 11
kintalles in his carriage without powder or chargers.

In the fort called, El Porto de Casa Salga where as Don Pedro de Valdes was
lost.
One Piece of brass eight square with ye Arms of France of 18 kintalles 83
ll. in his carriage: one Falcon with the Arms of Portugal of 7 kintals: two
Pieces of cast iron of 15 kintals a Piece in their carriage: other two Pieces
of cast y^on of 13 kintals a piece in the carriages: one other Piece of cast
iron of 10 kintalles in his carriage: two hundredth and thirty shot for them
all: a carriage without any thing.

In the fort of the Muelas.
One Piece of cast iron in his carriage with twelve shot: two great^ Faulcones
with the Portugal Arms of 6 kintalles a piece: three Pieces* of cast iron in
the cariages* fifty shot without chargers.

In the forte right over against San Sebastian, there was no Artillery for
that they had carried it away unto the mountains, that day the people came a
shore.

In the great and old forte of San Sebastian and now called Porto Nouo.
Six Pieces of cast iron of 20 kint. a piece: five other pieces of cast iron of
8 kint. a piece in their cariages. Two hundred shot for the^ all: three Bases:
three cariages, and very much wood, but no chargers nor poulder.

In an other Fort which is at the point of the Ribera Seca.
One Piece of cast iron, of 11 kynt. 75 li. One other Piece of cast iron, of 7
kyntals.

In the Fort of the Perezosas.
One demye Culuerin with the arms of Portugal: one great turkish Falcon of 14
kyntals: two Pieces of cast iron, the one of 11 kyntals, and the other of 7
kyntals, in their cariages.

In the Forte of Porto Martin.
One Piece of cast iron of 20 kyntals in his Carriage: one other Piece of cast
iron of 18 kyntals: three pieces of iron, of 12 kyntals a piece in their
cariages: two bases of brass with the arms of Portugal. Two hundred and
fifty shot, and three barrels of poulder, with their chargers.

In certain trenches which were against the Forte.
Two Falcons for stones, with the arms of Portugal, and their chambers: three
pieces of cast iron in their cariages: 42 shot.

In the Fort of Santa Catalina.
One demye Culuerin with the arms of France of 35 kyntals in his carriage: One
Falcon of brass of 6 kintals with the arms of Portugal: One Base of brass
with the same arms: Four pieces of cast iron of 12 kyntals a piece, in their
cariages. 300 shot for all these pieces, and their chargers.

In the Castle called Dopao.
One demi Culuering with the arms of Portugal in his carriage. Two great Pot
gunnes, with all that belongs unto them.

In the Fort of Me^io Faul which is before this.
Four pieces of cast iron, in their cariages: four score shot, and their
chargers.

In the Fort called San Anton.
Two demye Culuerings of brass in their cariages: one Base of brass: three
Bases of brass: five pieces of cast iron. Three hundred shot with their
chargers.

In a Bulwark which is nigh unto the Play.
One piece of cast iron in his carriage: two bases of cast iron. Six and
twenty shot with their chargers.

In the Forte called the Chagas.
One demye Culuerin, eight square, with the arms of France, of 18 kynt. 95
pound in his carriage: four pieces of cast iron of 12 kintals a piece, in their
cariages: two great pot gunnes of iron: 100 shot for them all, and their
chambers.

In a Fort that is in the Play called San Francisco.
One piece of cast iron of 15 kynt. in his carriage: one other Piece of cast
iron of 14 kint. one other piece of cast iron of 8 kint. one other piece of
cast iron of 12 kintals: one other of cast iron of 8 kint. all these in their
cariages. One barrel of poulder. One hundred shot and chargers for them all.

In the Fort called Nuestra sennora de la Luz.
One demi Culuering with the arms of Portugal, of 28 kyntals in his carriage:
one Base of brass with the same arms, and his chambers: three pieces of cast
iron, of sixteen kintalles a piece, in their cariages: 90 balls for all, and
their chargers.

In the Fort called San Pedro.
One demye Cannon for stones, with the arms of Portugal, of 13 kintals in his
carriage: one Faulcon of brass, with the same arms, and three of Iron: Two
Bases of brass, with their Chambers: two pieces of cast iron of five kintals a
piece in their cariages, fifty and four shot, with all their chargers.

In the Forte called Santa cruz.
One cannon of battery of 35 kyntals, 64 l. with the Turks arms, and three
flower deluses, in his Carriage: one other Cannon for stones with the arms of
Portugal: one demi cannon for stones, with the same arms: three pieces of cast
iron of 11 kynt. a piece: two bases of brass with their cha^bers: two barrels
of poulder. One hundred and eyghte shot for them all, and all in their
cariages, and with chargers and scourers.

In the Fort called the Conception.
Two Cannons of Batterye with the Portugal arms, in his Carriage: one Base of
brass in his carriage: two pieces of cast iron of 10 kint. a piece in their
cariages. Three skore and four shot for them all, with their chargers.

In a trenche which is betwixt the two fortes.
Three Bases of brass, and one piece of cast iron in his carriage.

In a Platform which is upon the Point, and thereto they have visited.
One Culuering of brass in his Carriage: One piece of cast iron in his carriage.

In a house which is in the Village of the Play, of munition there was more
then 600 shot of iron, small and great.

Somewhat before that there is another fort called Porto de casa ^as alga, which
has four pieces, two of brass and two of iron. There is an other Fort before
this, called Porto de cruz. which has four Pieces, two of brass* and two of
cast iron. And from one Fort unto an other, of al these aforesaid that have
their Trenches with their trauerses that does defend and keep them.

Relation of the munition that they found in the high church of the City of
Angra, and in the College of the Teatinos.
Three and twentye hogsheads, the greatest full, fast, and well conditioned,
which seemed to be of poulder, nineteen of them were great, and four small.

In the house of the Fathers of the company of Jesus (which Don Antonio had
taken, and some of them he had banished and sent into England, for that they
were in part of his Majesty) was found: two and twentye hogsheds little and
great, full of poulder, 12 of them were fast shut, and all the rest were open
and some of them bego^ ^here was (...) sack full: four and thirty ^alles of
will fire artificially covered with matches hanging at them: A chest full of
branches of iron for to ^^ke cloven shot: Cer^aine cloven shot of lead of
four and 5 ll. waighte: a small chist of chargers made of while place:
fourscore and ten horse men's spears with their heads, and so^^de: ten pickes
of iron: many pieces of corsele^^ very evil intrea^ed, and some old
hargabuziers: certain^ (...) of hempen cords and other bottomes of cott^n and
of each a little: four (...) of brass, one great, and 3 little ones in the
cariages: two great chambers of iron: a close wagon for to carrye poulder: a
carriage for a Falcon. Certain balls of lead for har^abuziers, muskets, and
Bases.

Relation of that which was found in the custom house of the City of Angra.
Four great hogsheads full of poulder: Four hogsheads full of salt pe^er,
for cate^^^^ ^^thall, and they say that it is of the Island Graciosa* three
hogsheads full of match for Har^abuziers: certain balls of iron, and chains,
and old ropes ends of hemp: seven ^arels of tar: six chestes full of
rosin: two grapels: six kyntals of small tarred ropes new: (...) and twentye
Oars for barks: sails for ships great and small, as it seemed for ten ships:
tarred ropes old and other necessaries for the said sails* a great beam of
timber with chains, and their (...) which belonged unto the custom house
(...) little Bell of brass broken: an other (...) whole and sound of a mean
bigness^ (...) cheastes of wood full of (...) to the quantity of forty (...),
that was nothing worth: two (...) for to heat tar in* (...) with Copperas:
one hogshead of (...) hogsheade of Ra^^ bane.

In a Warehouse over against the Custom house.
A great heap of Cannon shot of cast iron of 1000 shot: an other heap of demi
(...) shot, and other lesser shot to the numbe^ of more then four thousand:
one hundred shot of stone and Cannon: one hundred (...) of iron with their
helues ^ five and (...) Oars for a Gallie: one hundred and (...) wicke^
baskets with their gyrts.

In an other Warehouse was found as follows.
Two Bases of iron: old Ropes with pullyes, and other necessaries for ships.

At the gate toward the Sea on the left hand.
One demye Cannon of brass for stones in his Carriage: one Demye Cannon of iron
in his Carriage: one Demye Sacar of France, of brass, eight square in his
carriage. So that there was taken and found in all the ships, Forts, and in
other places as is said 301 pieces of Artilerie.

And after that they had taken the city, Castles, Fortes, artilerie, and
munitions, and given to the soldiers the spoil for 3 days, as it is said.
The Marquis did ordain that all the dwellers and naturals of the Island should
return unto their houses, and that they should understand in the labor of the
field, and tilling of the (...)* who straight way began to come together,
although but ^ few, and the general Auditor did proceed against those that
were culpable, and did apprehend many, as hereafter shall he made mention. In
this time the frenchmen were three leagues from the city of Angra, in a strong
cituation, the which they had trenched, and made strong; where the^ had water
and other commodities and were treating with Don Pedro de Padilla, that he would
let the^ depart in their ensigns and armor, and to carrye with them such
Portugals as they thought best, and all the artilirie which they brought out
of France, which was more then one hundred pieces, and their ships and
bastements, saying: that they would show pattents of the king of France, and
of his mother. To which the Marquis would not give any ear, nor to any thing
that was asked, but went forth with his ^ampe for to destroy them, but yet
after great hold and keep, the Marquis did resolve himself at the instance
and request of Don Pedro de Toledo, Don Lope de Figuereo, and of the earl
Geronimo de Lodron, Don Pedro de Padilla, Don Iorge Manrique, Don Francisco de
Bobadilla, Don Iuan de Sandouall, Don Cri^toball de Erasso, Iuan de Vibina, who
(...) remain for Gouernoure and May^^^ of the field of all the I^and, and of
Iuan Martines de Recalde, that the Frenchmen surrendering and yielding their
Ensigns, and Armoure, and to let remain still in the Gal^^s for to be
punished, the two hundred which before they had taken, and all the rest to be
^a^yed to the coast of Spain jointly without (...), and from thence to be
carried to their own country, in those ships that the Marquis shall think
best. And so wednesday the third of August, Don Pedro de Padilla, and Do^
Iorge Manrique, with the Marquis order, went unto their camp, a league from
ours, where when they were come, they brought them unto a Fort which was at the
waters side, nigh unto the city of Angra, whereas they did surrender and yield
up eyghteene Ensigns, the most part of them of the most auntientste of
France, and many drums and Flutes, and they were unarmed one by one of their
Harquebuziers and muskets, ^alberds and Pikes, and being disarmed they did
pass by our armies, and without the City they did lodge them, and gave them
all that was necessary: and the Commendador Monsieur de Chattes, with the
Masters of the field, captains, and chief Sargeants as shall be expressed,
went and kissed the hands of the Marquis. Monsieur de Chattes, General:
Linguadoca Commendador of San Iuan: Monsieur de carauaques a Gascoyne, master
of the field. Baptista Serichi, an Italion and chief Sergeant. Captain
Vasito a Gascoyne. Captain Hernan, of the Province. Captain Luys an Italyon.
Captain La^aral a gascoin. Captain Campani, an Italion. Captain Linerola a
Norman. Capt. Brebito of the Province. Capt. Lasta a Frenchman. Capt. Companion
a frenchman. Capt. Ca^^ipit a frenchman. Capt. Labarra, a Frenchman. Captayn
Perminet a Frenchman. Captayn Iabino, a frenchman. Captayn Lagraua a Frenchman.

In these are not counted the captayns that were slain, nor the Ensign
bearers, for that there was slain threescore and ten, and wounded and
Prisoners more then 400, besides the Portugals, who likewise did yield and
surrender their Ensigns and arms: and it is a thing never the like seen, so
great an army against ours, fighting with so much bravery in their own
country and houses, and with so many For^es, and in them more then 300 Pieces
of Ordinance to come to yield themselves, certainly it was a great spectakle
to behold. In this time the Marquis was very vigilant and careful to apprehend
Manuel de Silua, who did titulate himself Earl of Torres Vedras, Gouernoure
and Captain General of this Island, and the principal and Original of all
these Rebellions amongste them, and of many robberies and insolences which
was done with the ships that they had in the Port, and Frenchmen and
English men which came unto them, and they did accept and retain them. So
they sent captains and other soldiers unto diverse parts to run over the
hills and mountains, and it happened thurseday the fourth of Auguste, a
captain of the Field of the Master of the field, Don Francisco de
Bobadilla, did apprehend him, and did deliver him unto the captayn Lazaro de
(...), who went also to seek him, and he brought him unto the city of Angra,
whereas Don Pedro de Padilla did carry him aboard the Admiral, and did deliver
him to Iuan Ruyz de Velasco Captain of the said Galiaza, whereas he had
likewise other captains Prisoners liefetenants, and such as were culpable of
the rebellion, as shall be declared unto you in the punishment done upon them*
And likewise certain Friars which went in indecent habits, amongst them was
Friar Simon, of the profession of the order of Saint Dominicko, Sacerdote, and
Preacher, who did declare that which hereafter follows.

How that he went for France, and did ask ^y^ and succor of the Queen
Mother for this Island, and how she did grant it unto them* by the intercession
of the Duke of Jo^osa, and of Mos de Rochileu, the Abbot of Guadanni, the Duke
of Prenon, the Earl of Brisac, Mos de Serlebus, Governor of Abre de gracia,
all the which does aid, help, and strengthen the causes of Do^ Antonio. So ye
Queen mother did send a thousand five hundredth frenchmen besides those that
were before in the Island with Monsiur de chattres a knight of the order of
Saint John and governor of Deep, and cousin unto the Duke of Joyosa, and
brother law unto the king of France. And for master of the field, Monsiur
de Garab^ques, and Monsiur de Camps, and other principal men, all which did
ariue at this Island the two and twenty day of June, in this year of 1583 with
pattents of ye king of France, for that the intention of the king and
par^iculerly of his mother was to have these Island in their powers, and to
strengthen them with men and ships, for to disturb and take away the traffic
and commercio of the Indies, and how that the principals which does aid and
help Don Antonio are in great hope that by this means they shall reap great
profit and interest, and now seeing the destruction and loss of victory of
the french men, he shall not find any other that will help him.

So likewise he was in England, and Antonio de Vega dwelling in Lishboorne, who
has his wife in Caparica, and the Queen would not give nor grant unto them
any aid or succor, but all only did consent that for his money he might buy
Artilery and munitions paying for them. Also he said that the twentye of May
Don Antonio was in Deep, and that he was woonte to go unto Parris in
disembling wise with two or three servants, and did lodge in the house of the
abbot of Guadani who is private with ye Queen mother, and for the vittailes for
himself and others which trauails in his service, they are merueilous indebted
in their lodginges and Innes, and how that al there remedy did depend upon
these Islands, although as it is said the Queen mother would have had the
power thereof, and that in substance it was the voice of Jacob, and the hands
of Esau, al such as are in the service of Don antonio, are these persons
following, and how that in portugal there are few that are corespondente unto
them, for that all in general did abide to see the end and the succession
herein, in ye which did depend the quietness of al christendom.

Don Antonio de menes, of Lishborne: Ciprian de figueredo, of Trascoso: Iuan
Corea de Sosa, of Lishborne: Iuan Rodrigez de vejae, of Ebora: Thomas Cachero,
of Lishborne: Diego Rodriguez, of Setuba^: Rodrigo de santaren, of Santaren:
Diego Botello, of Lishborn: Manuel Fernandiz, of Lishborn: Gaspar Diaz, chanon
of Ebora: Baltazar Limpo, Deane of Braga: dwelling in Guimarans: Simon Alfonso
de caruallo of Guimarans: Manuel de brito, of lishborne: Constantino de brito,
of Ebora: Geronimo de Silua of Viana: Antonio di brio Pime^tel of Golagan.

AT such time as they were entered into the City of Angra, wednesdaye the 7 and
20 of July, as aforesaid, the Marquis of Santa Cruz did send Don Pedro de
Toledo, Marquis of Villa franca, Duke of Fernandina, unto the Island of Fayall,
which was thirty leagues from this, whereas was five hundred Frenchmen in
garrison, with twelve Galleys four Pataxes sixteen Pinises, and certain small
Barks, and in them two thousand and five hundred soldiers of different
companies with the master of the field, Augustine Iniquez de carate, and
Captains, Iuan de salazar, Miguel ferrer, Don Christoval de Acuna, Don Esteuan
del Aguila, Bustamante de Herrera, Miguel de b^nsa, Sancho de solis, Don Iuan
de lanuza, Sancho de bullon, Luys de gueuara, Pedro pardo de aguiar, Martin de
herera and the Captain Carlos with one hundred and fifty Almains and
gentlemen such as were venturers, Don Vgo de moncada, Don Iuan manrique, Don
phillippe de cordoua, Don bernardido de me^doca, Don pedro Enriques, Do^
Gonsalo de Gueuara, Don Hieronimo capata Don Pedro Ponza de Leon, Don Iuan de
Acunna, Don Antonio Enriques, Don Gonzalo Ronquillo, who brought the news
that the said Fayal was taken, and Iuan Fernandez Galindo, Diego de Miranda.
And for that was requisite at the Sea, these captains, Miguell de Oquendo,
Rodrigo de Vargas Y Marolin, Don Antonio de Me^doca, who in this vyage had the
charge of the pataxes and pynises. And passing by the Island of S George, and
the Pick, reducing them to the service of his Majesty, they arrived at the
said Island of Fayal, Sunday being the last of the said Month, and sent them
word by a Portugal that they should surrender and yield themselves, who^ they
slew. Upon the monday they went and viewed the place where they should
disimbark themselves. So tuesday the 2 of Aug. they put the soldiers aland,
and the frenchmen and Portugals did resist the^, til such time as Don Pedro de
Toledo did strengthen the^ that did skirmish with 200 muskets, and 100 Pykes,
they gave the^ the repulse with loss of one hundred frenchmen, and the rest
did retire and put themselves into the Castle, whereas they had 17 great
pieces of Ordinance, and great store of poulder and munition, besides other
forty Pieces that were in other Fortes there about them, all the which the
frenchmen did surre^der and yield up to save their lives, and lost all this,
and four ships that was in the port, and did yield up their Ensigns and
arm, And did put into the galies all such Portugalles as did enter into the
Castle with them, and did hang up Antonio de Guides, a portugal, and
governor of the said Island, a man prodigal and cruel, and left for
governor thereof for his Majesty, Don Antonio de Portugal, with two hundred
soldiers, and vittayles for four months.

And when they had conquered the Islands of S. George, and the Pick, and Fayal,
Don Pedro de Toledo did return with the Galies, ships, and such people as
he carried with him. Mondaye the eight of August 1583.

The Commission given unto the Licentiado Mosquera, General Auditor of the
Navy and Army for to punish the Rebels.
FOr so much as by the commandment of his Majesty, I am come hither with
this Navy and army upon the Island of Tercera, and that here they did
withstand me, and made resistaunce whereas I should come unto an an^er with
very much artilerie, and not acknowledging their du^tie, but with great
disobedience and insolence. I did send and require them with protestation for
to surrender and yielde unto me the ylande, and to suffer me to land in the
Island, and to pardon them ^ll the disobedience pa^^, and unto the naturals
their lives and goods, and likewise unto the strangers that were (...) and
hither in their aid and succor to give them shipping that they might depart,
as does appear by the processes and other writings which I do command to
be put adioining unto this commission* And for that neither the one nor the
other would harken unto this grace and mercy which was offered unto them, but
rather at such time as I would disimbarke my army being tewesday the six and
twenty of this present being saint Annes day, they did make defense against
me, and did resist me with much artillery and force of men, and all that were
in the said Island as well naturals as strangers did put themselves in the
field and with their armies in good order, did give ye atempt against those of
his majesty which I had upon my charge, maintaining themselves one whole day
with skirmishing and representing of battle till such time as the next day
following, being overcome by the force of our soldiers* they ran a way and
put themselves into the Mountains. And for that such like disobedience,
rebellion and tyranny, which unto this day they have used with and unto them
which has been in deuosion unto his Majesty, and many other insolensies and
roberies which they have committed and done* shall not remain without liuely^
ensample of chastisement* By this present I do give power and facultye, as
Captain general of his Majesty in this Navy and Army unto Lecenciado
Mosquera de Figueroa, general auditor of this happy Army and Navy, for that
having taken information of the aforesaid in general and in particular, of
all such persons as be found culpable in the same, and the parties to be
called and heard, and according unto the right, to do Justice upon their
persons goods and Cattelles, for all, and in all, of defaultes paste and now
present depending. I do give unto you power and faculty in as ample manner
as I have it of his Majesty. And the better to perform and accomplish and
execute the same, I do ordain the ^hee^e Master of the field and Coronel of
the* Almaynes, and all the rest of the Masters of the field: Captains and
soldiers, (...) of the Gall^es* that they do give and deliver unto you the
prisoners which they have, and from this day forewardes shall have* and all the
aid and favor that you shall demand of them* And so likewise (...) you the
said power and faculty (...) proceed against* what so ever person (...)
persons that shall withstand or disturb any part or parsell of all that is
aforesaid, ^n the which GGD and his Majesty shall be served. Made and
written in the Ylande of Tercera, in the city of Angra, the eight and twenty
of Iulye, in the year of our Lord, 1583.

Albaro de Bacan.
At the commandment of his Lordship.

Bartolome de Aguilar.




ANd by virtue of this Commission, the Licenciado Mosquera de Figueroa, did
proceed against the said Islands, and particulers of the same, pronounsing
these sentences following.

In the plyte which in the office of Justice has been followed in the absence
of rebellion, against the Island of Tercera, Fayal, the P^ck* and S. George, the
Graciosa, and the Cueruo, and against all the dwellers and abiders in the Island
of the Acores. The process of the cause being seen, and how that the said
Islands has denied their obedience to their King Don Philip our Lord, being
their legitime and natural King, and in prosecuting hereof, have admitted into
their company, people of diverse Nations, Robbers and Pirates, and have
conspyred against his Majesty Ryall, and made resistaunce against his mighty
power, and has defended with armor and blood, the entry into these Islands
which is of his crown of Portugal. The proses and case, and all things
requisite being seen: I do find, and I ought to declare, and do declare and
pronounce the said Islands, and every one of them for Rebels, and partakers of
this delight, in consequence or con^ideration of the which, I ought to condemn
and do condemn them in loss of all their liberties which has been given and
granted by the kings predecessors, of his majesty, of the kingdom of
Portugal, likewise of their proper lands and goods: and other privileges of
the which they might advance and profit themselves, if they had not
committed this offense of Rebellion and disobedience. And these the said
Antonio Xuares who was Faccor for the king Don Sebastian, and at this present
was Judge of the Money house, Baltazar Aluarez, Ramires, disimbargar, and
Domingos Pinnero, and Iuan Goncales Cottea, disimbargar: and all the rest that
be found culpable in this said offense. I do condemn them, and whensoever
and in what place they shall be taken, to be prisoners, and brought unto the
common prison of this city of Angra, whereas I do command that they be
brought forth with ropes about their necks, with the voice of a crier, for to
make manifest the^^ fault, and so to be carried into the public and open
place of this city, whereas they shall be hanged til such time as they do
naturally die, and straighte way to be quartered, and their quarters to be
put in the high ways toward this city. Also I do condemn the aforesaid in
the loss of all their goods* applying them as confiscate unto the chamber of
his Majesty, and that their sons nor Neuewes shall not enjoy any Ryall
office. And I do command that all such money that has the name of Don
Antonio Prior of Ocrato, with the arms ryall, as false evil and usurped, to
be burned in the public place of this city, and not to be currante in these
Islands, and that no person do use the same upon pain of death. (And in the
performaunce of the same, they did burn the said money public) And by this my
last sentence difinitiue* I do pronounce and command with costs. El
Licenciado Mosquera, de Figueroa.


