CHRIST'S Bloody Sweat, or the SON OF GOD in his AGONY. By. I. F.

LONDON. Printed by Ralph Blower, and are to be sold at his house upon Lambert
hill. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WILLIAM Earl of PEMBROOKE, etc. One of his Majesty's
most Honorable privy Counsel, and Knight of the Noble Order of the Garter,
etc.
RIGHT HONORABLE, as your Titles do ennoble your Virtues, so (in the Judgment
of those that know you) your Virtues do as much more entitle your Nobleness:
which two, in this age, do so seldom meet in one, as most usually to be
Great, and to be Good, is required a double person. It is not so (and it is
not so reported) in you; being reputed therein to deserve the Honors you
possess, for chiefly loving the desertfull. These assurances, have encouraged
me, to offer to your judicious view, this little labor, which contains but a
Summarie of the Son of Gods sorrows; Wherein, let me crave this favor from
your Noble bounty, to measure, with the defect in writing, the sweetness of
what is written: the effect of that sweetness, and the benefit of that effect.
And as for me (my good Lord) I shall take comfort in my pains, if you to whom
they are devoted, (being won here to by the general commendation of your
merit) please to allow your Patronage to one, who offers, what he offers, in
the perfect nakedness of perfect simplicity, Resting

A lover of your person, for your Noble worthiness. I. F.

To such as shall peruse this Book.
POETRY is so every way made the Herald of wantonness, as there is not now
any thing too unclean for lascivious rhyme; which among some (in whose hearts
God has wrought better things) has bin the cause, why so general an
imputation is laid upon this ancient and industrious Art. And I, to clear (as
I might) verse, from the soil of this unworthiness, have he^ein (at least)
proved that it may deliver good matter, with fit harmony of words, though I
have erred in the latter. The way to Do well, is not so doubtful, as not to
be sought; neither so dark, but it may be found. I confess, I have, touching
my particular, been long carried with the doubts of folly, youth and opinion,
and as long miscarried in the da^knesse of unhappiness, both in invention and
action. This was not the path that led to a contented rest, or a respected
name. In regard whereof, I have here set forth the witness that may testify
what I desire to be. Not that many should know it, but that many should take
comfort by it. And (Kind Reader) this is my request, that faults in Printing
may be charit^bly corrected; that the sense of the matter may be wisely (and
herein truly) construed, and so shall ye both approve your own Judgments,
and right the Author in his hopes.

Farewell.
(...) A Lord of Glory, Prince of Heaven and Peace,
An elder brother of the sons of rest,
An Heir of promise, that with large increase,
A Kingdom and an Empire has possessed:
Whereby those poor weak souls in earth cast down,
Like Kings in Heaven, shall all support a Crown.
Such thoughts as those, whiles in a rauish't spirit,
Fair meditations Summoned to appear,
Before the Arc, and mercie-seat of mer^it,
A sacred flame mixed with an holy fear,
As if Gods voice had spoke, seemed to inuit,
My heart to prompt, my ready hand to write.
Thou (quoth it) that have spent thy best of days,
In thirstlesse ^imes (sweet baytes to poysen Youth)
Led with the wanton hopes of laud and praise,
Vain shadows of delight seals of untruth,
Now I impose new taskes upon thy Pen,
to show my sorrows to the eyes of Men.
Set then the tenor of thy doleful song,
To the deep accentes of my bloody sweat?
Sweet strains of Music, sweetly mixed among,
The discord of my pains, the pleasure great,
The comforts lasting that the world has got,
By the delightful sound, of his sad note.
Here then unclasp the burden of my woes,
My woes, distilled into a stream of tears,
My tears, begetting sighs, whcih sighs disclose
A rock of torment, which affliction bears:
My griefs, tears, sighs, y^ rock, seas, winds v^fain'd
Whence shipwrackt souls, the Land of safety gayn'd.
For whiles incompast in a fleshly frame,
A cloud of dark mortality I lived:
I lived the subject both of scorn and shame,
Banished from mirth, Esaias. 53. 3.
of comfortes all deprived:
Horrors with scandal, cares with cares did strive,
And ever as I lived, I died alive.
Tears in mine eyes, division in my heart,
Disgrace upon my name, plaintes in my breast,
Thirst in my sufferance, Mat. 4. 2.
hunger in my smart,
Naked and cold, imprisoned and oppressed:
Troubled within, Luke. 9. 58.
tempted without, my Head
Uncertain, where to lead me to my bed.
Poor and forsaken ever day in danger
Of wrath and Treason, lesser pris'd then dust,
Of all abhorred, enen to mine own a stranger,
No man my friend, in any friend no trust:
My miracles termed diuilish, Psalm. 41. 9.
and my prayer
Hypocrisy, Mat. 12. 24.
my sorrows held dispayer.
This entertaynment in the world I had,
Yet for the world exposed my self to all:
All more then this though this be all to sad,
But here to did my Fathers will me call:
Which most above the rest his with pain,
Did cleave my soul, all woe-begon in twain.
The charge of whose hot wrath so fearful was,
As against Nature changed my sweat to blood:
Which trickling down my cheeks upon the grass, Luke. 22. 44

Well ^ould the agony wherein I stood:
An agony indeed, whose trembling heat,
Powered out the wonder of a bloody sweat,
Which bloody Sweat, for that it is a theme,
(The happy matter of a moving style)
That now I challenge from thy sacred dream,
And meditations (in that dream) the while,
Thou undertake, to Register that part,
And with my spirit, I will guide thy heart.
Remember first the sorrows thou have past,
The shame thou have escaped, what thou have felt,
How I have ever succored thee at last,
How gently, with thee and thy sins I dealt,
Think on the griefs, have made thy pride decline,
For by thine own, thou may conceive of mine.
For as the Sun exceedes the smallest Star,
In height of glory, in his goulden Spheres:
Whiles as I was with men, a man so far,
And much more, did my horrors exceed theires:
But thou begin, and where thy sacred fires
Wax dim, my breath shall quicken thy desires.
Thus then I soon obayd the Heavenly voice,
And wrote; the weight of vengeance now increast,
From God the Father on his son, whose choice
Would not from that iniunction be releast:
But he must feel, the curse and scourging rod,
Of our and his (through us) offended God.
No sacrifice or incense could appease,
Or reconcile the Majesty above:
No Customary Rites, no Tribute please,
No law redeem the breach of his dear love:
His most just justice, would no mercy give,
But God as man must die, that men may live.
The holy and inuiolate decree, Acts. 2. 23.

In his vnchaunging wisdom had appointed,
That the true way to happiness should be
Found out in blood, and blood of his anointed:
Whose pure Vermilion red, John. 1. 29. 36.
did fairly guild,
Sinn's black as night, for who^ this lamb was killed
Meek and vnfriended to the world he came, Reave 5. 8. 9.

Lowly, 1. Zech: 9. 9
sad, patient, in his humbled looks
The Mirror of humility; Mat 2. 5.
so ^ame,
As if his forehead had bin sorrows books: Mat. 11. 29.

Thus whiles the Jews hopes, Mat. 12. 18. 19. 20.
with ambition winged,
Flew through y^ earth, their Savior cames vn-king'd.
Vn-king'd good man, so far from any grace
Of earthly mai^stie, Mar. 6. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
of Crowns of state:
As he was set much lower then the base, Luke. 4. 22. to 31.

Beneath the sight of pity or of hate:
Yet this is that Messiah, he who brings
Life in his death, John. 1. 41.
makes men saints, Saints as Kings.
What eye did ever see him laugh? what ears
Have heard him speak the languages of pleasure? John. 11. 33. 35. 38.

But every eye that saw him, saw his Tears,
All Ears that heard him, Mar. 8. 12.
heard him speak in measure:
For still his words, Luke. 19. 41 42.
with grief such measure kept,
His speech was sighs, and as he spoke, he wept.
No hand did lend on little Cloth to dry, Lam. 1. 12

The rivers on his cheeks, no thought bewailed
His solitary Cares, but all past by
Those unrespected griefs, his heart assailed
Himself he seemed, as if he meant to crave,
But of himself, to bear him to his grave.
His precious head, crowned with a goodly fleece,
Of hayres more precious, then are goulden threedes,
Appears but as an Artist's Master piece
Scarce worth to view his locks him ouer-spreads
vntrim'd: Mat. 27. 29.
as if they ought that head no duty,
So much his daily woes had chaung'd his beauty.
His face in which the Rose did with the lilly, Esaias. 53. 2.

Strive curiousty for change in little space,
Through many untaught sighs, appeared so silly,
As to was but like the ruins of a face:
Never was man, so excellently named,
For shape, whom sadness had so soon vnfram'd.
And now the fullness of the time drew on, John. 13. 1.

When he should pay the ransom of his death, Gal. 4. 5.

To make oblation of his blood alone, Ephesians. 1. 10.

Offering the last gasp of a guiltless breath:
As if his only arrant from the womb.
Were but to run a race unto his Tomb.
When with the small remainder of his stock, Mat. 26. 37

A remnant of the worlds vn-numbred son's,
A little remnant, a poor simple flock,
This pastor with those sheep together run's,
To sequester them and himself apart, Luke 21. 37

That he might offer up to God his heart.
Not far from the Holy City stood,
The mount of Oliuet, Mat. 21. 1. et 24. 3.
at whose steep Base
Ceadron the river, with a gentle flood,
Made Music to the silence of that place: John. 18. 1.

Near which was Gethsemane, Mar. 14. 32.
whereto say,
He often came and often used to pray.
Retired from out the clamours of the day,
Our Savior with his chosen thi^her came:
That with more leisure he might freely pray, Luke. 22. 4

Before the hour that must dissolve the frame
Of his mortallity, the curse and scourge
He was to bear, from sinners sin to purge.
And feeling now the approaching horrors near,
Of God's inkindled wrath, the time at hand
Of coming vengeance, trembling in his fear,
(Which being man he knew not to command) John. 8. 59.

His soul was heavy to the death, Mat. 26. 28
his heart
Through wounded, ere he felt his wounds to smart.
Burst with the burden of tormenting anguish, Esaias. ^2. 4. 7.

Wasted with bitter throbbes, his hastening pain
Did make his Manhood quake, and sadly languish
In agonyes so heavy to sustain,
As but the Jewish malice was to heady,
New death's were needless, he was dead already.
In terrors buried quick, he strove to have
To the prepared Sepulcher of shame:
Dreading the judgment, heaven had over past
Upon his human frailty hell to tame:
His flesh and Godhead st^oue, but he the while,
Meek in his suffraunce, did both weep and smile:
His Godhead smiled to see his manhood weep,
Remembering what his Godhead had decreed:
His manhood did a sure full reckoning keep,
Of every sorrow, that could sorrow breed:
And feign he would as man from death, be-los'd
which on himself as God, himself imposed. John. 10. 18

Father he prayed, Mat. 26. 39.
and lifted up his eyes,
(For in his eyes he had enthroned his heart)
Father? ah that those terrors might suffize?
Ah that this deadly banquet might depart?
In which without thy wrath, I might not sup,
The health of sick souls, in a poys'ned Cup.
And if it may be possible? But Oh?
Let not my prayers disanull thy will? Mar. 14. 36

If thine eternal counsel order so,
That I must thy, severe decree fulfill?
Father, so it let be? though death has won
Gain on my flesh, Luke. 22. 42
yet O thy, Phil. 2. 8.
thy will be done.
Here sincking down, for being fore oppressed,
With all the worlds innumerable sins,
Assaulted in that conflict, and distressed, Heb. 2. 9.

An Angel comforts him, and he begins
To shake of those his fears in which he stood, Luke. 22. 43

Which from his passions drew a sweat of blood. Verse. 44. ibid.

Dear eye what-soe're thou be that shall peruse,
The Lurthen of those lamentable lines?
An holy meditation may infuse,
A-mazement to thy soul by those fair signs:
Here stay thy wandering gaze, and faintly hear
(Ere thou read more) thou may let fall a tear?
And think it not a labor all vn-meete,
To spend a sigh on this unhappy view?
Woeful the subject, but the gain is sweet,
By which all serve no more, but reign a new:
For every tear of water thou can shed?
The heart of Christ, a tear of blood has bled.
He sweat not drops of blood for his own cause, Psalm. 18. 23.

For he vnblemish't lamb was innocent: 1. Pet. 2. 22.

He had obai'd no God, Esaias. 53. 9.
he broke no Laws,
He harbourd no deceit, no falsehood meant,
He never wronged his friend by secret stealth,
Nor by oppression sought to purchase wealth.
His tongue for gain was never heard to lie,
Or tu'nd to swear, or flatter, curse, or fawn,
Lust could not train his heart, or love his eye,
No wanton baits of pleasure could impawne
His chaste desire, to forfet to delight
The lawelesse issues of a banefull night.
His meekenes thirsted notreuenge, his mind
Was never set on wrath, no fruitless pride
Trauail'd new fashions curiously to find,
He only cared his naked wast to hide: Luke. 8. 2. 3

He never sought to be reputed brave,
So he had clothes, yet clothes, could scarcely have.
Helou'd not sloth (unprofitable rest)
Which eats, and feeds, and only feeds and eats:
Excess of feeding he has not professed,
To surfeit in variety of Meats.
His diet was not change, Mat. 14. 19.
or choice: his dish
Sometimes a Barley loaf, sometimes a fish.
No Wines of mixture, or new drinks to drown
His soul he vsd: he was, as Nature made him,
A drinker, John. 47.
but no drunkard: to vncrowne
His innocence no friendship should persuade him: Mat. 11. 19.

His voice vn-fee'd, Luke. 4. 21.
spoke to a Nation dull,
And fed the sheep, Mar. 6. 6
but would not share the Wool.
He did not stop his ears against the cries
Of harmless suitors, to do justice right;
He enui'd not the great, nor did despise
The broken hearted poor,.1 John. 3. 5.
borne down by might:
But without doing evil, Mat. 8. 17.
all to win
He lost his life; and yet he knew no sin.
He knew no sin, then needed not to sweat
The liquid moisture of dissolved blood,
For his own faults, but ours; our faults so great,
As scant is one amongst a thousand good
And yet that one of thousands, if the letter
Of life were surely scand, might be much better.
This was that Pelican indeed, retired
Into the desert of a troubled breast,
Who for to pay the ransom long desired,
Consumed himself to give his people rest:
A Pelican indeed, that with her blood
Pulls out her heart, to give her Chickens food.
He like the Phaenix burning in the Sun,
That from his ashes may spring up a younger,
Does beat himself to death, and will not shun
The fire, that weak men may in him grow stronger:
A perfect Phaenix, that most gladly dies,
That many in his only death may rise. Heb. 9. 28.

In every sex, and some of all degrees,
He saw the misspent riot of their Talent:
No sin escapt the eye of his decrees,
But he beheld how apt men were to fall in it:
For so is prone mortalyty accursed,
As still it strives to plot and work the woorst.
This man of men did in his troubled spirit
Into a stream of soft compassion melt
His ^cye blood, that frailty might inherit
The sun of comfort, by the griefs he felt:
Each drop of blood he shed, Leui. 17. 11.
he, shed it then
To wash a several sin from several men. Heb. 19. 22

Here saw he Princes in the awful throne
Of eminency, as happened by Herod.
how wantonly they strove
For thirst of glory, Mat 2. 8.
to protect alone
Religious name, not for religious love: Luke. 3. 1.

Graceing the graceless, in whom grace was lost, Acts. 12. 21 22.

Such Parasites as knew to flatter most.
For those he sweated blood: John. 18. 22.
that they whom Heaven
Created God's, Psalm. 82. 1. 6
on earth, should so profane
By courses indirect and laws uneven,
Of will and sensual lust, Reu. 17. 2
the law first drawn
By that eternal royalty, who stood
To watch their faults: for Kings he sweated blood.
Here saw he such, who under those were placed
In seats of greatness and commaundes of state:
How fond in their madness they did wast
Their greatness in ambition and debate: Luke. 23. 12.

Aiming not to support, but scorn the good, Acts. 23. 4. 5.

By unjust force, for such he sweated blood.
Here saw he how in Moses chair thereraign'd
Scribes clothed in wool of Lambs, Mat. 7. 15.
and speaking well, Mat. 23. 2.

But Wolves in nature, Mat. 7. 3.
so coruptly stayn'd,
As if they were but messengers of hell: John. 8. 44.

Abusing vnlearn'd souls and Leuits power, Mat. 23. 13

More ready, Mar. 12. 40
then to cherrish, to devour.
Those whom the breath of God at first inspired
To shine as Lamps, Mat. 5. 14.
and speak the Heavenly sound,
With Angels tongues, Eze. 22. 25.
were silent, Mat. 15. 9.
if not hired,
More studying with the scriptures to compound
Their own traditions, Mar. 7. 7.
and for those indeed,
In heavy drops the sweat of Christ did bleed.
Here saw he Lawyers soberly engoun'd, Luke. 11. 46 52.

Wanting the Robe of Justice: not regarding
The poor man's right, Luke 18. 2. 3
nor where the case was sound,
But giving Judgment, as he felt rewarding: Pro. 29. 4.

Whose tongue was bought, against that side was weak,
Most times as well to hold his peace, as speak:
For them he sweated blood, and here he saw
Intrused jurisdiction ouer-sway'd
By partial favor, John. 12. 43
above form of Law,
Cold Conscience, by which Conscience was betrayed:
For those condemning, Luke. 6. 37.
were condemned to much,
As they condemned, Mat. 7. 1. 2.
He sweated blood for such,
Here saw he Soldiers toyling in the heat
Of cruelty, Luke. 3. 14.
not measuring the right,
Why they bore Arms, but to content the great
And their own lawless hate prepared to fight,
For prey and spoil aduenturing to rent
Their lives and souls, for those his blood He spent.
Here saw he others that did keep the sword
Of office and authority, as in Annas and Cayphas John. 18. 13. 14.
in peace, Pro. 29. 2.

Compacted in a knot, not to accord
Or set at unity strifes, but increase:
Wounding or sparing with a watchful hand,
As some superior person should command.
For them he sweated blood: here with much grief
He saw how Scholars, Eccle. 10. 1. 2.
trained with strength of wit,
Inricht with knowledge, and of men the chief,
For knowing more then men, with straynes unfit
Did boast their pride, which wisdom disallowed, Mat. 11. 19.

For being still both needy and yet proud: Pro. 14. 6.

Scholars he saw, how foolishly they strove,
With terms of Art and smooth beguiling rimes,
To paynt the grosenes of unlawful love, James. 3. 15

And prove the sins that did corrupt the times, Acts. 19. 19

Mayntayning vp-start sects which all with-stood
Truths precious light: Mic. 2. 1.
for those He sweated blood. Gal. 5. 20.

Here saw he some, whose servile baseness waited 1. Tim. 1. 4.

Upon such vices as attend the great, as the Herodians^

Whom Hell with all it is nimble turning bayted
To usher lusts, by many a subtle feat, Mat. 22. 16.

Those make good clothes their God, Luke. 4 25.
and pay the fees
Of lewdnes, with fair words and supple knees, Mat. 11. 7.

For those did Jesus sweat in blood: with those
Here saw he some, that were in nature skilled,
Searching the rules of Physic, Mar. 15. 26.
to disclose
The treasure that the help of Art could yield,
How Gold did prompt them, and the thirst of wealth,
To hasten death, or to recover health.
Much mischief and abuse he saw in such,
How they would cocker lust, and stir up heat
Of wanton blood, concealing shame too much,
With many sins, too many to repeat:
For those and their iniquities, Christ's grief
Did sweat in blood, to give their souls relief.
Here saw ^he men, whose winged vessels brought
From lands far off, the Merchandise of profit,
How by their factors, Ren. ^^. 23.
all the world was sought,
For Precious wares such as made plenty of it: Hos 12. 7. 8

And yielded to their greedy hopes such treasure, Mic. 6. 10. 11. 12.

As they had heap't, by subtle weight and measure.
Thus did they wast the poor, 1 Cor. 6. 8.
and purchase wealth
By falsehood in extremityes retyring
As they pretend, 1. These. 4. 6
for benefit of health,
To their full garners: greedily conspiring
How they might starve the hungry, Reave. 18. 3. 11.
and still keep
Their gould, for those his bloody sweat did weep.
Here saw he others, such as was Achab to Naboth.
cursed with large posessions
Hard Landlords, raising rentes, who still would grutch
The bread of honest gayue, by stern oppressions,
Wrangling for earth, 1. Kin. 21. 2
till earth they had too much,
For those the Lord, Psalm. 83. 5.
now being man was driven,
To sweat in blood; 1. Job. 9. 24
that those might be forgiven.
Here saw he yet a woo^ser sort, Eze. 18. 12. 13.
provoking
The wrath of God, (...) 22. 12. 13.
who living still in plenty,
And cunning in Arethmeticke, lay soaking
The needy: Pro. 22. 23.
gayning on the hundred twenty:
Unconscionable usurers, Romans 2. ^. 2. Pet. 3. 9.
not contented
With ten to one? James. 5. 3.
nor one of ten repented.
For them he sweated blood, Genesis 6. 2.
here saw he Creatures
In face as sweet as Angels, died in grain,
Of natures Art, fair Miracle of features.
Wonder of beauty, loves delicious train,
Adorned with seeming graces that did shine
So glorious, as they were esteemed divine.
Women they were, Saints to behold, in view
Chaste Matrons, but (O frailtyes cursed) in trial
More vain then vanity, Pro. 31. 30.
and more untrue
Then falsehood: Pro. 7. 10.
only; only cunning in denial:
In whose denial virtue was so scant,
As when they not denied, they most will grant.
Words, Ecclc. ^. 7. 28.
wit, and fayrnesse, or the smiling ginnes
Wherewith they catch insnard men: where to heaven
Bestowed for blessings, are but bands to sins
Abused; whom God made straight, those make even:
Of whom the most are worst, Ibid. 30.
the fewer good,
The good not free, for all he sweated blood.
No sex was vncorrupt, but all in all,
In every fashion, and in each degree,
Drew comfort from the sower-bitter Gall
Of his afflictions, therein to set free
That souls from bondage, and to cool that heat
of just damnation, in his bloody sweat.
The tide of killing Sins was swollen high,
And could not be abated to an ebb. Romans 3. 23. ^4.

Before the blessed Son of God must dye,
Undoing by his death the painful webb,
The web of endless pains that Satan laid,
In which the Souls of sinners were betrayed.
Even as a man that treades a weary pace,
In laborinthes, continually in doubt
To find the center of the curious trace,
Once entered, still uncertain to get out,
Before some skillfull master by a twist,
Does guide him, in or out, or as he list.
Or as some Christian Merchant by a Turk
Surprisd, and chayn'd, is made a gally-slaue,
Whipped every day, and forced to toil and work,
Consumed with grief, still living in a grave,
Until some one more strong, does free his pain,
And set's him in his wonted state again:
So men, that in a maze of deathfull error
Did tread the paths of miseries and woe, 1. Tim. 2. 26

Bound by that Turk the Devil, Deu. 6. 21.
slau'd to that terror
Of condemnation, labored to and fro:
Till Christ by death, Gal. 3. 26.
did lead them out of sin,
And freed them from the bondage they were in.
The Devil could not with his active might
Prevail against the Lord, Mat. 12. 28. 29.
but he abates
His policy and strength; Mar. 3. 27.
and skilled in fight,
Conquer's the sting of Death, Hose 13. 14
cast down hell gates,
Triumphs on sin, Mat. 16. 18. 2. Cor. 15. 55. 56.
kept dark confusion under,
Breaking the cursed Dragons head a sunder.
Captivity, Genesis 3. 15.
led Captive, does vn-maske
The hideous visor of his dismal smiles,
And all the world shakes off the irksome task
It had sustayn'd, and see's the deadly guiles,
The sugared bane, the draught it had sucked up
Of spiced pleasures in a damned cup.
A damned cup, a cup of Gods fierce wrath,
Of fornications, Reu. 18. 3.
of consuming wine,
A cup, such as restoratiues none has,
But mere consumptions, no way to refine
New blood as Cordialls, but to ouer-cloy
The Diet of the Soul, and Soul destroy.
All those has Christ's dear bloody sweat laid open^
(For even his death was but a sweat in blood)
Offering to all in heart contrite and broken,
The benefit of life and living food:
Not foo^e not Manna, John. 6. 31. 35.
that shall perish, waste,
Or stincke, but bread that shall for ever last.
For ever last? O who would spend his days,
In transitory follyes of delight?
Such as pass soon away, and soon decays,
Vanish as soon as thought forgotten quite?
When they beyond all term of time or date
might reign as Kings, but in a happier state?
This did the Leacher sleeping in the sheets
Which reeke with lust, but think on, he would weep;
This did the Drunkard reeling in the streets
(Then only wise when he does only sleep)
Consider, he might sigh; and not incline
To vomit out his soul in streams of wine.
This did the Miscreants ( Gallant's called) who boldly,
Tear Gods eternal name, with liberal oaths,
Remember, they would pray, and not so coldly
Quench zeal, by warning pride in costly clothes:
For zeal does last, when clothes are worn and rotten,
Men great; once seen in rags, are soon forgotten.
This did the gamsters, spending nights and days,
In loosing what they gain (such gain is loss)
For-cast, they would repent, and have such plays,
Reputing money (as it is but dross:
They, whiles other cheat, in hope of slime,
Ill-gotten thrift, do cheat their selves of time.
This did the lo^-sicke musicke-straining wanton,
Who leads his life in sonnetting some Ay-m^es:
Ponder, he would cease, and then there would be scant one
En-amourd on so many lisping Shces:
But changing better notes, they would take pity
On their own souls, and sing a sweeter dittie.
This did the bloody-minded butcher mildly,
Conceive, he would not be so flesht in strife,
He would not ouer-giuen be so wildly,
To stabbe, to fight, to scorn the weight of life:
Who seeks a name by murder, and does prize it,
Being termd a true brave Spirit hardly buys it.
This did the mockers of the elect and holy,
Whom God has set on earth to do his will,
Regard they could not be so cursed in folly, 2. kin 2. 23.

As to persevere in their miscniefe still: Acts 2. 13.

Despising Preachers, Mat. 10. 22.
and nicke naming those,
With malice whom the holy ghost chose.
This did the women of much shame and badnesse,
Who prostitute their bodies do disgrace.
In penance, and a feeling tuch of sadness
But look into, they would not be so base,
To gain diseases, but with hearts all rent
Redeem the unchaste hours, Ioh. 8. 11.
they have misspent.
He that does most addict himself to sin,
Did he but bathe his thoughts and once a day
Wash through his earnest meditations, in
The bloody sweat of Christ, and truly pray
To be made clean, by sorrows strongly urged,
Soon should he hate his faults, and soon be purged
But this to flesh and frailty is so strange,
So hard to think, so difficult to do,
As it is almost impossible to change,
From bad to good though God in mercy woe
Mortality, to taste of mercies treasure,
Yet O, it is hard to leave the baits of pleasure.
O thou that dalliest in secure content?
And do not feel the sins that ouer-presse thee?
Think on his bloody sweat and straight repent,
Before a heavier Judgment do distress thee?
And then alas, in that vn-hopefull state,
The time is past thou will repent too late.
Christ's bloody sweat, was that distilling river,
The comfortable Jordan, 2. kin. 5. 14.
whose fair streams
Did cleanse the Syrian Naaman, and deliver
His body from the leprosies extremes:
We all are Naamans leprous, but more foul,
Till in his bloody sweat he purge our soul.
Christ's bloody sweat that precious poole is, Ioh. 5. 2.
truly
Bethesda called, where he that was dis-easd
For eight and thirty years, did wait most duly
To be put in, thereby to be releasd:
We all are sick, and languishingly houer,
Till in his bloody sweat, we health recouer^.
Christ's bloody sweat, that Siloam is, where he
Must strive to wash his eyes, Ioh. 9. 7.
who was borne blind,
In which pure lauer, he attaind to see
With eyes of body, and with eyes of mind:
So must we wash, our blinduesse is so great,
In the fresh fountain of his bloody sweat.
These are the waters of eternal life, Esa. 12. 3.

And he that drinks them shall not thirst again; John. 4. 14.

Not springs of Meribath, Nu. 20. 13.
or floods of strife,
To move contentions, or produce disdain,
For such as taste this licour, shall possess
Sure peace of conscience, perfect happiness.
Does any love to be in love with beauty?
Come hither, in those drops he shall behold
Water and blood, both in their proper duty,
So lively as Arts self would have extold:
In curious figures, shadowing delight,
Blood like to red, and Water like to white.
Does any covet time, beg^^ing song?
Come h^ther, hear is music in this sweat;
Words sung to God, spoke with a zeal so strong,
As that it does his bloody sweat beget.
This must inchant the senses, and impart,
Not solace to the ear, but to the heart. Ephe. 5. 19.

Does any wish for costly fare or diet?
Come hither, banquet in his sacred passion.
Here Is comfort for the foul, and perfect quiet,
Such food as Christ himself had in like fashion,
When talking with the woman at the well,
He eat what no man but himself could tell. Ioh. 4. 32.

Does any hope for Honor or promotion,
Come hither, let him meditate on this,
And with the sacrifice of true devotion,
Lift up his voice to ask continuing bliss.
And to him shall be given with increase, 1. Pet. 5. 4.

A crown of glory, a firm throane of peace. 2. Tim. 4. 8.

Does any take content in strength and might,
Come hither from this blood recover trust,
And he shall put the Devils force to flight,
Rebate the darts of Hell and judge th'^ must: 1. Ioh. 2. 14

And bear the Cross and conquer in like manner, Iam. 4. 6.

Safe Soldiers fighting under Christ his banner.
It is an honor in the eyes of men.
If when the King in person is in field,
Some forward spirit desperately then:
Assault his foe, and force him for to yield.
For which attempt, if such a one by right,
Under the standard royal be made Knight.
It is an honor, and to times succeeding,
This banneret shall purchase lasting fame,
What honor is it then if one lie bleeding,
Under the wounds of Christ and in his name?
By Christian combat, level in the dust
The worlds aspiring sins deuoting lust.
He that does overcome himself and see,
His guerdon by the holy written word,
Is a fair man at arms more strong then he,
Who plowes up Kingdoms with his threatening sword
For greater enemies incampe about,
Man's own weak heart, then any are without.
Here lurkes adulteries, fornication, rapes,
Murders, Mat. 15. 19.
false testimonies, slanders pride,
Treason, Mar. 7. 21. 22.
backe-biting, evil thoughts escapes,
Thefts, foolishnes, affections fondly e^'de,
Uncleanness, covetousness, deceits and all,
Which brings the poor captiued foul in ^hrall.
Turn then thy weapons on thy self, O man,
And fight against those enemies within thee,
Beat down thy proper strength, sincerely scan
The horror of those foes that aim to win thee:
Put plates of righteousness upon thy breast. Ephesians 6. 14.

And have thy feet shod with the Gospels rest. Verse. 15.

Gird on thy loins with verity, Verse. 14.
and take
Saluations helmet to secure thy head, Verse. 17.

Bear up the shield of faith and hourly shake Verse. 16.

The spirits sword and on thy watchful bed Ibid.

Keep centinell when all thy powers retreat
Then come and bath thee in his bloody sweat. Colos. 4. 2.

For as the Heart long hunted on the mountains, Psa. 42. 1.

Breathless does pant for life but all in vain,
Until revived in the lively fountains,
He does recover strength and breath again:
So we of breath, of life, are all deprived.
Til in his bloody sweat we be revived.
The curse on man from God when first he fell
From the free comforts of possessed grace,
Was danger of a second death and hell
Ecating his bread with sweat upon his face,
Then all his sweat his sorrows did decree him, Genesis 3. 19.

This bloody sweat should from his sorrows free him.
Sweat was ordaind to get us bread, which bread
Achab the king did to Michaiah give
When to the prison causing to be led,
He did ordain the prophet to relieve
With bread, which showed his cruel jurisdiction
In giving bread, 1. ^in. 22. 21
but bread it was of Affliction.
In sweat we eat our bread, 1. Sam. 13. 14.
such bread as David
A man of God, and chosen to his heart,
Cride out he had, when doubting to be saved
He bore the weakness of the Churches smart.
Bread it was indeed, so kneaded up in fears,
As well he witnest it was the bread of tears. Psa. 80. 6.

In sweat we eat our bread, such bread so scant,
As Esaias promisd to the faithless Jews,
Who being pierced with famine, steru'd with want,
Sought stranger gods and did the known refuse.
Such bread is our bread, and be sweated so,
Bread of adversity, Esa. 30. 20.
and bread of woe.
As then the sweat in getting of our bread,
Did set before our eyes the curse we live in,
So may this bloody sweat abandon dread,
In only which we know we are forgiven:
Then let us in those sweates redeem time past,
Feeling the first, still have in mind the last.
And still as often as our heart presents us
The memory of our unhappy fall,
By sweating for that bread which discontents us
So often, let us call to mind withal
This sweat of comfort, that does hourly bleed
Our woeful souls with bread of l^fe to feed.
Let not the pleasures of uncertain taste,
Beguile ourp^iates to deceive our hearts:
Let not the momentarie hopes that wast,
Inuit to folly that too soon ^eparts: Ioh. 10. 7. 9.

But let us look on Christ the way and door,
That all must tread as he has gone before.
Peeter and Andrew, James and John, whom first
The Lord elected to be great on earth, Mat. 4. 19.

From men with men in ran^ke of men the worst,
The meanest in degree of baseft birth,
When they were clad Gods glory for to see,
The only words he used, were follow me.
Matthew surnamed Leuy who to raise
His estate to wealth and Houour sat and took
Custom, and tallage till his better days,
Approached when the time was he forsook
Vain trust, and was God's glory called to see,
The only words Christ used, Mar. 2. 14.
were follow me.
The rich man that to justify himself,
By keeping whole the fire-condemning law,
He that was sad to leave his worldly pelf
When the true man to righteousness he saw:
To him then called Gods glory for to see
The only words he used, Mar. 10. 21.
were follow me.
To him that would be just, Luke. 9. 61.
but first had rather
To bid his guestes at home farewell and he,
Who chose to lay into his grave his father, Mat. 8. 22.

Before he meant a Nazuarite to be:
When they should come Gods glory for to see.
The only words he used, Ibid. 22.
were follow me.
Phillip when yet redemption was not known,
To be on earth found such a saving favor,
As that the Lord did chose him for his own,
By calling him unto the precious savor:
Of life, to life, Gods glory for to see,
Yet all the words he used, John. 1. 43.
were follow me.
Which follow me, must not be understood
In fastes of Miracle, or earthly pleasure,
Nor striuiug, as he did in sweating blood,
To know no sin, but to attain the treasure
Of neuer-fading joys, of true salvation,
By holding worldly pomp in detestation. Io. 2. 15. 16

For he who follows Christ must not respect
Promotion, money, glory, ease delight:
But poverty, To. 13. 14.
reproof, and selfe-neglect
Disgrace, Mat 10. 37
tears, hunger, cold, thirst, scorn, despite,
Friends, Mat. 19. 29.
father, mother, brethren, children, wife,
Must be forgon, yea lands and goods and life.
His Cross must be took up and as he was
In meekness, Luke 9. 23. 1. Pet. 2. 21. 22.
sufferance, patience, and sobriety,
Such must we be, thus must we over pass
The wars of frayltie, lusts sacietie,
We must lay down our lives, and gain the crown
Of life indeed, as life we do lay down.
Unto the simple was the Lord revealed,
To men obscure, Mat. 10. 39
disdained, and unlearned,
His mercy from the mighty is concealed, 1. Cor. 1. 27 28.

He only of the poor will be discerned,
That they who to the world are poor in show, Ioh. 21. 3. 4.

Might teach the world, Mat. 5. 3.
and greatness overthrow.
When to the bar of judgment we shall plead,
And hold up guilty hands, and sue for grace,
A book shall be brought forth thereon to read
A miserere mei, Psalm. 51. 1.
but our case
Will Be so hard, our sins will so deprave us,
As then our book will come too late to save us.
For then our booke^ the book that does contain,
The words of life, Christ's bloody sweat and passion,
That book will witness how we did disdain
His love, and drive us to a desperation,
And then not every one that cries Lord, Lord,
Shall Be received, Mat. 1. 2.
for scorning of his word.
Then shall the Lord reply, for you I sweated
Sad drops of blood, and yet you would not love me:
For you in agony, my heart was heated,
My wounds did cry, yet would ye not approve me:
I know ye not, Mat. 25. 4.
ye cursed creatures go
Where damned souls do feel eternal woe. Psa. 6. 8.

Never may day give comfort to your cries,
But ouer-cloud you in perpetual night:
Never hence forward may your hopes arise,
For to behold my life-restoring sight:
Let death and devils torture you for ever,
For you shall be released never, never.
Here shall the wantons for a downy bed,
Be rackt on pal^ets of stil-burning steel:
Here shall the glutton, that has daily fed,
On choice of dainty diet, hourly feel
Worse meat then toads, and beyond time be drencht
In flames of fire, that never shall be quenched.
Each moment shall the killer, be tormented
With stables, that shall not so procure his death:
The drunkard that would never be contented
With drinking up whole flagons at a breath,
Shall Be denied (as he with thirst is stung)
A drop of water for to cool his tongue.
The mony-hoording Miser in his throat
Shall swallow molten lead: the spruce perfumed
Shall smell most loathsome brimstome: he who wrote
Soule-killing rimes, shall living be consumed
By such a gnawing worm, Mar. 9. 44.
that never dies,
And hear in stead of music hellish cries.
No sin that is not washed in true repentance,
Shall escape in every sense to be perplexed:
But every sin^ and sinner shall have sentence,
To be without all end with horrors vexed. Romans 6. 23.

And that not for a day, a month, a score
Of years, or term, or time, but evermore.
For as the God whom such have once offended,
Is infinite in majesty and power:
So shall their tortures be to them extended
Most infinite, and ceast not to devour:
And after thousand thousand years, their sin
Is no more free then when it did begin.
Lo here the view of souls condemned to hell,
Yet here is not the woorst of their indurance,
Their greater torments are for that they fell
From everlasting joys, and known assurance
Of Gods great glory: which so long remains:
As date-lesse as are their all-scorning pains.
Unto the blessed shall he change his voice,
And with as much grim horror as he spoke,
The curse of wrath: so sweet shall be the voice,
That with a gracious mildness shall provoke
Laughter and comfort to the long distressed, Luke. 6. 21.

When he shall call them to his quiet rest.
Come (will he say) ye blessed of my Father,
Unto the kingdom he has chosen for you: Mat. 25. 34

Since in the time of frailty ye had rather
Then serve as worldlings, have the world abhor you:
You gron'd, and sighed, and mortifide the flesh,
Waiting till I, your sorrows do refresh.
My Bloody sweat won pity in your eyes,
And you poor souls did love me in my griefs,
My base reproof you no way did despise.
Hungry, cold naked, thirsty, your reliefes
Did cheer my dying heart: for which regard
Take life eternal, for your due reward.
Here shall the Martyrs slain upon the Alter
Of persecution, Reu. 6. 10.
for his glorious sake
By Bannishment, the sword, the axe, the halter,
The water, rack, the whip, the fiery stake,
No longer cry, how long? but rest in peace,
And have such pleasures as shall never cease.
Here shall the meek in spirit be exalted,
The naked clothd, Ibid. 11.
in perfect robes of white:
The poor that felt no taste of sin, be salted
With savors of exceeding great delight:
The hungry fed, the sick releeu'd, the chaste
With honors, that shall never fall be graced.
Those when the Trumpet from the flaming skies,
Shall sound a summons to the day of doom, Mat. 24, 31

Heard shrill even from the simple to the wise, 1. The 4. 17

Shall with the Lord of glory fairly come,
And stand as witnesses, Psa. 50. 3.
then to provoke
The Lord to judgment, Joel. 2. 34.
whiles the heaven ^ smoke
Here Dives from the flames he suffers in, Luke 13. 23

Looks up, and faintly, on the Lords right hand,
(Who comes to pay the wages of his sin)
Beholds poor Lazarus in triumph stand
And then his conscience prompts him, telling how
As he did once scorn him, he scorns him now.
What boots complaints? or whither can he run
To hide him from that presence? all in vain
He calls to mind the follyes he has done,
But cannot ransom back his time again;
Justice pronounces, as it justly fitted:
Sin showed no pity, sin must not be pitied.
Unto this Audit and severe account,
How we have lived? what words we spoke, what prayer
We made? what thoughts we thought? how we surmount
In goodness? how the poor we did repaire^
What can we answer? but in meek accord
Confess us guilty, and cry mercy Lord?
A sparrow cannot fall unto the ground
Without the providence of God above: Mat. 10. 29

Our hairs are numbered, Ibid. 30.
and we shall be found.
The heirs of promise, as we hate or love:
The secrets of our hearts are not our own, 2. Cor. 4. 5.

Our hearts and secrets then will both be known.
Before the issue of which doleful day,
When no excuse will be admitted there,
A time is given, and a tongue to pray,
O who will then that precious time defer?
But whiles the sufferance of our God is great,
Fly to the safety of his Bloody sweat.
His bloody sweat the comfortable matter,
That must renew us in the time of need,
Both meat and drink ^ blood, meat, and drink, the water,
The last to quicken, Ephesians. 5. 26.
and the first to feed:
Water the seal of Baptism does present, John. 6. 55

And blood his supper each a sacrament.
See here in earnest meditations, now
The mystery of all salvation, Ephesians 1. 9. 10

How orderly God has ordaind, and how
He wisely wrought it from the first creation,
So good this gracious God is to defend us,
As he fore-thinks the means that must commend us.
When Christ prepared himself to die, and bear
The wrath of God that we in him might live:
The time of his sour passion drawing near,
In which he was his life for us to give,
Retird alone his father to entreat,
His agonies brought forth a bloody sweat.
So when upon the cross he had endured
The bitter pangs of hell, and breathd the last,
Confounding death that had his death procured
When all the tide of cruel griefs was past,
A soldier with a spear did pierce his side,
When blood with water gushing was espide. Ioh. 19. 34.

Water and blood what could it else intend
Or wher-unto so likened could it be
But to the bloody sweat his soul did send
Before his death oppressed in agony
That as the first before his death diminisht
Death of the soul this in his death that finished.
He di'd indeed not as an actor dies
To die to day, and live again to morrow,
In show to please the audience, or disguise
The idle habit of enforced sorrow:
The Cross his stage was, and he played the part
Of one that for his friend did pawn his heart.
His heart he pawnd, and yet not for his friend,
For who was friend to him, or who did love him?
But to his deadly foe he did extend, Colos. 1. 21

His dearest blood to them that did reprove him,
For such as took his life from him, he gave
Such life, as by his life they could not have.
Great miracle of love, redemptions wonder,
Where he that should be su'd to, sues to those:
Who would not sue to him, but still kept under
That better part which he in mercy chose:
Rare president of value, which discouers
How love is scant, where plenty is of lovers.
If we but look into the little home,
The home of our own selves, we may epsy
How many pirates still make haste to come
To wrecke our souls, whom whiles we do defy
We entertain, and freely, but unsought,
Make merchandise of what we never bought.
The pearl and the treasures which the Lord
Did witness, Mat. 13. 44 45. 46.
were of an unvalued price:
Jesus did purchase of his own accord
To free us from our death deserving vice,
And left us for an heritage, the gain
Of life immortal ever to remain.
Hels gaping womb which every minute sunk
Millions of souls, Pro. 27. 20.
and would not be content
With streams of blood, which greedily it drunk,
But still cryde more, his mercy did prevent,
For he shut up the laws, and did acquit
The rau'nous gorge of that devouring pit.
The ever empty swallow of the grave
And bottomless confusion of the deep
His blood has made in vain, and this does save
From dangers, such as dangers daily keep.
Deaths sting it has rebated and vn-edg'd
Such souls as were in sorrows bondage pledged.
What should a sinner do? or whither fly
To hide him from his shame that ever wakes?
Poor man less then a man who cannot die,
Nor cannot live so much his Care mistakes,
And still he draws destruction with his breath,
As it is all one to suffer life or death.
Sad thoughts like burning furies still pursue him,
And seek his life who them alive does cherrish,
Fond thoughts whose inward eyes nosooner view him
But kill that Master, who once dead, they perish:
His thoughts do tell his conscience of his thrall,
His conscience makes him think that he must fall.
What shall he cry to mountains to conceal him?
Or shall he beg, Luke 23. 30
the seas to ouer-drench him?
The mountains are removed and cannot heal him
The Seas are dry, Psa. 139. 9.
and they cannot entrench him, Reu. 6. 14.

But ever as he hopes the light to shun,
In groping for the night he finds the sun.
A Son whose glory does disclose abroad
The secrets of his hearts, and lays all open,
Lines out the sundry paths that he has trod,
Unfolds the several treasons he has spoken:
The inside of his bosom is apparent, 1. Ioh. 3. 20

And he has none excuse to plead his warrant.
What can he now resolve, but to retire
Unto the sweat of Christ, and cleft in mind.
Humbled in meek astonishment, desire
Comfort in this his bloody Bath to find:
Which bloody sweat, when every help does fail
To cure the soul, that only does avail.
Pure distillations are but vain receipts.
Curious to draine, but comfortless in taste,
Compounded Cordials are unwise deceits,
Whose virtue does but with the present last:
Christ's body is the Limbecke that must yield
Distilled blood, our souls from death to shield.
If pleasures, honors, money, gifts promotion,
Physic, restoratiues repasted diet,
Ease, cost, delights, cold heat, profane devotion,
Drinks, purges, observation, courtly quiet,
Or one, or all, the souls spots could expel,
Great Kings had never ran so fast to hell.
The Princes of the Sodomites, the chiefes
Of Egypt, Achab, Eserod, and the rest,
Had never felt the terrors of their griefs,
If art could have a remedy expressed,
But therefore di'd they, cause they know no good,
To purge them in the stream of Christ his blood.
The woman's painting Iesabel, the whore
Of the Israelitish monarch, 2. Kin. 9. 30
could not hide
Her sins from God but as her self was poor
In virtue, so she died in naked pride:
O had she fe^ne Christ's bloody sweat cont^i^'d
In his Eliahs grief, she might have li^'d. 1 Kin. 19. ^^ 4 5.

But they whom worldly pleasures wrap in woe,
Esteemd this sweat a fancy or a fable,
Which one day they will find was nothing so,
When to recall again they are not able:
And their this blood which has procurda crown
Shall Be a flood, not to refresh but drown.
What is a man but dust made up in form?
Frail, Genesis 3. 19.
weak, corrupted: keeping ti^e in motion,
A ship at sea, ^re-turnd with every storm:
Eats, sleeps, and dies, unsettled in devotion:
In health unbridled, in his years a span,
A sading bloome, 1. Pet. 1. 24.
and such a thing is man.
Man's beauty but a frame made up in snow,
Immixt with wax, which melts with every Sun,
Even so experience teaches men to know,
How soon this work of frailty is undone:
A winters frost, or summers parching heat,
Does soon this pictures ornament defeat,
Yet as a cunning fire-worke lighted glowes,
Spits and with hissing wonders dares the skies,
Till being wasted, down it fall, and shows
No more; his matter spent it weakly dies,
And vanishes to air and smoke, so men
In health are strong, but dying vanish then.
Man as a cunning fire-worke in his power,
Dares God and heaven, Psalm. 12. 4.
and kicks against the Lord,
Till all his force be spent, then in an hour
Abates, decaies, falls of his own accord:
Being indeed as nothing, in dcspaire
Of doing ill, fumes into smoke and air.
But here is not the end of all his ils^
His greater souls vexation is behind^
A death which both the soul and body kills,
To which the miserable are confind: Reu. 14. 18.

And then too late they wish to co^^e the heat,
Of flames and brimstone, in Christ's bloody sweat.
If one condemnd for some notorious fact,
Labor his pardon, and does surely think
His life is safe: forgets his former act,
Does revel, swear, profane, carouse and drink,
Whiles thus his jolly time he does apply,
One says that he within an howe^ must die.
How cold that news strikes to his heart? his checks
How soon they change their merriment? and he
With what submission pensive, humbly seeks
For grace to alter that un^op't decree?
How would he promise, beg, protest, o^ give
All that he had, or could procure to live.
Such is the case, who till the day draw near,
Wherein we must (...)^p the right^
We hold of living: do our souls appear
Slaves to disorder, servants to delight:
But when we are arrested to depart,
Then we can feel the dolours of our heart.
Yet Christ is not regarded, who stood up
And in the last day of the feast cride out,
H^ come to me, Io. 7. 31. 38
all ye who thirst, and sup
Rivers of life, drink freely round about:
And if there come a scarcity of food, Ioh. 6. 5.

My flesh shall be your bread, your drink my blood. Ibid. 54.

Dull ears who will not listen to this call?
Dull eyes who will not see this fount of ease?
Dull heart that will not shun temptations gall?
Dull soul that will not seek this God to please?
Dull ears, dull eyes, dull heart, dull soul, whose strife
Nor hears, nor sees, nor thinks, nor seeks for life.
Life may be freed from everlasting wrath,
Which is prepared for those which will not live,
If they but aim to bathe them in the bath
Of Christ his blood, which he does frankly give
To cleanse and wash away each leprous spot,
That use of sin does feed as sin begot.
Besieged mankind when the foe assaults,
Of number-lesse temptations, shrikes or fears,
Mewed up in care, and yields to the faults,
Whom as a weighty burden still he bears:
And ere h^ loose the honor of the field,
Does like a turne-coate, to his weakness yield.
Where now is faith? where is that courage now
Which prou^ mortality prefumes it has?
Base servile frailty does despairing bow
To wear the fetters of consuning wrath,
So cowards boast in time of peace, but fly
When wars increase, and unremembered die.
Others there are, who smooth the front of sin,
And mask his ugly forehead with the color
Of lust, engendered novelties, to win
Grace to their arts by making art seem fuller:
And they their foolish wits with pride to prove,
Will strive forsooth to make a God of love.
They are the devils secretaries right,
Whose rules have drawn whole troops of souls to hell
That might have else been saved, they day and night
Toil out their brains, that mischief might excel,
They feel the whips whiles as they kiss the rod,
By making lust the devil, and the god.
Love is no god, as some of wicked times
(Led with the dreaming dotage of their folly)
Have set him forth in their lascivious rimes,
Bewitched with errors, and conceits unholy:
It is raging blood affections blind,
Which boiles both in the body and the mind.
But such whose lawful thoughts, and honest heat,
Does temperately move with chaste desires,
To choose an equal partner, and beget
Like comforts by alike inkindled fires:
Such find no doubt in union made so even,
Sweet fruits of succors, and on earth a heaven.
Such find the pastures of their souls and hearts,
Refreshed by the soft distilling dew,
Of Christ's dear bloody sweat, which still imparts
Plenty of life and joys so surely true,
As like a barren ground they drink the pleasure,
Of that in estimable shower of treasure.
If every word we write, and speak, Mat. 12. 36
or thought
We think, or deeds we do, or hour we spend,
Shall one day to a^st^ict account be brought,
When shall be made a whole and final end,
Then all in vain we shall condemnd that wit,
Which has in sin or thought, Act. 8. 22.
or spoke, or writ.
Those Angels who as Porters, guard the gate
Of Gods eternal kingdom, will control
All entrance there and curiously debate
Questions of quarrel with the trembling soul,
And like some churlish officer at court,
Keep back the press of all the worser fort.
Here now the soul is baffaild whiles they chide,
What are ye? souls oppressed: but whither press ye?
Into the court of God here to abide,
What sick? yes sick: whom seek ye to dress ye?
Christ our physician: Mar. 2. 17.
who has sent ye to him?
Our faith; what faith? such faith as coms to woe him
Woe him for what? for life: where are your seals
Of piety and truth? lost: O fools
Get hence? Mat. 22. 11.
our wounded care appeals
To mercy, promised in the sacred schools:
To Justice? no to mercy we behave us:
Justice condemns you? yet will mercy save us.
Have you then bathd your sins? in what: in sweat?
What sweat? his bloody sweat: we have not know^ it:
Ah have you not? no: then you are to great
In sins, sins? sins, and those have overthrown it:
Hence souls away, ye are too late deluded,
Thus are the wicked souls from heaven excluded.
Thus are the wicked souls from heaven excluded,
And torturd in the horror of their fears,
Heavens gate is shut, when they would have intruded,
And al because they were too slack in tears:
Which are the ready tokens Christ has lent,
His bloody sweat on earth to represent.
Never was tear from any heart let fall, Mat. 5. 4.

In true repentance, but the Lord of grace,
Has seen and botled up, and kept it all
For such as must his saving health embrace:
This is a rule in text for certain given,
An eye still dry does seldom come to heaven.
He who can gush out tears as twere a flood,
Of crystal sorrows, and a zeal unfeigned,
Does purge his faults in Christ his sweat of blood,
And with his faults shall never more be stained,
Stars in their brightness shall not shine so glorious,
Nor all the Kings on earth be so victorious.
It Is not enough to read the Bible over,
Here to fold down a leaf, and there to quote it,
Now to behold the Lord in blood, then houer
And range: but freely in thy heart to note it:
For where the Word does tell us Christ did bleed,
And sweat, there must our thoght^ both drink and feed
Did but a King before a public view,
Embrace and kiss his subject, how would fame
Speed such such a favor, how would people sue,
To grace their service by his only name: Pro. 22. 23. 26.

So here does Christ a much more grief impare,
And cries to all, My son give me thy heart.
My son give me thy heart, Can. 1. 1.
and in exchange
Take mine, I both will kiss thee and embrace thee:
What heavenly words are in this voice? O strange?
See sinner how the God of love does grace thee,
My son give me thy heart, but give me thine
And I will sweat in blood, to pawn thee mine
God knocks, then let us open: let not hell
Bar out the King of mercy: he intreates,
Let not the devil distwade: God comes to dwell
With men, let men him entertain: he sweates
For us, let us for him like duty keep:
He sweated blood, let us in sorrow weep.
A man that lives in pleasures, as his days
Increase, the days past over seem a dream:
Still newer joy, more hope of joy bewrayes,
And as he lives, he lives still in extreme:
He wakes to sleep, and sleeps in hope to wake:
So here is all the pleasure he can take.
Is this a life? O what a life is this?
To covet age, which being come is hated:
Whose end is death, which death the utmost is
Of every lease that in the grave is dated:
They that enjoy what their own hearts can crave
Crave only time, which brings them to the grave.
And here they die, and dying once die all,
Die al as they unworthily have lived,
No part of them suruiues, but feels the thral
Of life in death, and death of life deprived:
Thus then the promise of all the worlds desire,
Bears life to die, then dies in life to tire.
Weary unrest, and restless weary woe,
That leads to pleasures in their birth abortiue:
How much more better were it to forgo
A life so grievous, and a death so sportiue?
And rest the griefs so numberless and great,
In the sweet slumber of his bloody sweat?
When Pharaohs heart was hardened, and denied
Freedom to Israel, Exo 8. 3.
the Lord to scourge
Pharaohs ambition and detested pride,
Which mercy could not win, nor mildness urge; Ibid. 19. 20:

Commanded Aaron when he touched the flood,
The Egyptian waters all were turned to blood.
Water was turned to blood, but in this sweat
Here blood is turned to water: as the first
Betoken'd plagues for sins, the last does treat
Redemption from those sins, who were accurs^:
The first his wrath, the lass does show his love,
His justice this did, that his mercy prove.
By blood offenses in the written law,
Unto the law of grace were reconciled;
By blood offenses must redemption draw, Heb: 9: 13: 18:

From blood; which blood the Gospel now is styled:
The law, the blood of Goats and bulls desired,
The Gospel has the blood of Christ required.
A surety for his friend that is arrested,
Kept close in prison, bound in iron chains,
Is hungry, cold, and weary, sick, and wrested
To change of inward griefs, and outward pains:
Deserves from him for whom he asseast,
If not a full reward, yet thanks at least.
So he, who in the absence of his friend,
Whom malice has vpbraided with abuse,
Does undertake his quarrel to defend,
Clearing the imputation with excuse,
Fights and is wounded; being wounded dies,
May justly claim the tribute of his eyes.
Jesus, the son of God was at our su^e
A rested, and imprisoned in the frame
Of flesh; Ioh. 1. 14
was fettered, and of no repute,
Tired with his griefs, the byword of defame,
All this he was, and did, yet to relieve him,
We scarce can in our hearts find thanks to give him.
He undertook our quarrel with the Devil, Reu. 12. 7. 8

When we were all unable to resist, Luke 1. 7^.

And in that quarrel to discharge our evil,
Was wounded to the death, yet we persist
Too obstinate in malice, and forbear
Upon his bleeding wounds to shed one tear.
We see upon his furrow-drowned face
The print of sorrows stamp, yet not regard him;
We see his honor leuel'd with disgrace,
Yet with our only thanks will not ^eward him:
It Is bad to sin; sin it is to be ungrateful,
Sin is abhorred, unthankfulness is hateful.
Go then Remembrance, tell that Queen of Reason
(Fair bride to Christ) the Sou^e her lover comes, Mat. 25. 1.

Decked in his wedding robes, Reu. 21. 9.
and courts the season
With choice of pleasures, and with many sins
Of sure deserts, inuites this wandering Queen,
To be as true as he to her has been.
Lady (quoth he) thy fortunes have not won
My heart to love, thy beauty cannot force me
To wanton dotage, what my care has done,
No time shall alter, no repo^ts divorce me:
For to my chaster flames thy zeal gave fuel,
And I will guard thee, if thou be not cruel.
No dower from thy treasuries I crave,
No wanton dil^^ance in a bed of lust,
Thy pureness is the portion I would have,
Artlesse simpliciue and steedy trust: Romans 16. 19.

And if thou prove but constant to implore,
Virtue with goodness, I will ask no more.
Heer^ vows the soul virgini^v, Cant, 2. 16.
and swears
She will be only his, and means to do it,
Until distracted in her fleshly fears,
She shrinkes from her first troth when she comes to it,
And like a strumpet false, she here ^^^swore,
That plighted promise she had made before.
Simplicity was wooed by youthful Just,
And would not yield; young Just did fee old sin,
Old sin assaults simplicity whose trust
Thus to make less she trimly does begin:
Fair daughter ^^^^en, time will come when thou
Shall change thy hue, and be as I am now.
Vnhealthie, old, forsaken, and despised,
I lead a life, who was adored then;
Beauty amidst the ^roppe is only prized,
Fair souls, in youth, are chie^ly liked of men:
But when my time did court me I for-went it,
And lost my days, and now I do repent it.
Daughter will thou alone live vnpossest,
Of youths best ornaments and natures joys?
Will thou deny to be a mother blessed,
In pretty daughters and more pretty boys?
O no, had not our mothers took their lot,
We had been yet unborn and vnbegot.
Heaven has o^ dained thee to be sweet on earth,
Both love and youth do-homage to thine eyes,
And will thou curb thy self of pleasures mirth?
By vainly striving how to be precise?
She that has fairness were as good have none,
If foolishly she keep it all for one.
Yet you forsooth young mistress in the folly,
Of standing on some pleasure threatening text,
Dream of some great renown, in being holly,
Read this, and that, and that, and what is next:
I know not what, and ever vainly plod,
In hope to marry with the Son of God.
No doubt: come yet, I Will tell a safer way,
If you will needs to that ambition clime,
Do it at last, bu^spend thy youth in play,
Revel, enjoy the freedom of the time:
And when you are old, unfit for sport, bereauen
Of youth and joys, then you may think on heaven
Tush daughter, Eze: 18. 21. 22.
God respects thee in thine age,
As well as in thy prime, and he will bear
With flesh and blood, then seek not to engage
Best of delight, before delights do wear:
And thou to God may be (my words are truth)
As welcome in thine age, as in thy youth.
Won is the soul with this, or rather lost,
Sins sweet temptation has undone the zone
Of Maiden chastitye, the feeld is lost,
Lust has preuailde and Christ is left a lone.
For now the soul resolves that sports unfold
Law to the young repentance fits the old.
Yet thus that kind good God will not give over,
But once again by parley does attempt,
To court this per^u^'d dame: and like a lover
Scorned of his Lady from all hope exempt,
Pittyes the shipwreck of her taiuted name,
And yet by Manage would recure her fame,
I know (quoth Christ) I louethee, else I would not,
Haue^^^^nd unto thee in a Sea of blood:
More testify my love thou know I could not,
Long have I strove to bring they soul to good:
And witness here this crimson sweat, how I,
(O soul of man) do for thy whoredoms dye.
How often in my bosom did I sue
To have thee lodged, Luke 13. 34.
how often did I call thee
From strange imbracements; from affections new,
Whose only surfeit did too soon inthrall thee?
And yet thou would not come, till age bereftthee,
Then I must take thee when all else have left thee:
When years have made thee all unfit for action,
When lust has sucked thy Marrow dry, and those
With whom thou had conspired in trothles faction,
Shall shun thy lewdness, and deride thy woes:
To me thou then wilt come and I must hide
The known defects of thy declined pride:
Call but to mind what it is to be a whore,
A whore, the worst of creatures, trades her pleasures
With all diseases, lives till she be poor;
Sels all to buy damnation, never measures^
Or shame, or health, but makes her bodies mart
Her souls confusion; such an one thou art. Heb. 13. 4.

And though perhaps temptation might persuade thee,
That even the winter of thine age shall find,
If thou repent, mercy from him that made thee,
Be not secure, for thou shall feel thy mind
So far divided, so currup^ly bent,
As then thou can not if thou would repent.
Redeem the poor remainder of thy days,
Deaden the life of thy lascivious lust,
Take pity on thy self, Fze. 18. 31.
forsake thy ways
Of licorish bondage, hate what is unjust,
Be true to my desires, when sin assaults,
And I Will forget thy wrongs, forgive thy faults.
Did ever man speak thus! was ever crcature
In such a language courted, when the heat
Of wilful madness wrought the souls defeature,
The God that should have punished does entreat:
He in whose power it is to scourge the sinner,
With words of mildness does assay to win her. Mat. 11. 28.

Read in this morrall, if it may be termed so,
Christ's love, the souls infection, this is willing,
That wilful, and eschues to be confirmed so^
That from his love she may behold distilling,
A sweat of blood, as if his blood complains
To tell her of the horrors he sustaines.
Guilt reads a lecture of her foul misdeeds,
And bids her look upon this stream of red,
Lays to her view the speaking sweat that bleeds,
When she lies gasping on her death full bed:
And then her conscience summoned to the doom
Of Judgment, hastes unto her toombe.
When now (O God she cries) and have Iliu'd,
Ah shall I live no more? Is grace and beauty
Vanished so soon, of all respect deprived?
Must pomp and state renounce her wonted duty?
Must my divided soul contemned and lost,
Surrender up my short appalled Gh^st?
Inconstant fate, and will thou change thy course,
And leave me to the terrors of my dread?
Can gold prolong no life? Must life by force
Be shadowed with the ruins of the dead? Ioh. 8. 9.

It Is bad to die; Romans 2. 15.
but oh, I feel the curse
Of my own conscience does accuse me worse.
Oh, had I twenty thousand mints of treasure,
Kingdoms to morgage, worlds within my power,
I would give all, but for a little leisure,
A little little minute, one small hour,
That I might sue for grace from grace cast down,
But oh, I see my anger, God does frown.
Be not, O be not moved thou glorious son,
Time was when thou did sue to me, I crave
Thy bounty of thy bloody sweat; and run
With confident assurance to my grave: Psalm. 45. 2.

Thou art my spouse, I am thy bride, ^steeme me,
None but my Christ, none did but he redeem me.
Hear I disclaim the follies of my will,
Hear I return the sins my frailties gave me:
Hear I forsake my heart-inueigling ill,
Hear fly I to his o^lie blood did save me:
Mercy, O mercy, I commend as even
My whordomes to the dust, my soul to heaven.
Christ is appeased, and where the soul is pressed
With sense of knowinge she has done amiss,
Asking for grace, she is with grace redrest,
Her case is pitied she for given is, Mat. 7. 7.

But this so seldom happens and so rare,
Scant two such souls amongst amillion are.
Presumption leads the ready path to hell,
For whilst we look on mercy we forget
The equallnes of Justice, and compel
Our souls to run into a greater debt,
That God is merciful it is true, Pro: 13. 10.
so must
Our bouldnes eke remember he is just. Rom: 11. 20.

Ost has bin seen a woman who has loved
Some constant friend who black mischance has slain
How looking on his wounds she has bin moved
To rent her hair and fa^allie complain,
Cursing her birth and life, refraining food,
Kissinge the silent murmur of his blood.
Weeping upon his body, as if tears
Could make the gaping windows that let in
Vngentell Death close up, and then inferres:
Wrech, wreched villiane! could not such looks win
Remorce in thy hard heart! with many words
Which then against the butcher grief affords.
Can this a woman do? And should the ^ule,
Behold her lover, Christ slain, not lamenting,
Or should she entertain a thought so foul,
As to gaze upon his wounds without repenting:
Should wanton carnal love so much deplore,
And shall not true religion do much more?
A Soul which in the Gospel reads the Story
Of Christ's most bloody sweat, and deadly wounds,
Cannot, in rules of zeal, but be most ^orie,
Whilst sorrow mingled with remorce confound^
Reason and sense, Ioh. 20. 2.
that spectacle to pity,
Whilst both sigh out this lamentable dittie.
And art thou dead! and must mine eyes behold,
The Lord of glory crucified for me
And is he dead, is his sweet body cold^
Made earth with earth and do I live to ^^e,
The great acquittance of my debt discharged,
Sealed with his blood, that I might be enlarged.
Unhappy hand that gave the fatal stroke,
Which wrought the subject of my weeping eyes,
But most unhappy me, who did provoke
With blushlesse sins, Gal. 2. 1.
the cause for which he dies:
But I, if it were possible, would (...),
With kissing of his wounds, fetch life again.
Take here ^he tribute of my mourning heart,
A poor weak widowed souls complaints remaining,
Fit earnest of my death desiring (...),
Smarting in death, Psalm. 22. 16.
and dying in complaining:
As my offenses did my Savior (...),
So with my sorrows will I dec^^e his hea^^e.
First, I abjure all sin-contriuing thoughts,
Here I renounce each sin-inuiting word,
Then every sin-effecting act which dotes
On flesh, I will no more: let Heaven record
My fast indissoluble vows, I strive
For Christ alone, his votarie to live.
His wounds shall be my cloister, here immured,
I Will sequester my solace from the living:
His drops of blood my beads, 1. Pet. 2. 24.
with which secured
I Will score the prayers of my heart mis-giuing:
My waxen Taper, whose clear light applies
Light to my blindness, shall be his fair eyes.
My book, the Legend of his Story; Zeal,
The incense I will offer up; Contrition
My penance; the confession I reveal,
My guilt; my Hope the comforts of fruition;
His Spirit my Confessor; Faith the gift,
Which must absolve me, and his Love my shrift.
Whiles on the Alter of his Innocence,
I Will lay the poor oblation of my heart:
His Death shall be the Pardon to dispense
With all my sins, set free in every part:
My tears the holy water, and the fires
To burn this sacrifice, my chaste desires.
And now, my God, no day shall ouerslip me,
But I will meditate on thy great passion;
My self accusing conscience shall so whip me,
As I will need no other condemnation:
Be thou but pleased to pity those my fears,
And every day I Will wet thy tomb with tears.
This, if a man can pick out time to do,
His conscience may assure him that he is
A sanctified creature, and called to (...)
The happy tidings of eternal bliss:
And thus he may be sure that for Christ's sake,
Chists bloody sweat, he does indeed partake.
So is he purged with water, fed with blood,
Regenerate in Baptism, and made whole
By eating the Lords Supper, tasting good
In the repasted diet of his soul:
Where by those bloody streams of sweat did stain
The cheeks of Christ, were not all spent in vain.
God will not think the heauine^^e he ^e^^,
Even to the death, when he was man with us,
Pains castaway: but as in love he dealt
With soule-endangered men by suff^^ng thus:
Yet will he not repent, when he shall know
What thankfulness in heart we do bestow. Psalm. 50. 14.

The crimson dye of his carnation red,
Has washed the soul in purity of white, Esaias 2. 18.

The conduit of the water that he bled,
Has died the soul in grain of wish^ delight^
Water has died, and blood has washed, it is strange,
But true; his virtue has procured this change.
Nor is it strange since the most curious eye
That saw him lead his sol^ary life,
Whiles he was man on earth, could not espi^
One blemish in his actions, prone to strife,
Bu^all he spoke, or did, was wonders theme,
For even the coat he wore was without s^ame. Ioh 19. 23.

For even the co^^ he wore was without seame,
Implying his sincerity and truth,
Unmoved in joy, vnda^^^^d in extreme,
Nor fearing age, nor ^ainly spending youth:
Loving where he was hated, aiming still
To save from death, such as were bent to kill.
To save from death, such as were bent to kill,
Men, bloodi^^^ in the f^st^s of cruel hate,
Of hateful cruelty, and to fulfill
The wrath and measure of a woeful state:
Yet those with gentle sighs, and tears, his aim,
Strove from the day of vengeance to reclaim.
Strove, from the day of vengeance to re claim,
A day of vengeance, when they shall behold
His wounds, to whom they gave a deadly maime,
Crying Re^enge, Zech. 13. 6.
and they the^ selves be fold
Unto an heavy doom, yet Christ, who saw it
With (...) persuasions labored to withdraw it.
With meek persuasions labored to withdraw it, 1. Pet. 2. 21.

And taught them by example how to shun
Death, whiles they lived, who would not over awe it,
But headlong to their own destruction run:
Yet He, when no inuitement could entreat,
Wept for their errors in his bloody sweat.
Wept for their errors in his bloody sweat,
His bloody sweat, that crucified delight,
Delight, which all was smoother'd in a heat,
An heat of passion an vnsollac't sight:
Vn^ollac't sight, when he with griefs repleat,
Wept for sins error in his bloody sweat.
Eyes were the Instruments ordayn'd to weep,
But eyes in such a case must not suffice;
For his whole body did due order keep,
It undertook the office of his eyes,
That as his eyes his precious tears did waste,
So did his heart, bleed tears of blood as fast.
Wherein his sorrows sadly did abound,
Not measured by compulsion, but free will,
That as his eyes, so might his heart be drowned,
Surcharged with burdens of amazing ill:
And if his shedding tears his blood did pain,
His drops of blood, pai'd back his tears again.
His eye was but an echo to his heart,
Which answered every accent of his woe,
While both his eye and heart did bear a part,
As said the one, the other echoed so:
Was ever man as I am? Lamen. 3. 1.
(quoth his eyes)
I am, (alas, his heavy heart replies.
His Eyes cry out in tears, O cruel pain!
O cruel pain his Heart says! (quoth his Eyes)
And must I then be flaire? I must be slain
Answers his Heart, his eyes, Ah let me die,
Me die, his Heart; his Eyes dye dye content,
I die content, his Heart, thus both consent.
Not like the fawning of some subtle queen,
Some Dalilah, Judge. 6. 4.
that flatters and beguiles,
Knowing Arts rule, how to abuse the mean,
To laugh in tears, and both to weep in smiles^
Christ could not do so, he wept tears in deed,
Such tears as 'twas all one to weep or bleed.
He wept not to deceive, but to revive;
He bleeded not in show, but bled in proof:
Not like the Crocadile, life to deptiue,
But gave such life, as nere was; not aloofe^
He wept, he bled, he bled, he wept a flood,
Blood in his tears, and water in his blood.
Weeping and bleeding for offending men,
His bloody sweat in agonies so fitted,
As for his enemies he groued then,
So for his own, and sins by both committed:
His enemies conceived a fatal loathing,
His own perceiving all, conceived nothing.
Those few Apostles who had heard him teach,
And knew him to be Gods begotten son,
They amongst whom he every day did preach,
Seeing the miracles that he had done:
Were weak in faith, in understanding dull,
Poor in their plenty, steru'd with being full.
Blindness so far their ignorance did tempt,
With weakness of belief (ambitions feast)
As knowing Christ was come, yet still they dreamt
Of petty Kings, or being Dukes at least:
Supposing Christ's spiritual Kingdoms mirth
Contained a goodly Kingdom here on earth.
And as the Antichristian throne is now
Propt up with scarlet robes and triple crowns,
To vassail^ Princes rights, and to allow
All as it likes, or hates, with smiles or frowns:
Commanding, forcing, with his proud decree,
Such did they hope the throne of Christ should be.
For when the Lord had finished now his errant,
Returning to his Father that had sent him^
Sealing his power with his deaths strict warrant^
When neither Hell nor Satan could prevent him:
Yet dreamt they on, Acts 1. 6.
and said Lord (as before)
Will thou thy Kingdom now to us restore?
Could this but breed his grief, when he foresaw
Peter's denial, his Apostles scattered?
His own to feel the rigor of the Law, Luke 22. 57.

Zeal cold, Ioh. 16. 32.
Faith dead, Hope lost, frailty batter'd^
Deuisions breeding, Kings aspiring great?
All these, and such like brought his bloody sweat.
For shortly he beheld the coming curse,
Upon the sacred Scriptures Commentaries,
How, though the Jews were naught, a people worse,
Whose studies are the Deu^ls Seminaries,
Should make the name of Jesus, Mat. 24. 23 24.
the diguise
Of countenancing impudence and lies.
Such, like a nose of wax, do wrest the word
To color sin, and hellishly^ pervert
Christ's sacred Gospel, whiles with one accord
They boast the glory of their own desert:
Damning the s^mpe and the poor in mind,
As serves their lusts, Blind guides to lead the blind.
All those the Lord foresaw, and gron'd in Spirit.
Sweated in blood, was heavy to the death,
That so his precious passion, blameless merit,
Should be abused, that he had given his breath,
His life, his ghost, his soul, yet could not win
Such wretched creatures, from enchanting sin.
Enchanting sin, that with it is cunning charms
Luls men in death-full sleeps, and slily makes
Impostum'd ulcers of vnsenced harms,
Rocks them in Lethargies, Prou. 2. 10.
and never wakes
Reason, to feel the bane-impotion'd wrath,
Which by such dead security it has.
This was the cause that from our Savior drew
A bloody sweat, so grievous to be borne,
As did the eyes of cruel men but view,
How with this bloody tempest he was worn,
Humane compassion could not choose but melt,
To think upon the sorrows which he felt.
No measure did his payned soul acquaint
With case or respite, no Arithmeticke
Cast up the sum of his unheard complaint,
No heart conceive the dolours that did prick
With fiery stings, his manhood, and appall
His face with streams, which burst in twain his gall
For as a River running in a round,
Having no vent or sluice to slide away,
Will make, by force, eruptions in the ground,
Drown all the neighbour-land, and never stay,
Till with a violent course and headlong rage,
It slack his strength, and of it self assuage.
Even so the tide of many griefs abounding,
Sweld in the bosom of the Son of God,
Still growing to a head, and still confounding
His frail mortality (deep horrors rod)
Till bursting forth with might and fury great,
It drowned his body in a bloody sweat.
Who ever saw (as often has been seen)
A shoure of blood, but thought it did portend
Some doom of Judgment, or some angry teene
Of heauens-incensed King? So here the end
Of this strange bloody rain, does show in brief,
How shortly Christ was to be wrapped in grief.
The pangs of death, th'ntollerable pains,
Which woeful creatures were to undergo;
The man Christ Jesus, in this sweat sustaines,
Consuming wrath, and soule-deuouring woe
He felt, that he, us men might timely free,
From Gods unchanging, and divine Decree.
Not that his death could abrogate the will
Of his great Father, for he aimed not to it;
But that, in death, he wholly might fulfill
The eternal Justice, as he came to do it:
Who as he, death from men for sin required,
Had in his Sons death, more than death desired.
Yet neither did the Death or Bloody sweat
Of Christ, extend to souls ordained to Hell:
But to the chosen, Mat. 9. 3.
and elect, 1. Tim. 1. 13.
beget
A double life, although the Scriptures tell
How this meek Lamb of God did chiefly come
To call the lost sheep, and the strayers home.
Look how the blessed do partake the good
(Sweet pledge of bounty, precious Seal of Joys)
Which issues from his Water and his Blood,
So both alike the Reprobate destroys:
Gods mercies to the Righteous, to his foes
Are Justice, to augment their enlesse woes.
When Isack's seed fled from The Egyptian force,
And through the Red Sea took the ready way,
The waters stood on heaps, and slaid their course,
Both waves and winds the passage did obey: Psalm. 78. 13.

And in those waters safely paston ground,
In which, Exo. 14. 28.
whiles Pharaoh followed, he was drowned.
Whereby, as water saved the Lords Elect,
And led them through the terrors of the deep,
So water, to them of a deulish sect,
Proved sod ine death, and neuer-waking sleep:
Christ's bloo^ie sweat is that Red Sea, 1. Cor. 10. 1. 4.
whose power
Secures the good, and does the bad devour.
The Cloud and fiery ^ille^ that gave light^
Unto the children, in the desert plaines^
The one by day, the other shined by night,
Guiding their iourneis, Exo. 13. 21.
comforting their pains;
Were to the Host of Egypt, Exo. 14. 20.
mistes obscure
To blind their eyes, and certain death procure.
Which burning Pillar, and which shining Cloud,
Is Christ, 1. Cor. 10. 4.
unto whose blood such are baptized,
As by the Holy Spirit are allowed,
When otherwise, all such as are despised
Are darkened in the comforts of their sight,
And loose the glory of this holy light.
A greater ligh more holy and Divine,
Surp^ssing all the splendor of the Sun,
Could never to the eyes of mortals shine,
Then this most sacred Blood, which has undone,
And laid to public view the Mount of Evil,
Which both was framed, and colored by the Devil.
In aftertimes, when in the winters cold,
Folks use to warm them by their nightly fires;
Such Parents as the time of life terms old,
Wasting the season, as the night requires:
In stead of tales may to their children tell,
What to the Lord of glory once befell.
Once, may they say, (my child) a time there was,
When men were beasts, so cruelly they lived,
As they did nights and days in pleasure pass,
Like some of Reason and of Sense deprived:
Not fearing God, or loving man, given ore
To Lust and Will, as beasts could do no more.
The naughty Devil slily did entice,
By sensual sports and pitiless deceits,
Our weak forefathers to insnaring vice;
Masking his tyranny with wanton baits:
And we, in them, did every thing he wil'd us,
Till the foul feind (my child) had almost killed us.
But straight, when our good God almighty saw,
How near unto the Pit-hole we were brought,
For being not obedient to his Law,
He forthwith of a remedy bethought:
And he, Ephesians. 1. 9. 10.
to save us from this wicked Feind,
His only Son into the world did send.
A lovely Son (my child) a dainty boy,
Who had a cheek as red as any cherie,
Sweet babie, was his mothers only joy,
And made her ^eauie heart full often merry:
Who, though he were Gods Son, yet like a stranger,
He in a Stable borne was, Luke ^. 7.
in a Manger.
And poor, God knows he was, (my child) not fine,
Or like a gentleman in gay attire:
But simple clothes he had, which was a sign,
How little to be proud, he did desire:
Yet if he would have sought for worldly grace,
He might have gone in silk, and golden lace.
When he was twelve years old (mark this my child)
He was a perfect Scholar, and did pose
Great learned clerks, Luke 2. 46.
and Doctors, but so mild
As he would never chide, but rather chose
To teach then anger, and one might persuade him
To do whats'uer any body bad him.
Thirty good years and odd, this blessed man,
Lived on the earth; in all which time he seemed
So comfortless, with looks so pale and wan,
As if he had not bin by men esteemed,
Full many an hungry meal he made, Luke 8. 23.
and lay
Bare legged and bare-foote many a day.
He never laughed, but he did evermore
Weep, weep continually; and (O my child)
He never did none harm; he holpt the poor,
Cured tht diseased, and such as were beguild
With witches, and with wicked things (God bless us)
He drove them from us when they would oppres us.
And he made much of children, and did good
To every one, Mat. 19. 14.
yet wicked men did strive
To take away his life, and shed his blood,
Whiles yet this blessed Jesus was alive;
And on a time, he was so much dismayed,
He sweated blood, Luke 22. 44.
as he his prayers said
But what is worse then this, (hard-hearted Jews)
Did hang this good goodman upon the cross,
Nayling his feet and hands, and did misuse
This gentle soul, whom they did fiercely toss
From post to pillar, and would not be stilled,
Until they had this, our Redeemer killed.
Here now, may be, the pretty child will weep,
And ask his parents why they used him so;
To which they may reply, that God did keep
His soul alive, though life he did forgo:
For Christ (my child) so died, then may they tell,
That every one might be redeemed from hell.
Much might be added more, to spend the hours,
In better leisure then an anticke tale;
Teaching the silly hearers how the powers
Above reserved us from the Devils sale:
Whom had not Christ his blood regained the wrath
Of life, all us lost sin had sold to death.
Come then, sad Patron of this bloody sweat,
And with thine everlasting comforts cherish,
Unfenced Faith, which daily is beset
With treasons, which entice the soul to perish:
In the delicious Bath of Blood and Water.
Cleance leporous Souls, and Hels dominion batter.
And here, my God, the glorious Son of peace,
I close the music of my weeping song;
And further to enlarge, thy sorrows cease,
Beseeching that thy Spirit may be strong,
To move my heart, and gently to commit
to meditations, all the lines I writ.
Let not the frailty of my youth misled, Psalm. 55. 7.

Be once remembered in the day of grace;
Let not the bloody drops which thou have bled,
Condemn me guilty; let thy wounds deface
The wounds of mine infection, now begin
Thoroughly to wash me from mine odious sin. Psalm. 51. 2.

The hours and days which I have spent in vain,
In fruitless studies, and inuentiue pleasure,
Redeem, O Christ, and call them back again,
Do not, in Judgment, mine offenses measure:
But, in thy mercies, hide my faults; protect
My sighs, let thy love cover my defect.
Here, Savior of the world, work that I may
Begin to live anew, and in this theme
Of thy sad bloody sweat, learn out the way
Of life indeed, and wake me from the dream
Wherein my Soul long slept, and felt the terror,
Of double two Apprentiships to error.
And now my God, if I discharged have,
This imposition of thine heavenly task,
Some token of thy^being pleased I crave, Iud. 6. 37.

Some certain knowledge of thy will I ask:
For Heaven, and Angels with my soul record,
Ino way have traduced the written word.
No malice to detract from ruses of State,
No singular conceit to purchase fame,
No pointing at some person, neither hate
To any priuare wrongs, have made me name
The Plurisies of sin; but as thy Sweat
All sins has purged, all sins I did repeat.
For which, as first thy Spirit did inuit,
In holy raptures to advance my mind,
From earthly slime, of holy things to write;
So having written, likewise let me find
Of thy most precious privilege, some token
To grace the truth of all that has bin spoken.
Here, in the pens^ue solace of my Soul,
Me thought, a soft cool wind did gently breath,
As if my spirit were now transported whole,
Unto another life, from carnal death:
When straight a shining light perfumed the room,
Out of which light, a whispring voice did come.
Rest there (it said) and toil thee now no more,
Knit up the period of thy trembling Style;
And learn to live, not as thou did before,
But in a smoother course; and I the while,
Will teach thee how thou shall attain the place,
Where quiet souls do end their happy race.
For since thou have with such a modest care,
(Although thy verse do want the grace of words)
Limn'd out my wounds, and told them as they are,
So lively as thy simple skill affords;
I Will take thy meaning in the better part, Mar. 22. 43.

And for thine offering will accept thy heart.
May be, some wandering eye that shall survey
This wonder of my Sweat, in those thy numbers,
Will take a truce with time, and shake away
Fron^ ^ff his Soul, the lusts wherein it slumbers:
Then have thou hid a multitude of sin.
If all thy pains, ^am. 5. 20.
one Soul from ruin win.
And blessedly hereafter shall succeed,
Thy studies and thy labors, if thou shun
The path that thou have ^rode, and wilt take heed
To undo the many follies thou have done:
For if thou have respect unto my Laws,
Before my Father I will plead thy cause.
But thou, mark well these words; A time shall be
When Reason shall beat down the force of might,
And Natures Sons shall wish for peace, but see
The Effects of blood, and feel the scourge of fight:
Now unrespected, and not felt: but men
Shall, what they had vnprais'd, remember then.
Happy the soul that sleeps in peace, and thou,
Provide against such days, watch, fast, and crave
A dissolution, Phil. 2.
and prepare thee how
Thy conscience may be furnished for thy grave:
Nor do repute it for a fabling ^este,
Which says; Good conscience is a daily feast.
Feast on in that, and henceforth be secure
In strength of Faith: let all thy cares be ^as'd
By bathing in my Blood, and fountain pure
Of this my Sweat, and I in this am pleased:
Rest thou for lo, the Angels in their ranks
Wait my return; thy labor be thy thanks.
Up flew the light, and silence showed the voice
Retired to stillness; which deprived my sense
Of all the glory of that heavenly noise,
Which with such sweet content departed thence:
Forthwith, my Soul, her wonted babit took,
And Healed up my comforts in a book.
FINIS.

