CHRIST'S VICTORY, AND TRIumph in Heaven, and Earth, over, and after death.

A te principium, tibi desinet, accipe iussis
Carmina caepta tuis, atque hanc sine tempora circum
Inter victrices hederam tibi serpere lauros.
CONFIDO IN DOMINO



CAMBRIDGE Printed by C. LEG. 1610.

To the Reader.
THear are but few of many that can rightly judge of Poetry, and yet thear at
many of those few, that carry so lefthanded an opinion of it, as some of them
think it half sacrilege for profane Poetry to deal with divine and
heavenly matters, as though David wear to be sentenced by them, for vtte^ng his
grave matter upon the harp: others something more ^olent in their censure, but
sure less reasonable (as though ^oetrie corrupted all good wits, when,
indeed, bad wits cor^pt Poetry) banish it with Plato out of all well-ordered
Commonwealths. Both theas I will strive rather to satisfy, ^en refute.

And of the first I would gladly know, whither they sup^ose it fitter, that
the sacred songs in the Scripture of those he^oicall Saints, Moses, Deborah,
Jeremy, Mary, Simeon, Da^id, Solomon, (the wisest Scholeman, and wittiest
Poet) should ^ee eiected from the canon, for want of gravity, or rather this
^rroure eraced out of their minds, for want of truth. But, it may be, they
will give the Spirit of God leave to breath through what pipe it please, and
will confess, because they must ^eeds, that all the songs dittied by him, must
needs be, as their Fountain is, most holy: but their common clamor is, who
may compare with (...), and yet as none may compare without presum^ all may
imitat, and not without commendation: which made Nazianzen, on of the Stars of
(...) Greek Church, that now shines as bright in heaven, as (...) did then on
earth, write so many divine Poems of the Ge^ alogie, Miracles, Parables,
Passion of Christ, called by him h^ (...), which when Basil, the Prince of the
Fathen^ and his Chamberfellowe, had seen, his opinion of them was, that he
could have devised nothing either more fruitful to others: because it kindly
woed them to Religion, or more honorable to himself, (...), because by
imitating the singing Angels in heaven, himself became, though before his
time, an earthly Angel. What should I speak of Iuvencus, Prosper, and the wise
Prudentius? the last of which living in Hieroms time twelve hundred years
ago, brought forth in his declining age, so many, and so religious poems,
straightly charging his soul, not to let pass so much as one either night or
day without some divine song, Hymnis continuet dies, Nec nox vlla vacet, quin
Dominum canat. And as sedulous Prudentius, so prudent Sedulius was famous in
this poetical divinity, the coetan of Bernard, who sung the history of Christ
with as much devotion in himself, as admitation to others; all which wear
followed by the choicest wits of Christendom: Nonnius translating all Saint
John's Ghosipel into Greek verse, Sanazar, the late-liuing Image, and happy
imitator of Uirgil, bestowing ten-yeares upon a song, only to celebrat that
one day when Christ was borne unto us on earth, and we (a happy change) unto
God in heaven: thrice-honour'd Bartas, and our (I know no other name more
glorious then his own) Mr. Edmund Spencer (two blessed Souls) not thinking ten
years enough, layeing out their whole lives upon this one study: Nay I may
justly say, that the Princely Father of our Country (though in my conscience,
God has made him of all the learned Princes that ever wear the most religious,
and of all the religious Princes, the most learned, that so, by the one, he
might oppose him against the Pope, the peste of all Religion, and by the other,
against Bellarmine the abuser of all good Learning) is yet so far enamored
with this celestial Muse, that it shall never repent me -- calamo triuisse
labellum, whenever I shall remember Hac eadem vt sciret quid non faciebat
Amyntas? To name no more in such plenty, whear I may find how to begin,
sooner then to end, Saint Paul, by the Example of Christ, that went singing
to mount Oliuet, with his Disciples, after his last supper, exciteth the
Christians to solace themselves with ^ymnes, and Psalms, and spiritual songs;
and thearefore, by their leav's, be it an error for Poets to be Divines, I had
rather ^rr with the Scripture, then be rectified by them: I had rather ^dore
the stepps of Nazianzen, Prudentius, Sedulius, then fol^owe their steps, to be
misguided: I had rather be the devout Admirer of Nonnius, Bartas, my sacred
Soueraign, and others, the miracles of our latter age, then the false sectatie
of these, that have nothing at all to follow, but their own naked opinions: To
conclude, I had rather with my Lord, and his most divine Apostle sing (though I
sing sorilie) the love of heaven and earth, then praise God (as they do) with
the worthy gift of silence, and sitting still, or think I dispraisd him with
this poetical discourse. It seems they have either not read, or clean ^orgot,
that it is the duty of the Muses (if we may beeleeue ^indare, and Hesiod) to
set allwaies under the throne of Jupiter, ^ius and lauds, and beneficia (...),
which made a very worthy German writer conclude it Certo statuimus, proprium
atque pe^uliare poetarum munus esse, Christi gloriam illustrare, being good
reason that the heavenly infusion of such Poetry, should ^nde in his glory,
that had beginning from his goodness, fit o^ator, nascitur Poeta.

For the secound sort thearfore, that eliminat Poets out of their city gates;
as though they wear now grown so bad, as ^hey could neither grow worse, nor
better, though it be ^omewhat hard for those to be the only men should want
cities, that wear the only causers of the building of them, and somewhat
inhumane to thrust them into the woods, to live among the beasts, who wear the
first that called men out of the woods, from their beastly, and wild life, yet
since they will needs shoulder them out for the only firebrands to inflame
lust (the fault of earthly men, not heavenly Poetry) I would gladly learn,
what kind of professions theas men would be entreated to entertain, that so
deride and disaffect Poesy: would they admit of Philosophers, that after they
have burnt out the whole candle of their life in the circular study of
Sciences, cry out at length, Se nihil prorsus seire? or should Musicians be
welcome to them, that Dant sine mente sonum -- bring delight with them indeed,
could they as well express with their instruments a voice, as they can a sound?
or would they most approve of Soldiers that defend the life of their countrymen
either by the death of themselves, or their enemies? If Philosophers please
them, who is it, that knows not, that all the lights of Example, to clear
their precepts, are borrowed by Philosophers from Poets; that without Homers
examples, Aristotle would be as blind as Homer: If they retain Musicians, who
ever doubted, but that Poets infused the very soul into the inarticulate
sounds of music; that without Pindar, and Horace the Lyriques had been
silenced for ever: If they must needs entertain Soldiers, who can but
confess, that Poets restore again that life to soldiers, which they before
lost for the safety of their country; that without Uirgil, Aeneas had never
been so much as heard of. How then can they for shame deny commonwealths to
them, who wear the first Authors of them; how can they deny the blind
Philosopher, that teaches them, his light; the empty Musician that delights
them, his soul; the dying Soldier, that defends their life, immortality,
after his own death; let Philosophy, let Ethiques* let all the Arts bestow
upon us this gift, that we be no^ thought deadmen, whilst we remain among
the living: it is only Poetry that can make us be thought living men, when we
lie among the dead, and therefore I think it unequal to thrust them out of
our cities, that call us out of our graves, to think so hardly of them, that
make us to be so well thought of, to deny them to live a while among us, that
make us live for ever among our Posterity.

So being now weary in persuading those that hate, I commend my self to
those that love such Poets, as Plato speaks of, that sing divine and heroical
matters. (...), recommending theas my idle hours, not idly spent, to good
scholars, and good Christians, that have overcome their ignorance with ^eason,
and their reason, with religion.

FOnd ladds, that spend so fast your poasting time,
(Too poasting time, that spends your time as fast)
To chaunt light toys, or frame some wanton time,
Where idle boys may glut their lustful taste,
Or else with praise to cloth some fleshly shine
With virgins roses, and fair lillies chaste:
While itching bloods, and youthful ears adore it,
But wiser men, and once your selves will most abhor it.
But thou (most near, most dear) in this of thine
Have proov'd the Muses not to Venus bound,
Such as thy matter, such thy muse, divine.
Or thou such grace with Merci's self have found,
That she her self deign's in thy leaves to shine:
Or stolen from heaven, thou broughts this verse to ground,
Which frights the nummed soul with fearful thunder,
And soon with honied dewes melts it twixt joy, and wonder.
Then do not thou malicious tongues esteem,
The glass, through which an envious eye does gaze,
Can easily make a molehill mountains seem;
His praise dispraises, his dispraises, praise.
Enough if best men best thy labors deem,
And to the highest pitch thy merit raise,
While all the Muses to thy song decree
Victorious Triumph, Triumphant Victory.
Phin. Fletcher Regal.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPVLL, AND REVEREND Mr. Doctor NEVILE, Deane of
CANTERBVRIE, and the Master of TRINITY College in CAMBRIDGE.
RIght worthy, and reverend Sir: As I have always thought the place wherein I
live, after heaven, principally to be desired, both because I most want, and it
most abounds with wisdom, which is fled by some with as much delight, as it is
obtained by others, and ought to be followed by all: so I cannot but next unto
God, for ever acknowledge myself most bound unto the hand of God, (I mean
yourselfe) that reached down, as it were out of heaven, unto me, a be^fit of
that nature, and price, then which, I could wish none, (one^ heaven itself
excepted) either more fruitful, and contenting ^r the time that is now
present, or more comfortable, and encouraging for the time that is already
past, or more hopeful, and ^omising for the time that is yet to come.

For as in all men's judgments (that have any judgment) Eu^pe is worthily
deemed the Queen of the world, that Garland both of Learning, and pure
Religion being now become her crown, and blossoming upon her head, that has
long since lain withered in Greece and Palestine; so my opinion of this Island
has always been, that it is the very face, and beauty of all Europe, in
which both true Religion is faithfully professed without superstition, and (if
on earth) true Learning sweetly flourishes without ostentation: and what are
the two eyes of this Land, but the two Universities; which cannot but prosper
in the time of such a Prince, that is a Prince of Learning, as well as of
People: and truly I should forget myself, if I should not call Cambridge the
right eye: and I think (King Henry the 8. being the uniter, Edward the 3.
the Founder, and your self the Repairer of this College, wherein I live) none
will blame me, if I esteem the same, since your polishing of it, the fairest
sight in Cambridge: in which being placed by your only favor, most freely,
without either any means from other, or any desert in my self, being not
able to do more, I could do no less, then acknowledge that debt, which I
shall never be able to pay, and with old Silenus, in the Poet (upon whom the
boys -- injiciunt ipsis ex vincula sertis, making his garland, his fetters)
finding my self bound unto you by so many benefits, that were given by your
self for ornaments, but are to me as so many golden cheines, to hold me fast
in a kind of desired bondage, seek (as he does) my freedom with a song, the
matter whereof is as worthy the sweetest Singer, as my self, the miserable
Singer, unworthy so divine a subject: but the same favor, that before
rewarded no desert knows now as well how to pardon all faults, then which
indulgence, when I regard my self, I can wish no more; when I remember you, I
can hope no less.

So commending these few broken lines unto yours, and your self into the hands
of the best Physician, JESUS CHRIST with whom, the most ill affected man, in
the midst of his sickness, is in good health, and without whoms, the most lusty
body, in his greatest iollitie, is but a languishing karcase, I humbly take my
^eaue, ending with the same wish, that your devoted Observer, and my approved
Friend does, in his verses presently sequent, that your passage to heaven may
be slow to us, that shall want ^ou here, but to your self, that cannot want us
there, most secure and certain.

Your Worships, in all duty, and service G. FLETCHER.

THOMAS NEVYLE. MOST HEAVENLY.
AS when the Captain of the heavenly host,
Or else that glorious army does appear
In waters drowned, with surging billows tossed,
We know they are not, where we see they are;
We see them in the deep, we see them move,
We know they fixed are in heaven above:
So did the Sun of righteousness come down
Clowded in flesh, and seemed be in the deep:
So do the many waters seem to drown
The stars his Saints, and they on earth to keep,
And yet this Sun from heaven never fell,
And yet these earthly stars in heaven dwell.
What if their souls be into prison cast
In earthly bodies? yet they long for heaven:
What if this worldly Sea they have not past?
Yet feign they would be brought into their haven.
They are not here, and yet we here them see,
For every man is there, where he would be.
Long may you wish, and yet long wish in vain,
Hence to depart, and yet that wish obtain.
Long may you here in heaven on earth remain,
And yet a heaven in heaven hereafter gain.
Go you to heaven, but yet O make no have,
Go slowly slowly, but yet go at last.
But when the Nightingale so near does sit,
Silence the Titmouse better may befit.
F. Nethersole.

QVid o, quid Veneres, Cupidinesque,
Turturesque, iocosque, passeresque
Lascivi canitis greges, poetae?
Ettam languidulos amantum ocellos,
Et mox turgidulas sinu papillas,
Iam risus teneros, lachrymulasque,
Mox suspiria, morsiunculasque,
Mill basia; mill, mill nugas?
Et vultus pueri, puellululaeve
(Heu fusci pueri, puellulaeque)
Pingitis nivibus, rosunculisque,
(Mentitis nivibus, rosunculisque)
Quae vel primo hyemis rigore torpent,
Vel Phaebi intuitu statim relanguent.
Heu stulti nimium greges poetae!
Vt, quas sic nimis, ah nimis stupetis,
(Nives candidulae, and rosae pudentes)
Sic vobis pereunt statim labores:
Et solemn fugiunt severiorem,
Vel solemn gelida rigent senecta:
At tu qui clypeo, haud inane nomen
(Minervae clypeo Iovisque) sumens
Victrices resonas dei Triumphos,
Triumphos lachrymis, metuque plenos,
Plenos laetitiae, and spei triumphos,
Dum rem carmine, Pieroque dignam
Aggrederis, tibi res decora rebus
Praebet carmina, Pieroque digna.
Quin ille ipse tuos legens triumphos,
Pleno^ militia, labor plenos,
Tuo propitius parat labori
Plenos laetitiae, and spec triumphos.
Phin. Fletcher Regal.

(...).
BEatissima virginum Maria,
Sed materque simul beata, per quam
Qui semper fuit ille coepit esse:
Quae Vitae dederisque inire vitam:
Et Luci dederis videre lucem:
Quae fastidia, morsiunculasque
Passa es quas grauidae solent, nec vnquam
Audebas propier viro venire,)
Dum clusus penetralibus latebat
Matricis tunica vndique involutus,
Quem se posse negant tenere coeli.
Quae non virgineas premi papillas
Passa, virgineas tamen dedisti
Lactandas puero tuo papillas.
Eia, dic age, dic beata virgo,
Cur piam abstineas manum, timesque
Sancta tangere, Sanctuariumque
Insolens fugias? an inquinari
Contactu metuis tuo sacrata?
Contactu metuit suo sacrata
Pollui pia, cernis en ferentem,
Lenimenta Dei furentis, illa
Foedatas sibi far quae iubebat.
Sis felix noua virgo-mater opto,
Quae mollire Deum paras amicum.
Quin hic dona licet licet relinquas,
Agnellumque repone, turturemque,
Audax ingrediare inanis aedes
Dei, tange Deo sacrata, tange.
Quae non concubitu coinquinata
Agnellum peperitque, Turturemque
Exclusit, facili Deo litabit
Agno cum Deus insit, and columbae.
NOr can I so much say as much I ought,
Nor yet so little can I say as naught,
^raise of this thy work, so heavenly pend,
^at sure the sacred Dove a quill did lend
^m her high-soaring wing: certes I know
(...) other plumes, that makes man seem so low
^his own eyes, who to all others sight
(...) mounted to the highest pitch of height:
^here if thou seem to any of small price,
^e fault is not in thee, but in his eyes:
^t what do I thy flood of wit restreine
^ithin the narrow banks of my poor vein?
^re I could say, and would, but that to praise
^y verses, is to keep them from their praise.
(...) them who reads, and does them not advance,
(...) envy does it, or of ignorance.
F. Nethersole.

CHRIST'S VICTORY in Heaven.
1
THe birth of him that no beginning knew, The Argument propounded in general:
Our redemption by Christ.

Yet gives beginning to all that are borne,
And how the Infinite far greater grew,
By growing less, and how the rising Morn,
that shot from heaven, did back to heaven return,
The obsequies of him that could not die,
And death of life, end of eternity,
^ow worthily he died, that died unworthily;
2
^ow God, and Man did both embrace each other,
^et in one person, heaven, and earth did kiss,
and how a Virgin did become a Mother,
and bare that Son, who the worlds Father is,
and Maker of his mother, and how Bliss
Descended from the bosom of the High,
To cloth himself in naked misery,
^yling at length to heaven, in earth, triumphantly,
3
(...) the first flame, wherewith my whiter Muse
^oth burn in heavenly love, such love to tell. The Authors Invocation, for
the better handling of it.

(...) thou that did this holy fire infuse,
and taught'st this breast, but late the grave of hell,
Wherein a blind, and dead heart lived, to swell
With better thoughts, send down those lights that len^
Knowledge, how to begin, and how to end
The love, that never was, nor ever can be pend.
4
Ye sacred writings in whose antique leaves
The memories of heaven entreasur'd lie,
Say, what might be the cause that Mercy heaues
The dust of sin above the industrious sky;
And lets it not to dust, and ashes fly?
Could Justice be of sin so ouer-wooed,
Or so great ill be cause of so great good,
That bloody man to save, man's Savior shed his blood?
5
Or did the lips of Mercy drop soft speech The Argument, Man's redemption,
expounded from the cause. Mercy

For traytrous man, when at th'Eternalls throne
Incensed Nemesis did heaven beseech
With thundering voice, that justice might be shown
Against the Rebels, that from God were flowne;
O say, say how could Mercy plead for those
That scarcely made, against their Maker rose?
Will any slay his friend, that he may spare his foes?
6
There is a place beyond that flaming hill
From whence the stars their thin appearance shed, Dwelling in heaven

A place, beyond all place, where never ill,
Nor impure thought was ever harbored,
But Sainctly Heroes are for ever s'ed
To keep an everlasting Sabbaoths rest,
Still wishing that, of what they are still possessed,
Enjoying but one joy, but one of all joys best.
7
^ere, when the ruin of that beauteous frame, And pleading for man now guilde.

Whose golden building shined with every star
^f excellence, deformed with age became,
MERCY, remembering peace in midst of war,
^^ft up the music of her voice, to bar
Eternal fate, least it should quite erace
That from the world, which was the first worlds grace,
^^d all again into their, nothing, Chaos chase.
8
(...) what had all this All, which Man in one
^d not unite; the earth, air, water, fire,
^e, sense, and spirit, nay the powrefull throne
(...) the diuinest Essence, did retire,
^d his own Image into clay inspire:
So that this Creature well might called be
Of the great world, the small epitomie,
(...) the dead world, the live, and quick anatomy.
9
^t Justice had no sooner Mercy seen with Justice, described

^oothing the wrinkles of her Fathers browe,
(...) up she starts, and ^^rowes her self between.
(...) when a vapor, from a moory slough,
^eting with fresh Eous, that but now
Opened the world, which all in darkness lay,
Does heavens bright face of his rays disaray,
^d sads the smiling orient of the springing day.
10
(...) was a Virgin of austere regard, by her qualities.

^t as the world esteems her, deaf, and blind,
^t as the Eagle, that has often compared
(...) eye with heavens, so, and more brightly shined
Her lamping sight: for she the same could wind
Into the solid heart, and with her ears,
The silence of the thought loud speaking hears,
And in one hand a pair of even scoals she wears.
11
No riot of affection revel kept
Within her breast, but a still apathy
Possessed all her soul, which softly slept,
Securely, without tempest, no sad cry
Awakes her pity, but wronged poverty,
Sending his eyes to heaven swimming in tears,
With hideous clamours ever struck her ears,
Whetting the blazing sword, that in her hand she bears.
12
The winged Lightning is her Mercury,
And round about her mighty thunders sound: Her Retinue.

Impatient of himself lies pining by
Pale Sickness, with his kercher'd head vpwound,
And thousand noisome plagues attend her round,
But if her clowdie browe but once grow foul,
The flints do melt, and rocks to water roll,
And ayrie mountains shake, and frighted shadows how^
13
Famine, and bloodles Care, and bloody War,
Want, and the Want of knowledge how to use
Abundance, Age, and Fear, that runs afar
Before his fellow Grief, that aye pursues
His winged steps; for who would not refuse
Greefes company, a dull, and rawebon'd spright,
That lankes the cheeks, and pales the freshest sight,
Vnbosoming the cheerful breast of all delight;
14
Before this cursed throng, goes Ignorance,
That needs will lead the way he cannot see:
And after all, Death does his flag advance,
And in the midst, Strife still would roaguing be,
Whose ragged flesh, and clothes did well agree:
And round about, amazed Horror flies,
And over all, Shame veiles his guilty eyes,
And underneath, Hells hungry throat still yawning lies.
15
Upon two stony tables, spread before her,
She leaned her bosom, more then stony hard,
There slept th'vnpartiall judge, and strict restorer Her Subject.

Of wrong, or right, with pain, or with reward,
There hung the skore of all our debts, the card
Whear good, and bad, and life, and death were painted:
Was never heart of mortal so untainted,
But when that scroule was read, with thousand terrors fainted.
16
Witness the thunder that mount Sinai heard,
When (...) hill with fiery clouds did flame,
And (...) Israel, with the sight afeard,
Blinded (...) seeing, durst not touch the same,
But like a wood of shaking leaves became.
On this dead Justice, she, the Living Law,
Bowing herself with a maiestique awe,
All heaven, to hear her speech, did into silence draw.
17
Dread Lord of Spirits, well thou did devise
To fling the worlds rude dunghill, and the dross Her accusation of Man's sin.

Of the old Chaos, farthest from the skies,
And thine own seat, that hear the child of loss,
Of all the lower heaven the curse, and cross,
That wretch, beast, caytiue, monster Man, might spend,
(Proud of the mire, in which his soul is pend)
Clodded in lumps of clay, his weary life to end.
18
His body dust: whear grew such cause of pride?
His soul thy Image: what could he envy? And 1. of Adams first sin.

Himself most happy: if he so would bide:
Now grow'n most wretched, who can remedy?
He slew himself, himself the enemy.
That his own soul would her own murder wreake,
If I were silent, heaven and earth would speak,
And if all fayl'd, these stones would into clamours break.
19
How many darts made furrows in his side,
When she, that out of his own side was made,
Gave feathers to their flight? whear was the pride
Of their new knowledge; whither did it fade,
When, running from thy voice into the shade,
He fled thy sight, himself of sight bereaved;
And for his shield a leauie armor weau'd,
With which, vain man, he thought Gods eyes to (...)
20
And well he might delude those eyes, that see,
And judge by colors: for who ever saw
A man of leaves, a reasonable tree?
But those that from this stock their life did draw, Then of his posterities,
in all kind of Idolatry.

Soon made their Father godly, and by law
Proclaimed Trees almighty: Gods of wood,
Of stocks, and stones with crowns of laurel stood
Templed, and fed by fathers with their childrens blood.
21
The sparkling fanes, that burn in beaten gould,
And, like the stars of heaven in midst of night,
^lacke Egypt, as her mirrhours, does behold,
^re but the denns whear idoll-snakes delight
^gaine to cover Satan from their sight:
Yet these are all their gods, to whom they vie
The Crocodile, the Cock, the Rat, the Fly.
(...) gods, indeed, for such men to be served by.
22
^e Fire, the wind, the sea, the sun, and moon,
^e flitting Air, and the swift-winged How'rs,
^d all the watchmen, that so nimbly run,
^d sentinel about the walled towers
(...) the worlds city, in their heavenly bowr's.
And, least their pleasant gods should want delight,
Neptune spues out the Lady Aphrodite,
^d but in heaven proud Iunos peacocks skorne to lite.
23
^e senseless Earth, the Serpent, dog, and catte,
^d worse then all these, Man, and woorst of men
^rping Jove, and swilling Bacchus fat,
^d drunk with the vines purple blood, and then
^e Fiend himself they conjure from his den,
Because he only yet remained to be
Worse then the worst of men, they fly from thee,
^d wear his altar-stones out with their pliant knee.
24
(...) that he speaks (and all he speaks are lies)
^e oracles, it is he (that wounded all)
^res all their wounds, he (that put out their eyes)
^at gives them light, he (that death first did call
Into the world) that with his orizall,
Inspirits earth: he heavens al-seeing eye,
He earths great Prophet, he, whom rest does fly,
That on salt billows does, as pillowes, sleeping lie.
25
But let him in his cabin restles rest,
The dungeon of dark flames, and freezing fire, How hopeless any patronage of
(...).

Justice in heaven against man makes request
To God, and of his Angels does require
Sins punishment: if what I did desire,
Or who, or against whom, or why, or whear,
Of, or before whom ignorant I wear,
Then should my speech their sands of sins to mountains ^ea^
26
Wear not the heavens pure, in whose courts I sue,
The Judge, to whom I sue, just to requite him,
The cause for sin, the punishment most due,
Justice her self the plaintiff to endite him,
The Angels holy, before whom I cite him,
He against whom, wicked, unjust, impure;
Then might he sinful live, and die secure,
Or trial might escape, of trial might endure,
27
The Judge might partial be, and ouer-pray'd,
The place appeald from, in whose courts he sues,
The fault excused, or punishment delayed,
The parties self accused, that did accuse,
Angels for pardon might their prayers use:
But now no star can shine, no hope be got.
Most wretched creature, if he knew his lot,
And yet more wretched far, because he knows it not.
28
What should I tell how barren earth is grown, All the Creatures having
disleagued themselves with him

^ll for to sterue her children, did not thou
^ater with heavenly showers her womb unsown,
and drop down clouds of flowers, did not thou bow
^ine easy ear unto the plowmans vow,
Long might he look, and look, and long in vain
Might load his harvest in an empty wayne,
^d beat the woods, to find the poor oaks hungry grain.
29
^he swelling sea seethes in his angry waves,
^d smites the earth, that dares the traitors nourish,
^t often his thunder their light cork outbraues,
^owing the mountains, on whose temples flourish
^hole woods of garlands, and, their pride to cherish,
Plowe through the seaes green fields, and nets display
To catch the flying winds, and steal away,
^oozning the greedy sea, prisning their nimble prey.
30
^w often have I seen the wauing pine,
^st on a watrie mountain, knock his head
(...) heavens too patient gates, and with salt brine
^ench the Moons burning horns, and safely fled
^m heavens revenge, her passengers, all dead
With stiff astonishment, tumble to hell?
How often the sea all earth would ouerswell,
^d not thy sandy girdle bind the mighty well?
31
^ould not the air be filled with steames of death,
(...) poison the quick rivers of their blood,
^d not thy winds fan, with their panting breath,
^e flitting region? would not the hasty flood
Empty it self into the seas wide wood,
Did not thou lead it wandering from his way,
To give men drink, and make his waters strey,
To fresh the flowrie meadows, through whose fields they play^
32
Who makes the sources of the silver fountains
From the flints mouth, and rocky valleis slide,
Thickning the ayrie bowels of the mountains?
Who has the wild herds of the forest tide
In their cold denns, making them hungry bide
Till man to rest be laid? can beastly he,
That should have most sense, only senseles be,
And all things else, beside himself, so awefull see?
33
Wear he not wilder then the saluage beast,
Prowder then haughty hills, harder then rocks,
Colder then fountains, from their springs releast,
Lighter then air, blinder then senseles stocks,
More changing then the rivers curling locks,
If reason would not, sense would soon reprove him,
And unto shame, if not to sorrow, move him, For his extreme ungratefulness.

To see cold floods, wild beasts, dull stocks, hard stones out-l^
34
Under the weight of sin the earth did fall,
And swallowed Dathan; and the raging wind,
And stormy sea, and gaping Whale, did call
For Jonas; and the air did bullets find,
And shot from heaven a stony shower, to grind
The five proud Kings, that for their idols fought,
The Sun it self stood still to fight it out,
And fire from heaven slew down, when sin to heaven did (...)
35
should any to himself for safety fly? So that being destitute of all hope,
or any remedy.

The way to save himself, if any were,
^ear to fly from himself: should he rely
Upon the promise of his wife? but there,
that can he see, but that he most may fear,
A Siren, sweet to death: upon his friends?
Who that he needs, or that he has not lends?
^r wanting aid himself, aid to another sends?
36
^is strength? but duft: his pleasure? cause of pain:
^s hope? false courtier: youth, or beawtie? brittle:
^treatie? fond: repentance? late, and vain:
^st recompense? the world wear all too little:
^y love? he has no title to a tittle:
Hells force? in vain her furies hell shall gather:
His Servants, Kinsmen, or his children rather?
^is child, if good, shall judge, if bad, shall curse his father.
37
^is life? that brings him to his end, and leaves him:
^is end? that leaves him to begin his woe:
^s goods? what good in that, that so deceaues him?
^s gods of wood? their feet, alas, are slow
(...) go to help, that must be helped to go:
Honor, great worth? ah, little worth they be
Unto their owners: wit? that makes him see
(...) wanted wit, that thought he had it, wanting thee.
38
^e sea to drink him quick? that casts his dead:
^ngells to spare? they punish: night to hide?
^e world shall burn in light: the heavens to spread
their wings to save him? heaven it self shall slide,
And roll away like melting stars, that glide
Along their oily threads: his mind pursues him:
His house to shrowde, or hills to fall, and bruise him?
As Seargeants both attache, and witnesses accuse him:
39
What need I urge, what they must needs confess?
Sentence on them, condemned by their own lust;
I crave no more, and thou can give no less, He can look for nothing, but a
fearful sentence.

Then death to dead men, justice to unjust;
Shame to most shameful, and most shameless dust:
But if thy Mercy needs will spare her friends,
Let Mercy there begin, where Justice ends.
It Is cruel Mercy, that the wrong from right defends.
40
She ended, and the heavenly Hierarchies, The effect of Justice her speech: the
inflammation of the heavenly Powers,

Burning in zeal, thickly imbranded wear:
Like to an army, that allarum cries,
And every one shakes his ydraded spear,
And the Almighties self, as he would tear
The earth, and her firm basis quite in sunder,
Flamed all in just revenge, and mighty thunder,
Heaven stole it self from earth by clouds that moisterd vnd^
41
As when the cheerful Sun, elamping wide, Appeased by Mercy, who is
described by her cherfulnes to defend Man.

Glads all the world with his vprising raye,
And wooes the widowed earth afresh to pride,
And paint her bosom with the flowrie May,
His silent sister steals him quite away,
Wrapped in a sable cloud, from mortal eyes,
The hasty stars at noone begin to rise,
And headlong to his early roost the sparrowe flies.
42
But soon as he again dishadowed ^is,
Restoring the blind world his blemish't sight,
As though another day wear newely ris,
The cooz'ned birds busily take their flight,
And wonder at the shortness of the night:
So Mercy once again her self displayes,
Out from her sisters cloud, and open lays
Those sunshine looks, whose beams would dim a thousand days.
43
How may a worm, that crawles along the dust,
Clamber the azure mountains, thrown so high, Our inabilitie to describe her.

And fetch from thence they fair Idea just,
That in those sunny courts does hidden lie,
Clothed with such light, as blinds the Angels eye;
How may weak mortal ever hope to file
His vnsmooth tongue, and his deprostrate style?
(...) raise thou from his corse, thy now entombed exile.
44
One touch would rouse me from my sluggish hearse,
One word would call me to my wished home,
One look would polish my afflicted verse,
One thought would steal my soul from her thick lome,
And force it wandering up to heaven to come,
Thear to importune, and to beg apace
One happy favor of thy sacred grace,
To see, (what though it loose her eyes?) to see thy face. Her beauty,
resembled by the creatures, which are all frail shadows of her essential
perfection.

45
If any ask why roses please the sight,
Because their leaves upon thy cheel^es do bower;
If any ask why lillies are so white,
Because their blossoms in thy hand do flower:
Or why sweet plants so grateful odours shoure;
It is because thy breath so like they be:
Or why the Orient Sun so bright we see;
What reason can we give, but from thine eyes, and thee?
46
Ros'd all in lively crimsin ar thy cheeks,
Whear beawties indeflourishing abide,
And, as to pass his fellow either seeks,
Seems both do blush at one another pride:
And on thine eyelids, waiting thee beside,
Ten thousand Graces sit, and when they move
To earth their amourous belgards from above, Her Attendants.

They fly from heaven, and on their wings convey thy love.
47
All of discolored plumes their wings a^ made,
And with so wondrous art the quills a^ wrought,
That whensoere they cut the ayrie glade,
The wind into their hollow pipes is caught:
As seems the spheres with them they down have brought:
Like to the seauen-fold reed of Arcadie,
Which Pan of Syriux made, when she did fly
To Ladon sands, and at his sighs sung m^ly.
48
As melting honey, dropping from the comb,
So still the words, that spring between thy lips, Her perswasiue power.

Thy lips, whear smiling sweetness keeps her home,
And heavenly Eloquence pure manna sipps,
He that his pen but in that fountain dipps,
How nimbly will the golden phrases fly,
And shed forth streams of choycest rhetorie,
Welling celestial torrents out of poesy?
49
Like as the thirsty land, in summers heat,
Calls to the clouds, and gapes at every shower,
As though her hungry clifts all heaven would eat,
Which if high God into her bosom power,
Though much refresht, yet more she could devour:
So hang the greedy ears of Angels sweet,
And every breath a thousand cupids meet,
Some flying in, some out, and all about her fleet.
50
Upon her breast, Delight does softly sleep,
And of eternal joy is brought abed,
Those snowie mountelets, through which do creep
The milkie rivers, that are inly bred
In silver cesternes, and themselves do shed
To weary Trauailers, in heat of day,
To quench their fiery thrist, and to allay
With dropping nectar floods, the fury of their way.
51
If any wander, thou do call him back, Her kind offices to Man.

If any be not forward thou incit'st him,
Thou do expect, if any should grow slack,
If any seem but willing, thou inuit'st him,
Or if he do offend thee, thou acquit'st him,
Thou find'st the lost, and follow'st him that flies,
Healing the sick, and quickening him that dies,
Thou art the lame man's friendly staff, the blind man's eyes.
52
So fair thou art that all would thee behold,
But none can thee behold, thou art so fair,
Pardon, O pardon then thy Vassal bold,
That with poor shadows strives thee to compare,
And match the things, which he knows matchless are;
O thou vive mirrhour of celestial grace,
How can frail colors pourtraict out thy face,
Or paint in flesh thy beawtie, in such semblance base?
53
Her upper garment was a silken lawne,
With needle-woorke richly embroidered, Her Garments, wrought by her own
hands, wherewith she clothes her self, composd of all the Creatures,

Which she her self with her own hand had drawn,
And all the world therein had pourtrayed,
With threads, so fresh, and lively colored,
That seemed the world she new created thear,
And the mistaken eye would rashly swear
The silken trees did grow, and the beasts living wear.
54
Low at her feet the Earth was cast alone, The Earth,

(As though to kiss her foot it did aspire,
And gave it self for her to tread upon)
With so unlike, and different attire,
That every one that saw it, did admire
What it might be, was of so various hew;
For to it self it often so diverse grew,
That still it seemed the same, and still it seemed a new.
55
And here, and there few men she scattered,
(That in their thought the world esteem but small,
And themselves great) but she with one fine thread
So short, and small, and slender woue them all,
That like a sort of busy ants, that crawle
About some molehill, so they wandered:
And round about the wauing Sea was shed, Sea,

But, for the silver sands, small pearls were sprinkled.
56
So curiously the vnderworke did creep,
And curling circlets so well shadowed lay,
That afar off the waters seemed to sleep,
But those that near the margin pearl did play,
Hoarcely enwaued wear with hasty sway,
As though they meant to rock the gentle ear,
And hush the former that enslumbred wear,
And here a dangerous rock the flying ships did fear.
57
High in the ayrie element there hung Air,

Another clowdy sea, that did disdain
(As though his purer waves from heaven sprung)
To crawle on earth, as does the sluggish maine:
But it the earth would water with his rain,
That eb'd, and flowed, as wind, and season would,
And often the Sun would cleave the limber mould
To alabaster rocks, that in the liquid rolled.
58
Beneath those sunny banks, a darker cloud,
Dropping with thicker deaw, did melt apace,
And bent it self into a hollow shroude,
On which, if Mercy did but cast her face,
A thousand colors did the bowe-enchace,
That wonder was to see the silk distained
With the resplendance from her beawtie gained,
And Iris paint her locks with beams, so lively feigned.
59
About her head a cyprus heaven she wore, The celestial bodies,

Spread like a veil, vpheld with silver wire,
In which the stars so burned in golden ore,
As seemed, the azure web was all on fire,
But hastily, to quench their sparkling ire,
A flood of milk came rolling up the shore,
That on his curded ^aue swift Argus bore,
And the immortal swan, that did her life deplore.
60
Yet strange it was, so many stars to see
Without a Sun, to give their tapers light:
Yet strange it was not, that it so should be:
For, where the Sun centers himself by right,
Her face, and locks did flame, that at the sight,
The heavenly veil, that else should nimbly move,
Forgot his flight, and all incensed with love,
With wonder, and amazement, did her beauty prove.
61
Over her hung a canopie of state, The third heaven.

Not of rich tissew, nor of spangled gold,
But of a substance, though not animate,
Yet of a heavenly, and spiritual mould,
That only eyes of Spirits might behold:
Such light as from maine rocks of diamound,
Shooting their sparks at Phoebus, would rebound,
And little Angels, holding hands, daunc't all around.
62
Seemed those little sprights, through nimbless bold,
The stately canopy bore on their wings,
But them it self, as pendants, did uphold,
Besides the crowns of many famous kings,
Among the rest, thear David ever sings,
And now, with years grown young, renewes his laye^
Unto his golden harp, and ditties plays,
Psalming aloud in well tuned songs his Makers praise.
63
Thou self-Idea of all joys to come,
Whose love is such, would make the rudest speak,
Whose love is such, would make the wisest dumb,
O when will thou thy too long silence break,
And overcome the strong to save the weak!
If thou no weapons have, thine eyes will wound
The Almighties self, that now stick on the ground,
As though some blessed object thear did them empound. Her Objects.

64
Ah miserable Abject of disgrace, Repentance.

What happiness is in thy misery?
I both must pity, and envy thy case.
For she, that is the glory of the sky,
Leaves heaven blind, to fix on thee her eye.
Yet her (though Mercies self esteems not small)
The world despisd', they her Repentance call,
And she her self despises, and the world, and all.
65
Deeply, alas empassioned she stood,
To see a flaming brand, tossed up from hell,
Boiling her heart in her own lustful blood,
That often for torment she would loudely yell,
Now she would sighing sit, and now she fell
Crouching upon the ground, in sackcloath trust,
Early, and late she prayed, and fast she must,
And all her hair hung full of ashes, and of dust.
66
Of all most hated, yet hated most of all
Of her own self she was; disconsolat
(As though her flesh did but infunerall
Her buried ghost) she in an arbor sat
Of thornie brier, weeping her cursed state,
And her before a hasty river fled,
Which her blind eyes with faithful penance fed,
And all about, the grass with tears hung down his head.
67
Her eyes, though blind abroad, at home kept fast,
Inwards they turned, and looked into her head,
At which she often started, as aghast,
To see so fearful spectacles of dread,
And with one hand, her breast she martyred,
Wounding her heart, the same to mortify,
The other a fair damsel held her by, Faith.

Which if but once let go, she sunk immediately.
68
But Faith was quick, and nimble as the heaven,
As if of love, and life she all had been,
And though of present sight her sense were reauen,
Yet she could see the things could not be seen:
Beyond the stars, as nothing wear between,
She fixed her sight, disdeigning things below,
Into the sea she could a mountain throw,
And make the Sun to stand, and waters backewards flow.
69
Such when as Mercy her beheld from high,
In a dark valley, drowned with her own tears,
One of her graces she sent hastily,
Smiling Eirene, that a garland wears
Of gilded olive, on her fairer hears,
To crown the fainting souls true sacrifice,
Whom when as sad Repentance coming spies,
The holy Desperado wiped her swollen eyes.
70
But Mercy felt a kind remorse to run Her deprecative spech for Man, in
which

Through her soft veins, and therefore, hying fast
To give an end to silence, thus begun.
Aye-honour'd Father, if no joy thou have
But to reward desert, reward at last
The Devils voice, spoke with a serpents tongue,
Fit to hiss out the words so deadly stung,
And let him die, deaths bitter charms so sweetly sung.
71
He was the father of that hopeles season, She tra^slates the principal fault
unto the Devil.

That to serve other Gods, forgot their own,
The reason was, thou wast above their reason:
They would have any Gods, rather then none,
A^beasily serpent, or a senseless stone:
And these, as Justice bates, so I deplore:
But the vp-plowed heart, all rent, and tore,
Though wounded by it self, I gladly would restore.
72
He was but dust; Why feared he not to fall? And repeating Justice her
aggravation of man's sin.

And being fallen, how can he hope to live?
Cannot the hand destroy him, that made all?
Could be not take away, as well as give?
Should man deprave, and should not God deprive?
Was it not all the worlds deceiving spirit,
(That, bladder'd up with pride of his own merit,
Fell in his rise) that him of heaven did disinherit?
73
He was but dust: how could he stand before him? Mittigates it (...). by a
contrary i^ference.

And being fallen, why should he fear to die?
Cannot the hand that made him first, restore him?
Deprau'd of sin, should he deprived lie
Of grace? can he not hide infirmity
That gave him strength? unworthy the forsaking,
He is, who ever weighs, without mistaking,
Or Maker of the man, or manner of his making.
74
Who shall thy temple incense any more;
Or to thy altar crown the sacrifice;
Or strewe with idle flowers the hallowed flore;
Or what should Prayer deck with herbs, and spice,
Her vialls, breathing orisons of price?
If all must pay that which all cannot pay?
O first begin with me, and Mercy slaie, 2 By interessing her self in the
cause, and Christ.

And thy thrice-honour'd Son, that now beneath does strey.
75
But if or he, or I may live, and speak,
And heaven can joy to see a sinner weep,
Oh let not Justice iron scepter break
A heart already broke, that low does creep,
And with prone humblesse her feets dust does sweep.
Must all go by desert? is nothing free?
Ah, if but those that only worthy be,
None should thee ever see, none should thee ever see.
76
What has man done, that man shall not undo,
Since God to him is grown so near a kin? That is as sufficient to satisfy,
as Man was impotent.

Did his foe slay him? he shall slay his foe:
Has he lost all? he all again shall win;
Is Sin his Master? he shall master sin:
Too hardy soul, with sin the field to try:
The only way to conquer, was to fly,
But thus long death has lived, and now deaths self shall die.
77
He is a path, if any be misled,
He is a robe, if any naked be,
If any chance to hunger, he is bread,
If any be a bondsman, he is free,
If any be but weak, how strong is he?
To dead men life he is, to sick men health,
To blind men sight, and to the needy wealth,
A pleasure without loss, a treasure without stealth.
78
Who can forget, never to be forgot,
The time, that all the world in slumber lies, Whom she celebrates from the
time of his nativity.

When, like the stars, the singing Angels shot
To earth, and heaven awaked all his eyes,
To see another Sun, at midnight rise,
On earth? was never sight of pareil fame,
For God before Man like himself did frame,
But God himself now like a mortal man became.
79
(...) Child he was, and had not learned to speak, From the effects of it in
himself.

That with his word the world before did make,
His Mothers arms him bore, he was so weak,
That with one hand the vaults of heaven could shake,
^ee how small room my infant Lord does take,
Whom all the world is not enough to hold.
Who of his years, or of his age has told?
^euer such age so young, never a child so old.
80
and yet but newely he was insanted,
and yet already he was sought to die,
^et scarcely borne, already banished,
^ot able yet to go, and forced to fly,
But scarcely fled away, when by and by,
The Tyrans sword with blood is all defiled,
And Rachel, for her sons with fury wild,
Cries, O thou cruel King, and O my sweetest child.
81
Egypt his Nource became, whear Nilus springs,
Who streit, to entertain the rising sun, Egypt.

The hasty harvest in his bosom brings;
But now for dries the fields wear all undone,
And now with waters all is ouerrunne,
So fast the Cynthian mountains powered their snow,
When once they felt the sun so near them glowe,
That Nilus Egypt lost, and to a sea did grow.
82
The Angels caroll'd loud their song of peace, The Angels,

The cursed Oracles wear stricken dumb,
To see their Sheapheard, the poor Sheapheards press, Men,

To see their King, the Kingly Sophies come,
And them to guide unto his Masters home,
A Star comes dancing up the orient,
That springs for joy over the strawy tent,
Whear gold, to make their Prince a crown, they all present.
83
Young John, glad child, before he could be borne,
Leapt in the woombe, his joy to prophecy,
Old Anna though with age all spent, and worn,
Proclaims her Savior to posterity,
And Simeon fast his dying notes does plie.
Oh how the blessed souls about him trace.
It is the fire of heaven thou do embrace,
Sing, Simeon, sing, sing Simeon, sing apace.
84
With that the mighty thunder dropped away The effect of Mercies speech.

From Gods unwary arm, now milder grown,
And melted into tears, as if to pray
For pardon, and for pity, it had known,
That should have been for sacred vengeance thrown:
Thereto the Armies Angelique devo'wd
Their former rage, and all to Mercy bo'wd,
Their broken weapons at her feet they gladly strow'd.
85
Bring, bring ye Graces all your silver flaskets, A Transition to Christ's
second victory.

Painted with every choicest flower that grows,
That I may soon vnflow'r your fragrant baskets,
To strowe the fields with odours whear he goes,
Let what so e're he treads on be a rose.
So down she let her eyelids fall, to shine
Upon the rivers of bright Palestine,
Whose woods drop honey, and her rivers skip with wine.
CHRIST'S VICTORY on Earth.
1
THear all alone she spied, alas the while; Christ brought into the place of
combat, the wilderness, among the wild beasts. Mark. 1. 13.

In shadie darkness a poor Desolate,
That now had measured many a weary mile,
Through a wast desert, whither heavenly fate,
And his own will him brought; he praying fate,
And him to prey, as he to pray began,
The Citizens of the wild forest ran,
And all with open throat would swallowe whole the man.
2
Soon did the Lady to her Graces cry, Described by his proper Attribute. The
Mercy of God.

And on their wings her self did nimbly strowe,
After her coach a thousand Loves did fly,
So down into the wilderness they throw,
Whear she, and all her train that with her flow
Thorough the ayrie wave, with sails so gay,
Sinking into his breast that weary lay,
Made shipwreck of themselves, and vanished quite away.
3
Seemed that Man had them devoured all,
Whom to devour the beasts did make pretense,
But him their saluage thirst did naught appall,
Though weapons none he had for his defense:
What arms for Innocence, but Innocence?
For when they saw their Lords bright cognizance
Shine in his face, soon did they disadvaunce,
And some unto him kneel, and some about him dance.
4
Down fell the Lordly Lions angry mood, Whom the creatures cannot but adore.

And he himself fell down, in congies low;
Bidding him welcome to his wast full wood,
Sometime he kissed the grass whear he did go,
And, as to wash his feet he well did know,
With fauning tongue he lickt away the dust,
And every one would nearest to him thrust,
And every one, with new, forgot his former lust.
5
Unmindful of himself, to mind his Lord,
The Lamb stood gazing by the Tigers side,
As though between them they had made accord,
And on the Lions back the goat did ride,
Forgetful of the roughnes of the hide,
If he stood still, their eyes upon him bayted,
If walked, they all in order on him waited,
And when he slep't, they as his watch themselves conceited.
6
Wonder does call me up to see, O no, By his unity with the Godhead.

I cannot see, and therefore sink in wonder,
The man, that shines as bright as God, not so,
For God he is himself, that close lies under
That man, so close, that no time can dissunder
That band, yet not so close, but from him break
Such beams, as mortal eyes are all too weak
Such sight to see, or it, if they should see, to speak.
7
Upon a grassie hillock he was laid, His proper place.

With woodie primroses befreckeled,
Over his head the wanton shadows played
Of a wild olive, that her bowgh's so spread,
As with her leau's she seemed to crown his head,
And her green arms to'embrace the Prince of peace,
The Sun so near, needs must the winter cease,
The Sun so near, another Spring seemed to increase.
8
His hair was black, and in small curls did twine, The beutie of his body.
Cant. 5. 11. Psalm. 45. 2.

As though it wear the shadow of some light,
And underneath his face, as day, did shine,
But sure the day shined not half so bright,
Nor the Suns shadow made so dark a night.
Under his lovely locks, her head to shroude,
Did make Humility her self grow proud,
Hither, to light their lamps, did all the Graces croude.
9
One of ten thousand souls I am, and more,
That of his eyes, and their sweet wounds complain,
Sweet are the wounds of love, never so sore,
Ah might he often slaie me so again.
He never lives, that thus is never slain.
What boots it watch? those eyes, for all my art,
Mine own eyes looking on, have stole my heart,
In them Love bends his bow, and dips his burning dart.
10
As when the Sun, caught in an adverse cloud,
Flies cross the world, and thear a new begets,
The watery picture of his beauty proud,
Throws all abroad his sparkling spangelets,
And the whole world in dire amazement sets,
To see two days abroad at once, and all
Doubt whither now he rise, or now will fall:
So flamed the Godly flesh, proud of his heavenly thrall.
11
His cheeks as snowie apples, sop't in wine, Genesis 49. 12. Cant. 5. 10.

Had their red roses quenched with lillies white,
And like to garden strawberries did shine,
Washed in a bowl of milk, or rose-buds bright
Vnbosoming their breasts against the light:
Here loue-sicke souls did eat, thear drank, and made
Sweete-smelling posies, that could never fade,
But worldly eyes him thought more like some living shade. Isa. 53. 2.

12
For laughter never looked upon his browe,
Though in his face all smiling joys did bide,
No filken banners did about him flow,
Fools make their fetters ensigns of their pride:
He was best clothed when naked was his side,
A Lamb he was, and woollen fleece he bore,
Woue with one thread, his feet low sandalls wore,
But bared were his legs, so went the times of yore.
13
As two white marble pillars that uphold
Gods holy place whear he in glory sets,
And rise with goodly grace and courage bold,
To bear his Temple on their ample ietts,
Vein'd every whear with azure rivulets,
Whom all the people on some holy morn,
With boughs and flowrie garlands do adorn,
Of such, though fairer far, this Temple was vpborne.
14
Twice had Diana bent her golden bow, By preparing himself to the combat

And shot from heaven her silver shafts, to rouse
The sluggish saluages, that den below,
And all the day in lazy covert drouze,
Since him the silent wilderness did house,
The heaven his roof, and arbor harbor was,
The ground his bed, and his moist pillowe grass.
But fruit thear none did grow, nor rivers none did pass.
15
At length an aged Sire far off he saw With his Adversary, that seemd what
he was not,

Come slowely footing, every step he guest
One of his feet he from the grave did draw,
Three legs he had, the wooden was the best,
And all the way he went, he ever blessed
With benedicities, and prayers store,
But the bad ground was blessed never the more,
And all his head with snow of Age was waxen hoar.
16
A good old Hermit he might seem to be, Some devout Essene.

That for devotion had the world forsaken,
And now was travailing some Saint to see,
Since to his beads he had himself betaken,
Whear all his former sins he might awaken,
And them might wash away with dropping brine,
And alms, and fasts, and churches discipline,
And dead, might rest his bones under the holy shrine.
17
But when he nearer came, he lowted low
With prone obeisance, and with curt'sie kind,
That at his feet his head he seemd to throw;
What needs him now another Saint to find?
Affections are the sails, and faith the wind,
That to this Saint a thousand souls conueigh
Each hour': O happy Pilgrims thither strey!
What caren they for beasts, or for the weary way?
18
Soon the old Palmer his devotions sung,
Like pleasing anthems, moduled in time,
For well that aged Sire could tip his tongue
With golden foil of eloquence, and lime,
And lick his rugged speech with phrases prime.
Ay me, quoth he, how many years have been,
Since these old eyes the Sun of heaven have seen!
Certes the Son of heaven they now behold I ween.
19
Ah, mote my humble cell so blessed be
As heaven to welcome in his lowely roose,
And be the Temple for thy deity!
Lo how my cottage worships thee aloof,
That under ground has hid his head, in proof
It does adore thee with the seeling low,
Here honey, milk, and chestnuts wild do grow,
The boughs a bed of leaves upon thee shall bestow.
20
But oh, he said, and therewith sigh't full deep, (Closely tempting him to
despair of Gods providence, and provide for himself.)

The heavens, alas, too envious are grown,
Because our fields thy presence from them keep;
^or stones do grow, where corn was lately sown:
So stooping down, he gathered up a stone)
But thou with corn can make this stone to ear.
What needen we the angry heavens to fear?
Let them envy us still, so we enjoy thee here.
21
Thus on they wandered, but those holy weeds But was what he seemed not, Satan,
and would feign have lead him

A monstrous Serpent, and no man did cover.
So under greenest herbs the Adds feeds:
And round about that stinking corpse did houer
The dismal Prince of gloomie night, and over
His euer-damned head the Shadows erred
Of thousand peccant ghosts, unseen, unheard,
And all the Tyrant fears, and all the Tyrant feared.
22
He was the Son of blackest Acheron,
Whear many frozen souls do chattring lie,
And ruled the burning waves of Phlegethon,
Whear many more in flaming sulphur fry,
At once compelled to live and forced to die.
Whear nothing can be heard for the loud cry
Of oh, and ah, and out alas that I
Or once again might live, or once at length might die.
23
Ere long they came near to a balefull bower, 1. To Desperation, characterd by
his place,

Much like the mouth of that infernal cave,
That gaping stood all Comers to devour,
Dark, doleful, dreary, like a greedy grave,
That still for carrion carcasses does crave.
The ground no herbs, but venomous did bear,
Nor ragged trees did leave, but every whear
Dead bones, and skulls wear cast, and bodies hanged wear.
24
Upon the roof the bird of sorrow sat
Elonging joyful day with her sad note,
And through the shady air, the fluttring bat
Did wa^e her leather sails, and blindely flote,
While with her wings the fatal Shreechowle smote
The unblessed house, thear, on a craggy stone,
Celeno hung, and made his direful moan,
And all about the murdered ghosts did shreek, and groan,
25
Like clowdie moonshine, in some shadowie grove,
Such was the light in which DESPAIR did dwell, Countenance, Apparel,
horrible apparitions, etc.

But he himself with night for darkness strove.
His black vncombed locks dishevelled fell
About his face, through which, as brands of hell,
Sunk in his skull, his staring eyes did glowe,
That made him deadly look, their glimpse did show
Like Cockatrices eyes, that sparks of poison throw.
26
His clothes wear ragged clouts, with thorns pind fast,
And as he musing lay, to stony fright
A thousand wild Chimera's would him cast:
As when a fearful dream, in midst of night,
Skips to the brain, and phansies to the sight
Some winged fury, strait the hasty foot,
Eger to fly, cannot pluck up his root,
The voice dies in the tongue, and mouth gapes without boot.
27
Now he would dream that he from heaven fell,
And then would snatch the air, afraid to fall;
And now he thought he sinking was to hell,
And then would grasp the earth, and now his stall
Him seemed hell, and then he out would crawle,
And ever, as he crept, would squint aside,
Lest him, perhaps, some Fury had espide,
And then, alas, he should in chains for ever bide.
28
Therefore he softly shrunk, and stole away,
Ne ever durst to draw his breath for fear,
Till to the door he came, and thear he lay
Panting for breath, as though he dying were,
And still he thought, he felt their craples tear
Him by the heels back to his ougly den,
Out feign he would have leapt abroad, but then
The heaven, as hell, he feared, that punish guilty men.
29
Within the gloomie hole of this pale wight
The Serpent wooed him with his charms to inn,
Thear he might bait the day, and rest the night,
But under that same bait a fearful grin
Was ready to entangle him in sin.
But he upon ambrosia daily fed,
That grew in Eden, thus he answered,
So both away wear caught, and to the Temple fled.
30
Well knew our Savior this the Serpent was,
And the old Serpent knew our Savior well,
Never did any this in falsehood pass,
Never did any him in truth excel:
With him we fly to heaven, from heaven we fell
With him: but now they both together met
Upon the sacred pinnacles, that threat
With their aspiring tops, Astraeas starrie seat.
31
Here did PRESVMPTION her paullion spread, 2. To Presumption, characterd by her
place,

Over the Temple, the bright startes among,
(Ah that her foot should trample on the head
Of that most reverend place!) and a lewd throng
Of wamon boys sung her a pleasant song Attendants, etc.

Of love, long life, of mercy, and of grace,
And every one her dearly did embrace,
And she herself enamored was of her own face.
32
A painted face, belied with vermeyl store,
Which light Euelpis every day did trim,
That in one hand a gilded anchor wore,
Not fixed on the rock, but on the brimme
Of the wide air she let it loosely swim:
Her other hand a sprinkle carried,
And ever, when her Lady wauered,
Court-holy water all upon her sprinkeled.
33
Poor fool, she thought herself in wondrous price
With God, as if in Paradise she wear,
But, wear she not in a fools paradise,
She might have seen more reason to despere:
But him she, like some ghastly fiend, did fear,
And therefore as that wretch hewed out his cell
Under the bowels, in the heart of hell,
So she above the Moon, amid the stars would dwell.
34
Her Tent with sunny clouds was seel'd aloft,
And so exceeding shone with a false light,
That heaven it self to her it seemed often,
Heaven without clouds to her deluded sight,
But clouds withouten heaven it was aright,
And as her house was built, so did her brain
Build castles in the air, with idle pain,
But heart she never had in all her body vain.
35
Like as a ship, in which no balance lies,
Without a Pilot, on the sleeping waves,
Fairly along with wind, and water flies,
And painted masts with silken sails embraues,
That Neptune self the bragging vessel saues,
To laugh a while at her so proud array;
Her wauing streamers loosely she lets play,
And flagging colors shine as bright as smiling day:
36
But all so soon as heaven his brows does bend,
She veils her banners, and pulls in her beams,
The empty bark the raging billows send
Up to the Olympique waves, and Argus seems
Again to ride upon our lower streams:
Right so PRESVMPTION did her self behave,
Tossed about with every stormy wave,
And in white lawne she went, most like an Angel brave.
37
Gently our Savior she began to shrive, And by her Temptation.

Whither he wear the Son of God, or no;
For any other she disdeign'd to wive:
And if he wear, she bid him fearles throw
Himself to ground, and thearwithall did show
A flight of little Angels, that did wait
Upon their glittering wings, to latch him strait,
And longed on their backs to feel his glorious weight.
38
But when she saw her speech prevailed naught,
Her self she tombled headlong to the flore:
But him the Angels on their feathers caught,
And to an ayrie mountain nimbly bore,
Whose snowie shoulders, like some chaulkie shore,
Restles Olympus seemed to rest upon
With all his swimming globes: so both are gone,
The Dragon with the Lamb. Ah, unmeet Paragon. 3. To Vainglory.

39
All suddenly the hill his snow deuours, Poetically described from the place
where her court stood. A garden.

In liew whereof a goodly garden grew,
As if the snow had melted into flowers,
Which their sweet breath in subtle vapors threw,
That all about perfumed spirits flew.
For what so ever might aggrate the sense,
In all the world, or please the appetence,
Here it was powered out in lavish affluence.
40
Not lovely Ida might with this compare,
Though many streams his banks besiluered,
Though Xanthus with his golden sands he bare,
Nor Hibla, though his thyme depastured,
As fast again with honey blossomed.
Ne Rhodope, ne Tempes flowrie plain,
Adonis garden was to this but vain,
Though Plato on his beds a flood of praise did rain.
41
For in all these, some one thing most did grow,
But in this one, grew all things else beside,
For sweet variety herself did throw
To every bank, here all the ground she did
In lilly white, there pinks eblazed wide;
And damask't all the earth, and here she shed
Blew violets, and there came roses red,
And every sight the yielding sense, as captive led.
42
The garden like a Lady fair was cut,
That lay as if she slumber'd in delight,
And to the open skies her eyes did shut;
The azure fields of heaven wear sembled right
In a large round, set with the flowr's of light,
The flowr's-de-luce, and the round sparks of deaw,
That hung upon their azure leaves, did show
Like twinkling stars, that sparkle in th'eau'ning blew.
43
Upon a hilly bank her head she cast,
On which the bower of Vaine-Delight was built,
White, and red roses for her face wear placed,
And for her tresses Marigolds wear spilt:
Them broadly she displaid, like flaming guilt,
Till in the ocean the glad day wear drowned,
Then up again her yellow locks she wound,
And with green fillets in their pretty calls them bound.
44
What should I here depei^t her lilly hand,
Her veins of violets, her ermine breast,
Which thear in orient colors living stand,
Or how her gown with silken leaves is dressed;
Or how her watchmen, armed with boughie crest,
A wall of prim hid in his bushes bea^s,
Shaking at every wind their leauie spears,
While she supinely sleeps, ne to be waked fears?
45
Over the hedge depends the graping Elm,
Whose greener head, empurpuled in wine,
Seemed to wonder at his bloody helm,
And half suspect the bunches of the vine,
Least they, perhaps, his wit should undermine.
For well he knew such fruit he never bore:
But her weak arms embraced him the more,
And with her ruby grapes laughed at her paramour.
46
Under the shadow of these drunken el^es
A Fountain rose, where Pangloretta uses,
(When her some flood of fancy ouerwhelms,
And one of all her favorites she chooses)
To bath herself, whom she in lust abuses,
And from his wanton body sucks his soul,
Which drowned in pleasure, in that shaly bowl,
And swimming in delight, does amarously roll.
47
The font of silver was, and so his showrs
^n silver fell, only the gilded bowls
(Like to a furnace, that the min'rall powers)
Seemed to have moul't it in their shining holes:
And on the water, like to burning coals,
On liquid silver, leaves of roses lay:
But when PANGLORIE here did list to play,
^ose water then it ran, and milk it rained they say.
48
The roof thick clouds did paint, from which three boys
^hree gaping mermaides with their ea^^s did feed,
Whose breasts let fall the stream, with sleepie noise,
^o Lions mouths, from whence it leapt with speed,
And in the rosy lauer seemed to bleed.
The naked boys unto the waters fall,
Their stony nightingales had taught to call,
When Zephyr breathed into their watery interall.
49
And all about, embayed in soft sleep,
A heard of charmed beasts a ground wear spread,
Which the fair Witch in goulden chains did keep,
And them in willing bondage fettered,
Once men they lived, but now the men were dead,
And turned to beasts, so fabled Homer old,
That Circe, with her potion, charmed in gold,
Used manly souls in beastly bodies to immould.
50
Through this false Eden, to his Lemans bower, From her Court, and Courtiers.
1. Pleasure in drinking.

(Whom thousand souls devoutly idolize)
Our first destroyer led our Savior.
Thear in the lower room, in solemn wise,
They daunc't a round, and powered their sacrifice
To plumpe Lyaeus, and among the rest,
The jolly Priest, in yuie garlands dressed,
Chaunted wild Orgialls, in honor of the feast.
51
Others within their arbours swilling sat,
(For all the room about was arboured)
With laughing Bacchus, that was grown so fat,
That stand he could not, but was carried,
And every evening freshly watered,
To quench his fiery cheeks, and all about
Small cocks broke through the wall, and sallied out
Flaggons of wine, to set on fire that spueing tour.
52
This their inhumed souls esteemed their wealths,
To crown the bouzing kan from day to night,
And sick to drink themselves with drinking healths,
Some vomiting, all drunken with delight.
Hence to a loft, carved all in yvorie white, in Luxury.

They came, wheat whiter Ladies naked went,
Melted in pleasure, and soft languishment,
And sunk in beds of roses, amourous glaunces sent.
53
Fly, fly thou holy child that wanton room,
And thou my chaster Muse those harlots shun,
And with him to a higher story come, 2. Avarice.

Whear mounts of gold, and floods of silver run,
The while the owners, with their wealth undone,
Starve in their store, and in their plenty pine,
Tumbling themselves upon their heaps of mine.
Glutting their famish't souls with the deceitful shine.
54
Ah, who was he such precious perils found?
How strongly Nature did her treasures hide;
And threw upon them mountains of thick ground,
To dark their orie luster; but queint Pride
Has taught her Sons to wound their mothers side,
And gage the depth, to search for flaring shells,
In whose bright bosom spumie Bacchus swells,
That neither heaven, nor earth henceforth in safety dwells.
55
^ sacred hunger of the greedy eye,
Whose need has end, but no end covetise,
Empty in fulness, rich in poverty,
That having all things, nothing can suffice,
How thou befanciest the men most wise?
The poor man would be rich, the rich man great,
The great man King, the King, in Gods own seat
Enthroned, with mortal arm dares flames, and thunder threat.
56
Therefore above the rest Ambition sat: 3. Ambitious honor.

His Court with glitterant pearl was all enwall'd,
And round about the wall in chaires of State,
And most maiestique splendour, wear enstall'd
A hundred Kings, whose temples wear impaled
In goulden diadems, set here, and thear
With diamounds, and gemmed every whear,
And of their golden virges none disceptred wear.
57
High over all, Panglories blazing throne, From her throne.

In her bright turret, all of crystal wrought,
Like Phoebus lamp in midst of heaven, shone:
Whose starry top, with pride infernal fraught,
Selfe-arching columns to uphold wear taught:
In which, her Image still reflected was
By the smooth crystal, that most like her glass,
In beauty, and in frailty, did all others pass.
58
A Silver wande the sorceresse did sway,
And, for a crown of gold, her hair she wore,
Only a garland of rosebuds did play
About her locks, and in her hand, she bore
A hollow globe of glass, that long before,
She full of emptiness had bladdered,
And all the world therein depictured,
Whose colors, like the rainebowe, ever vanished.
59
Such watery orbicles young boys do blow
Out from their sopy snells, and much admire
The swimming world, which tenderly they row
With easy breath, till it be waued higher,
But if they chance but roughly once aspire,
The painted bubble instantly does fall.
Here when she came, she began for music call,
And sung this wooing song, to welcome him withal.
Love is the blossom whear thear blows From her temptation.

Every thing, that lives, or grows,
Love does make the heavens to move,
And the Sun does burn in love;
Love the strong, and weak does yoke,
And makes the y^ie climb the oak,
Under whose shadows Lions wild,
Soft'ned by Love, grow tame, and mild;
Love no medicine can appease,
He burns the fishes in the seas,
Not all the skill his wounds can stench,
Not all the sea his fire can quench;
Love did make the bloody spear
Once a levy coat to wear,
While in his leaves thear shrouded lay
Sweet birds, for love, that sing, and play;
And of all loves joyful flame,
I the bud, and blossom am.
Only bend thy knee to me,
Thy wooeing, shall thy winning be.
See, see the flowers that below,
Now as fresh as morning blow,
And of all, the virgin rose,
That as bright Aurora shows,
How they all vnleaued die,
Loosing their virgintie:
Like unto a summer-shade,
But now borne, and now they fade.
Every thing does pass away,
Thear is danger in delay,
Come, come gather then the rose,
Gather it, or it you lose.
All the sand of Tagus shore
Into my bosom casts his ore;
All the valleys swimming corn
To my house is yearly borne;
Every grape, of every vine
Is gladly bruised to make me wine,
While ten thousand kings, as proud,
To carry up my train, have bowed,
And a world of Ladies send me
In my chambers to attend me:
All the stars in heaven that shine,
And ten thousand more, are mine:
Only bend thy knee to me,
Thy wooing shall thy winning be.
60
Thus sought the dire Enchauntress in his mind
Her guilefull bay^ to have embosomed,
But he her charms dispersed into wind,
And her of insolence admonished,
And all her optique glasses shattered. The ef^ect of this victory in Satan.

So with her Sire to hell she took her flight,
(The starting air flew from the damned spright,)
Whear deeply both aggrieved, plunged themselves in night.
61
But to their Lord, now musing in his thought, The Angels.

A heavenly volie of light Angels flew,
And from his Father him a banquet brought,
Through the fine element, for well they knew,
After his lenten fast, he hungry grew,
And, as he fed, the holy quires combine
To sing a hymn of the celestial Trine;
All thought to pass, and each was past all thought divine.
62
The birds sweet notes, to sonnet out their joys, The Creatures.

Attemper'd to the lays Angelical,
And to the birds, the winds attune their noise,
And to the winds, the waters hoarcely call,
And Echo back again revoyced all,
That the whole valley rung with victory.
But now our Lord to rest does homewards fly:
See how the Night comes stealing from the mountains high.
CHRIST'S TRIVMPH Over and after death.

Vincenti dabitur.

CONFIDO IN DOMINO



Printed by C. LEG. 1610.

CHRIST'S TRIVMPH over Death.
1
SO down the silver streams of Eridan, Christ's Triumph over death, on the
cross, expressed. 1. in general by his joy to undergo it: singing before he
went to the garden, Mat. 26. 30.

On either side bank't with a lilly wall,
Whiter then both, rides the triumphant Swan,
And sings his dirge, and prophesies his fall,
Diuing into his watrie funeral:
But Eridan to Cedron must submit
His flowery shore, nor can he envy it,
If when Apollo sings, his swa^s do silent sit.
2
That heavenly voice I more delight to hear,
Then gentle airs to breath, or swelling waves
Against the sounding rocks their bosoms tear,
Or whistling reeds, that rutty Jordan laues,
And with their verdure his white head embraues,
To chide the winds, or hiuing bees, that fly
About the laughing bloosms of sallowie,
Rocking asleep the idle grooms that lazy lie.
3
And yet, how can I hear thee singing go,
When men incensed with hate, thy death foreset?
Or else, why do I hear thee sighing so,
When thou, inflamed with love, their life do get?
That Love, and hate, and sighs, and songs are met;
But thus, and only thus thy love did crave,
To send thee singing for us to thy grave,
While we sought thee to kill, and thou sought'st us to save.
4
When I remember Christ our burden bears, By his grief in the undergoing it.

I look for glory, but find misery;
I look for joy, but find a sea of tears;
I look that we should live, and find him die;
I look for Angels songs, and hear him cry:
Thus what I look, I cannot find so well,
Or rather, what I find, I cannot tell,
These banks so narrow are, those streams so highly s^
5
Christ suffers, and in this, his tears begin,
Suffers for us, and our joy springs in this,
Suffers to death, here is his Manhood seen,
Suffers to rise, and here his Godhead is.
For Man, that could not by himself have ris,
Out of the grave does by the Godhead rise,
And God, that could not die, in Manhood dies,
That we in both might live, by that sweet sacrifice.
6
Go giddy brains, whose wits are thought so fresh,
Pluck all the flowr's that Nature forth does throw,
Go stick them on the cheeks of wanton flesh;
Poor idol, (forced atonce to fall and grow)
Of fading roses, and of melting snow:
Your songs exceed your matter, this of mine,
The matter, which it sings, shall make divine,
As stars dull puddles guild, in which their beauties shine.
7
Who does not see drowned in Deucalions name, By the obscure fables of the
Gentiles, typing it.

(When earth his men, and sea had lost his shore)
Old Noah; and in Nisus lock, the fame
Of Sampson yet alive; and long before
In Phaethons, mine own fall I deplore:
But he that conquered hell, to fetch again
His virgin widow, by a serpent slain,
Another Orpheus was then dreaming poets feign.
8
That taught the stones to melt for passion,
And dormant sea, to hear him, silent lie,
And at his voice, the watrie nation
To flock, as if they deemed it cheap, to buy
With their own deaths his sacred harmony:
The while the waves stood still to hear his song,
And steadie shore wau'd with the reeling throng
Of thirsty souls, that hung upon his fluent tongue.
9
What better friendship, then to cover shame? By the cause of it in him, his
Love.

What greater love, then for a friend to die?
Yet this is better to asself the blame,
And this is greater, for an enemy:
But more then this, to die, not suddenly,
Not with some common death, or easy pain,
But slowely, and with torments to be slain,
O depth, without a depth, far better seen, then saine!
10
And yet the Son is humbled for the Slave, By the effect it should have in us.

And yet the Slave is proud before the Son:
Yet the Creator for his creature gave
Himself, and yet the creature hasts to run
From his Creator, and self-good does shun:
And yet the Prince, and God himself does cry
To Man, his Traitor, pardon not to fly,
Yet Man his God, and Traitor does his Prince defy.
11
Who is it sees not that he nothing is,
But he that nothing sees; what weaker breast,
Since Adams Armor failed, dares warrant his?
That made by God of all his creatures best,
Strait made himself the woorst of all the rest:
" If any strength we have, it is to ill,
" But all the good is Gods, both power, and will:
The dead man cannot rise, though he himself may kill.
12
But let the thorny schools these punctualls
Of wills, all good, or bad, or neuter diss;
Such joy we gained by our parentalls,
That good, or bad, whither I cannot wiss,
To call it a mishap, or happy miss
That fell from Eden, and to heaven did rise:
Albee the mitred Card'nall more did prize
His part in Paris, then his part in Paradise.
13
A Tree was first the instrument of strife,
Whear Eve to sin her soul did prostitute, By the instrument, the cursed
Tree,

A Tree is now the instrument of life,
Though ill that trunk, and this fair body suit:
Ah, cursed tree, and yet O blessed fruit!
That death to him, this life to us does give:
Strange is the cure, when things past cure reviue,
And the Physician dies, to make his patient live.
14
Sweet Eden was the arbor of delight, 2. expressed in particular, (...) by his
fore-passion in the Garden.

Yet in his honey flowr's our poison blew;
Sad Gethseman the bower of balefull night,
Whear Christ a health of poison for us drew,
Yet all our honey in that poison grew:
So we from sweetest flowr's, could suck our bane,
And Christ from bitter venom, could again
Extract life out of death, and pleasure out of pain.
15
A Man was first the author of our fall,
A Man is now the author of our rise,
A Garden was the place we perished all,
A Garden is the place he pays our price,
And the old Serpent with a new devise,
Has found a way himself for to beguile,
So he, that all men tangled in his wile,
^s now by one man caught, beguiled with his own guile.
16
The dewie night had with her frostie shade
Immant'led all the world, and the stiff ground
Sparkled in ice, only the Lord, that made
All for himself, himself dissolved found,
Sweat without heat, and bled without a wound:
Of heaven, and earth, and God, and Man forlore,
Thrice begging help of those, whose sins he bore,
And thrice denied of those, not to deny had swore.
17
Yet had he been alone of God forsaken,
Or had his body been imbroyl'd alone
In fierce assault, he might, perhaps, have taken
Some joy in soul, when all joy else was gone,
But that with God, and God to heaven is flow'n;
And Hell it self out from her grave does rise,
Black as the starles night, and with them flies,
Yet blacker then they both, the Son of blasphemies.
18
As when the Planets, with unkind aspect,
Call from her caves the meager pestilence,
The sacred vapor, eager to infect,
Obeyes the voice of the sad influence,
And vomits up a thousand noisome sents,
The well of life, flaming his golden flood
With the sick air, fevers the boiling blood,
And poisons all the body with contagious food.
19
The bold Physician, too incautelous,
By those he cures, himself is murdered,
Kindness infects, pity is dangerous,
And the poor infant, yet not fully bred,
Thear where he should be borne, lies buried,
So the dark Prince, from his infernal cell,
Casts up his griesly Torturers of hell,
And whets them to revenge, with this insulting spell.
20
See how the world smiles in eternal peace;
While we, the harmles brats, and rustie throng
Of Night, our snakes in curles do pranke, and dress:
Why sleep our drouzie scorpions so long?
Whear is our wonted virtue to do wrong?
Are we our selves; or are we Graces grown?
The Sons of hell, or heaven? was never known
Our whips so ouer-moss't, and brands so deadly blown.
21
O long desired, never hoped for hour,
When our Tormentour shall our torments feel!
Arm, arm your selves, sad Dires of my power,
And make our Judge for pardon to us kneel,
Slise, launch, dig, tear him with your whips of steel:
My self in honor of so noble prize,
Will power you reaking blood, shed with the cries
Of hasty heirs, who their own fathers sacrifice.
22
With that a flood of poison, black as hell,
Out from his filthy gorge, the beast did spue,
That all about his blessed body fell,
And thousand flaming serpents hissing flew
About his soul, from hellish sulphur threw,
And every one brandisht his fiery tongue,
And woorming all about his soul they clung,
But he their stings tore out, and to the ground them flung.
23
So have I seen a rocks heroique breast,
Against proud Neptune, that his ruin threats,
When all his waves he has to battle pressed,
And with a thousand swelling billows beats
The stubborn stone, and foams, and chafes, and frets
To heave him from his root, unmoved stand;
And more in heaps the barking surges band,
The more in pieces beat, fly weeping to the strand.
24
So may we often a venurous father see,
To please his wanton son, his only joy,
Coast all about, to catch the roving be,
And stung himself, his busy hands employ
To save the honey, for the gamesome boy:
Or from the snake her rank'rous teeth erace,
Making his child the toothles Serpent chase,
Or, with his little hands, her ^um'rous gorge embrace.
25
Thus Christ himself to watch, and sorrow gives,
While, deaw'd in easy sleep, dead Peter lies:
Thus Man in his own grave securely lives,
While Christ alive, with thousand horrors dies,
Yet more for theirs, then his own pardon cries:
No sins he had, yet all our sins he bare,
So much does God for others evils care,
And yet so careless men for their own evils are.
26
See drouzie Peter, see whear Judas wakes, By his passion it self, amplified,
1. from the general causes.

Whear Judas kisses him whom Peter flies:
O kiss more deadly then the sting of snakes!
False love more hurtful then true injuries!
Aye me! how deerly God his Servant buies?
For God his man, at his own blood does hold,
And Man his God, for thirty pence has sold.
So tin for silver goes, and dunghill dross for gold.
27
Yet was it not enough for Sin to choose
A Servant, to betray his Lord to them;
But that a Subject must his King accuse,
But that a Pagan must his God condemn,
But that a Father must his Son contemn,
But that the Son must his own death desire,
That Prince, and People, Servant, and the Sire,
Gentil, and Jew, and he against himself conspire?
28
Was this the oil, to make thy Saints adore thee, Parts, and

The froathy spittle of the rascal throng?
At these the virges, that at borne before thee,
Base whipps of cord, and knotted all along?
^s this thy golden seepter, against wrong,
A reedie cane? is that the crown adornes
Thy shining locks, a crown of spiny thorns?
(...) theas the Angels himns, the Priests blasphemous scorns?
29
Who ever saw Honor before ashamed; Effects of it.

Afflicted Majesty, debased height;
^^nocence guilty, Honesty defamed;
Liberty bound, Health sick, the Sun in night?
But since such wrong was offered unto right,
Our night is day, our sickness health is grown,
Our shame is veild, this now remains alone
For us, since he was ours, that we be not our own.
30
Night was ordeyn'd for rest, and not for pain, 1. From the particular causes.

But they, to pain their Lord, their rest contemn,
Good laws to save, what bad men would have slain,
And not bad Judges, with one breath, by them
The innocent to pardon, and condemn:
Death for revenge of murderers, not decaie
Of guiltles blood, but now, all headlong sway
Man's Murderer to save, man's Savior to slaie.
31
Frail Multitude, whose giddy law is list,
And best applause is windy flattering,
Most like the breath of which it does consist,
No sooner blown, but as soon vanishing,
As much desired, as little profiting,
That makes the men that have it often as light,
As those that give it, which the proud inuit,
And fear: the bad man's friend, the good man's hypocrite.
32
It was but now their sounding clamours sung, Parts, and

Blessed is he, that comes from the most high,
And all the mountains with Hosanna rung,
And now, away with him, away they cry,
And nothing can be heard but crucify:
It was but now, the Crown it self they save,
And golden name of King unto him gave,
And now, no King, but only Caesar, they will have:
33
It was but now they gathered blooming May,
And of his arms disrobed the branching tree,
To strowe with boughs, and blossoms all thy way,
And now, the branchlesse truncke a cross for thee,
And May, dismayed, thy coronet must be:
It was but now they wear so kind, to throw
Their own best garments, whear thy feet should go,
And now, thy self they strip, and bleeding wounds they show
34
See whear the author of all life is dying:
O fearful day! he dead, what hope of living?
See whear the hopes of all our lives are buying:
O cheerful day! they bought, what fear of grieuing?
Love love for hate, and death for life is giving:
Loc how his arms are stretched abroad to grace thee,
And, as they open stand, call to embrace thee,
Why stai'st thou then my soul; o fly, fly thither have thee.
35
His radious head, with shameful thorns they tear,
His tender back, with bloody whipps they rent,
His side, and heart they furrowe with a spear,
His hands, and feet, with riuing nails they tent,
And, as to disentrayle his soul they meant,
They jolly at his grief, and make their game,
His naked body to expose to shame,
That all might come to see, and all might see, that came.
36
Whereat the heaven put out his guilty eye, Effects of it in heaven.

That durst behold so execrable sight,
And sabled all in black the shadie sky,
And the pale stars, struck with unwonted fright,
Quenched their everlasting lamps in night:
And at his birth as all the stars heaven had,
Wear not enough, but a new star was made,
^o now both new, and old, and all away did fade.
37
The mazed Angels shook their fiery wings, in the heavenly Spirits.

Ready to lighten vengeance from Gods throne,
One down his eyes upon the Manhood flings,
Another gazes on the Godhead, none
But surely thought his wits wear not his own:
Some flew, to look if it wear very he,
But, when Gods arm unarmed they did see,
^lbee they saw it was, they vowed it could not be.
38
The sadded air hung all in cheerelesse black, in the Creatures sub
celestial.

Through which, the gentle winds soft sighing flewe,
And Jordan into such huge sorrow brake,
(As if his holy stream no measure knew,)
That all his narrow banks he ouerthrewe,
The trembling earth with horror inly shook,
And stubborn stones, such grief vnus'd to brook,
Did burst, and ghosts awaking from their graves began look.
39
The wise Philosopher cried, all aghast,
The God of nature surely lanquished,
The sad Centurion cried out as fast,
The Son of God, the Son of God was dead,
The headlong Jew hung down his pensive head, In the wicked Jews.

And homewards fared, and ever, as he went,
He smote his breast, half desperately bent,
The very woods, and beasts did seem his death lament.
40
The graceless Traitor round about did look, In Judas.

(He lok't not long, the Devil quickly met him)
To find a halter, which he found, and took,
Only a gibbet now he needs must get him,
So on a withered tree he fairly set him,
And helped him fit the rope, and in his thought
A thousand furies, with their whippes, he brought,
So thear he stands, ready to hell to make his vault.
41
For him a waking bloodhound, yelling loud,
That in his bosom long had sleeping laid,
A guilty Conscience, barking after blood,
Pursued eagerly, ne ever stayed,
Till the betrayers self it had betrayed.
Often changed he place, in hope away to wind,
But change of place could never change his mind,
Himself he flies to loose, and follows for to find.
42
Thear is but two ways for this soul to have,
When parting from the body, forth it purges,
To fly to heaven, or fall into the grave,
Where whippes of scorpions, with the stinging scourges,
Feed on the howling ghosts, and fiery Surges
Of brimstone roll about the cave of night,
Where flames do burn, and yet no spark of light,
And fire both fries, and freezes the blaspheming spright.
43
Thear lies the captive soul, aye-sighing sore,
Reckoning a thousand years since her first bands,
Yet stays not thear, but adds a thousand more,
And at another thousand never stands,
But tells to them the stars, and heaps the sands,
And now the startes are told, and sands are run,
And all those thousand thousand myriads done,
And yet but now, alas! but now all is begun.
44
With that a flaming brand a Fury caught,
And shook, and tossed it round in his wild thought,
So from his heart all joy, all comfort snatched,
With every star of hope, and as he sought,
(With present fear, and future grief dist^aught)
To fly from his own heart, and aid in plore
Of him, the more he gives, that has the more,
Whose storehouse is the heavens, too little for his store.
45
Stay wretch on earth, ^d Satan, re^^le^ rest,
Know thou not Justice lives in heau'n^ or ean
The worst of creatures live among the best;
Among the blessed Angels cursed man?
Will Judas now become a Christian?
Whither will hopes long wings transport thy mind;
Or can thou not thy self a sinner find;
Or cruel to thy self, would thou have Mercy kind?
46
He gave thee life: why should thou seek to slay him?
He lent thee wealth: to feed thy avarice?
He called thee friend: what, that thou should betray him?
He kissed thee, though he knew his life the price:
He washed thy feet: should thou his sacrifice?
He gave thee bread, and wine, his body, blood,
And at thy heart to enter in he stood,
But then I entered in, and all my snakie brood.
47
As when wild Pentheus, grown mad with fear,
Whole troops of hellish haggs about him spies,
Two bloody Suns stalking the duskie sphere,
And twofold Thebes runs rolling in his eyes:
Or through the scene staring Orestes flies,
With eyes flung back upon his Mothers ghost,
That, with infernal serpents all embost,
And torches quenched in blood, does her stern son accost.
48
Such horrid gorgons, and misformed forms
Of damned fiends, flew dancing in his heart,
That new, unable to endure their storms,
Fly, fly, he cries, thy self, what ere thou art,
Hell, hell already burns in every part.
So down into his Torturers arms he fell,
That ready stood his funerals to yell,
And in a clowd of night to wa^^ him quick to hell.
49
Yet often he snacht, and started as he hung:
So when the senses half enslumb'red lie,
The headlong body, ready to be flung,
By the deluding phan^^e, from some high,
And craggie rock, recovers greedily,
And clasps the yielding pillow, half asleep,
And, as from heaven it tombled to the deep,
Feels a cold sweat through every trembling member creep.
50
Thear let him hang, embowelled in blood,
Whear never any gentle Sheapheard feed
His blessed flocks, nor ever heavenly flood
Fall on the cursed ground, nor wholesome seed,
That may the least delight, or pleasure breed:
Let never Spring visit his habitation,
But nettles, kixe, and all the weedie nation,
With empty elders grow, sad signs of desolation.
51
Thea^ let the Dragon keep his habitance,
And stinking karcases be thrown avaunt,
Faunes, Sylvans, and deformed Sa^yrs dance,
Wild-cats, wolves, ^oad^, and shreechowles direly chaunt,
Thear ever let some restles spirit haunt,
With hollow sound, and clashing cheynes, to scarr
The passenger, and eyes like to the starr,
That sparkles in the crest of ang^i^ Mars afa^^.
52
But let the blessed deawes for ever shower
Upon that ground, in whose fair fields I spy
The bloody ensign of our Savior:
Strange conquest, whear the Conqueror must die,
And he is slain, that winns the victory:
But he, that living, had no house to owe it, In the blessed Saint, Joseph, etc.

Now had no grave, but Joseph must bestow it,
O run ye Saints apace, and with sweet flowr's bestow it.
53
And ye glad Spirits, that now sainted sit
On your celestial thrones, in beawtie dressed,
Though I your tears recoumpt, O let not it
With after-sorrowe wound your tender breast,
Or with new grief unquiet your soft rest:
Enough is me your plaints to sound again,
That never could enough my self complain,
Sing then, O sing aloude thou Arimathean Swain.
54
But long he stood, in his faint arms vphoulding
The fairest spoil heaven ever forfeited,
With such a silent passion grief unfolding,
That, had the sheet but on himself been spread,
He for the corse might have been buried:
And with him stood the happy thief, that stole
By night his own salvation, and a shole
Of Mary's drowned, round about him, sat in dole.
55
At length (kissing his lips before he spoke,
As if from thence he fetched again his ghost)
To Mary thus, with tears, his silence brake.
Ah woeful soul! what joy in all our cost,
When him we hold, we have already lost?
Once did thou loose thy Son, but found'st again,
Now find'st thy Son, but find'st him lost, and slain.
Ay me! though he could death, how can thou life sustain?
56
Whear ere, dear Lord, thy Shadow houereth,
Blessing the place, wherein it deigns abide,
Look how the earth dark horror covers,
Clothing in mournful black her naked side,
Willing her shadow up to heaven to glide,
To see and if it meet thee wandering thear,
That so, and if her self must miss thee hear,
At least her shadow may her duty to thee bear.
57
See how the Sun in daytime clouds his face,
And lagging Vesper, loosing his late teame,
Forgets in heaven to run his nightly race,
But, sleeping on bright Oetas top, does dream
The world a Chaos is, no joyful beam
Looks from his starrie bower, the heavens do move,
And Trees drop tears, least we should grieve alone,
The winds have learnt to sigh, and waters hoarcely groan.
58
And you sweet flowers, that in this garden grow,
Whose happy states a thousand souls envy,
Did you your own felicities but know,
Your selves vnpluckt would to his funerals hi^,
You never could in better season die:
O that I might into your places slide,
The gate of heaven stands gaping in his side,
Thear in my soul should steal, and all her faults should hide.
59
Are theas the eyes, that made all others blind;
Ah why ar they themselves now blemished?
Is this the face, in which all beawtie shined;
What blast has thus his flowers debellished?
At these the feet, that on the watery head
Of the unfaithful Ocean passage found;
Why go they now so lowely under ground,
Washed with our woorthles tears, and their own precious wound?
60
One hem but of the garments that he wore,
Could medicine whole countries of their pain,
One touch of this pale hand could life restore,
One word of these cold lips revive the slain:
Well the blind man thy Godhead might maintain,
What though the sullen Pharisees repined?
He that should both compare, at length would find
The blind man only saw, the Seers all wear blind.
61
Why should they think thee worthy to be slain?
Was it because thou gave their blind men eyes;
Or that thou made their lame to walk again;
Or for thou heal'dst their sick men's maladies;
Or made their dumb to speak; and dead to rise?
O could all these but any grace have won,
What would they not to save thy life have done?
The dumb man would have spoke, and lame man would have run.
62
Let me, O let me near some fountain lie,
That through the rock heaues up his sandy head,
Or let me dwell upon some mountain high,
Whose hollow root, and baser parts ar spread
On fleeting waters, in his bowels bred,
That I their streams, and they my tears may feed,
Or, clothed in some Hermits ragged weed,
Spend all my days, in weeping for this cursed deed.
63
The life, the which I onte did love, I leave,
The love, in which I once did live, I loath,
I hate the light, that did my light bereave,
Both love, and life, I do despise you both,
O that one grave might both our ashes cloth!
A Love, a Life, a Light I now obtain,
Able to make my Age grow young again,
Able to save the sick, and to revive the slain.
64
Thus spend we tears, that never can be spent,
On him, that sorrow now no more shall see:
Thus send we sighs, that never can be sent,
To him, that died to live, and would not be,
To be thear whear he would; here bury we
This heavenly earth, here let it softly sleep,
The fairest Sheapheard of the fairest sheep.
So all the body kissed, and homewards went to weep.
65
So home their bodies went, to seek repose,
But at the grave they left their souls behind;
O who the force of love celestial knows!
That can the cheynes of natures self unbind,
Sending the Body home, without the mind.
Ah blessed Virgin, what high Angels art
Can ever coumpt thy tears, or sing thy smart,
When every nail, that pierst his hand, did pierce thy heart?
66
So Philomel, perch't on an aspin sprig,
Weeps all the night her lost virginity,
And sings her sad tale to the merry twig,
That daunces at such joyful misery,
Ne ever lets sweet rest invade her eye:
But leaning on a thorn her dainty chest,
For fear soft sleep should steal into her breast,
Expresses in her song grief not to be expressed.
67
So when the Lark, poor bird, afar espi'th
Her yet vnfeather'd children (whom to save
She strives in vain) slain by the fatal sith,
Which from the medowe her green locks does shave,
That their warm nest is now become their grave;
The woeful mother up to heaven springs,
And all about her plaintiue notes she flings,
And their untimely fate most pitifully sings.
CHRIST'S TRIVMPH after Death.
1
But now the second Morning, from her bower, Christ's Triumph after death. 1. in
his Resurrection, manifested by the effects of it in the Creatures.

Began to glister in her beams, and now
The roses of the day began to flower
In the eastern garden; for heavens smiling browe
Half insolent for joy begun to show:
The early Sun came lively dancing out,
And the brag lambs ran wantoning about,
That heaven, and earth might seem in triumph both to shour.
2
The engladded Spring, forgetful now to weep,
Began to eblazon from her leauie bed,
The waking swallowe broke her halfe-yeares sleep,
And every bush lay deeply purpured
With violets, the woods late-wintry head
Wide flaming primroses set all on fire,
And his bald trees put on their green attire,
Among whose insant leaves the ioyeous birds conspire.
3
And now the taller Sons (whom Titan warmes)
Of unshorn mountains, blown with easy winds,
Dandled the mornings childhood in their arms,
And, if they chaunc't to slip the prouder pines,
The under Corylets did catch the shines,
To guild their leaves, saw never happy year
Such joyful triumph, and triumphant cheer,
As though the aged world anew created wear.
4
Say Earth, why have thou got thee new attire,
And stick'st thy habit full of dazies red?
Seems that thou do to some high thought aspire,
And some newe-found-out Bridegroom mean to wed:
Tell me ye Trees, so fresh apparelled,
So never let the spiteful Canker wast you,
So never let the heavens with lightening blast you,
Why go you now so trimly dressed, or whither have you?
5
Answer me Jordan, why thy crooked tide
So often wanders from his nearest way,
As though some other way thy stream would slide,
And feign salute the place where something lay?
And you sweet birds, that shaded from the ray,
Sit carolling, and piping grief away,
The while the lambs to hear you dance, and play,
Tell me sweet birds, what is it you so feign would say?
6
And, thou fair Spouse of Earth, that every year,
Gett'st such a numerous issue of thy bride,
How chance thou hotter shin'st, and draw'st more near?
Sure thou somewhear some worthy sight have spide,
That in one place for joy thou can not bide:
And you dead Swallows, that so lively now
Through the flit air your winged passage row,
How could new life into your frozen ashes flow?
7
Ye Primroses, and purple violets,
Tell me, why blaze ye from your leauie bed,
And woo men's hands to rent you from your sets,
As though you would somewhear be carried,
With fresh perfumes, and velvets garnished?
But ah, I need not ask, it is surely so,
You all would to your Saviors triumphs go,
Thear would ye all awaite, and humble homage do.
8
Thear should the Earth herself with garlands new In himself.

And lovely flowr's embellished adore,
Such roses never in her garland grew,
Such lillies never in her breast she wore,
Like beauty never yet did shine before:
Thear should the Sun another Sun behold,
From whence himself borrowes his locks of gold,
That kindle heaven, and earth with beauties manifold.
9
Thear might the violet, and primrose sweet
Beams of more lively, and more lovely grace,
Arising from their beds of incense meet;
Thear should the Swallowe see new life embrace
Dead ashes, and the grave vnheale his face,
To let the living from his bowels creep,
Unable longer his own dead to keep:
Thear heaven, and earth should see their Lord awake from sleep.
10
Their Lord, before by other judged to die,
Now Judge of all himself, before forsaken
Of all the world, that from his aid did fly,
Now by the Saints into their armies taken,
Before for an unworthy man mistaken,
Now worthy to be God confessed, before
With blasphemies by all the basest tore,
Now worshipped by Angels, that him low adore.
11
Whose garment was before indipt in blood,
But now, imbright'ned into heavenly flame,
The Sun it self outglitters, though he should
Climb to the top of the celestial frame,
And force the stars go hide themselves for shame:
Before that under earth was buried,
But now about the heavens is carried,
And thear for ever by the Angels heried.
12
So fairest Phosphor the bright Morning star,
But neewely washed in the green element,
Before the drouzie Night is half aware,
Shooting his flaming locks with deaw besprent,
Springs lively up into the orient,
And the bright drove, fleec't all in gold, he chaces
To drink, that on the Olympique mountain grazes,
The while the minor Planets forfeit all their faces.
13
So long he wandered in our lower sphere, 2. In his Ascension to heaven, whose
jove's are described,

That heaven began his cloudy stars despise,
Half envious, to see on earth appear
A greater light, then flamed in his own skies:
At length it burst for spite, and out thear flies
A globe of winged Angels, swift as thought,
That, on their spotted feathers, lively caught
The sparkling Earth, and to their azure fields it brought.
14
The rest, that yet amazed stood below,
With eyes cast up, as greedy to be sed,
And hands vpheld, themselves to ground did throw,
So when the Trojan boy was ravished,
As through th'Idalian woods they say he fled,
His aged Gardians stood all dismayed,
Some least he should have fallen back afraid,
And some their hasty vows, and timely prayers said.
15
Toss up your heads ye everlasting gates,
And let the Prince of glory enter in:
At whose brave voly of sideriall States,
The Sun to blush, and stars grow pale wear seen,
When, leaping first from earth, he did begin
To climb his Angels wings; then open hang
Your crystal doors, so all the chorus sang
Of heavenly birds, as to the stars they nimbly sprang.
16
Hark how the floods clap their applauding hands,
The pleasant valleys singing for delight,
And wanton Mountains dance about the Lands,
The while the fields, struck with the heavenly light,
Set all their flowr's a smiling at the sight,
The trees laugh with their blossoms, and the sound
Of the triumphant shout of praise, that crowned
The flaming Lamb, breaking through heaven, has passage found.
17
Out leap the antique Patriarchs, all in have, 1. By the access of all good,
the blessed Society of the Saints,

To see the powr's of Hell in triumph lead,
And with small stars a garland intercha'st
Of olive leaves they bore, to crown his head,
That was before with thorns degloried,
After them flewe the Prophets, brightly stol'd
In shining lawne, and wimpled manifold,
Striking their yuorie harpes, strung all in chords of gold.
18
To which the Saints victorious carolls sung,
Ten thousand Saints atonce, that with the sound,
The hollow vaults of heaven for triumph rung:
The Cherubins their clamours did confound Angels, etc.

With all the rest, and clapped their wings around:
Down from their thrones the Dominations flow,
And at his feet their crowns, and scepters throw,
And all the princely Souls fell on their faces low.
19
Nor can the Martyrs wounds them stay behind,
But out they rush among the heavenly crowd,
Seeking their hean'n out of their heaven to find,
Sounding their silver trumpets out so loud,
That the shrill noise broke through the starrie cloud,
And all the virgin Souls, in pure araie,
Came dancing forth, and making ioyeous play;
So him they lead along into the courts of day.
20
So him they lead into the courts of day, The sweet quiet and peace, inioyed
under God.

Whear never war, nor wounds abide him more,
But in that house, eternal peace does play,
Acquieting the souls, that new before
Their way to heaven through their own blood did skore,
But now, estranged from all misery,
As far as heaven, and earth discoasted lie,
Swelter in quiet waves of immortality.
20
And if great things by smaller may be ghuest, Shadowed by the peace we enjoy
under our Sovereign.

So, in the midst of Neptunes angry tide,
Our Britan Island, like the weedie nest
Of true Haleyon, on the waves does ride,
And softly sailing, skornes the waters pride:
While all the rest, drowned on the continent,
And tossed in bloody waves, their wounds lament,
And stand, to see our peace, as struck with woonderment.
21
The Ship of France religious waves do toss,
And Greec it self is now grown barbarous,
Spains Children hardly dare the Ocean cross,
And Belges field lies wast, and ruinous,
That unto those, the heavens ar invious,
And unto them, themselves ar strangers grown,
And unto these, the Seas ar faithles known,
And unto her, alas, her own is not her own.
22
Here only shut we Ianus iron gates,
And call the welcome Muses to our springs,
And ar but Pilgrims from our heavenly states,
The while the trusty Earth sure plenty brings,
And Ships through Neptune safely spread their wings.
Go blessed Island, wander whear thou please,
Unto thy God, or men, heaven, lands, or seas,
Thou can not loose thy way, thy King with all has peace.
23
Dear Prince, thy Subjects joy, hope of their heirs,
Picture of peace, or breathing Image rather,
The certain argument of all our prayers.
Thy Harries, and thy Countries lovely Father,
Let Peace, in endless joys, for ever bath her
Within thy sacred breast, that at thy birth
Brought her with thee from heaven, to dwell on earth,
Making our earth a heaven, and paradise of mirth.
24
Let not my Liege misdeem these humble lays,
As lick't with soft, and supple blandishment,
Or spoken to disparagon his praise;
For though pale Cynthia, near her brothers tent,
Soon disappeares in the white firmament,
And gives him back the beams, before wear his,
Yet when he verges, or is hardly ris,
She the viue image of her absent brother is.
25
Nor let the Prince of peace his beadsman blame,
That with his Stewart dares his Lord compare,
And heavenly peace with earthly quiet shame:
So Pines to lowely plants compared ar,
And lightning Phoebus to a little star:
And well I wot, my rhyme, albee vnsmooth,
Ne, says but what it means, ne means but sooth,
Ne harms the good, ne good to harmefull person does.
26
Gaze but upon the house, whear Man embowr's:
With flowr's, and rushes paued is his way, The beauty of the place.

Whear all the Creatures at his Seruitours,
The winds do sweep his chambers every day,
And clouds do wash his rooms, the seeling gay,
Starred aloft the gilded knob^ embraue:
If such a house God to another gave,
How shine those glittering courts, he for himself will have?
27
And if a sullen cloud, as sad as night, The Caritie (as the school cal^ it)
of the Saints bodies.

In which the Sun may seem embodied,
Depur'd of all his dross, we see so white,
Burning in melted gold his warrie head,
Or round with yuorie edges siluered,
What luster superexcellent will he
Lighten on those, that shall his sunneshine see,
In that all-glorious court, in which all glories be?
28
If but one Sun, whith his diffusiue fires,
Can paint the stars, and the whole world with light,
And joy, and life into each heart inspires,
And every Saint shall shine in heaven, as bright
As does the Sun in his transcendent might,
(As faith may well believe, what Truth once says)
What shall so many Suns united rays
But dazzle all the eyes, that now in heaven we praise?
29
Here let my Lord hang up his conquering lance,
And bloody armor with late slaughter warm,
And looking down on his weak Militants,
Behold his Saints, midst of their hot alarm,
Hang all their golden hopes upon his arm.
And in this lower field dispacing wide,
Through windy thoughts, that would their sails misguide,
Anchor their fleshly ships fast in his wounded side.
30
Here may the Band, that now in Triumph shines,
And that (before they wear invested thus)
In earthly bodies carried heavenly minds,
Pitched round about in order glorious,
Their sunny Tents, and houses luminous,
All their eternal day in songs employing,
Ioying their end, without end of their ioying,
While their almighty Prince Destruction is destroying.
31
Full, yet without satietie, of that The impletion of the Appetite.

Which whetts, and quiets greedy Appetite,
Whear never Sun did rise, nor ever sat,
But one eternal day, and endless light
Gives time to those, whose time is infinite,
Speaking with thought, obtaining without see,
Beholding him, whom never eye could see,
And magnifying him, that cannot greater be.
32
How can such joy as this want words to speak?
And yet what words can speak such joy as this?
Far from the world, that might their quiet break,
Here the glad Souls the face of beauty kiss,
Powered out in pleasure, on their beds of bliss.
And drunk with nectar torrents, ever hold
Their eyes on him, whose graces manifold,
The more they do behold, the more they would behold.
33
Their sight drinks lovely fires in at their eyes, The joy of the senses, etc.

Their brain sweet incense with fine breath accloyes,
That on Gods sweating altar burning lies,
Their hungry ears feed on their heavenly noise,
That Angels sing, to tell their vntould joys;
Their understanding naked Truth, their wills
The all, and selfe-sufficient Goodness fills,
That nothing here is wanting, but the want of ills.
34
No Sorrow now hangs clowding on their browe, 2. By the amotion of all evil.

No bloodles Malady empales their face,
No Age drops on their hayrs his silver snow,
No Nakedness their bodies does embase,
No Poverty themselves, and theirs disgrace,
No fear of death the joy of life deuours,
No unchaste sleep their precious time deflowrs,
No loss, no grief, no change wait on their winged hour's.
35
But now their naked bodies skorne the cold,
And from their eyes joy looks, and laughs at pain,
The Infant wonders how he came so old,
And old man how he came so young again;
Still resting, though from sleep they stiil refrain,
Whear all are rich, and yet no gold they owe,
And all are Kings, and yet no Subjects know,
All full, and yet no time on food they do bestow.
36
For things that pass are past, and in this field,
The indeficient Spring no Winter fears,
The Trees together fruit, and blossom yield,
Th'vnfading Lilly leaves of silver bears,
And crimson rose a skarlet garment wears:
And all of these on the Saints bodies grow,
Not, as they wont, on baser earth below; By the access of all good again

Three rivers here of milk, and wine, and honey flow.
37
About the holy City rowles a flood in the glory of the Holy City.

Of moulten crystal, like a sea of glass,
On which weak stream a strong foundation ^^ood,
Of living Diamounds the building (...),
That all things else, besides it self, did pass.
Her streets, in stead of stones, the stars did paue,
And little pearls, for dust, it seemed to have,
On which soft-streaming Manna, like pure snow, did ^
38
In midst of this City celestial, in the beatificall vision of God.

Wheat the eternal Temple should have rose,
Light'ned the Idea Beatificall:
End, and beginning of each thing that grows,
Whose self no end, nor yet beginning knows,
That has no eyes to see, nor ears to hear,
Yet sees, and hears, and is all-eye, all-eare,
That no wheat is contained, and yet is every whear.
39
Changer of all things, yet immutable,
Before, and after all, the first, and last,
That moving all, is yet immovable,
Great without quantity, in whose forecast,
Things past are present, things to come are past,
Swift without motion, to whose open eye
The hearts of wicked men vnbrested lie,
At once absent, and present to them, far, and nigh.
40
It is no flaming luster, made of light,
No sweet concent, or well-tim'd harmony,
Ambrosia, for to feast the Appetite,
Or flowrie odor, mixed with spicerie.
^o soft embrace, or pleasure bodily,
And yet it is a kind of inward feast,
A harmony, that sounds within the breast,
^n odor, light, embrace, in which the soul does rest,
41
A heavenly feast, no hunger can consume,
A light unseen, yet shines in every place,
(...) sound, no time can steal, a sweet perfume,
No winds can scatter, an entire embrace,
That no satietie can ere unlace,
Ingrac't into so ^igh a favor, thear
The Saints, with their Beaw-peers, whole worlds outwear,
And things unseen do see, and things unheard do hear.
42
Ye blessed souls, grown richer by your spoil, And of Christ.

Whose loss, though great, is cause of greater gains,
Here may your weary Spirits rest from toil,
Spending your endless eav'ning, that remains,
Among those white flocks, and celestial trains,
That feed upon their Sheapheards eyes, and frame
That heavenly music of so woondrous fame,
Psalming aloude the holy honors of his name.
43
Had I a voice of steel to tune my song,
Wear every verse as smoothly filled as glass,
And every member turned to a tongue,
And every tongue wear made of sounding brass,
Yet all that skill, and all this strength, alas,
Should it presume to guild, wear misadvis'd,
The place, wheat David has new songs devised,
As in his burning throne he sits emparadis'd.
44
Most happy Prince, whose eyes those stars behold,
Treading ours under feet, now may thou power
That ouerflowing skill, whear with of old
Thou woont'st to comb rough speech, now may thou sho^
Fresh streams of praise upon that holy bower,
Which well we heaven call, not that it rowles,
But that it is the haven of our souls.
Most happy Prince, whose ^ight so heavenly ^ight be^
45
Ah foolish Sheapheards, that wear wont esteem,
Your God all rough, and shaggy-hair'd to be;
And yet far wiser Sheapheards then ye deem,
For who so poor (though who so rich) as he,
When, with us hermiting in low degree,
He washed his flocks in Iordans spotles tide,
And, that his dear remembrance aie might bide,
Did to us come, and with us lived, and for us di'd?
46
But now so lively colors did embeame
His sparkling forehead, and so shiny rays
Kindled his flaming locks; that down did stream
In curies, along his neck, whear sweetly plays
(Singing his wounds of love in sacred lays)
His dearest Spouse, Spouse of the dearest Lover,
Knitting a thousand knots over, and over,
And dying still for love, but they her still recover.
47
Fair Egliset, that at his eyes does dress
Her glorious face, those eyes, from whence a^ shed
Infinite belamours, wheat to express
His love, high God all heaven as captive leads,
And all the banners of his grace dispreads,
And in those windows, does his arms englaze,
And on those eyes, the Angels all do gaze,
And from those eyes, the lights of heaven do gleane their blaze.
48
But let the Kentish lad, that lately taught
His oaten reed the trumpets silver sound,
Young Thy^silis, and for his music brought
The willing spears from heaven, to lead a round
Of dancing Nymphs, and Herds, that sung, and crowned
Eclectas hymen with ten thousand flowrs
Of choycest praise, and hung her heavenly bowers
With saffron garlands, dressed for Nuptial Paramours,
49
Let his shrill trumpet, with her silver blast,
Of fair Eclecta, and her Spousall bed,
Be the sweet pipe, and smooth Encomiast:
But my green Muse, hiding her younger head
Under old Chamus flaggy banks, that spread
Their willough locks abroad, and all the day
With their own wa^ry shadows wanton play,
Dares not those high amors, and loue-sick songs assay.
50
Impotent words, weak sides, that strive in vain,
In vain, alas, to tell so heavenly sight,
So heavenly sight, as none can greater ^eigne,
Feign what he can, that seems of greatest might,
Might any yet compare with Infinite?
Infinite sure those joys, my words but light,
Light is the palace whear she dwells. O blessed wight!
RUina Coeli pulchra; iam t^rris decus,
Deusque* proles matris i^nuptae, and pater:
Sine matre natus, sine patre excrescens caro:
Quem nec mare, ether, terra, non coelum capit,
Vtero puellae totus angusto latens;
Aequaev^s idem patri, matre antiquior:
Heu domite victor, and triumphator; tui
Opus, opifexque, qui minor quam sis, eo
Mayor resurgis: vita, quae mori velis,
Atque ergo possis: passa ^inem Aeternitas.
Quid tibi rependam, quid ti^i rependam miser?
Vt quando ocellos mollis inuadit quies,
Et nocte membra plurimus Morpheus pr^mit,
Auide vid^mur velle de te^go sequens
Effugere monstrum, and plumbeos frustra pedes
Celerare; media succidim^s aegri fuga;
Solitum pigrescit robur, os quaerit viam,
Sed proditurus moritur in lingua sonus:
Sic stupeo totus, totus haeresco, intu^ns
Et saepe repeto, forte si rependerem:
Solus rependit ille, qui repetit be^e.
G. Fletcher.


