A DIVINE HERBALL Together with A Forest of THORNS. In FIVE SERMONS. 1. The
Garden of Graces. 2. The praise of Fertility. 3. The Contemplation of the
Herbs. 4. The Forest of Thorns. 5. The end of Thorns.


By THO. ADAMS.

ESAIAS 55. 11. My word, says the Lord, shall not return to me void, but shall
prosper in the thing whereto I sent it.

AUGUST. de benedict. IACO. and ESAV. Simul pluit Dominus super segetes, and
super spinas: sed segeti pluit ad horreum, spinis ad ignem: and tamen vna est
pluvia.

LONDON, Printed by George Purslowe, for John Budge, and are to be sold at his
shop, at the great South-dore of Paul's, and at Britains Burse. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, WILLIAM Earl of Pembroke, Lord Chamberlain of his
Majesty's household, and one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council,
and Knight of the most noble order of the Garter: The most noble embracer, and
encourager of GOODNESS.
Right Honorable,
I Am bold to present to your Honor a short contemplation of those Herbs,
(cut in rough pieces) which grow really and plentifully in your own Garden:
and give so good nourishment to your virtues, delightful taste to the Church,
and odoriferous savor to all; that, like the Vine in Iothams Parable, they
cheer the heart of both God and man. Your Honor, I ^now, cannot dislike that
in sight, which you so preserve in sense, and (for a happy reward) does and
shall preserve you. You are zealously honored of all those that know
goodness; and have daily as many prayers, as the earth Saints. Into this
number I have (hop^fully presuming) thrust myself; as loath to be hindmost in
that acknowledgement, which is so nobly deserved, and so joyfully rendered of al
tongues: dedicating to your Honor some public devotions, that can never
forget you in my private. I will not think of adding one Herb to your store:
I only desire to remember your Honor what hand planted them, what dew waters
them, what influence conserues, and enspheares a sweet provident air about
them: and when gay weeds, that shoot up like Jonas gourd in a night, shall
wither in an hour, (for moriuntur, quomodo oriuntur) Your Herb of Grace shall
flourish and be praised, both ob eminentiam, and permanentiam; and at last be
transported into that heavenly Paradise, whence it receives the originary root
and being. Your Honor will excuse me for coupling to a Divine Herball, a
Forest of Thorns; by a true observation in both material and mystical
Gardens, though a Poet records it.

Terra salutiferas herbas, eadernque nocentes
Nutrit, et vrticae proxima soepe rosa est.
Your Honor will love the light better, because the dark night follows so
near it, That your Sun may never set, your noble Garden never wither; that
your honors may be still multiplied with our most Royal and Religious King
on earth, and with the King of Kings in heaven; is faithfully prayed for by

Your Honors humbly devoted, THO. ADAMS.

To my worthy friend Tho. Adams on his HERBALL.
THe Herbs which these dead leaves now bring,
Thy living voice did sweetly sing.
That thy transported Hearers thought
A PARADISE before them brought.
As if their inward eyes had seen
Another EDEN fresh and green.
How they will smell, or taste, thus sent,
Will be perceived in the event.
I stay no censures; for my part,
May they grow green still in my heart.
VV. B.

R. S. His good-speede to the Herball.
Truly thou do the world disclose, which grows,
Promiscuous; here a Thorn, and there a Rose.
So shall black vices ugly face add grace,
Unto the virtue, which shines next in place.
So when a stinging Thorn shall wound, is found,
An Herb to heal the Soul, and make it sound.
To the divine Author of the divine Herball, his true friend dedicateth this
small Encomium of that which his pen dispaires to praise.
HAd ADAM lived till this decayed age,
And seen an HERBALL so Divine, and Sage,
He would have said, that no succeeding man
Might do for Adam that which Adams can.
For while he tilled his Garden, his dark mind
In all that compass no Herbe-Grace could find.
This man has found it; and herein is blessed:
Adam was good, my Adam's still is best.
W. R. D. of Physic.

To the praise of the Herball.
THe Ground Gods Image, and his word the Rain:
His Christ the Sun, never eclipsed again:
The Clouds his Ministerial instruments:
His Mercy the all-working influence.
From these a Garden of sweet Herbs does grow,
With such a Spring, as shall no Autumn know.
I. STOKES.

GReat Persons love a GARDEN for delight;
To please their nosthrils, or content their sight.
The poor man's state likes it to feast withal.
Physicians for the virtues medicinal.
For Odor, Ornament, and med'cinal worth,
A sweeter HERBALL never yet came forth.
Cecinit The. Parny.

A DIVINE HERBALL OR GARDEN Of GRACES.
HEB. Chap. 6. Verse. 7. 8. For the earth which drinks in the rain that
comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it is
dressed, receives blessing from God.

But that which bears thorns and briars, is rejected, and is nigh unto
cursing, whose end is to be burned.


I Presume, here is no Atheist to hear and deny; Romans 1. 16.
The Gospel is the power of God to salvation. I hope here is no Libertine; if
there be, let him hear also: It is the power of God to confusion. It is a
double-edged Sword, Heb. 4. 12.
and gives, vel vitam, vel vindi^tam, either instruction, or destruction. It is
Fire, that does melt wax to repentance, and harden clay to vengeance. It is
here a Rain or Deaw falling on the ground of man's heart; causing one soil to
be fertile in good works, another to abound with weeds of impiety: For it
returns not back to him that sent it, in vain. That it conuayes grace to
us, and returns our fruitful gratitude to God, is a high and happy mercy.
That it offers grace to the wicked and by their corrupt natures occasions
greater impiety, is a heavy but holy judgment.

Not to travel far for Division, here lies Earth before us. And as I have
seen in some places of this Island, one hedge parts a fruitful meadow, and a
barren heath: so of this Earth, Man; the same substance for natures
constitution, clay of the same heap in the creating hand of the Potter; for
matter, mass, and stuff, none made de meliore luto; though in respect of
Eternities Ordination, some vessels of honor, of disshonour others; here be
two kinds, a good and a bad soil: the one a Garden, the other a desert: the
former an enclosure of sweet herbs, excellent graces: the latter a wild and
savage Forest of Briars and thorns, scratching and wounding offenses.

For the better ground we will consider. 1. The operative means, or working
cause of the fertility; the rain that comes often upon it. 2. The thankful
returning of expected fruit; it brings forth herbs meet for them, by whom
it is dressed. 3. The reward of mercy; it receives blessing from God.

All is an Allegory. The Earth is Man: the Rain, Gods Word: the herbs are
Graces: and the Blessing, is a sweet retribution and accumulation of mercy.

The Earth
IS the best ground that lies betwixt heaven and earth, Man: the noblest part
of this world: the worthiest creature, that has earth for the pauement, and
heaven for the seeling: the Creators Image; and as some read, his Shadow; which
moves as the body does, whose it is. When the body puts forth an arm, the
shadow shows an arm, etc: so man in his actions and courses depends upon the
disposition of God, as his allpowerfull Maker and Mouer. The blessed Deity
(which has in it a Trinity of most equal and eternal Persons) is the first
and best of all beings: the holy Angels next: and a Jove tertius Ajax, man next
them.

Ardens conceateth upon Mark 16. Mark 16. 15.
in the Apostles commission, Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel
to every Creature; that by this Every Creature, is meant Man. For to liuelesse,
senseless, or reason-lesse things, God never enjoined to preach the Gospel.
But man is called Every creature, because he has a participation of the best
in all creatures. *
Stones have a being, not life: plants have a being and life, not sense: beasts
have a being, life, and sense, but not understanding: Angels have both being,
life, sense, and understanding. Man participates with all these in their best.
He has a being with stones, life with plants, sense with beasts, understanding
with Angels: a sweet abstract or compendium of all creatures perfections.

Let not all this make man proud. Even this word Earth, though here used in a
spiritual sense, puts him in mind that this excellent man is a mortal
creature. Earth, must be earth: hot earth to cold earth: that earth which
has now a life in it, Iere. 22. 29.
to that earth which has no life in it. Therefore I will say from the Prophet.
O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord. Bestow not too much pains
in adorning this perishable earth, thy flesh: the earth thou must be careful
of, and which God here waters from heaven with his holy deawes, is thy heart,
thy conscience.

I could willingly step out a little to chide those, that neglecting Gods
Earth, the Soul; fall to trimming with a curious superstition the Earths
earth, clay and lome: a body of corruption painted, til it shine like a Lilly
(like it in whiteness, not in humility, Cant. 2. 1.
the candor of beauty; for the Lilly grows low; Lilium conuallium, a flower
of the valleys and bottomes) a little slime done over with a past-boord;
rottenness hid under golden leaves; stench lapp'd up in a bundle of silks:
and by reason of poison sucked from sin and hell, worthy of no better
attribute then glorious damnation. Is there no sickness? is there no disgrace?
is there no old age? is there no death? that you make so much of this earth. Or
do you desperately resolve to dote on it living, as if you never hoped to
find it again being dead? Fear not, you shall meet with it again; perhaps
when you would not. God has struck as gallant, as you can make or think your
selves, with sudden, sore, and sure judgments. Believe it, his hand is his
own. His arm was never yet broken, luxate, or manacled.

Woe worth them that have put Pride and Covetousness fellow-commoners among
us: for they out-eate us all, and sta^ue the whole house of our Land. Couetise
would be charitable, but there is that other sum to make up. Pride would
give, or at least forbear to extort, but there is a ruff of the new fashion
to be bought. *
Dignity, a caroch, or strange apparel is to be purchased; and who but the
poor tenants must pay for it! upon whom they (once so accoutred) afterward
look betwixt scorn and anger: and go as if they were shut up in wainscote.

Sed vitate viros cultum formasque professos.
Quique suas ponunt in statione comas.
Such a one will not give, lest his white hand should touch the poor beggars:
who perhaps has a hand cleaner then his; I mean, from aspersions of blood,
rapine, injury, briberie, lust and filthiness. He cannot intend to pray; for
he is called to dinner just when his last lock is hung to his mind. O the
monstrous curiosity of tricking up this earth of earth! yet from the Courtier
to the Carter, from the Lady to the Inkle-beggar, *
there is this excess and going beyond their calling.

But I have strayed out of my way, to cut off a lap of Prides garment: I
conclude this Earth with this caution. Respice, aspice, prospice. Look back
what thou wast: behold what thou art: consider what thou must be. BERNARD
Recole primordia, attend media, pr^^uideto nouissima. Haec pudorem adducunt,
illa dolorem ingerunt, ista timorem incutiunt. Call to mind former things, see
the present, foresee the last. The first will breed in thee shame, the other
grief, these fear. Remember thou were taken out of the earth: behold thy
strength of life subject to diseases; manifold, manifest, sensible ones:
foresee that thou must dye; this earth must to earth again.

But the Earth here meant is a divine, spiritual, immortal nature; called
Earth by a Metaphor, incapable of suffering terrene fragilitie. This is Gods
Earth, and that in a high and mystical sense, though proper enough. Indeed
Domini terra, the earth is the Lords and the fulnes^e thereof, says the
Psalmist. But he has not such respect to the Earth he made, as to this Earth
for whom he made it. This is Terra sigillata, earth that he has sealed and
sanctified for himself, by setting his stamp and impression upon it. Now the
good man's heart is compared to Earth for diverse reasons.

1. For humility. Humus, quasi humilis. The Earth is the lowest of all
elements, and the center of the world. The godly heart is not so low in
situation; but so lowly in it own estimation. God is said to hang the earth
upon nothing. Io^. 26. Job. 26. 7.
He stretches out the North over the empty place, and hangs the Earth upon
nothing: that it might wholly depend on himself. So a true Christian heart, in
regard of it self, is founded upon nothing; (has an humble vilipending and
disprising of it own worth) that it may ( ex toto, and ex tuto) wholly and
safely rely on God. O man of earth, why exaltest thou thy self? this is the
way to prevent and frustrate the exaltation of God. Keep thy self lowly as
the Earth; reject all opinion of thy own worth, and thou shall one day
ouer-top the clouds. The Earth is thy mother, that brought thee forth when
thou were not: a stage that carries thee whiles thou art: a tomb that receives
thee when thou art not. It gives thee original, harbor, sepulcher. Like a
kind mother, she bears her offspring on her back; and her brood is her
perpetual burden, till she receive them again into the same womb, from whence
she delivered them. She shall be yet more kind to thee, if her baseness can
teach thee humility; and keep thee from being more proud of other things, then
thou can (with any reason) be of thy Parentage. Few are proud of their
souls; and none but fools can be proud of their bodies: seeing here is all
the difference betwixt him that walks, and his floor he walks on: Living
Earth treads upon dead earth, and shall at last be as dead as his pauement.
Many are the favors that the earth does us; yet amongst them all there is none
greater, then the schooling us to humility; and working in us a true
acknowledgement of our own vileness, and so directing us to heaven, to find
that above which she cannot give us below.

2. For Patience. The Earth is called Terra, quia teritur: and this is the
natural earth. For they distinguish it into 3. sorts. Terra quam terimus:
terra quam gerimus: terra quam quaerimus; which is the glorious land of
Promise. That earth is cut and wounded with culters and shares; yet is patient
to suffer it, and returns fruits to those that ploughed it. The good heart is
thus rent with vexations, and broken with sorrows; yet offers the other cheek
to the smiter, endures all with a magnanimous patience; assured of that
victory, which comes by suffering, Vincit qui patitur. Neither is this all: it
returns mercy for injury, prayers for persecutions, and blesses them that
cursed it. Psalm. 129. 3.
The Plowers plowed upon my back: they made long their furrows. Psalm. 35. 12.
13.
They rewarded me evil for good, to the spoiling of my soul. Yet when they
were sick, my clothing was sackecloth, I humbled my soul with fasting: I was
heavy, as one that mourned for his friend or brother; and my prayer returned
into mine own bosom. When the heart of our Savior was thus ploughed up with
a spear, it ran streams of mercy, real mercy; which his vocal tongue
interpreted, Father forgive them: they know not what they do. His blood Heb.
12. Heb. 12. 24.
had a voice, a merciful voice, and spoke better things then the blood of
Abel. That cried from the cauerns of the earth for revenge; this from the
Cross in the sweet tune of compassion and forgiveness. It is a strong
argument of a heart rich in grace, to wrappe and embrace his iniurer in the
arms of love; as the earth quietly receives those dead to burial, who living
tore up her bowels.

3. For faithful Constancy. The Earth is called Solum; because it stands
alone, depending on nothing but the Makers hand. Eccle. 1. 4.
One generation passes away, and another generation comes; but the earth
abides for ever. She often changes her burden, without any sensible mutation
of her self. Psa. 119. 90.
Thy faithfulness is to all generations: thou have established the Earth, and
it stands. The Hebrew is, To generation and generation: inferring that times,
and men, and the sons of men, posterity after posterity pass away, but the
Earth whereon, and whereout they pass, abides. The parts thereof have been
altered; and violent Earthquakes begot in the own bowels, have totterd it.
Psalm. 104. 5.
But God has laid the foundations of the earth, (the Original is, founded it
upon her bases) that it should not be removed for ever: the body of it is
immovable. Such a constant soliditie is in the faithful heart; that should it
thunder Bulls from Rome, and bolts from heaven, Impau^dum ferient ruinae. ^
Indeed God has sometimes bent an angry brow against his own dear ones; and
then no marvel, if they shudder: if the bones of David tremble, and the teeth
of Hezekiah chatter. But God will not be long angry with his: and the balances,
at first putting in of the euenest weights, may be a little swayed, not without
some show of inequality: which yet after a little motion, settle themselves in
a just poyse. So the first terror has moved the godly, not removed them: they
return to themselves, and rest in a resolved peace. Lord, do what thou will:
if thou kill me, I will trust in thee. Let us hear it from him, that had it
from the Lord. Psalm. 112. Psalm. 112. 6.
Surely he shall not be moved for ever: the righteous shall be in everlasting
remembrance. He shall not be afraid of evil tidings: his heart is fixed,
trusting in the Lord. His heart is established, etc. Oh sweet description of a
constant soul!

They give diverse causes of Earthquakes: Aristotle among the rest, admits the
eclipse of the Sun for one; the interposition of the Moons body hindering some
places from his heat. I know not how certain this is in Philosophy: ^n
Divinity it is most true, that only the eclipse of our Sun, JESUS CHRIST,
raises Earthquakes in our hearts: when that inconstant and euer-changing body
of (the Moon) the world steps betwixt our Sun and us, and keeps us from
the kindly vital heat of his favor: then, O then, the earth of our heart
quakes; and we feel a terror in our bones and bowels, as if the busy hand of
death were searching them. But no eclipse lasts long: especially not this: our
Sun will shine on us again: we shall stand sure, Psalm. 129. 1.
even as mount Sion, which cannot be removed, but abides for ever.

4. For Charity. The Earth brings forth food for all creatures that live on
it. Green herb for the cattle: oil and wine for man: The vallyes stand
thick with corn: the Mower fills his sithe, and the binder up of sheaues
his bosom. A good man is so full of charity: he releeues all without
improuidence to himself. He gives plentifully that all may have some: not
indiscreetly, that some have all. On the Earth stand many glorious Cities, and
goodly buildings; fair monuments of her beauty and adornation. The sanctified
soul, in an happy respondencie, has manifold works of charity, manifest
deeds of piety; that sweetly become the Faith which he professes.

5. For Riches. The Earth is but poor without: the surface of it, especially
when squalid winter has bemired it, seems poor and barren: but within, it is
full of rich mines, ores of gold, and quarries of precious minerals. For medals
and metals, it is abundantly wealthy. The sanctified heart may seem poor to
the worlds eye, which only beholds and judges the rind and husk, and thinks
there is no treasure in the Cabinet, because it is covered with leather. But
within he is full of golden mines, and rich ores; the invisible graces of
faith, fear, love, hope, patience, holiness: sweeter then the spices of the
East Indies, and richer then the gold of the West. Psalm. 45. 13.
Omnis decor filiae Sion ab intus. The Kings Daughter is all glorious within.
It is not the superficial skin, but the internal beauty, that moves the
King of heaven to be enamoured of us; Cant. 4. 7.
and to say, Thou art all fair my Love: there is no spot in thee.

6. Lastly, for Fertility. The Earth is fruitful: when the air has given
influence, the Clouds showred down seasonable deawes, and the Sun bestowed
his kindly heat; lo, the thankful earth returns fruits, and that in
abundance. The Christian soul, having received such holy operations,
inspirations, and sanctifying motions from above, is never found without a
grateful fertility. Yea, as the Earth to man, so man to God, returns a
blessed usury; ten for one; nay sometimes 30. sometimes 60. sometimes an
hundred fold.

But the succeeding doctrine will challenge this demonstration. I have been
somewhat copious in the first word; the breuity of the rest shall recompense
it. The operative cause, that works the good earth to this fruitfulness, is
a heavenly Rain that falls often upon it: and the earth does drink it up.
Wherein is obseruable, that the rain does come, that it is welcome. God sends
it plenteously, and man entertaines it lovingly. It comes often, and he drinks
it up. Gods love to man is declared in the coming: in the welcomming, man's
love to God. In the former, we will consider, 1. The matter. 2. The manner. The
matter that comes, is Rain. The manner consists in 3* respects. 1. There is
mercy, It comes. It is not constrained, deserved, pulled down from heaven;
It comes. 2. Frequencie, it comes often: there is no scanting of this
mercy: it flows abundantly, as if the windows of heaven were opened: Often.
3. Direction of it right, upon this earth. It falls not near it, nor besides
it, but upon it. To begin with the

Rain.
GOds Word is often compared to Rain or Deaw. Deuteronomy. 32. 2.
Moses begins his Song with My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech
shall distill as the deaw; as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the
showers upon the grass. Therefore in the first verse, he calls to the earth to
hear his voice. Man is the Earth, and his Doctrine the Rain. Mica. 2. Mica.
2. 6.
Prophecy ye not: the original word is Drop ye not, etc. Amos 7. 16. Amos 7.
16.
Thou say, Prophecy not against Israel, drop not thy word against the house
of Isaac. Ezekiel. 21. Ezekiel. 21. 2.
Son of man set thy face toward Jerusalem, and drop thy word toward the holy
places. The Metaphore is usual: wherein stands the comparison? In 6.
concurrences.

1. It is the property of Rain to cool heat* Experience tells us, that a
sweltring fervor of the air, which almost fryes us, is allayed by a moderate
shower sent from the clouds. The burning heat of sin in us, and of Gods
anger for sin against us, is quenched by the Gospel. It cooles our
intemperate heat of malice, anger, ambition, avarice, lust; which are burning
sins.

2. Another effect of Rain, is Thirst quenched. The dry earth parched with
heat, opens it self in refts and cranies, as if it would devour the clouds
for moisture. The Christian soul thirsts after righteousness; is dry at
heart till he can have the Gospel: a shower of this mercy from heaven
quenches his thirst: he is satisfied. Whosoever drinks of the water that I
shall give him, shall never thirst: Ioh. 4. 14.
but it shall be in him a well of water, springing up into everlasting life.

3. Rain does allay the winds. When the air is in an uproar, and the
stoutest Cedars crouch to the ground before a violent blast; even Towers and
Cities tremble; a shower of rain sent from the clouds mitigates this fury.
When the Potentates of the world, Tyrants, little better then Devils, Gog and
Magog, Moab and Ammon, Turkey, Rome, Hell, storm against us; God quiets all
our fears, secures us from al their terrors by a gracious rain, drops of
mercy in the neuer-fayling promises of the Gospel.

4. Rain has a powerful efficacy to cleanse the air. When infectious
fogges, and contagious vapors have filled it full of corruption, the
distilling showers wash away the noisome putrefaction. We know, that too often
filthy fumes of errors and heresies surge up in a land, that the soul of faith
is almost stifled, and the uncleanness of corrupt doctrine gets a predominant
place: the Lord then drops his word from heaven: the pure Rain of his holy
Gospel cleanses away this putrefaction, and gives new life to the almost
smothered truth. Woe to them then that would deprive men's souls of the Gospel,
and withold the Truth in unrighteousness. When they lock up the gates of
grace (as Christ reproved the Lawyers) and labor to make the heavens brass,
they must needs also make the Earth iron. How should the earth of man's heart
bring forth fruits, when the rain is withheld from it? No marvel, if their
air be poisoned.

5. Rain has yet another working; to mollify a hard matter. The parched and
heat-hardned earth is made soft by the deawes of heaven. O how hard and
obdurate is the heart of man, till this raine^falls on it. Is the heart
covetous? no tears from distressed eyes can melt a penny out of it. Is it
malicious? no supplications can beg forbearance of the least wrong. Is it
given to drunkenness? you may melt his body into a dropsy; before his heart
into sobriety. Is it ambitious? you may as well treat with Lucifer about
humiliation. Is it factious? a Quire of Angels cannot sing him into peace. No
means on earth can soften the heart; whether you anoint it with the supple
balmes of entreaties, or thunder against it the bolts of menaces, or beat it
with the hammer of mortal blows. Behold! GOD showers this rain of the
Gospel from heaven, and it is suddenly softened. One Sermon may prick him at
the heart; one drop of a Saviors blood distilled on it by the Spirit, in the
preaching of the Word, melts him like wax. The Drunkard is made sober, the
Adulterer chaste, Zaccheus merciful, and raging Paul as tame as a Lamb.

They that have erst served the Devil with an eager appetite, and were hurried
by him with a voluntary precipitation; have all their chains eaten off by this
Aqua fortis: one drop of this rain has broken their fetters; and now all
the powers of hell cannot prevail against them. There is a Legend, (I had as
good say, a tale) of an Hermit, that heard (as he imagined) all the Devils of
hell on the other side of the wall, lifting, and blowing, and groaning, as if
they were a removing the world. The Hermit desires to see them: admitted,
behold, they were all lifting at a feather, and could not stir it. The
application may serve; yield the fable idle. Satan and his Armies, Spirits,
Lusts, Vanities, Sins, that erst could toss and blow a man up and down like
a feather; and did not sooner present a wickedness to his sight, but he was
more ready for action, then they for instigation; now they cannot stir him:
they may sooner remove the world from the pillars, then him from the grace and
mercy of God. The deaw of heaven has watered him, and made him grow; and the
power of hell shall not supplant him. The rain of mercy has softened his
heart, and the heat of sin shall never harden it.

6 Lastly, Rain is one principal subordinate cause, that all things
fructify. This holy deaw is the operative means and working cause, next under
the grace of God in our Lord Jesus Christ, that the souls of Christians should
bring forth the fruits of faith and obedience. I know, God can save without it:
we dispute not of his power, but of his work; of ordinary, not extraordinary
operations. God usually works this in our hearts by his word. Thus for the
matter: the manner is: 1. It comes. 2. Often. 3. Upon it.


It comes:
IT is not forced, nor fetched, but comes of his own mere mercy, whose it is.
Iam. 1. James 1. 17.
So says the Apostle: Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above,
and comes down from the Father of lights. They that want it, have no merit
of congruity to draw it to them: they that have it, have no merit of
condignitie to keep it with them. It is the mercy and gratuitall favor of
God, that this Gospel comes to us. For, if ipsum minus be munus, how highly
is this great gift to be praised! What deserve we more then other Nations? They
have as pregnant wits, as proportionable bodies, as strong sinews as we: and
perhaps would bring forth better fruits. Yet they want it: with us it is. We
need not travel from Coast to coast, nor journey to it; it is come to us.
Venit ad limina virtus: will you step over your thresholds, and gather Manna?
When the Gospel was far off from our Fathers, yet in them Studium audiendi
superabat taedium accedendi: the desire of hearing it beguiled the length of
the way. But we will scarce put forth our hand to take this bread: and, as in
some ignorant country towns, be more eager to catch the rain, that falls
from the outside of the Church in their buckets, then this rain of grace
preached in it, in their hearts. Oh you wrong us; we are fond of it; we call
for preaching: yes, as your forefathers of the blind times would call apace for
holy water; yet when the Sexton cast it on the^, they would turn away their
faces, and let it fall on their backs. Let God sow as thick as he will, you
will come up thin. You will admit frequencie of preaching, but you have taken
an order with your selves of rare practicing. You are content this Rain should
come, as the next circumstance gives it,

Often.
GOD has respect to our infirmities, and sends us a plentiful rain. One
shower will not make us fruitful; it must come often upon us. Gutta cauat
lapidem, non vi, sed saepe cadendo. The rain dints the hard stone, not by
violence, but by oft-falling drops. Line must be added to line: here a little
and there a little. God could power a whole flood on us at once: but man's
understanding Is like a vial, narrow at the top:
Not capable of more, then drop by drop,
Says the Poet. If much were powered at once, a great deal would fall besides,
and be spilt. Like children, we must be fed by spoonfulls, according to the
capacity of our weak natures. It is not an abundant rain falling at once,
that makes the plants grow; but kindly and frequent showers. One sermon in a
year contents some thoroughly; and God is highly beholding to the^, if they will
sit out that waking. You desire your fields, your gardens, your plants to be
often watered; your souls will grow well enough with one raining. How happy
would man be, if he were as wise for his soul, as he is for his body! Some
there are, that would hear often, may be too often; til edification turn to
tedification; and get themselves a multitude of Teachers; but they will do
nothing. You shall have them run ten miles to a Sermon; but not step to their
own doors with a morsel of bread to a poor brother. They wish well to the
cause of Christ, but they will do nothing for it worth God-a-mercie. The world
is full of good wishes: but heaven only full of good works. Others would have
this Rain fall often, so it be such as they desire it. Such a cloud must give
it, and it must be begotten in thunder; faction and innovation. Hier. in Ep. ad
Galat.
Till Euangelium Christi fit euangelium hominis; aut quod peius est, Diaboli.
Till the Gospel of Christ be made man's Gospel, or which is worse, the
devils, If the rain, as it falls, do not smell of Nouelty, it shall fall
besides them. They regard not so much heaven whence it comes, as who brings it.
I have read of two, that meeting at a Tauem, Manl.
fell a tossing their religion about as m^rily as their cups: and much drunken
discourse was of their profession. One protested himself of Doctor Martins
Religion: the other swore, he was of Doctor Luthers Religion: whereas Martin
and Luther was one man. No rain shall water them, but such a man's: otherwise
be it never so wholesome, they spew it up again. As if their conscience were
so nice and delicate as that ground at Coleine, Baron.
where some of St. Vrsula's eleven thousand Virgins were buried; which will
cast up again in the night, any that have been interred there in the day:
except of that company, though it were a child newly baptized. For our selves,
the limits of sobriety being kept, desire we to hear the Gospel often; and
let our due succeding obedience justify the goodness of our thirst. When
Christ spoke of the bread of life, the transported Disciples beseech him, Lord,
evermore give us this bread. Ioh. 6. 34.
So pray we, Lord evermore shower down upon us this rain.

Upon it.
GOd so directs this deaw of his Word, that it shall fall on our hearts, not
besides. The Rain of the Gospel, like the rain of the clouds, has sometimes
gone by coasts. Amos 4. Amos 4. 7.
I have withheld the rain from you, and I have caused it to rain upon one
City, and caused it not to rain upon another City: one piece was rained
upon, and the piece whereupon it rayned not withered. But I have wetted your
fields, moysten'd your hearts, with the deawes of heaven, given you my statutes
and ordinances, Psa. 147. 20.
says the Lord: I have not dealt so with every people; there be some that have
not the knowledge of my laws. The Sun shines on many nations, where this
spiritual rain falls not. This is not all; but as at the last day, two in one
bed shall be divorced; so even now one seat in the Church may hold two, upon
one whereof this saving rain may fall, not on the other. The Spirit blows
where he pleases: and though the sound of the rain be to all open ears
alike, yet the spiritual deaw drops only into the open heart. Many come to
Jacobs well, but bring no pitchers with them; wherewith to draw the water. A
good shower may come on the earth, yet if a man house himself, or be shrouded
under a thick bush, or borough'd in the ground, he will be dry still. God
sends down his rain; one houseth himself in the darkness of security: he
is too drowsy to be told in with the bells: Another sits dallying with the
delights of lust under a green bush, a third is borough'd in the ground, mining
and intrenching himself in the quest of riches. Alas, how should the deaw of
grace fall upon these! Thou would not shelter thy ground from the clouds,
lest it grow barren: oh then keep not thy soul from the rain of heaven.

You have heard how the rain is come; now hear how it is made welcome. The
good ground drinks it, nay drinks it in. Imbibit. The comparison stands thus.
The thirsty Land drinks up the rain greedily, which the clouds pour upon
it. You would wonder what becomes of it: you may find it in your fruits. When
your Vines hang full of clusters, your Gardens stand thick with flowers, your
Meadows with grass, your fields with corn; you will say, the earth has been
beholden to the heaven. That has rained moisture, this has drunk it in; we
see it in our fruits. Hos. 2. 21.
The Lord says, I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth, and
the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they shall
hear Iezreel. The fruits of corn, wine, oil, witness that the earth has
heard them, that heaven has heard the earth, and that the Lord has heard the
heaven. The heavens give influence to the ground, the ground sap to the
plants, the plants nourishment to us, the Lord a blessing to all. The Lord
waters the hills from the chambers: Psa. 104. 13
the earth is satisfied with the fruit of the works. He causes the grass to
grow for the cattle, and herb for the service of man: Wine to make glad his
heart, and oil to make his face shine; and bread to strengthen man's heart,
etc. With such thirsty appetite, and no less happy success, does the good
soul swallow the dew of grace. If you perceive not when the faithful take it;
you may see they have it: for their fruits testify it. It is a most evident
demonstration, that they have bin beholding to the Gospel; they have a
sanctified life. Drinks it in.

There be very many great Drinkers in the world. The maine drunkenness, that
gives denomination to all the rest, is that throte-drunkennesse: whereof the
Prophet, Vae fortibus ad potandum. These are they, that will not drink this
mystical wine in the Church, so willingly as be drunk in the tap-house.
Wine-worshippers, that are at it on their knees, protesting from the bottomes
of their hearts to the bottom of the cups; if the health be not pledged, actum
est de amicitia: farewell friendship. I have read of a street in Rome, called
vicus sobrius, sober street. Find such a street in any City or populous town
in England, and some good man will put it in the Chronicle.

It has been said, that the Germans are great drinkers; and therefore to
Carowse is given to be derived from them; the word being originally to
Gar-rowse, which is to drink off all: Gar signifying totum: so the Germans
are called by themselves Germanni, quasi toti homines; as if a Germane were
All-man; according to another denomination of their Country, Allmanie. And so
we are grown to think him, that can tipple soundly, a tall man, nay all-man
from top to toe. But if England plyes her liquor so fast as she begins,
Germany is like to loose her Charter. I have heard how the Jesuits out-stripp'd
the Franciscans. Indeed Saint Francis at the first meeting saw six thousand
Friars. Ignatius, because he could not begin his order with so many, made up
the number in Devils. The Germans had of us both priority and number for
drunkards. Our English beggars first got the fashion: but because their number
was short, and it was like that the Nation would be disgraced, it was agreed to
make it up in Gallants.

No marvel, if the Lord for this threaten us with the rod of famine, and to
scourge us with that most smarting string of his whippe. God has laid himself
fair in his bow already, and is ready to draw this arrow up to the head, and
send it singing into our bosoms. Ferro saeuior fames: it is one of Gods sorest
judgments. Beasts and Sword kill quickly; and the Plague is not long in
dispatching us: but Dearth is a lingering death. Lament. 4. Lament. 4. 9
They that be slain with the sword, are better then they that be slain with
hunger: for these pine away, stricken through for want of the fruits of the
field. We see how our seasons are changed, because we can find no season to
repentance. Our Springs have bin graves, rather then cradles: our Summers have
not shot up, but withered our grass: our Autumnes have taken away the flocks
of our sheep. And for our latest Harvest, we have had cause to inuert the
words of our Savior, Luke 10. Luke 10. 2.
He says, the Harvest is great, but the Laborers are few: pray ye therefore
the Lord to send forth more Laborers into his harvest. But we might have
said: the Laborers are many, and the harvest is small: pray ye therefore the
Lord to send a greater harvest for the Laborers. God has thus, as it were,
pulled the Cup from the Drunkards lips; and since he will know no measure,
the Lord will stint him. If there will be no voluntary, there shall be an
enforced fast. We have other great drinkers besides.

What say you to those that Drink up whole towns, unpeople countries,
depopulate villages, enclose fields? that Pharise-like, swallow up poor men's
houses, drink their goods, though mingled with tears of damme and young ones,
mother and children? Are not these horrible drinkers? Sure God will one day
hold the Cup of vengeance to their lips, and bid them drink their fills.

The Proud-man is a great drinker. It is not his belly, but his back, that is
the drunkard. He pincheth the poor, rackes out the other fine, enhanceth the
rent, spends his own means, and what he can finger besides, upon clothes. If
his rent-day make even with his Silkeman, Mercer, Tailor, he is well. And his
white Madam drinks deeper then he. The walls of the City are kept in
reparation with easier cost, then a Ladies face, and the appurtenances to her
head.

The Ambitious is a deep- drinker: O he has a dry thirst upon him. He loves
the wine of promotion extremely. Put a whole monopoly into the cup, and he will
carouse it off. There is a time when other drunkards give over for
asleeping-while: this drinker has never enough.

Your grimme Usurer is a monstrous drinker: you shall seldom see him drunk
at's own cost: yet he has vowed, not to be sober til his Doomesdaye. His
brains, and his gown are lined with fox; he is ever afoxing. It may be some
infernal spirit has put loue-pouder in his drink; for he dotes upon the
devil extremely. Let him take heed; he shall one day drink his own
obligations and they will choke him.

The Rob-altar is a huge drinker. He loves, like Belshazzar, to drink only in
the goblets of the Temple. Woe unto him, he carowses the wine he never swet for,
and keeps the poor Minister thirsty. The tenth sheafe is his diet: the tenth
fleece (O it is a golden fleece he thinks) is his drink: but the wool shall
choke him. Some drink down whole Churches and steeples; but the bells shall
ring in their bellies.

Every covetous worldling is a great drinker: he swallows aurum potabil^ as
his dyet-drinke. And like an absolute, dissolute drunkard, the more he drinks,
the dryer he is; for he has never enough. It may be said of him, as it was of
Bonosus, whom the Emperor Aurelian set to drink with the German Ambassador;
not a man, but a rundlet filled with wine.

And my fine precise Artizan, that shunnes a Tavern, as the Devil does a
Cross, is often as drunk as the rankest. His language does not savor of the
pot; he swears not, but indeed: but trust him, and indeed he will cozen you
to your face. The love of money has made him drunk. And though the Proverb be,
In vino veritas; yet as drunk as he is, you shall never have truth break out
of his lips.

And the unconscionable Lawyer, that takes fees on both hands, as if he could
not drink but with two cups at once, is not he a great drinker? If what is
wanting in the goodness of the cause, be supplied in the greatness of the fees,
O these Foecundi calices, quem non fecere disertum?

Let all think these ebrieties must be accounted for. How fearful were it,
if a man's latter end should take him drunk! Luke 21. 34
Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be ouercharged with
surfeting and drunkenness, and so that day come upon you unawares. In
corporal ebriety the soul leaves a drunken body: in spiritual, the body
leaves a drunken soul; both desperately fearful.

There is yet a last, and those a blessed sort of Drinkers: which drink in this
sweet rain of grace and mercy. They do not only taste it: so do the
wicked. Verse 4. They have tasted of the heavenly gift: they have tasted of the
good word of God, and of the powers of the world to come. 2. Nor drink it
only to their throat, as if they did gargarize the word; as carnal
Politicians, and formal Professors do. They must attend, they must admit, but
no further then their throats: they will but gargarize the Gospel. It shall
never come into their stomakes, never near their hearts. But these drink it
in, digest it in their consciences; take liberal draughts of it, and do
indeed drink Healths thereof. Common health-maintainers drink their
sickness. Therefore says the modern Poet honestly, Vne salus sanis nullam
potare salutem.

But this is a saving health: such as our Savior began to us; when he drank
to us in his own blood, a saving Health to all Nations. And we are bound to
pledge him in our own faith and thankfulness; as David, I will take the cup
of salvation, and bless the name of the Lord. This is a hearty draught of the
waters of life; the deeper the sweeter. Blessed he is that drinks soundly of
it, and with a thirsty appetite. There is, as Divines say, Ardens.
sancta ebrietas: such as fell on the blessed Apostles on Whitsunday. Acts 2.
They were drunk (not with new wine, but) with the holy Ghost. This holy
plenitude does (as it were) inebriate the souls of the Saints. Psalm. 36. 8.
They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house: and thou
shall make them drink of the river of thy pleasures. The Spouse sings of her
Saviors kindness, He brought me to the banqueting house, Cant. 2. 4. 5.
and his banner over me, was love. Stay me with flagons, and comfort me with
apples, for I am sick of love. In the original it is called, House of wine.
Christ has broached to his Church the sweet wines of the Gospel, and our
hearts are cheared with it; our souls made merry with flagons of mercy Come
to this wine, Cant. 5. 1.
bibite and inebriamini: eat O friends, drink, yea drink abundantly, O
beloved: drink and be drunk with it. God will be pleased with this (and no
other but this) Drunkenness.

The vessel of our heart being once thus filled with grace, shall hereafter be
replenished with glory.

A DIVINE Herball, Or, THE PRAISE OF FERTILITY. The SECOND SERMON.

MATH. 25. 29. Unto every one that has shall be given, and he shall have
abundance.

AUGUST. Magnae Virtutis est, cum foelicitate luctari:
Magnae foelicitatis est, a foelicitate non vinci.
LONDON, Printed by George Purslowe, for John Budge, and are to be sold at his
shop, at the great South-dore of Paul's, and at Britains Burse. 1616.

A DIVINE HERBALL, OR The praise of Fertillitie.
THE SECOND SERMON.
HEB. Chap. 6. Verse. 7. For the earth which drinks in the rain that comes
often upon it, and brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed,
receives blessing from God.
THAT difference which the Philosophers put between learning and metals, we
may truly find between humane writings and Gods Scriptures conferred. They
that dig in the one, find Paruum in magno, a little gold in a great deal of
ore. They that dig in this rich field (which the wise Merchant sold all he
had to purchase) find Magnum in pa^ no, much treasure in a few words.

We have heard how the good earth is beholding to God for his holy Rain: the
next circumstance objects to our meditation this earths thankful fertility. It
brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed. Every word
transcends the other; and as it excludes some vicious defect, so demonstrates
it also some graduall virtue.

1. It brings forth. It is not barren like a dead ground that yields neither
herbs nor weeds. This is no idle heart, that does neither good nor harm;
that like a mere spectator of the world, sits by with a silent contemplation
for whom was made that Epitaph: Here lies he, was borne and cried,
Lived threescore years, fell sick and dyed.


Doing neither profit nor prejudice to the Country he lived in. Here is no
such stupid neutralitie, nor infructuous deadness. It brings forth.

2. They are not weeds it produces, but herbs. A man had as good do nothing,
as do naughty things. It is less evil to sit still, then to run swift by
in the pursuit of wickedness. They that forbear Idleness, and fall to
lewdness, mend the matter, as the Devil (in the tale) mended his dames leg;
when he should have put it in joint, he broke it quite in pieces. It is not
enough that this ground brings forth, but that it yields herbs. Of the two,
the barren earth is not so evil as the wicked earth: that men pity, this
they curse. It brings forth herbs.

3. Neither is it a paucity of herbs this ground affords, but an abundance:
not one herb, but herbs; a plural and plentiful number. There is neither
barrenness nor bareness in this ground; not no fruits, not few fruits, but
many herbs.

4. Lastly, they are such herbs, as are meet for the dresser: such as God
expects of the garden, who planted it: such as he will accept, not in strict
justice for their own worth, but in great mercy for Jesus Christ. Meet for
them by whom it is dressed.

We have now opened the mine, let us digg^ for the treasure. Four
demonstrations commend this good Ground. 1. It is fruitful. 2. It is fruitful
in good. 3. It is fruitful in much good. 4. It is fruitful in such good, as
the Dresser looks for.


1. Fertillitie. It brings forth.
Barrenness has ever been held a curse, a shame, a reproach. So the mother
of John Baptist insinuated, Luke 1. Luke 1. 25.
Thus has the Lord dealt with me in the days wherein he looked on me, to
take away my reproach among men. When God will bring the Gospel, and with it
salvation to the Gentiles, he is said to take away their barrenness. So was it
prophesied, Esaias, 54. 1. So was it accomplished, Galat. 4. 27. Rejoice thou
barren that bear not, break forth and cry (with joy) thou that trauellest
not: for the desolate has many more children, then she that has an husband.
The primordial praise of this good ground is, that it is not barren. This
Fertillitie in the Christian heart, does 1. conclude thankfulness. 2. exclude
idleness.

1. For the former; GOD has given him Rain for this purpose, that he should
bring forth fruit: if he should take the rain, and not answer the senders
hopes, he were unthankful. The good man considers the end why he received any
blessing, and examines what God meant in conferring on him such a benefit.
Has God given him wisdom? Salomen has taught him to Let his fountains be
dispersed abroad, Pro^. 5. 16.
and his rivers of waters in the streets. Whether thy knowledge be great in
divine things, tanquam luminare maius; or in humane, tanquam luminare minus;
remember our Saviors lesson Math. Mat. 5. 15.
5* Put not your light under a bushel, but upon a candlestick; that it may
give light to all that are in the (...). Let your light shine before men, etc.
They that are Gods lights, must waste themselves to give light to others. Aug.
Conf. lib. 12. cap. 25.
Non licct habere priuata^, ne priue^ur ^a. To keep it private is the way to be
deprived of it. So the old verse. Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat
alter. As we must not be wise in our selves, so nor only wise to ourselves.
He that conceales his knowledge, cancels it, and shall at last turn fool.
Do not enclose that for several, which God has meant common. The not
employing will be the impayring of Gods gifts.

This is the fruit, which the good ground must send forth for all the feeds of
grace sown in it. Neither does this instruction bound it self with our
spiritual; but extend also to our temporal gifts. Have thou riches? when God
scattered those blessings upon thee, in the seed-time of his bounty, he
intended thou should return him a good croppe at the harvest. Be thankful
then, in doing that with them for which God gave them. Custos es tuarum, non
dominus, facultatum. Thou art a deputed Steward, not an independent Lord of thy
wealth. God meant them to promoue, and help forward thy journey to heaven; let
them not retard thy course, or put thee quite out of the way. Thou art a
thankful ground, if thou suffer thy riches to bring forth those fruits, which
the hand of God looks to gather from them. (...) merciful; be charitable; be
helpful. Stips pauperum, the saurus diuitum. The rich man's treasure is the
poor man's stock. The distressed soul asks but his own. Christ may say to
thee in the Beggars person; Pay (not give) me a penny thou owe me. Da mihi ex
eo quod tibi dedi: de meo quaero, Chrysostom.
non de tuo: da and read: Give me of that which I gave thee: I demand some
of my own, not of thine: it is more properly a restoring then a gift.
Petimusque damusque vicissim. Thou ask the Lord, and he gives thee: but on
this condition, that thou give him some of it back again. Thou art more truly
the beggar: and God but a demaunder of a just and easy retribution. This is
not all.

God did also mean, that thy self should take comfort in these things. It is
a part of that Blessedness, Psalm. 128. 2.
which the Psalmist promises to him that fears the Lord. Thou shall eat the
labor of thine hands: happy shall thou be, and it shall be well with thee.
For God gave wine (for this purpose) to make glad the heart of man, Psalm. 104.
15
and oil to make his face shine, and bread to strengthen his heart. How does
man divert Gods goodness, when he turns his blessing into a curse, and puts
his good creatures from their intended uses! The Lambs are for thy clothing,
Prou. 27. 25.
and the Goats are the price of thy field, says the Wiseman. Thou must wear
the wool, and drink the milk of thy own flock. Neither be so sparing, as
to starve thy self in the midst of thine own plenty. As the covetous
wretch, that dares not eat an egg, lest he should loose a chicken. Nor so
profuse to thy own lusts, that thou should give all, vel veneri, vel ventri:
not that surfets or wine should sluice out thy estate into thy belly. Not that
with unnecessary quarrels of law, thou should afflict and weary thy
neighbors. O madness! that to put out both thy brothers eyes, thou should
put out one of thine own: nay, both thine own for one of his. Ungrateful men
for Gods great mercy; that what they get by peace with forraines, vainly spend
it in civil wars: where the Lawyers set them together, as men clappe on
unwilling Mastiues! Most commonly they fight at the long weapon, a tedious,
wearying, weather-beaten suit. Sometimes they fight close; Poniard and Pistol,
killing quarrels: laying traynes for one another, till both be blown up. Can
the back of charity bear no load? Are the sinews of love grown so feeble?
Alas fools! you get both nothing but the blows; the Lawyer goes away with the
victory. He fills his purse, and you come home both well beaten.

Well, the good ground knows no such end for Gods blessings. He sees with the
eye of faith, another intentionall and internal meaning for such bounty. He
does not say of his riches, as the Atheists of their tongues. Psalm. 12. Psalm.
12. 4.
They are our own. What has Magistrate on the bench, or Preacher in the
pulpit, or friend in private, to do with it? I waste none of theirs: let me do
with my own, as I lift. But says the Apostle. Fool, what have thou, that
thou have not received? And wherefore have thou received them? To satiate thy
own lusts? or to bring forth fruit mee^ for them, by whom thou art dressed?
There is nothing, that a man can properly and in district terms call his own,
but his sins. His impieties, weaknesses, ignoranc^s, vices, lusts; these are
his own. All good things are Gods gifts, James 1. 17. Be thankful then, and
after the rain of mercy, bring forth the herbs of obedience. You see what
this Fertillitie concludes; Thankfulness. Hear now what it excludes.

2. Idleness. This good ground lies not dead and barren: nor returns all
heavens rain with a naked and neutrall acceptance: it brings forth. You read,
Luke 19. Luke 19.
of a Servant, to whom when his Lord had entrusted a Talent, he hid it in the
ground, as an Usurer his money, to keep it safe. And at his Lords return,
Domine ecce tuum: he answered his account with, Lord behold thine own. I knew
that thou were seuerus Magister, a hard Master: therefore I thought it my
securest course, to make good thine own again. But the Lord replied, Ex ore
tuo: Oh evil servant, out of thy own mouth I condemn thee. Thou should
then have answered my austeritie, with thy laborious care of my advantage.
Therefore hear his doom. Mat. 25. 30.
Cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness: there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth. He did not evil with his talent: no, it was enough to
condemn him, he did nothing. There is abundance of this dead ground in the
world, which brings forth nothing. Idle wretches, that sleep out time and
admonition: but their damnation sleeps not. 2. Pet. 2. 3.
It was never said, Samson has lost his strength, till he slept in the lap
of Dalila. Idleness does neither get nor save: there is nothing more empty of
good fruits, nor more abundantly pregnant with evil. That man does ill, that
does nothing; and he loses, whiles he gains not. Many beholding with
cowardly and carnal eyes, what a long and t^oublesome journey it is to heaven,
sit them down and fall fast asleep. O barren grounds! will ye bring forth
nothing? Is difficulty made your hindrance, that should be a spur to your
more eager contention? Know you not, that the violent shall get the kingdom of
heaven? Some can follow their dogs all day in the field: others hunt Mammon
dry-foote in their shoppes year after year, and never complain of
weariness. Only an hour or two in the Church puts an ach into our bones; as
if nothing wearyed us so soon as well-doing. Is it fear of too much labor,
that keeps you from God? why does not the same reason deter you from serving
the devil? His laws are true burdens, and his service drudgerie. Mat. 11. 30.
But Christ's yoke is easy, and his burden light.

I'may boldly affirm it: your covetous man takes more pains to go to hell,
then the godly ordinarily to get to heaven. He rises early, and rests late,
and eats the course bread of sorrow: and after tedious and odious misery,
goes to the Devil for his labor. Shall we refuse easier pains, for a far
better recompense? It is but Satan's subtlety, that makes men believe the
passage to life so extremely difficult, that it is impossible. Herein the
Devil does like the inhospitable Savages of some countries, that make strange
fires, and a show of dismal terrors upon the shores, to keep passengers from
landing. The Sluggard, says Solomon, does but feign Bears and Lions, (as the
superstitious does bugges) in the way; as apologies of idleness, that he may
sit still and be at ease. The slothful person is the Devils shop, wherein he
works engines of destruction. He is most busy in the lazy. Eccles. 9. 10.
But whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might: for there is no
work nor knowledge, nor device, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go.
If thy soul be watered with the deaw of heaven, thou must needs bring forth.
What?

2. Herbs. There is Fertility in Goodness.
THe eldest daughter of Idleness is to do nothing: the next borne to do
something to no purpose. But the good man is not only doing, but well doing,
Math. 24. Mat. 24. 46
Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes, shall find so doing.
This so consists in doing Bonum, and Been. As the former verse may seem to
intimate. He gives them meat, there he does good: in due season, there he does
it well. The forbearance of wickedness is not enough to acquit the soul, but
the performance of righteousness. The rich Glutton is tormented in hell, not
because he did hurt, but because he did not help Lazarus. Non quod abstulerit
aliena, sed quod non donarit sua, August.
says S. Chrysostom. Not for taking away another man's, but for not giving his
own. He would not give the poor the crummes that fell from his board; and so
facere damna lucrum, make a gain of his losses: for they were lost that fell
from his libertine table, and yet would have refreshed the hungry and famished
soul. But Dives would not give a crumme, to get a crown. He wore fine linen;
but it was his own. He was clothed in rich purple; but it was his own. He
fared sumptuously every day, but he did eat his own meat: he took none of
all this from Lazarus. Yet he went to hell. God condemned him, because he did
not give some of this to Lazarus. Thus it is not only the commission of
lewdness, that sinkes men to hell, but even also the omission of goodness.
Do thou hear, O Earth; unless thou bring forth herbs, thou shall be
condemned. The Fig Tree had no bad fruit on it, yet was it cursed, because it
had none at all. The axe that is laid to the root, shall hew down even that
tree, Mat. 3. 10.
which brings not forth good fruit: though it bring forth no evil. Fire shall
take the barren, as well as the vveedie ground.

Except your righteousness shall exceed the righ^^ousnesse of the Scribes and
Pharisees, Mat. 5. 20.
ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Wherein (me thinks) our
Savior implies a threefold gradation to heaven. First there must be
Iustitia, Righteousness; an habitual practice of godliness; an vncorrupt
life, which shall only be entertained to Gods Hill. Psa. 15. 2
But the ground must be made good, before it can produce good herbs: for the
person must be accepted before the work. And this work must be good both
quoad fontem, and quoad finem: we must derive it from an honest heart, and
drive it to a right end. In the next place, this Righteousness must be a
man's own. Nisi iustitia vestra. Here, that ground which brings forth herbs
receives blessing; not that borrowes them of another. For so, as stony and
barren an heart as Cheapside, may be a far richer garden then some of those,
where those herbs (brought thither) naturally grew. The Pope has a huge
harden of these herbs; wherewith he can store as many, as will pay for them.
John Baptist fasted more then he was commanded: and Mary lived more strictly
then God required. Now the Church of Rome keeps an Herball of these
superabundant works; and money may have store of them. But heaven and Rome
stand a great way asunder. And as God never gave the Pope authority to make
such bargains, so he never means to stand to them. It is not only spoken, but
commanded to be written of the dying Saints, that their works follow them.
Their own works, Reu. 14. 13.
not the works of others. No righteousness of friend living, or of Saint dead,
shall do thee good, but the herbs of thy own Garden shall be accepted of
God. Lastly, this Righteousness must excel, nisi abundauerit. If it come
short of those that come short of heaven, what hope have you? It must exceed
innocence, and come to real goodness.

We have not sufficiently discharged our duties in being painful, unless we
be profitable. Some will take no pains, unless the Devil set them on work.
They must be their own caruers in their employment, or they will sit idle. But
so a man may work and have no thanks for his labor. It is not then simply
and only bringing forth, commends a ground, but bringing forth herbs.

The fruit of Peter's repentance is not to deny his Master no more; but to stand
to him to the death. We think, if we forbear our wonted notorious sins,
we are on the sudden excellent Christians. As if God were beholden to us, for
not wounding his name with oaths; for not playing out Sabaoths; for not
railing on his Gospel; for not oppressing his poor members: when we neither
reliue the poor, nor obey the Gospel, nor hallow his Saboths, nor honor his
name. Perhaps an Usurer when he has gotten enough will cease that damned
trade: now he is sure of heaven in a trice. Alas! how repents Zaccheus, if he
restores not? Shall I go a step higher? If he give not liberally, and show
compassion to the afflicted Saints? Perhaps an old Adulterer when his sap is
grown to cinders, breaks off his uncleanness. When the envious loses his
object, he may suspend his malice. But where are the returned fruits of
penitence, manifest and visible obedience? Say the weeds are gone, where be
the herbs? To root up the weeds, is but the first step to heaven: and some
are forty, threescore years taking this step. How long will it be ere their
garden be set with good growing herbs? Judge. 5. 23.
But Curse ye Meroz, said the Angel of the Lord, curse ye bitterly the
Inhabitants thereof: because they came not to the help of the Lord, (and that
it might fully appear, that this curse came not on them, for taking part with
Gods enemies and fighting against him; but only for denial of succor, the
song doubles it) to the help of the Lord against the mighty. Mat. 18. 28.
The offended Lord delivered that Servant to the tormentors, that (did not
extort from his fellow that he had no right to, nor wrest away an others
goods; but) did only say, Pay me that thou owe; and in a harsh manner, or
unmerciful measure, required his own due. It is the form of the last doom,
Mat. 25. 42.
I was hungry, and ye gave me no meat: though you took not away mine, yet for
not giving your own, Go ye cursed.

But if that ground be near unto cursing, that brings not forth herbs; what
shall we say to that, which brings forth weeds? What hell, and how many
torments are provided for oppressing Dives, when Dives that but denied his own
shall be tortured in endless flames! If he were bound to an everlasting
prison, that rigorously prosecuted his own right, chaleng'd his own debt:
whither shall they be cast, that unjustly vex their neighbors, quarrel for
that which is none of theirs, and lay title to another man's propriety? If he
that gives not his coat to the naked, shall lie naked to the vengeance of God;
then he that takes away the poor man's coat, shall be clad with burning
confusion. If he that gives not, wring his hands; he that takes away shall
rend his heart. The old world did but eat and drink, build and plant, marry
and be merry; and were swept away with the beesome of an universal deluge;
which things were in themselves lawful: what shall become of liars swearers,
adulterers, idolaters, malicious, monstrous, scandalous sinners; whose works
are in themselves simply unlawful. There are 3. sorts of ground mentioned,
Mark 4. and the very worst of them receives the seed, yet all damned: whither
shall the tempest of Gods wrath drive them, that would never give the Gospel a
religious ear? O beloved! weigh it.

Our Idle words must come to judgment: what shall be our answer for unlawful
deeds: If omission of good works be whipped with rods, commission of impieties
shall be scourged with Scorpions. If they that stand in a lukewarm
neutralitie, shall be spewed up; sure the palpable and notorious offender shall
be trodden under foot of a provoked Justice. Indifferency shall not escape: and
shall extreme presumption be spared? that like dogs, sup up the dregs they
have vomited. I have read of a Popish Saint, Henry the Dane, that in a mad and
hare-brain'd devotion, when worms crawled out of a corrupt ulcer in his knee,
did put them in again. There are such frantic wretches, that when the word
has squeased some poison out of their consciences, and driven forth lusts,
like crawling worms; they in a voluntary madness put them in again. As the
Tode casts ont per poison, when she goes to the water to drink; when she has
drunk, sups it up again. Adam lost himself, and all his posterity by one
transgression; and do we think, can we hope that our infinite shall escape
judgment? Or do we extenuate our iniquities with such selfe-flattering
mitigations, that if they be not innumerable, they are pardonable; and that a
few shall bring no man to judgment? And what call we this paucitie? As the
Gloss deals with a piece of Gratians Decretum. The Text says, Meretrix est,
quae multorum libidin^ patet. She is a whore, who serves many men's turns.

Now the Gloss brings this indefinite number to a certain, and gives Multorum
a reasonable latitude; saying, the name of Whore should not be given her, til
she has lain with three and twenty thousand men. So till we have doubled,
iterated, and multiplied our lies, oa^hes, oppressions, lusts, unto thousands,
and thousands, we do not think that we merit the names of liars, swearers,
oppressors, or luxurious persons. Beloved, these things must be reckoned for:
and if nescience be beaten with stripes, wilful impiety shall be burned with
fire. Blessed ground then, that brings forth herbs; and that not in scarsitie,
but in

3. Plenty. Many herbs.
THe good ground is plentiful in fruits. It bears fruit, good fruit, much
good fruit. Multiplicitie of grace is requisite, though not perfection. What
Garden is only planted with one singular kind of herb? The Christian has
need of many graces; because he is to meet with many defects, to answer many
tentations, to fight with many enemies. Therefore, 2. Pet. 1. 2. Pet. 1. 5.
Join with your faith virtue, and with virtue knowledge, Cant. 4.
and with knowledge temperance, etc. One Jewel will not serve: Christ's Spouse
must have diverse to adorn her. One piece of armor will not secure us; we know
not which way the blow will come, Ephesians. 6. 11.
nor where it will light. Therefore, Put on the whole armor of God, that ye
may be able to stand against all the wyles of the devil. The loins, the
breast, the head, the feet; all parts must be armed. The fruit of the Spirit
(those happy fruits which the Spirit of God works in us, and brings out of
us) is manifold. Galat. 5. Gal. 5. 22.
Love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
etc. The Apostle charge us to be rich in good works. 1. Tim. 6. 1. Tim. 6.
18
And for this cause bows his knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Ephesians. 3. 14. 16
that according to the riches of his glory we might be filled with all the
fullness of God. The reason is given by Christ. To whom much is given, of them
shall much be required. And it was his commendation of Mary Magd^l^n, that
because she had much forgiven her, therefore she loved much.

Happy then is that ground, which abounds with good herbs; the fruits of
faith, patience, content, charity. Not our riches, but our wor^s shall follow
us. Goodness shall only give Pulchrum sepulchrum: and as we use to stick dead
bodies with herbs; so these herbs our fruitful good works shall adorn and
beautify our memorialls, when the name of the wicked shall ^ot. I know
England, inueigh the Papists till their galls burst, is full of pious and
charitable works. It is a Garden full of good herbs. Not to us, but to God
be the praise; who has moved such instruments to works of his glory. Yet
Que^on fecimus ipsi, vix ca nostra voce: let ^uery man quiet his own
conscience, with the good herbs his own garden produces.

The rich man grows easily richer, so the good man easily better. It is the
custom of most men to be pleased with a very little religion. For the world,
we are enraged and transported with such a hunger, that the grave is sooner
satisfied: but a very little godliness contents us. But if we would not be
barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2. Pet. 1. 8.
we must, says the Apostle, abound with these herbs. And then for a
proportionate reward, An entrance shall be ministered unto us abundantly, Verse
11.
into the everlasting kingdom of our Savior Christ. Blessed is he that brings
forth herbs, many herbs, and lastly such as are

4. Meet for them by whom he is dressed.
THe word By whom, may as well be translated For whom: (...) Two instructions
are here necessarily offered us. 1. By whom this goodness comes. 2. For whom
it must be intended.


1. By whom it is dressed.
GOD is the Husbandman that dresseth this ground, and causes in it
Fertillitie. It was the Pelagian error. A Deo habemus qu^d homines sumus, a
nobis ipsis autem quod iusti sumus. We are beholding to God that we are men,
Aug. Tract. 81. in Ioh.
to our selves that we are good men. But the contrary is here evident. God does
not only make the ground, but he makes the ground fruitful: he raines upon
it, he dresseth it, he blesses it. Christ said not, Ioh. 15. 5.
Sine me parum potestis facere, sed sine me nihil. Without me ye can do
nothing, says our Savior, and to the best men, even the Apostles: not a
little, but nothing. If God had only made thee a man, and thou made thy self
a good man, then is thy work greater then Gods work. August.
For, Mel us est iustum esse, quam te hom^n^m esse. Our mere being is not so
happy, as our better being. No, this Text conuinceth that lie. For, according
to that distinction of grace. 1. Here is Gratia operans, God begins the work;
he makes the ground good. sanctifies the person. 2. Here is Gratia cooperans,
God that begins, performs the work; he raineth upon, he dresseth the heart,
and so causes it to produce herbs. 3. Here is Gratia saluans, whereby he
crowns our will and work in the day of our Lord JESUS. It receives blessing
from God. So Qui viret in foliis, venit a radicibus humor.

The sap of grace which appears green and flourishing in the branches and
fruit, comes from the root. Now in all this Deus non necessitat, sed factl^tat:
God induces the good to good by alacrity, not enforces against their wills.
Quoniam probitate coacta, Prud.
Gloria nulla venit. For God does not work upon us, as upon blocks and
stones, in all and every respect passive: but conuerts our wills to will our
own conversion. August.
Qui fecit te sine te, non iustificabit te sine te. Fecit nesc^entem,
Iustificat volentem. He that made thee without thy self, will not justify
thee without thy self. (without thy merit indeed, not without thine act). He
created thee when thou knew it not, he does justify thee with the consent
of thy own will. Let this consideration lay us all prostrate before the
footstool of God, kissing the feet of his mercy, Heb. 5. 23:
who is the Beginner and finisher of our faith. Who has made the ground good,
and increased the number of herbs with his holy dewes from heaven; dressed it
with his graces, and promised to reward it with his blessings. Thus By whom:
now For whom.

Meet for them who dressed it.
AND is it possible, that man should produce herbs meet for the acceptance
of God? Has he not pure eyes, which see uncleanness and imperfection in all
our works? Is there any man so happy, as to be justified in his sight? No;
but it pleases him to look upon our works in the Crystal glass, Christ;
and because they are the effects of a true faith in him, to esteem them meet.
S. Peter says, 1. Pet. 2. 19.
This is thanke-worthy, if a man for conscience toward God endure grief,
suffering wrongfully. Do even our sufferings then merit? (...) even this is
grace. To you it is given not only to believe in him, but even to suffer for
his sake. This was none of yours, but given you. And when you have suffered,
Romans 8. 18.
yet you must truly with Paul reckon, that the afflictions of this present
world are not worthy of that high inestimable weight of glory. There are no
works acceptable ( Quae praecedunt instificandum, sed quae sequuntur
iustificatum) which go before Justification, but these that follow it. All of
us, as Luther was wont to say, have naturally a Pope bred in our bellies; a
Mountebanke-opinion of our own worth. Narcissus-like, we dote upon our own
shadows; and think our works acceptable enough to God. If we have prayed,
relieved, believed the history of the Gospel, or attentively heard the word,
these are works meet for God. The Monk had but one hole in his Cell, and
though it was in the top, upward to heaven, yet the Devil made a shift to
creep in there. The Serpent thrusts in his head often in some crack of our
good works. Luther paradoxically. (...) ^niustitiarum ^ere sola causa (...).
Almost the only cause of all unrighteousness, is (a too-well conceited)
righteousness. We are easily induced to think our selves every one, Act* 8. 9.
as Simon Magas, some great man. There must be a deiection of this thought, an
annihilation of our own worth; that we can do nothing meet for God, or
worthy his just acceptance. For Serdet in distincti^^e Iudicis, quod fulget in
opinione operantis. That is often foul in the sentence of the Judge, which
shines in the imagination of him that does it.

But as Physicians say, no man dies of an ague, or without it: so seldom any
soul dies of pride, or without pride; not merely of pride, for (though that
sickness were enough to kill it, yet) it is ever accompanied with some other
disease and vicious wickedness; nor without it, for it is so inherent unto man's
nature, that pride, if it does not provoke yet at lest holds the door, whiles
any iniquity is doing. Hence flow so many errors, and factions, and
singularities.

For as in the body, a raw stomach makes a rhumatick head, and a rhumatick head
a raw stomach. So in the soul, an indigested conceit of some good thing in us,
makes the head rume of some rheumaticke opinion, or mad factious
singularity: and this petulant rheum in the brain, keeps the conscience raw
still; that the physic of repentance, or good diet of peaceable obedience
cannot help it. Let us correct these exorbitant and superfluous conceits,
which are like proud flesh upon us; and know, we are able to do nothing of
our selves, but God is feign to put even good thoughts in us. And if we do
good from him, how good soever it be as from him, yet running through us it
gets some pollution.

Neither let us run into the contrary error, as if in a stupid wilfulness,
what good soever we did, we could not hope that God in Jesus Christ would
accept it. There is a thresholde of despair below to stumble at, as well as a
post of high presumption to break our heads at. There is a base deiection, a
sordid humility. Bar^ena the Jesuit told another of his order; that when the
devil appeared to him one night, out of his profound humility he rose up to
meet him, and prayed him to sit down in his chair; for he was more worthy
to sit there then he. This did appear a strange kind of deiectednes. Surely
I think, a man should by Gods word and warrant, take comfort in his well doing,
and be cheared in the testimony which a good conscience, on good cause bears
to him. So David hartned himself against all the malicious slanders of his his
enemies; O Lord thou know mine innocence. Good works are the necessary and
inseparable effects of a true faith. We are by nature all dead in sin, and by
sin concluded under death. Our Savior bore for us this death, and by his
passion freed us from eternal damnation. It was not enough to escape hell, how
shall we get to heaven? Lo, we are clothed with the garment of his
righteousness, hung with the Jewels of his merits. So not only hell is
escaped by his sufferings, but heaven got by his doings. Why should we then
work? what need our gardens stand so full of herbs? Good reason. Shall God do
so much for us, and shall we do nothing for him, for our selves? If the Lord of
a Forest gives me a Tree, it is fit I should be at the cost to cut it down,
and bring it home, if I will have it. I cannot say that I deserved the tree; it
was another gift: but my labors must lead me to enjoy that, which was freely
given me. Neither, can the conscience have assurance of eternal life, so
frankly bestowed in Christ, without a good conversation. Faith does justify,
and works do testify that we are justified. In a clock, the finger of the
dyall makes not the clock to go, but the clock it: yet the finger without
shows how the clock goes within. Our external obedience is caused by our
inward faith; but that does manifest how truly the clock of our faith goes. As
a man's corporal actions of sleeping, eating, digesting, walking, declare his
recovery from sickness, and present health. So his life witnesses by
infallible Symptoms, that the disease and death of sin is mortified in him,
and that he has taken certain hold of eternal life. It is meet then that we
should do good works: but all our works are made meet and worthy in him that
bought us. I will conclude then with that Antheme, made by a sweet singer in
our Israel. Pendemus ate, credimus in te, tendimus, ad te, non nisi per te,
Optime Christ.

AMEN.
THE GARDEN Or, A Contemplation of the HERBS. The THIRD SERMON.

The Song of Solomon. Chap. 6. Ver. 2. My Beloved is gone down into his
Garden, to the beds of spices; to feed in the gardens, and to gather Lillies.

AMB. super LVC. Non Virtus est non posse peccare, sed nolle.

LONDON, Printed by George Purslowe, for John Budge, and are to be sold at his
shop, at the great South-dore of Paul's, and at Britains Burse. 1616.

THE GARDEN OR A Contemplation of the Herbs.
THE THIRD SERMON.
HEB. Chap. 6. Verse. 7. For the earth which drinks in the rain that comes
often upon it, and brings forth Herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed,
receives blessing from God.
THat the Herbs of our graces may be meet for the dresser; contentful to GOD,
who has planted, watered, husbanded the Garden of our hearts; we will require
in them four virtues: Odor, Taste, Ornament, Medicinal Virtue.

1. That they have a good odor. God is delighted with the smell of our graces.
My Beloved is gone down into his Garden, Cant. 6. 2.
to the beds of spices, to feed in the gardens, and to gather Lillies. The
virtues of Christ are thus principally pleasant; and all our herbs only smell
sweetly in his Garden. Because of the savor of thy good ointment, Cant. 1. 3.
thy name is as ointment powered forth, therefore do the Virgins love thee.
This savor is sweetly acceptable in the nostrils of God. All thy garments smell
of Myrrh, Psa. 45. 8.
Aloes, and Cassia: It is his righteousness, that gives all our herbs a good
odor: and in him it pleases God to judge our works sweet. When Noah had built
an Altar, Genesis 8. 21.
and sacrificed burnt offerings on it, the Lord smelled a sweet savor and
said, I will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake. Mat. 2.
Myrrh and Prankincense were two of the oblations, which the Wisemen offered
to CHRIST being an Infant.

Tres Reges, regum Regitria dona tulerunt:
Myrrham homini, vncto auru^, thura dedere Deo.
Tutriafac itidem dones pia munera Christo,
Muneribus gratus si cupis esse tuis.
Pro myrrha lacrymas, pro auro cor porrige purum,
Pro thure, ex humili pectore funde preces.
Three kings to the great King three offerings bring,
Incense for God, Myrrh for man, gold for king.
Thy Incense be the hands a white soul reares.
For gold give a pure heart, for myrrh drop tears.
The way to make our herbs smell sweetly, is first to purge our garden of
weeds. For if sin be fostered in our hearts, all our works will be
abominated. God hears not the prayers of the wicked. Leuit. 26. 31.
If ye will walk contrary to me, says the Lord, I will bring your
sanctuaries unto desolation, and I will not smell the savor of your sweet
odours. But being adopted by grace in Christ, and sanctified to holiness, our
good works smell sweetly, Phil. 4. Phil. 4. 18.
I have received of Epaphroditus the things which were sent from you, an odor
of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to God. It seems, GOD
highly esteems the herb Charity in our gardens. He that serves the Lord,
shall smell as Lebanon: Hos. 14. 6. 7.
he shall grow as the Vine, and his sent shall be as the wine of Lebanon.

Man is naturally delighted with pleasant savors, and abhorres noisome and
stinking smells. But our God has purer nosthrils, and cannot abide the polluted
heaps of iniquities. The Idle man is a standing pit; and has an
ill-sauour'd smell, an ill-fauour'd sight. The drunkard is like a bogge, a
fogge, a fenne of evil vapors: God cannot abide him. Your covetous wretch is
like a dunghill; there is nothing but rottenness and infection in him. Omnis
malitia eructat fumum. All wickedness belcheth forth an evil savor. Wonder
you, if God refuse to dwell with the Usurer, Swearer, Idolater, Adulterer?
There is a poison of lust, a leprosy of putrefaction in them: no carryon is so
odious to man, as man's impieties are to God. Yea the very oblations of defiled
hands stink in his presence. Esa. 66. 3.
He that sacrifices a Lamb, is as if he cut off a dogs neck, etc. As if
Ass a foetida was the only supply of their gardens. But good herbs give a
double savor: one outward to man, another inward to God. The sweet smoke of a
holy sacrifice, like a subtle air, rises up to heaven; and is with God before
man sees or smells it. It also cheares the hearts of Christians, to behold
Christian works. Reverence to the Word, hallowing the Sabaoths, releeuing the
poor, deeds of mercy, pity, piety, give a delightful sent: solacing the
souls of the Saints, and pleasing him that made them both men and Saints.
Therefore Hearken unto me, ye holy children, Eccl. 39. 13.
and budde forth as a Rose growing by the brook of the field. Give ye a sweet
savor, as frankincense, and flourish as a Lilly, send forth a smell, sing a
song of praise, and bless the Lord in all his works.

2. That they taste well. Many a flower has a sweet smell, but not so wholesome
a taste. Your Pharisaicall prayers and alms smelt sweetly in the vulgar
nosthrils: taste them, and they were but rue, or rather worme-wood. When the
Pharise saw the Publican in the lower part of the Temple, standing as it were
in the Belfrey; he could cry, Foh this Publican: but when they were both
tasted, by his palate that could judge, the Publican has an herb in his
bosom, and the Pharise but a gay, gorgeous, stinking weed. The herbs, that
the Passover were eaten with, were sour: yet they were enioined with sweet
bread. Sour they might be, but they were wholesome. Herbs have not only their
savor, but their nutriment. He causes the grass to grow for the cattle,
Psa. 104. 14
and herb for the service of man: that he may bring food out of the earth.
Herbs the^ are food, and have an alimentall virtue. So we may both with the
herbs of charity feed men's bodies, and with the herbs of piety feed their
souls. A good life is a good sallet: and in the second place to precepts, are
usefully necessary good examples. The blood of Martyrs is said to have
nourished the Church. The patience of the Saints, in the hottest extremity of
their afflictions, even when the flames of death has clipped them in their
arms; has been no less then a kindly nourishment to many men's faith. It is
expounded by an universal consent of Divines, that one of those 3. feedings,
which Christ imposed on Peter, is Pasce exemplo; let thy life feed them.
Blessed Gardens that yield herbs, like Iothams vine, that cheer the heart of
both God and man. Judge. 9^ 13.
The Poets feigned, that Nectar and Ambrosia were the food of their Gods.
Jupiter Ambrosia satur est, est Nectare plenus. But the true Gods diet, is the
virtues of his Saints, wherewith he promises to suppe, when he comes into their
hearts. Faith, Reu. 3. 20.
love, patience, meeknes, honesty; these dishes are his dainties.

If thou would make Christ good cheer in the parlour of thy conscience,
bring him the herbs of obedience. Do not say, I would have been as kind and
liberal to my Savior as the best, had I lived in those days, when he blessed
the world with his bodily presence. But now I may say with Mary Magdalen: They
have taken away the Lord, Ioh. 20. 2.
and I know not where to find him. Damn not thy self with excuses.
Wheresoever his Church is, there is he; exercise thy piety. Wheresoever his
members are, there is he; exercise thy charity. Thou art very niggardly, if
thou will not afford him a sallet, a dinner of herbs. Yet, says Solomon, A
dinner of green herbs with love, is better then a fat Ox with hatred.

3. That they be fit to adorn. Herbs and flowers have not only their use in
pleasing the nostrills, and the palate, but the eye also. They give delight to
all those three senses. Good works are the beauty of a house, and a better
sight then fresh herbs strewn in the windores. The Chamber, where Christ
would eat his Passover, was trimmed: and the Palace of our Princely Solomon is
paued With Love of the daughters of Jerusalem. Cant. 3. 10.


There is no ornature in the World like good deeds: no hanging of Tapestry, or
Arrase, comes near it. A stately building where an Idolater dwells, is but a
gaudy coat to a Sodome-apple. When you see an Oppressor raising a great house
from the ruins of many less; depopulating a Country to make up one Family;
building his Parlours with extortion, and cimenting his walls with the mortar
of blood: you say, there is a foul Minotaure in a fair Labyrinth. Be a man
dead, it is a foolish hope to rear immortality with a few senseless stones.
Perhaps the Passenger will be hereby occasioned, to comment upon his bad life;
and to discourse to his company the long enumeration of such a man's vices. So a
perpetual succession of infamy answers his gay sepulcher: and it had bin
better for him, to have been utterly inglorious, then inexcusably infamous. The
best report, that can be drawn from him, is but this. Here lies a fair Tomb,
and a foul carcass in it.

These things do neither honest a man living, nor honor him dead. Good works
are the best ornaments, the most lasting monuments. They become the house
wherein thy soul dwells, whiles it dwells there: and bless thy memory, when
those two are parted. A good life is man's best monument: and that Epitaph shall
last, as if it were written with a pen of iron, and claw of a Diamond; which is
made up of virtuous actions. Good herbs beautify more then dead stones.
Wheresoever thou shall be buried, obscurity shall not swallow thee. Every good
heart that knew thee is thy Tomb; and every tongue writes happy Epitaphes on
thy memorial. Thus height up your souls with a treasure of good works. Let
your herbs smell sweetly, let them taste cheerfully; let them adorn
beautiously. So Gods palate, his nosthrils, his sight shall be well pleased.

4. That they be medicinable; and serve not only as Antidotes to prevent, but
as medicaments to cure the souls infirmities. The poor man's physic lies in
his Garden: the good soul can fetch an herb from his heart (of Gods planting
there) that can help him. Pliny writes of a certain herb, which he calls
Thelygonum; we in English, The grace of God. A happy herb, and worthy to stand
in the first place, as chief of the garden. For it is the principal, and (as
it were) the Genus of all the rest. We may say of it, as some write of the
Carduus benedictus, or Holy-thistle; that it is herba omnimorbia; an herb of
such virtue, that it can cure all diseases. This may heal a man, who is
otherwise nullis medicabilis herbis. Wretched men, that are without this herb,
The grace of God, in their gardens.

Hysope and Humility.
IS a man tempted to pride? and that is a saucy sin, ever busy among good
works, like a Judas among the Apostles: let him look into this Garden for
Hysop, Humility of Spirit. Of which herb it is written.

Est humilis, petraeque suis radicibus haeret. Let him be taught by this herb,
to annihilate his own worth, and to cleave to the Rock, whereout he grows,
and whereof he is vpholden, JESUS CHRIST. Or let him produce the Camomill,
which smells the sweeter, the more it is trodden on. Humility is a gracious
herb, and allayes the wrath of God; whereas pride prouokes it. It is recorded
of an english king, Edward the first, that being exceeding angry with a servant
of his, in the sport of hawking, he threatened him sharply. The gentleman
answered, it was well there was a river between them. Hereat the King more
incensed, spurred his horse into the depth of the River, not without extreme
danger of his life; the water being deep, and the banks too steep and high for
his ascending. Yet at last recovering land, with his sword drawn, he pursues
the servant; who rode as fast from him. But finding himself too ill-hors'd, to
out-ride the angry King; he reyned, lighted, and on his knees exposed his neck
to the blow of the kings sword. The King no sooner saw this, but he put up his
sword, and would not touch him. A dangerous water could not withold him from
violence; yet his servants submission did soon pacify him. Whiles man flies
stubbornely from God, he that rides upon the wings of the wind, posts after
him with the sword of vengeance drawn. But when dust and ashes humbles
himself, and stands to his mercy, the wrath of God is soon appeased.

This Camomill or Hysop grows very low: Humbleness roots downward, yet no
herb has so high branches. We say, that proud men have high minds: they have
not. For their minds only aspire to some earthly honors, which are but low
shrubbes indeed. The humble man aspires to heaven, and to be great in the
eternal Kings favor; and this is the true, but good height of mind. His
desires have a high aim, though their dwelling be in the vale of an humble
heart. There are engines, that raise water to fall, that it may rise the
higher. A lowly heart, by abasing it self in the sight of God and men, does
mount all the other graces of the soul as high as heaven; and the eye of mercy
accepts them. Pride is a stinking weed; and though it be gay and garish, is
but like the Horse-flower. In the field it is of glorious show: croppe it, and
you cannot endure the savor. At the best, the proud man is but like the bird
of Paradise, or the Estridge; his feathers are more worth then his body. Let
not thy Garden be without this herb Humility. It may be least respected with
men; and among other herbs ouerlooked; but most acceptable to God. Respexit
humilitatem ancillae suae, sings the Virgin MARY. He had regard to the
lowliness of his hand-maiden. It shall not want a good remembrance, a good
recompense. For the last, the least, and the lowest may come to be the first,
the greatest, and the highest. This is a necessary herb.

Bulapathum. The herb Patience.
IS a man, through multitude of troubles, almost wrought to impatience; and to
repine at the providence of GOD; that disposes no more ease? Let him fetch an
herb out of the Garden to cure this malady; Bulapathum, the herb Patience.
The Adamant serves not for all seas; but Patience is good for all estates. Gods
purpose cannot be eluded with impatience: and man under his hand, is like a
bird in a net; the more he struggles, the faster he is. Impatience regards
not the highest but secondary causes: and so bites the stone in stead of the
thrower. If our inferior strike us, we trebble revenge. If an equal, we
requite it. If a superior, we repine not: or if we mutter, yet not utter our
discontent. Think whose hand strikes: it is Gods. Whether by a Pleurisy, or a
Fever, or a Sword, or what ever other instrument. The blow was his, whatsoever
was the weapon. And this wound will not be cured, unless by applying the
herb Patience.

The good man has such a hand over fortune; knowing who guides and disposes
all events; that no miseries, though they be sudden as well as sharp, can
vn-heart him. If he must dye, he goes breast to breast with virtue. If his life
must tarry a further succession of miseries, he makes absent joys present,
wants plenitudes; and beguiles calamity, as good company does the way, by
Patience. 1. King. 22. 34.
A certain man drew a bow at a venture, and smote the King of Israel between
the joints of the harness. The man shot at random, or as the Hebrew has it,
in his simplicity; but God directed the arrow to strike Ahab. 2. Sam. 16. 11.
So David spoke of Shimei. Let him alone, and let him curse; for the Lord has
bidden him. It may be that the Lord will look on mine affliction, and that the
Lord will requite good for his cursing this day. Consider we not so much, how
unjust man is that gives the wrong; as how just God is that guides it. Non
venit sine merito, quia Deus est iustus: nec erit sine commodo, quia Deus est
bonus. It comes not without our desert, for God is just: nor shall be without
our profit, for God is merciful. God has an herb, which he often puts into
his childrens sallet; that is Rue: and man's herb wherewith he eats it, must
be Lapathum, Patience.

This Rue is affliction; which has a profitable effect in those that qnietly
digest it. Of all the herbs in the garden, only Rue is the herb of grace.
How much virtue is wrought in the soul by this bitter plant! It is held by
some a sickness: it is rather Physic: a sharp and short medicine, that
brings with it much and long health. This, if they will needs have it a
sickness, may be compared to the Ague. The Ague shakes a man worse then
another disease, that is mortal. At last it gives (...) a kind farewell, and
says, I have purged thy choler, and made thee healthful; by consuming and
spending out that humor, which would have endangered thy life. Affliction in
the taste is often more bitter, then a judgment that kills outright: but at
last it tells the soul, I have purged away thy foulness, wrought out thy
Iustes, and left there a sound man. So the good Physician procures to his
Patient a gentle Ague, that he may cure him of a more dangerous disease. Vt
curet spasmum, procurat febrim. Christ our best Physician deals a little
roughly with us, that he may set us straight. And howsoever the Fever of
affliction disquiet us a while, we shall sing in the conclusion with the
Psalmist. Psalm. 119. 71.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted; that I might learn thy statutes.

Saepe facit Deus opus quod non est sum; vt faciat opus quod est suum. GOD by
a work that is none of his, effects a work in us that is his. He molests us
with some vexations, as he did Job; which is Satan's work immediately, not
his; that thereby he might bring us to patience and obedience, which is his
work immediately and wholly, 1. Cor. ^1. 30
not Satan's. So we are chastned of the Lord, that we might not be condemned
with the world.

Bees are drowned in honey, but live in vinegar, and good men grow the better
affected, the more they are afflicted. The poor man for his ague, goes to his
garden, and plucks up thyme. The remedy for this spiritual sever, is true, but
sensible patience. Men should feel Gods strokes, and so bear them. It is
dispraiseable, either to be senseless or fenselesse. Not to know we are
stricken, or not to take the blows on the target of Patience.

Many can lament the effects, but not the cause: and sorrow that God grieves
them, not that they grieve God. They are angry with heaven, for being angry
with them. They with heaven for justice, that is angry with them for injustice.
But Maereamus, quod mereamur paenam. Let not the punishment, but the cause of
it, make thy soul sorrowful. Know thou art whipped for thy faults; and apply
to the prints the herb Patience.

Hearts-case, and spiritual joy.
Does sorrow and anguish cast down a man's heart, and may he complain, that his
soul is disquieted within him? Psalm. 42.
Let him fetch an herb out of this Garden, called Heartsease; an inward joy
which the holy Ghost works in him. Though all the days of the afflicted be
evil, Pro. 15. 15.
yet a merry heart is a continual feast. This is Heaven upon earth. Romans 14.
Romans 14. 17.
Peace of conscience, and joy of the holy Ghost. His conscience is assured of
peace with God, of reconciliation in the blood of JESUS; and that his soul is
wrapped up in the bundle of life.

This may be well called Hearts-ease: it is a holy, a happy herb to comfort
the spirits. When worldly joys, either (like Rahels children) are not, or
(like Eli's) are rebellious, there is Heartsease in this Garden, that shall
cheer him against all sorrows, certainty of Gods fauo^r. Let the world
frown, and all things in it run cross to the grain of our minds; yet with
thee, O Lord, is mereie and plentiful redemption. And, if no body else, Psalm.
73. 1.
yet God will be still good to Israel, even to those that are of a pure heart.
Those which we call penal evils, are either past, present, or to come: and they
cause in the soul, sorrow, pain, fear. Evils past sorrow, present pain,
future fear. Here is Hearts-ease for all these. Miseries past are solaced,
because God has turned them to our good; and we are made the better, by once
being worse. Miseries present find mitigation: and the infinite comfort that
is with us, within us, sweetens the finite bitterness that is without us.
Miseries future are to us contingent: they are uncertain, but our strength is
certain; God. Noui in quem credidi: I know whom I have trusted. Here is
aabundant ease to the heart.

Balsamum, or Faith.
Has the heart got a green wound, by comitting some offense against God? for
actual iniquity makes a gash in the soul. The good man runs for Balsamum,
and stancheth the blood: Faith in the promises of Jesus Christ. He knows there
is Balm at Gilead, and there are Physicians there: Ier. 8. 22.
and therefore the health of his soul may easily be recovered. He is sure,
that if the blood of Christ be applied, it will soon stanch the blood of his
conscience, and keep him from bleeding to death: and that the wounds of his
Savior will cure the wounds of his soul. And though this virtuall healing
herb be in Gods own Garden, yet he has a key to open it, prayer: and a hand
to take it out, and to lay it on his sores, faith. This is a sovereign herb;
and indeed so sovereign, that there is no herb good to us, without it. It may
be called Panaces; which Physicians say is an herb for all manner of
diseases: and is indeed the principal herb of grace; for it adornes the
soul with all the merits and righteousness of JESUS CHRIST.

Saint Iohns-wort, or Charity.
Does the world, through sweetness of gain, that comes a little too fast upon
a man, begin to carry away his heart to covetousness? Let him look in this
Garden for the herb, called Saint-Iohns-wort, Charity, and brotherly love. It
is called S. John's. herb not improperly: for he spent a whole Epistle in
commending to us this grace; and often inculcated; Little children, love one
another. And he further teaches, that this love must be actual. For he that
has this worlds goods, 1. Ioh. 3. 17.
and sees his brother has need, and shuts up his cowels of compassion from
him, how dwells the love of God in him? He has no such herb, as
Saint-Iohns-wort in his garden. The good Christian considers, that he has the
goods of this world, to do good in this world. And that his riches are called
Bona, August.
Goods; Non quod faciant bonum, sed vnde faciat bonum; not that they make him a
good man, but give him means to do good to others.

He learns a Maxim of Christ from the world; which the world teaches, but
follows not; that is, to make sure as much wealth as he can: as if it were
madness, to leave those goods behind him, which he may carry with him. This
policy we all confess good; but fail in the consecution. The world thinks,
that this assurance is got by purchasing great reuenews, or by locking up gold
in a coffer. The Christian likes well to save what he can; but he thinks this
is not the way to do it. He considers, that the richest hoorder leaves all
behind him; and carries nothing but a windingsheet to his grave. But he finds
out this policy in the Scripturs; Psalm. 73.
as David was resolved of his doubt in the Sanctuary: that what he charitably
gives alive, he shall carry with him dead; and so resolves to give much, that
he may keep much. Therefore what he must loose by keeping, he will keep by
loosing: and so proves richer under ground, then ere he was above it. The
poor man's hand he sees, to be Christ's treasury: there he hoords up; knowing
it shall be surely kept, and safely returned him. His Garden shall stand full
with Saint-Iohns-wort; and Charity is his herb, to cure all the sores of
covetousness.

Peny-royall, and Content,
Does poverty fasten her sharp teeth in a man's sides and cannot all his good
industry keep want from his family? Let him come to this Garden for a little
Peny-royall, Content. This will teach him to think, that God who feeds the
Ravens, and clothes the Lillies, will not suffer him to lack food and
raiment. The birds of the air neither plow nor sow, yet he never sees them
lie dead in his way for want of provision. They sleep, and sing, and fly, and
play, and lack not. He gathers hence infallibly, that God will bless his
honest endeavors: and whiles he is sure of Gods benediction, he thinks his Penny
royal, his poor estate rich. No man is so happy as to have all things; and
none so miserable as not to have some. He knows he has some; and that of the
best riches: therefore resolves to enjoy them, and to want the rest with
Content. He that has this herb in his garden, Peny-royall, contentation of
heart; be he never so poor, is very rich.

Agnus castus, and Continence.
Does the rebellious flesh, upon a little indulgence, grow wanton; and would
concupiscence enkindle the fire of lust? The good soul has in this Garden, an
herb called, Agnus castus, the chaste herb; and good store of Lettuce: which
Physicians say, cool this natural intemperate heat. His Agnus castus and
Lettuce, are Prayer and Fasting. He knows, that if this kind of devil get
possession of the heart, it goes not out but by Prayer and fasting. It is
fasting spettle, that must kill that Serpent. Mistress Venus dwells at the sign
of the Iuy-bush: and where the belly is made a barrel, stuffed with delicious
meats, and heating drinks, the concupiscence will be luxurious of turpitudes.
Sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus. Venerie will freese, if wine and iunkets
do not make her a fire. Lust will starve, if flesh-pampering shall not get her
a stomach. Where there is thin diet, and clean teeth, there will follow
Chastity.

Barly-water, or Coole-anger.
Does the heat of anger boil in a man's heart; and enrageth him to some
violent and precipitate courses? Let him extract from this garden the juice of
many cooling herbs; and among the rest a drink of Barly-water; a Tysan of
Meekness, to cool this fire. He that has proceeded to anger, is a man: he
that has not proceeded to sinful, harmefull anger, is a Christian, Iras^i
hominis, i^iurtam non facere Christiani. Ierem.
The most loving man will chide his friend sweetly; and he that does not, hates
him in his heart. Sic vigelit tolerantia, vt non dormiat disciplina. August.
But he will not be transported with anger, to the loss of his friends, of
himself. He considers, that God is provoked every day, yet is long suffering,
and of great goodness. He hears that others speak ill of him: he judges not
without certain knowledge. Knowing, he suffers not himself abused. It were
silliness to believe all; sullenness to believe none. The wrong done to God
and a good conscience must move him.

Non patitur ludum fama, fides, oculus. A man's name, his faith, and his eye
must not be iested withal. Yet when he is most angry, he recollects himself,
and clappes upon his heat a Tysan of meekness.

Parsley, or Frugalitie.
DEclines a man's estate in this world, as if his hand had scattered too
lauishly? There is an herb in this Garden; let him for a while feed on it:
Parsley, Parsimonie. Hereon he will abridge himself of some superfluities: and
remember, that moderate fare is better then a whole College of Physicians. He
will wear good clothes, and never better; knowing there is no degree beyond
decency. It was for Pompey to wear as rich a scarf about his leg, as other
Princes wore on their heads. But the frugall man can clothe himself all over
decently, with half the cost, that one of our gallant Pompeyes caseth his
leg. He that would not want long, let him practice to want somewhat, before
he extremely needs. Martyrol. page 1872.
I have read of an English Martyr, that being put into a prison at Canterbury,
tried (when she had liberty of better fare) to live on a spare diet; as
preparing and prearming herself with ability to brook it, when necessity
should put her to it. Frugality puts but three fingers into the purse at once:
Prodigality scatters it by heaps and handfuls. It is reported, that Caesar's
host lived a long time at Dyrrhachium with Coleworts: whereof arose the
Proverb, Lapsana viuere, to live sparingly. That stock lasts, that is neither
hoorded miserably, nor dealt out indiscreetly. We sow the furrow, not by the
sack, but by the handful. The wise man knows, it is better looking through a
poor lattice-window, then through an iron grate. And though he will lend what
he may, he will not borrow till he must need.

Liuer-wort, or Peaceable love.
IS a man sick in his liver, by accession of some distemperature? Does his
charity and love to some neighbors, for their malignancie against him, fail
and faint in his heart? For they say, Cogit amare Iecur. I stand not here on
the distinction betwixt Amare and Diligere. Then let him step to this Garden,
for some Iecuraria; we call it Liuer-wort. He asks of his heart for his old
love, his wonted amity: if his reason answer, that the persecutions of such
and such calumnies have fled her into another country; he is not at quiet,
till affection fetch it home again. He thinks, that night he sleeps without
Charity in his bosom, his pillow is harder then Jacobs was at Bethel. If
carnal respects can draw him to love his friend for his profit, Genesis 28.
or his kinsman for blood: he will much more love a Christian for his Fathers
sake, for his own sake.

There is a story (nothing worth but for the moral) of a great King, that
married his daughter to a poor Gentleman, that loved her But his grant had a
condition annexed to it, that whenever the Gentleman's left side looked
black, or he lost his wedding ring, he should not only loose his Wife, but
his life. One day pursuing his sports, he fell into a quarrel; where (at once)
he received a bruise on his left breast, and lost his ring in the scuffing. The
tumult over, he perceived the danger, whereinto his own heedlesnesse had
brought him; and in bitterness of soul shed many tears. In his sorrow, he
spied a book, which opening, he found therein his ring again; and the first
words he read, were a medicine for a bruised side. It directed him three
herbs, whereof a plaster applied should not fail to heal him. He did so;
was cured; was secured.

The application is this. The great King of heaven marries to man, poor man,
his own daughter, Mercy, and everlasting kindness: But threatens him, that
his side must not look black; his heart must not be polluted with spiritual
adulteries: nor must he loose his wedding ring, love to God and his Saints:
l^^^ he forset both Gods mercy, and his own salvation. Man in the pursiue of
worldly affairs, quarrels with his neighbors, and sc^ffles with cotention. So
his heart takes a bruise, and looks black with hatred. And Charity his wedding
ring is lost, in these wilful turbulencies and vexations. What should he do
but mourn? Lo, God in his goodness, directs him to a book, the holy Gospel.
There the Spirit helps him to his ring again, his former love; and to heal
his bruise, prescribes him three herbs.

First Rue, or herb of grace, which is repentance this teaches him to sorrow
for his strife and emulation; and purges away the bruised blood.

The second is the (...) deluce, Thankfulness: he considers how infinitely God
has loved him; therefore he must needs love God, and in him his. Beatus qui
amat te, and amicum in te, and inimicum propter te. He (...) it impossible, to
love him he has not seen, and to hate his Image, which he has seen.

The third, (...), which will grow the faster for injuries. Many wrongs
hereafter shall not put him out of charity. A good plaster of these herbs
will draw his bosom white again. And when it is so, let him use Iecurarta,
L^^er-wort; a continual application of love to his heart: that he keeping his
ring of faith sure from loosing; and his breast from the selfe-procured blows
of contention; he may hold also his wife for ever; that beautiful daughter of
the King, Gods eternal mercy.

Lilly, or Pureness of heart.
Does a man perceive his heart a little beguiled with o^tentation, and desires
he to seem better then he is? And how easily is man won, to answer his
commenders speculation? Let him fetch the Lilly, pureness of heart; which is
an herb of grace, growing in the humble valley of a meek spirit; yet is
white, and lovely. He knows, God can unmask the vizarded face, and turn the
inside outward. If a man be a Herod within, and a John without: a wicked
Politician in a ruff of Precisian-set; God can distinguish him. There are too
many of these, that stand up in the fabric like Pyramides: it were better for
us, for themselves, if they were but good honest pillars. Plaine-dealing, is a
good plain song, and makes better music, then a forced squeaking trebble,
that troubles us all with ^ouelties. Shallow honesty is more commendable, then
the profound quicke-sands of subtlety: and one leaf of the Plane-tree, is
better then many handfuls of the pricking Holly. They search out iniquities,
they accomplish a diligent search: Psalm. 64. 6.
both the inward thought of every one of them, and the heart is deep. But when
God shall wound them with his arrowe, They shall make their tongue fall upon
themselves. Such a man's own wit shall snare him; and he shall sing, or
rather sigh, Ingenio perii. They are glad of Christ's Cross; not to suffer for
it, but to enjoy plenitude of riches by it: And so, like many in great
Funerals, rejoice to be mour^ers; that they may get some of the blackes. Put
them to no charges, and they will make you believe, they are strongly, strangely
religious. But, 2. Sam. 24. 2. Sam. 24. 24.
Shall we offer burnt sacrifices to the Lord our GOD of that which cost us
nothing? Christ compares this man to a painted sepulcher. Sepulchrum quasi
semi-pulchrum, says one. Extra nitidum, intus foetidum. But let them be the
men they seem; and not nettles in the midst of a rose-cake. The good great
man, though he be able securely to do much mischief; regards more the sins
indignity, then his own indemnity.

Enula campa^a, or Obedience.
PErhaps evil example has suddenly, and, without provided consideration, led
a man into evil. Let him run to this Garden for Enulaeampana. This herb is
that Christ enioined us. Search the Scriptures; adhere to the word of the Lord.
This shall give decision of al doubts: and teach thee what path to fly, what
way to take. It is given of this herb. Enula campana reddit praecordia sana.
It is true of our constant cleaving to the word; that it shall purge the heart
of what corruption soever bad precedents have put into it. Of all the herbs in
thy Garden loose not this. Forgo not the Sword of the Spirit: it is thy best
weapon.

Heart-wort, or Affiance in Gods promises.
IT may be, sorrow of heart for sins has cast a man down; and he is
swallowed up of too much heaviness. There is an herb to comfort him, called,
Heart-wort; affiance in the merciful promises of God: past to him by Word,
Oath, Seal, Scriptures, Sacraments,: and therefore infallible. At what time
soever what sinner soever repents of what sin soever, God will put all his
wickedness out of his remembrance. He will not let that promise fall to the
ground, but meets it with peace and joy. Blessed are they that mourn, for they
shall be comforted. Mat. 5. 4.
He believes that his wet seed time shall have a glad harvest: Psalm. 126. 5.
for they that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. He persuades himself, that
the days of mourning will pass over, as the wind blows over the rain; and
then God will wipe away al tears from his eyes, Ren. 7. 17.
with the hand of mercy. This confidence, in the midst of all sorrows, is his
Heart-wort.

Hyaeinth, or Following Christ.
SAy that the Christian has met with some gilded pill of corruption; some
poisonous doctrine, yet plausible to flesh and blood. Let him search this
Garden for Hyacinth, or So^sequium, Tornesol: an herb, that duly and
obediently follows the Sun. Do thou follow the Sun of righteousness:
Mal. 4. 2.
and let his bright beams guide thy course: who has promised to teach all
those, that with an humble heart, and earnest prayer seek it at his hands.
Follow the Sun, and he will bring thee where he is, to heaven, at the right
hand of his Father. Let no wandering Planet err thee; but adhere to the Sun
with a faithful imitation.

Care-^way.
IF worldly troubles come too fast upon a man; he has an herb called
Careaway. Not that he bequeathes himself to a supine negligence, as if God
would fill his house with provision, while he sits and sings care away. But as
he is free from idleness, so also from distrust. He considers the Ravens and
Lillies; and knows, that the Lord is the Preserver of men, as well as of
Fowls and flowers: that he respects man above those, and his own above other
men. Therefore he throws all his cares upon God; as if they were too heavy a
lode for himself. Sollicitous thoughtfulnes can give him no hurt, but this
herb Careaway shall easily cure it.

Holy Thi^tle, or good Resolution.
Yield that he is pressed with injuries; as who will live godly in Christ, and
shall not suffer persecution! He is oppressed by force or fraud, might or
subtilty; and cannot help himself. He has a good herb in this Garden,
called Carduus Benedictus, Holy thistle: a godly resolution, that through many
miseries he must enter heaven. He rests himself on God; and rather wishes his
harmelesnesse should suffer, then himself not to give passive and patient
obedience to lawful authority. Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us
from the burning fiery furnace, Dan. 3. 17.
and he will deliver us out of thine hand, O King. But if not; be it known to
thee, O King, that, we will not serve thy gods, nor worship thy golden Image.

There are many other herbs in this garden: as if he be to deal with crafty
adversaries, let him fetch some Sage, honest policy; and such as may stand
with an untouched conscience. For Christ gave us this prohibition, to be wise
as Serpents; though withal a cohibition, that we be harmless as Doves. Mat.
10. 16.
If he be tempted to ebriety, he has in this Garden, Coleworts; moderate
abstinence. Matthiolus on the preface of Dioscorides notes such a natural
enmity betwixt this herb and drunkenness: that if you plant Colewort near
to the roots of the Vine, of it self it flies from them. But I excuse my
self.

Non ego cunct a meis amplecti versibus opto. I would not leave nothing vnsayd.
Thus I have walked you through a sacred Garden of many gracious herbs: happy
souls thus planted. I will stay you no longer, then to hear your blessing.

It receives blessing from God.
THe Reward gives a happy conclusion to this good ground. So it pleases the
Lord to accept our labors, that he will reward them; not after our own merit,
for that is not an atome; but after his own mercy, which exceedes heaven and
earth. Receive this blessing with a thankful heart; thou have not earned it.
It is objected, that here it is said, their works are meet for God, therefore
deserve this blessing. And Wisd. 3. Wisd. 3. 5.
God proved them, and found them meet for himself; as if they could stand
Gods trial. And Paul exhorts us to walk worthy of the vocation, Ephesians. 4. 1.
wherewith we are called. I answer, Deus coronat done sua, non merit a nostra.
Aug.
God rewards his own works, not our worth. It is given, Non meritis
operantis, sed miseratione donantis: not for the deserts of the doer, but for
the mercy of the giver. Datur operatoribus, non pro operibus. Luke chap. 12.
Verse 32. Luke 12. 32.
It is my Fathers will to give you a kingdom.

Do we good? from whom is it? does not God work in us to will and to do?
Thou have done well: be comforted; be not proud. It was Gods work, Bern.
not thine. Omnia merita Dei dona sunt: and it a homo propter ipsa magis Deo
debtor est, quam Deus homini. All our good works are Gods gifts: and
therefore man is more beholding to God for them, then God to man. If in this
Garden any good herb spring over the wall, and sawcily challenge to i^ self a
prerogative of merit; deal with it, as the Gardener with supersluous
branches; prune it off. Or as Tor quatus with his ouer-venturous son; cut it
short with the sword of the Spirit, for daring beyond the Commission. Our
Adversaries oppose this truth very violently, both in the Schools, and in the
Pulpits: but come they to their deathbeds, to argue it between God and their
own souls; then grace and grace alone; mercy and only mercy; JESUS and none
but JESUS.

And this even their great Bell-weather is forced to acknowledge. Bellar. de
Iustif. lib. 5. cap. 7.
Propter incert it udinem propriae iustitiae, and periculum inanis gloriae,
tutissimum est fiduciam totam in sola Dei misericordia and benignitate
repo^ere. I will translate his words truly. By reason of the uncertainty of our
own righteousness, and the danger of vain glory; the sa^est course is to
put our whole trust and confidence in in the only favor and mercy of God.
But perhaps Bellarmine spoke this as a mere Jesuit; and now made Papable, he
be willing to recant and unsay it.

This blessing then comes not for the Grounds merit, but for the Dressers
mercy. It is said, Genesis 6. Genesis 6. 5.
tht God would destroy the World with a flood, Because the imaginations of man's
heart were only evil continually. And Genesis 8. Genesis 8. 21.
it is said, that GOD will no more curse and destroy the ground for man's sake;
because the imaginations of his heart are only evil from his youth. The same
reason that is alleged, why God will not spare the world, is also alleged why
God will spare the world.

It serves plentifully to demonstrate, that not for man's merit, but for Gods
mercy, confusion is withholden. Mal. 3. 6.
I am the Lord, I change not. Therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed.

It receives.
SVch is the immense goodness of God, that he will add grace to grace, and
when he has shown mercy, he will show more mercy. As if he expected no
other argument of future bounty, but his former bounty. Whom he did
predestinate, them also he called: and whom he called, Romans 8. 30.
them also he justified: and whom he justified, them he also glorified. Man is
to be considered in a fourfold estate. Confectionis, Infectionis,
Refectionis, Perfectionis. First, God made him happy, without misery, without
iniquity. God has made man upright: but they have sought out many inventions.
Eccl. 7. 29.
If a glorious heaven above him, a fruitful earth under him, feruiceable
creatures about him, could give him solace and folicity, he was not scanted.
Here is man's first draught of Gods bounty; his original state. 2. Then man
fell from holiness, and so from happiness; and lost the favor of the
Creator, with the good of the creature: that a general curse fell on the earth
for his sake. Lo, now he lies weltring in his gore, who shall heal him, who
shall revive him? God promised him a Savior, and kept his word. Look on his
own only Son hanging, bleeding, dying on an accursed Cross. 3. A Redeemer
is come; what is man the better for it, that has no power to believe on him?
Faith he has none, but what God must put into him. Again, Lord help: let us
receive yet a third mercy: make us believers, or we are never the better. We
had as good have no Savior, as not to have him our Savior: and ours he
cannot be, unless the Lord make us his. 4. Lastly the Lord gives us Faith: and
so we shall receive a happiness by this believed Savior, better then ever our
first creation gave us: a kingdom; a kingdom of life; an eternal kingdom of
life; that can never be taken from us. Thus we are still receivers, and God is
the giver. We receive blessing from God.

Blessing.
THis word is of a great latitude. What good is there, which will not be
brought within this compass? This blessing has a double extent. There is
Beatitudo viae, and Beatitudo Patriae. A blessing of the way, and a blessing of
the Country: one of grace, the other of glory. The former is either outward,
or inward.

1 Outward, Psalm. 132. Ps. 132. 15.
I will abundantly bless her proutsion: I will satisfy her poor with bread.
Deuteronomy. 28. Deuteronomy. 28. 4.
Blessed in the field, blessed in the city. The fruits of thy body, of thy
ground, of thy cattle shall be blessed. Thy basket, thy store; thy going out,
and coming in shall be blessed. Which things do often come to the godly even
on earth, and that in abundance. For as all have not riches, that exceedingly
love them: so many have them, that do not much care for them. Wealth is like a
woman; the more courted, the further off.

2 Inward. The godly on earth is (as it were) in the suburbs of heaven; Romans
14. 17.
whose kingdom consists, not in meat and drink, but righteousness, peace of
conscience, and joy of the holy Ghost. Could his life be as full of sorrows,
as ever Lazarus was full of sores, yet he is blessed. The Sunshine of mercy
is still upon him; and the blessing of GOD makes him rich. Let the air
thunder, and the earth quake, and hell roar; yet He that walks uprightly,
Pro. 10. 9.
walks surely. Qui vadit plane, vadit sane. I have read it storied of a young
Virgin, that at a great Princes hands had the choice of three vessels. One
whereof should be freely given her, even that she should choose. The first was a
vessel of gold, richly wrought, and set with precious stones; and on it
written. Who chooses me shall have what he deserves. The second was of
silver. superscribed thus. Who chooses me shall have what nature desires. The
third was of lead; whose motto was this. Who chooses me, shall have what God
has disposed. The former pleased her eye well, but not her understanding. It
offered what she deserved. She knew, that was just nothing: therefore refused
it. The second considered, offered what Nature desires. She thought that could
be no solid good; for Nature desires such things as please the carnal lust.
This she also refused. The third had a course outside, but the sentence
pleased her well; offering what God had disposed. So she faithfully put her
self upon Gods ordinance, and chose that. This Virginis man's soul. The golden
vessel is the worlds riches; contentf^ll to an auarous eye. Too many choose
this: but being opened, it was full of dead men's bones, and a fools babble. To
testify them fools, which cleave to the world: and at last all their hopes
shall be rewarded with a babble. Neither is this all. Though their inward
thought be, that their houses shall continue for ever; yet they shall be laid in
the grave like sheep, Psalm. 49. 11. 14.
and death shall feed on them. The siluer-vessell is the lusts of the flesh;
those fond and vain delights, which concupiscence seeks. So says the Motto:
It gives what nature desires: but corrupt nature affects nothing, but what
gives co^placency to the flesh. This vessel opened was full of wild fire, and
an iron whip. God shall scourge the lustful here with the whip of judgments,
diseases of body, infamy of name, overthrow of estate, vexation of conscience.
And Satan shall hereafter burn them in wild fire, such flames as can never be
quenched. The leaden vessel is, as the sense and sentence declares it, the
blessing of God. The chuser of it shall have what God has disposed for him.
Blessed soul that makes this election: for opened, it was found full of gold
and most precious jewels; every one more worth then a world, the immortal
graces of Gods Spirit.

The Virgin chose this, and she was married to the Kings son. Choose this
vessel, O my soul; and Jesus Christ the king of heaven shall marry thee. No
matter though it seem lead without; glister not with earthly vanities: it is
rich within; the wealth thereof cannot be valued, though all the Arithmeticians
of the world go about to sum it. Psalm. 4. 6.
There be many that say, who will show us any good? Lord lift thou up the
light of thy countenance upon us.

This blessing has yet a further extent, to the blessedness of our Country:
when we shall hear it: Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world. Mat. 25. 34.
For, si sic bonus es sequentibus te, qualis futurus es consequentibus! If thou
Lord, Bern. Sermon. 47. in Cant.
be so good to those that follow thee, what will thou be to those that find
thee! If there be such blessing in this world, what shall that be in the life
to come! If the first fruits of our inheritance, and the earnest of the spirit
be so graciously sweet here: surely when that infinite mass of glory shall
be broken up, and communicated to us, we shall be wonderfully ravished. When
that which is perfect is come, 1. Cor. 13. 10.
then that which is in part shall be done away. This is, beat a vita in font,
says Aug. a blessed life indeed. Aeterna sine successione, distributa sine
diminutione, communis sine inuidia, sufficiens sine indigentia, iucunda sine
tristitia, beata sine omni miseria. Thou will show me the path of life: in
thy presence is the fullness of joy, Psalm. 16. 11.
at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

No tongue can declare this blessing; happy heart that shall feel it: whose
glorified eye shall one day behold all: and ten thousand times more then we
have spoken. Who shall say, as it is in the Psalm: Sicut (...), it a and
vidimus; as we have heard, so we have seen in the City of our God. As we
have heard it preached on earth, we now find it true in heaven: though the
City we enjoy far excel the map we saw.

Well this is Gods blessing, and he will give it to the good ground. Labor we
then to be fruitful Gardens; and to abound with gracious herbs; that God may
in this world shower upon us, the deawes of his mercy: and after this life
transplant us to his heavenly Paradise. Let not the pleasures of sin; the
lusts of the wanton flesh, the riches, snares, cares of the world, nor all
those transient delights, whose taste is only in the sense, the operation in
the conscience; that tickle men for an hour, and wound them for ever: nor all
those vain desires of carnal complacency, which shall one day be laid upon
Gods cold earth; intercept us to the privation of this blessing.

Let us not be hunting after sports, as Esau for venison, and loose our
blessing: lest we cry, howl, rore, when it is too late to recover it Think,
oh think: there is a heaven, a GOD, a JESUS, a kingdom of glory, society of
Angels, communion of Saints, joy, peace, happiness, and eternity of all these;
which it will be a fearful thing to loose, for the base pleasures and short
delights of this world.

O great God of all, and sweet Father of thy chosen, pour upon us thy holy
deawes of grace: make our souls to stand thick with sanctified herbs; that
we may receive thy blessing. That honoring thee in the day of Grace, we may
be hononoured by thee in the day of Glory. Grant this for thy loved Son, and
our loving Savior, even, JESUS CHRIST his sake. Amen.

THE FOREST Of Thorns.

THE FOVRTH SERMON.

EZEKIEL. 28. 24. There shall be no more a pricking Bryar unto the house of Israel,
nor any grieuing Thorn of all that are round about them. Terra salutifferas
herbas, eadem que nocentes Nutrit; and vrticae proxima saepe rosa est.

LONDON, Printed by George Purslowe, for John Budge, and are to be sold at his
shop, at the great South-dore of Paul's, and at Britains Burse. 1616.

THE FOREST Of THORNS.
THE FOVRTH SERMON.
HEB. Chap. 6. Verse. 8. But that which bears thorns and briars, is rejected,
and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned.
THis verse begins with a word of Dsiunction; But. The Rain of grace falls
upon the good ground: it returns berbes; it receives blessing. But that
which bears thorns and briars, is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing. etc. It
is undeniably true, that S. Paul Act. 20. 27.
knew no Purgatory: otherwise, he that shunned not to declare to men all the
counsel of God, would not in a voluntary silence have omitted this mystery.
He delivers two sorts of Grounds, the good and the bad; the one blessed, the
other near unto cursing. He knew no mean, either betwixt good and evil men,
or betwixt reward and punishment, blessing and cursing. It seems that Christ
himself was ignorant of that point, which the Papists know so soundly, and
believe so roundly. Mat. 13. 24.
For he says, In Gods Field, whatsoever grows is either corn or cockle: for
the one whereof a Barn is provided; for the other, unquenchable Fire. A third
sort, between herbs and weeds, had either the Master or the Servant known,
they would have acknowledged.

This first word of the Text, But, is a strong engine set to the walls of
Purgatory, to ouer-turne them, and ouer-burne them with the fire of hell. For
they are imaginary pales, that divide hell and Purgatory: take away your
conceit, and they are both one: all is hell. For surely hell was raked, when
Purgatory was found; and it is nothing else but a larder to the Popes Kitchen.
What fancy soever founded it, their wits are foundred, that labor to
maintain it. For they cannot tell us, vel quid sit, vel vbi: what it is, nor
where it is. They cavil with us for want of unity and consent in judgment. De
Purgat. lib. 2. cap. 6.
Yet Bellarmine recites eight several opinions amongst them, about the place:
And concludes at last, that it must remain among those secrets, Quae suo
tempore aperientur nobis; which shall be unfolded to us in their times. Some
think the torments of it to consist in fire, others in water: some that the
afflicters are Angels, other that they are Devils. So they teach omni modo,
that which is nullo modo: and because it is vbique, is therefore nullibi.
Howsoever, it being the Popes peculiar; and in his power to command the Angels
to fetch out whom he list; me thinks the Popes are strangely unmerciful,
that in all this time none of them has made a general Gaole-deliuerie. But
our Purgatory is the blood of Jesus Christ, 1. Ioh. 1.
which cleanses us from sin. And they that have no portion in this blood
shall be rejected, are nigh unto cursing, and their end is to be burned.

The barren, or rather euil-fruited ground is the ground of my discourse: and
according to the common distinction of Evil, here is a double evil in the
Text. Vnum quod malus facit, alterum quod malus patitur. An evil which the
wicked man does; and an evil which he suffers: an evil that is sin, and an
evil that is punishment for sin. In the former the wicked are agents; in the
latter, patients. The one evil is done by them, the other upon them. They
offend Gods justice, and GOD in his justice offends them. They have loved
cursing, and cursing shall be unto them: they desired not blessing, and it is
far from them. They produce Thorns, and the end of thorns is to be burned.
The first and worst evil (for the other, though evil to them, is good in Gods
good Justice) is sin. Herein 1. the wicked are compared to bad ground. 2.
their iniquities to thorns and briars. 3. and the manner how so ill weeds
arise from this ground, is said to be bearing. The earth that bears thorns,
etc. Here first observe,

1 The different word the Apostle uses. For the good earth, he says, it is
(...) bringing forth herbs. For the evil, it is (...), bearing, not bringing
forth. As if good works were brought forth like children, not without pain
and travel: evil works but cast out like froth or skimme; as easily vented,
as invented. Therefore the earth is said ebullire, to bubble or boil out such
things, as mere excretions. Our proverb says, An ill weed grows apace.
Herbs grow not without preparing the ground, planting and watring them by
seasonable deawes and diligence. Weeds are common: it is hard to set the foot
besides them. The basest things are ever most plentiful. Plurima, pessima. I
have read of a kind of mouse, that breeds six score young ones in one nest.
Whereas the offspring of the Lioness or Elephant is but single. You shall
find your furrows full of Cockle and da^^ell, though you never sew them. The
earth, says the Philosopher, is now an own mother to weeds, and naturally
breeds and feeds them: but a stepmother to good herbs. Man by a procliuitie of
his own natural inclination, is apt to produce thorns and briars: but ere he
can bring forth herbs, Graces, God must take pains with him. No husbandman so
labors his ground, as God our hearts. Happy earth, that yields him an expected
harvest. But that which bears Thorns is near to be cursed and burned.

2 Observe, that a wicked man is compared to bad earth, and that fitly in 5.
respects.

1 For baseness. The earth is the heauiest of all Elements, and does naturally
sink downwards; as if it had no rest, but in the center; which it self is. A
wicked man is base-minded, and sinkes with a dull and ponderous declination;
not regarding the things above, but these below. He has commune with men
sursum os, but with beasts, deorsum cor. All his affections have a low object,
not out of humility, but base deiection. His hope, desire, love, joy, are set
on these inferior things: and like a Mole, he digs still downwards, till he
come to his Center, his own place, Hell. Acts. 1.
Telluris inutile pondus.

2 For coldness. Experience teaches that the earth is cold; and coldness is a
natural quality pertinent to it, though accidentally there be bred in it fiery
vapors. The wicked man has a cold heart, frozen up in the dregs of iniquity;
though there be an unnatural heat sometimes flaming in him; the fire of lust
and malice tormenting his bowels: but this is no kindly heat to warm his
conscience. That is derived from the fire of the Temple, that never goes out,
and only given by Jesus Christ, that baptizeth with the holy Ghost, and with
fire.

3 For foulness. The squalid earth (for we speak not here of any good
ground) is called Lutulenta terra; miery and noisome: yet is it neat and
clean in comparison of a sinne-contaminated soul. The body was taken from the
earth; not the Soul: the body shall resolve to the earth; not the soul: yet
the polluted soul is more sordid, then either a leprous body, or a muddy
earth. In the eye of GOD, there is no beauty so acceptable, no foulness so
detestable, as the souls. The Dove carried the praise of beauty from the
Peacocke, by the Eagles judgment: that though the Peacocke living had the
fayrer plumes, yet dead he has but a black liver. Gods judgment of all men's
fairness, is by the liver, the cleanesse of the heart in his eyesight.

4 For obscurity and darkness; the earth is called a place of black
darkness, the land of forgetfulness. So Job and David term it. The wicked
Soul is full of darkness, thickness of sight, caecitie of understanding;
not seeing the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. Our Gospel is hid to
those that are lost. 1. Cor. 4. 4*
Whose minds the god of this world has blinded. ^ugo.
There is in them Hebetudo mentis, which is acutae rationis obtusio, carnalis
intemperantiae crassis sensibus inducta. They are so utterly ignorant of
heaven, that (as it is in the Proverb) ne pictum quidem viderunt: they have
not seen it, so much as in the map or picture. As to men shut up in the low
cauernes of the earth, not so much as the sun, and stars, and the lights of
heavens lower parts have appeared. Tolerabilior est poena, viuere non posse,
quam nescire. Ignorance is a heavier punishment then death; says the
Philosopher. Se^.
Darkness is their desire, because their deeds are evil. Perhaps at last,
after a long dotage on their dark delight, earth; they come to hear of a
better and richer country: and then take only with them the Lantern of
Nature to find it. But so erepto lumine can delabrum querunt. Having lost the
light, they grope for the Candlestick. A man that comes into his house at
midnight, sees nothing amiss: in the daylight he finds many things misplaced.
Nature is but a dark Lantern, when by it we endeavor to ransacke the
conscience. Only the light of grace can demonstrate all the sluttish and
incurious misorders in our souls.

5 The maine resemblance between an evil ground and worse man, consists in
the ill fruits, that they both produce: briars and thorns; and such (not
only vnhelpefull, but) hurtful vices. This is the principal analogy, which
our Apostle intends; the pith and marow of this reference. But before we come
to a particular anatomizing of this Subject, some obseruable doctrines fall
profitably to our instruction. Observe therefore.

1 The word of God will work some way. It falls not upon any ground in vain;
but will produce herbs or weeds. It is such Physic, as will either cure or
kill. It mollifies one, makes another more hard. Acts. 2.
Some hearts it pricks, others it terrifies, though conuerts not, as it made
Foelix tremble. None ever heard it, but they are either better or worse by it.
1. Cor. 1. 23.
We preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block, unto the
Gentiles foolishness. But unto them which are called, both of Jews and
Greeks, the power of GOD, Heb. 4. 12.
and the wisdom of God. In this Epistle it is called a double-edged sword,
etc. It is either a converting or conuincing power; sealing receivers to
redemption, contemners to reiection. The word which I have preached, shall
judge you in the latter day.

If this doctrine were considerately digested in hearers hearts, what a zealous
preparation would it work in their souls! It would bring us to these seats
with other minds, if we remembered, that we return not back to our own
doors the very same we came out; but either somewhat better, Act. 13. 7. 8.
or much worse. Sergius Paulus was turned, Elimas obdurated at one Sermon.
After our Saviors heavenly Sermon. John 6. Some went back, Ioh. 6. 66.
and walked no more with him; that Christ bespake his Apostles, Will ye also
go away? Others stuck more close. Verse 68.
Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal life. The Prophet
Esaias speaks fully to this purpose. As the rain comes down, Esaias. 55. 10.
and returns not back, but waters the earth, and makes it bring forth and
bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the eater. So shall my
word be that goes forth out of my mouth: it shall not return unto me void;
but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing
whereto I sent it.

The word that we have preached, shall either save you, or judge you. It shall
be either a copy of your pardon, or a bill of your indictment at the last day.
John Baptist calls the Gospel a Fan, that will distinguish between true and
false children, between Wheat and Chafe. It will make known the
faithfulness of those, Mat. 3. 12.
that with honest hearts embrace it; and scatter hypocrites like chafe, by
reason of their insolid leuity. Simeon so prophesied to Mary the Virgin of her
Son, That he should be the fall and the rising, the reparation and ruin of
many: Luke. 2. 34.
and whiles he is set for a sign Which shall be spoken against, by this
means the thoughts of many hearts shall be revealed. The word is like fire,
that has a double operation upon the several subjects it works; stubble or
gold. It fires the one, and fines the other. Some hearts it enflames with zeal
to it: other it sets on fire to quench, impugn, persecute it. It is to
conversion, if believed; to confusion if despised. Lo, Christ, himself
preaching, some faithfully entertain, others reject; Mat. 8.
as the Gergesens, that had rather have their hogs saved then their souls.

2. That thorns are produced, the fault is not in the good Rain, but the ill
ground. What could I, Esa. 4. 5.
says God, have done more to my Vineyard? I have done enough to make it bear
good grapes. Wherefore then, or from what cause brings it forth wild grapes?
The earth desires the influence of heaven, and showers from the clouds, to
make it fruitful. It is granted: the Sun shines, the dewes fall. The Garden
hereupon brings forth herbs, the desert thorns. If these blessings of heaven
were the proper cause of the weeds; why has not then the good ground such
cursed effects? The everlasting lamp of heaven sends forth his saving rays:
and the sacred deawes of the Gospel fall on the pure and unclean heart. There
it is requited with a fertile obedience: here with an impious ingratitude. Let
not the mercy of God be blamed for this man's misery. Perditio ex se: God has
done enough to save him. S. Augustine directly to this purpose. Simul pluit
Dominus super segetes, De benedict. Esauet Jacob.
and super spinas. Sed segeti pluit ad horreum, spinis ad ignem: and tamen vna
est pl^uia. GOD at once raines upon the herbs and the thorns. Upon the herbs
or good seed, to shoot it up for his barn, for himself; upon the thorns to
fit them for the fire: yet is it one and the same rain.

This shall cover the faces of Libertines with ^uerlasting confusion; who are
evermore rubbing their own filthiness on Gods purity; and charging him as
the author of their sins. If the Devils in hell should speak, what could
they say more? we have fallen from our happiness, and God caused it. Reprobate
thoughts! Men have spilt blood, defiled forbidden beds, struck at Princes with
treasons, ruined countries with depopulations, filled the earth with rapes, and
shot at heaven with blasphemies; and lay their damnation on their Maker:
deriuing from his purpose excuses of their wickedness. The inevitable decree
of Gods counsel is charged: the thought of that has made them careless: so
with good food they poison themselves. Willing fools, rack not your belief
with impossibilities. Behold! God is so far from authorizing your sins and
falls; that he raines on yo^ the holy deawes of his word to mollify your
hearts. Justifying himself by this proffered means of your salvation, that he
would not the death of a sinner. O but his hidden will is to damn us. Mad men,
that forsake that signed will, written in tables, published with trumpets,
commanded with blessings, cursings, promises, menaces, to which every soul
stands bound! and fall to prying into those unsearchable mysteries, covered
with a curtain of holy secrecy, not to be drawn aside till the day comes,
wherein we shall know as we are known.

Cease aspiring man to root thy wickdnesse in heaven; and to draw in God as an
accessory to thy profaneness. God would have thee saved, but thou will bear
thorns and briars, though thou endangerest thy self to cursing. Is this the
requital for his mercy? Are all his kindnesses to thee thus taken? That when
he has done so much to bring thee to heaven, thou will tax him for casting
thee to hell? when he has so labored to make thee good, thou will lay to his
charge thy own voluntary badnesse. No: justify God, and magnify his mercy.
Accuse thine own corrupt heart, that turns so good and alimentall food into
offensive crudities. Say, Heaven is good, but thy ground is naught. Fatness
and juice has been bestowed on thee, but thou have yielded pestilent and
noisome fruits. Lay not the fault on heaven, but on the native corruption of
thy own heart, that has decocted the goodness of God into venom.

3. This observation shall make way (and give place) to another. That the
ground is very unthankful, which answers the kindness of heaven in rayning on
it, with briars and thorns. Wretched man, that receives so blessed deawes from
the fountain of mercy, and returns an ungrateful wickedness. Unthankful
it is; as failing in both these essential parts of Gratitude; acknowledging,
and requiting a benefit: and so guilty both of falsehood and injustice. Say the
wicked did confess Gods mercies, yet where is their obedience? True
thankfulness is called Gratiarum actio, non dictio. Whiles for holy deawes
they render unholy weeds, this disobedience is the greatest Ingratitude. The
silence of our tongues; the not opening our lips, to let our mouth show forth
his praise, is a grievous unthankfulness. He is of an evil disposition, that
conceales or dissembles a benefit. This is one branch of Ingratitude: but our
speech hitherto keeps but low water; let us rise up to view the mountenous
billows of that ingratitude here taxed; a real, actual, sensual, senseless
unthankfulness: if it be not a degree beyond it, and unthankfulness too
poor a word to express it. Mere ingratitude returns nothing for good; but
this sin returns evil for good. Silence in acknowledging is too short: we
must think of a contumacious and contumelious retribution. God, after his
merciful rain looks for some herbs of Grace, when he walks down into his
Garden, to see whether the Vine flourished, Cant. 6. 11.
and the Pomegranates budded. And behold weeds, stinking weeds, stinging
weeds; thorns and briars! Here is Ingratitude in full proportion, wiith all
the dimensions of his ugly stigmaiticke form. This is that wickedness, which
brings the ground here to reiection, malediction, combustion. Observe further
that

4. Wicked men prove commonly so much the worse, as they might have been
better: and divert the means of their conversion to their confusion. The more
rain of the Gospel they receive, the more abundantly they thrust forth the
thorns of iniquities. The roots of these briars are surely earthed in their
hearts, and do boil out at the warm deaws of the Word. It fares with them, as
with a man of a surfeted stomach: the more good meat he eats, the more he
increases his corruption. The former crudities undigested, vnegested, having
the greater force, turn the good nutriment into themselves. There is such an
antipathie betwixt the good word of God, and the heart of a reprobate; that the
more it wrastles to bring him to heaven, the more he wrastles against it, that
he might be damned. Tully mentions a Country, wherein a great drought and
heat makes abundance of mire and dirt; but store of rain causes dust. It is
here experimentally true: the plentiful rain of Gods blessed word is answered
with the dusty and sandy barrenness of men's evil lives. So the Sun, shining
upon unclean dung-hils, is said to cause a greater stench: yet no wise man
blames the beams of the Sun, but the filthiness of those putrified heaps,
for such offense. The Sun of righteousness has sent down the glorious
rays of his Gospel among vs^ the wicked hereupon steame out the more noisome
and stenchfull fruits. Upon whom shall the accusation light; Gods comfortable
heat of mercy, or our putrid and rank iniquities? Sometimes the Suns heat
working upon a muddy and baneful object, breeds horrid serpents. No wonder
then, if this rain of the Gospel engender in reprobate minds, weeds, and
prickles. The Cicones have a river, that does harden the bowels, Ovid.
and make the entrals stony: a strange operation in them that drink it. But if
the water of life do harden the hearts of Pharaohs, and exasperate the
mischiefs of a malicious Elimas, let the imputation of fault light where it is
deserved. It was a strange protestation, that God had against Israel. I have
nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me. Esa. 1. 2.
I have brought them up in my house, and taught them my precepts, and yet (as
if my instructions and favors had made them worse) they have rebelled against
me. Thus when the Sun is hottest, the springs are coldest: and the more
fervent the love of God is to us, the more cold is our charity to him, and to
others for him. As if the sweet dews of Hermon had made the hill of Syon more
barren.

It is written of the Thraeian flint, that it burns with water, and is
quenched with oil: a fit Emblem of those wicked souls, that are the worse
for Gods endeavor to better them. But such contrary effects has the Gospel in
contrary natures. As by the heat of the Sun wax is softened, and yet clay is
hardened: so by the preaching of the word, the hearts of such as shall be saved,
are mollified; but the hearts of the lost are further obdurate. God in his wis^
justice will be even with men: since they will not be the better for his
favors, they shall be the worse. Seeing they will not bring forth herbs, they
shall cast forth weeds: and he that might not in their salvation, will be
glorified in their subversion. For application.

This Rain has fallen upon us all: how have we entertained it? where be our
herbs? It is objected against us, that our forefathers who wanted this rain,
brought forth more herbs, then we that have it. That they in the days of
ignorance did more then they knew; that we in the light of the Gospel know more
then we do. Apollonius among other wonders writes one most wonderful: that
there was a people, which could see nothing in the day, but all in the night.
What, has the Sun blinded us? Cannot we see to serve God so well in the
light, as they did in the dark?

It was once said, Ignoti nulla cupido: but now it may be inuerted; Noti nullus
amor: we little esteem the Gospel, because it is frequent amongst us. The long
enjoying it has dulled our estimation. Full children are weary of their bread,
and play with it. Like the Indians, that have such store of gold and precious
stones, that they truck them away for glasses and rattles. Perhaps the cold
legs of custom will bring us to Church: and we are content to hear the
Preacher taxing our frauds, vsuries, oaths, oppressions. May be for some show
of devotion, we will ask counsel at his lips: but say what he will, we will
not part with our sins.

The Princes of Israel came to Jeremy, and entreat him to inquire of the Lord
fot them: Ier. 42.
promising, that whatsoever direction the Lord should send they would obey. The
Prophet accordingly presents their supplication to God. God answers You shall
not go into Egypt, Ier. 43.
lest you be destroyed: but abide still in Judah, and you shall be safe. When
they heard this Oracle, because it was not their humors, they replied, We will
go into Egypt. This was their purpose from the beginning, (though they
dissembled a will to know Gods mind) which if Gods command crosses, they will
cross his command: they will go into Egypt. So people will be content to
hear what God says to them by his Ministers: but if he speak not what
pleases them, they will follow their own affections. We are such nice and
froward pieces, that the more God wooes us, we are the further off. As it is
with some shallow professors of Music, says the Poet.

Omnibus hoc vitium cantoribus, Hor. lib. 1.
inter amicos,
Vt nunquam inducant animum cantare rogati. Sat. 3.

When they are most earnestly entreated, they make most dainty to sing or
play. So the more the Lord calls for our praises, the more hoarse are our
voices, the more harsh our notes; or perhaps we will not sing at all. But if
God has given us music, and we will not dance; as Christ reproved the Jews;
we shall mourn in sadness for our obstinate refusal of proffered mirth. You
have heard Herodotus tale of the Piper. He came to the waterside, and piped to
the fishes: they would not dance. He took his net and caught some of them;
and being thrown upon dry land they began to leap and skip up. Nay, quoth
the Piper, I offered you music before, and you would none: now you shall dance
without a pipe. Men commonly regard the Songs of Sion, as they do music
heard late at night in the streets, whiles they are in bed. Perhaps they will
step to the windore, and listen to it a while; and presently to bed again. So
men step from the couch of their lusts and sins to, Church, hear the Sermon;
and then to bed again; lulling themselves in their former security.

There are some, that care for hearing it no more: but sit down with a conceit
of their own sufficiency. They know as much as all the Preachers can tell
them: let the youth go to be Catechized. So the sluggish and irreligious Master
sits at home, whiles he sends his servants to Church. There is an old tale,
idle in it self; the use may be good. A certain man that would never go to
Church, when he heard the Saintsbell, would say to his wife. Go thou to
Church and pray for thee and me. One night he dreamed, that both he and his
wife were dead, and that they knocked together at Heauen-gate for entrance. S.
Peter (by the Legend) is Porter, and suffered the wife to enter in, but kept the
husband out: answering him, Illa intrauit pro se ette: She is gone in both for
her self and thee. As thy wife went to Church for thee, so she must go to
heaven for thee. The Moral instructs every one to have a personality of Faith,
and a propriety of devotion: that himself serving GOD, himself may be
blessed of God.

It now remains, to examine more narrowly the nature of the sins these
ungodly hearts produce. Lib. 21. cap. 16.
They are called Thorns and Briars. Pliny says that the Thorn is more soft
then a Tree, and more hard then an Herb: as if it were some unkindly thing;
and but an imperfect excrement of the earth. For the Philosopher says, It is
not the intent of kind, that Trees should be sharp with prickles and thorns:
but he would have it caused by the insoliditie and vnfastnes of the tree. By
which means the cold humor is drawn out by the pores ere it be concocted:
whereupon for scarcity of matter, it is hardened by the sun; and ^o shaped
and sharpened into a thorn.

But it is unquestionable truth, that God created the thorns and briars on the
earth. Some think, because it is said, Genesis 3. G^n. 3. 18.
in man's punishment, Maledict^ esto terra propter te: Cursed be the earth for
thy sake. Thorns and Thistles shall it bring forth to thee: that therefore if
mankind had not sinned, the ground should have produced no such thing. But the
most received opinion, and consonant to truth is; that these Thorns and briars
should have been, though man had never fallen: but they should not have been
noxious and hurtful to him. Now let us consider what resemblances may be
found, betwixt those natural, and these allegorical thorns and briars.

1 Where is abundance of thorns, there is most commonly a barren ground. For
they hinder the happy influence of the heavens, the kindly heat of the sun,
the deawes of the clouds, and all those working causes of fertillity. God
prearmes Ezekiel, that he should not wonder at the barrenness of Israel, Ezekiel.
2. 6.
for briars and thorns shall be with thee. Let no man marvel at our
unprofitable times; we have too many Briars and thorns among us: which do what
they can to hinder the goodness of heaven to us, or our goodness to heaven. That
which is sown nigh or among thorns seldom prospers. Our Savior says, that
the Seed sown in some hearers, brought forth no fruit; Mat. 13.
for the Thorns choked it. The very company of the wicked is harmful, for they
are as thorns to stifle any goodness. The companion of fools shall be afflicted,
says Solomon. He dwells among thorns, that shall wound him. To lay no more
affliction upon him then Salamon there meant; as appears by the opposite
member of the verse: he shall endure a privation of what good soever he had;
and a position of their lewdness. A good man with ill company, is like a
living man bound to a dead corpse: that will sooner suffocate him, then he can
revive that. The Soul that lives among thorns shall hardly thrive. Therefore
says the Lord of the vineyard concerning the barren tree. Cut it down, Luke.
13. 7.
why troubles it the ground?

2 Thorns and briars grow most commonly on heaps, and seldom are found
single, or destitute of company of their own kind, And though they be
troublesomely harmefull to other trees, yet they fold and embrace one another,
without hurt. It is so usually seen, that wicked men hold together, and sins
grow in united clusters. There is a combination of the ungodly; even so far
as to the very participation of their estates. Pro. 1. 14.
Cast in thy lot with us; we will have all one purse. They are entangled in
mutual amity, like beds of Eeles; nothing but thunder can break their knots.
Mat. 5. 46.
Is it much, says Christ, that you purpose diligere diligentes, to love them
that love you? Why, briars and thorns do it, even Publicans do the same. Yea,
I would to God, their unity did not shame ours. We see here, that one of the
Papists chief marks of their church is not infallible; their consent or unity:
when briars and thorns have it. The Pharisees, Saduces, Herodians conspire
against Christ: may be, they with the rest. Sins grow in heaps, like thorns in
bushes: where are some, are many. The Apostle brings them in by couples and
companies. Gluttony and Drunkenness, Chambering and wantonness, Romans 13. 13.
strife and envying. Me thinks Gluttony and Drunkenness come in like an
Englishman, and a Dutchman. Chambering and Wantonness like an Italian and a
Venetian. Strife and Envy like a Spaniard and a Frenchman. These sins being so
National, and natural to the countries: to ouer-drinke in Germany; to
ouer-eate in England; to wantonize in Italy and Venice; to quarrel in France,
and to be envious in Spain; Envy being ever the bosome-companion of Pride.

3 Thorns and briars, by reason of their thicknes and sharpnes, are refuges
for Serpents, Snakes, Addars, and such other venomous beasts. Where the ungodly
have a strong part, oppression, rapine, robbery, murder, and all those fatal
and deathstriking serpents are fostered. God, when he told Ezekiel. Ezekiel. 2.
That briars and thorns should be with him; adds in the very next words, And
thou shall dwell among Scorpions. Therefore in Latin, Rubetum is a place of
briars and brambles; and Rubeta is a toad, and that land-toad, the most
venomous of the kind. It is dangerous sleeping near such places. He that
lives among the wicked, has no need of security, but to have clear and
circumspect eyes; lest either the thorns prick him, or the Serpents under the
thorns sting him. Woe is me, says the Psalmist, that I must remain in
Mesheck, and dwell in the tents of Kedar.

4. Neither do the wicked, only with their thorns and briars, hinder others
passage, but even their own. No marvel, if it be so difficult for an ungodly
man to get to heaven; for he hedgeth up his own way. Men multiply their
transgressions to infinite, and cast up innumerable thorns, yet hope well to
be saved. But in vain he purposes to travel to Ierusa^em, that hedgeth up
his own passage. Pro. 22. 5.
Thorns and snares are in the way of the froward: not of Gods setting, but of
their own planting. For (the next words testify) he that keeps his soul,
shall be far from them. There are hindrances enough to heaven, though the
wicked make none themselves. The devil will look, that the way shall not be
easy. Neither has God set salvation upon such terms, that we may play and
get it. The kingdom of heaven is got by violence: and they must strive, that
will pass the narrow gate. Satan has so many plots and tricks to deceive them;
so many tentations, and corruptions to oppose them; that they have no cause to
fense up the way themselves, against themselves, with a hedge of their own
thorns. Heauen-gates will not fall down before men, as the iron-gates of the
City to Peter, of their own accord. Nay, Acts. 12. 10.
If the Righteous s^arcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner
appear? 1. Pet. 4. 18.


5. Sins are fitly compared to thorns and briars, for their wounding,
pricking, and such harmefull offenses. Therefore they are called tribuli, a
tribulando; from their vexing, oppression, and tribulation they give those that
touch them. The wicked are such Calthrops to the Country, boring and bloudying
her sides. Either pricking the flesh, or tearing of the fleece; as briars and
bushes that rob the sheep of their cotes, which come to them for shelter. A
great man wicked is like Abimelech, whom Iotham calls a Bramble in his Parable.
Judge. 9. 8.
The Olive would not leave his fatness, nor the Fig Tree his sweetness, nor
the Vine his goodness, to be promoted over the trees. But the aspiring
Bramble usurps it: and (as if he were some great Cedar) he calls the Trees to
trust under his shadow. But when poor men come to this Bramble for refuge,
here they loose a lock and there a lock, til they are left naked, Yea, the
clothes are not only rent from their backs; but like the sons of Sceua
exorcising the evil spirits, they depart not away naked only, Acts 19. 16.
but wounded. Their garments satisfy not these briars, scarce their blood and
lives.

These Briars and Thorns have such pricking and wounding effects, in regard of
three objects, whom they strike. For sins are like Thorns. 1. To men. 2. To
Christ. 3. To the own consciences of the committers. First to men. Pliny
mentions three sorts of Briars. Lib. 21. cap. 16.


1. The moorish Bryer, that only grows in rank and fen^e places, and is
nourished with rotten mud, and such squalid putrefaction. There is a generation
of men like these briars, given to drunkenness, whose affections are fed only
with the moisture of the pot. They cannot live but in fenny and moorish places.
Pliny says, that addars and toads love and eat the fruits of these briars; and
it is the food of serpents. The effects of drunkenness (in like sort) is a
condiment for the devil. Augustine somewhat near our purpose, when he
compares drunken places to the fens; where are bred snakes and serpents, and
such vile noxious things, which every year must be burned. It were a good
turn, if these morish brambles were stocked up by the roots. If you ask how
you should rid them; I will not point you to the Fen-men, who to make quick
dispatch of their anoiances, set fire on their fens: but I will give you another
precedent. When a king asked how he might be rid of certain noisome fowls,
which came abundantly flying into his land; one answered him. Nidos eorum
vbique destruendos: that the only means was to destroy their nests in every
place. So if you would be shut of these morish briars, the course is to destroy
their nests; their haunts, and rendeuous, as they term them; the common
quagmires of all filthiness. The ale houses are their nests and cages, where
they exhaust and lavish out their goods, and lay plots and devises how to get
more. Hence they fall either to robbing, or cheating; open courses of violence,
or secret mischiefs: till at last the Iayle prepares the^ for the gibbet. For
lightly they sing thorough a red lattice, before they cry through an iro^
grate. And when those briars are hamperd, and put into prisons; it is said,
that those places teach them more villainy then they knew before. That when a
lewd fellow comes out of prison, he is furnished with such a pack of mischiefs,
that he now sets up school, and teaches others. It is wonderful, that places
ordained for reformation, should be instructions of worse lewdnes. I speak not
against mercy: but experience and truth witnesses that the mercy of some times
is cruelty. And the pity to a notorious malefactor argues us of a hard
heart, and of unmercifulness to the commonwealth. The sparing of rapes,
robberies, whoredoms, cheatings, frauds, unjust measures, false balances,
occasioneth, yea encourages the like. If thou be a Magistrate, deputed to
judge it, and sparest a man that has shed blood; the next blood he sheddes
thou art guilty of. Thou consentest to the second robbery of a thief, that have
remitted him the first. A Father brings in a notorious malefactor arraigning at
the bar before the Judge. When the mother coms, misera^davlulatione, with
bitter weeping desiring mercy for her son.

The wife Lachrimabili voce, with mournful speech, imploring mercy for her
husband. The little children plorantibus ocellis, with crying eyes, beseeching
mercy for their Father. The people wishing he may be spared for the goodlinesse
of his person. Yet says the Judge, Non misereor modo: I pity, but must not
spare. Pereat vnus, potius quam vnitas. Better one perish, then all. Weed up
the implacable thorns, for they will keep the ground barren. It has been
said, Bear one injury and provoke more: but here in case of justice, forgive
one public injury, I mean a fact of horrid nature as I formerly taxed, and you
provoke and encourage many. The Mariners would feign save Jonas; but when
there is no remedy, they will rather loose one Jonas, then all themselves.

2. Plinies next sort of Briars are Tribuli agrestes, Field-bryers; which are
(says he) shrewd enemies to tillage, and the fruits of the earth. This Island
of ours, within these late days, has bred a great number of these
field-bryars: which unnaturally turn their mother into barrenness.
Oppressors, Inclosers, Depopulators, Deportators, Deprauators; that run the
land to ruin for a private benefit: and work out a particular gain from a
public and general loss.

Gain said I? Where is it? Did you ever know Inclosers prosper? I will speak
boldly. I never knew great man grow greater by his depopulations: and I hope no
man will say, he has grown better by them. Corne-fields are turned to
sheepwalkes; once-inhabited towns feed Oxen; and Churches are made Shepherds
Cottages: and yet the doers of all this never the richer. They keep less
Hospitality; for a few rooms in London serve their turns: they extort sorer
rents, and yet they have never the more money. It cannot be denied, but the
maine end of these courses was profit, and euhansing their estates: and lo,
in this very end GOD crosseth-them. Speak what you will of their pride, of
turning the alms they should give to the poor into feasts for the rich, of
their infrugall courses: I say confidently, hic digitus Dei: here is the very
hand of God striking them. Man, though he has authority, will not look to
these Field-bryars; but let them waste and forage, and play the Abimelechs;
but God will. But if we do not look to it, let me say to you, as Iotham to
the Shechemites of that aspiring Bramble, Judge. 9. Judge. 9. 20.
If fire come not out of Shechem to devour Abimelech; fire will come from
Abimelech to devour Shechem. If you undo not the oppressions of the
Field-bryers, their oppressions will undo us all.

3 There is the Town- bryar too, which grows in our mounds and fenses, and
about the closing of towns. You in the City have no great plenty of these
briars; yet you are troubled (in a metaphorical sense) with Town- briars, and
City-brambles: which would not a little vex you, if you were not those your
selves.

1. What say you to the Usurer? Is he not a Thorn amongst you? If you were
not Usurers your selves, you would confess it. But they say, the most horrible
usury in the world is here practiced, to 40. in the hundred: nay, to doubling
of the principal in one year. A landed Gentleman wants money, he shall have
it; but in commodities: which some compacted Broker buys of him, for half the
rate they cost him, in ready money. Are these Christians? dare they show their
faces in the Temple? But I know, you have been often told of these things. In a
word, even the gentles^ usury is a most sharp thorn, and pricks the side of
the Country till the blood follows. An Usurer with his money, is like a man
that has no work of his own, yet keeps a servant to let out: and takes not
only hire of others for his days labor; but charge him to steal somewhat
besides, and never to return home empty. You understand me: I need not
further apply it.

These are vile winding and wounding briars, that fetch away clothes, and
skin, and flesh too. Now the mercy of God rid us of these thorns. And let
us know it is for our sins, that God suffers Usurers among us. It may be he
permits them, as he did the Cananites for a while in Israel, lest the wild
beasts should break in upon them. Lest pride, and haughtiness, and
uncleanness should spill men's souls by a full estate of wealth. God suffers
Usurers like Horse-leeches to suck and soke them: thereby (possibly) to humble
them. Yet in mean time, I may say of them, as Iosuah did of those Cananites;
Josh. 23. 13.
that they are pricks in our sides, and thorns in our eyes.

2 What do you think of Adultery? Is it not a Thorn, yes, a sharp thorn,
wounding the purse, enuenoming the body, condemning the Soul. The ground that
bears it is lust: the sap that feeds it, is fullness of bread and Idleness:
the heat that makes it glow, grow, and shoot, is lewd and wanton speech, and
effeminate gestures: infamy is the budde; pollution the fruit; and the end
Hellfire. And as Caietan and Theophilact observes on 1. These. 4. These. 4. 4.
that the Apostle having bid men possess their vessel in holiness, he adds;
And let no man go beyond or defraud his brother in any matter: that this
circumuention may be applied to Adultery, when a man is deceived of his
bosome-spouse; who is hired to the subornation of bastards. So that lightly,
concupiscence and cousenage go together. As that wickedness, of all others,
never goes but by couples. For Adulterers non possunt ire soli ad diabolum.
Ierom.
An Adulterer cannot go alone to the Devil.

3 Corrupt and consciensce-les Lawyers you will confess to be sharp and
wounding brambles, and exceedingly hurtful. A poor Client among them, is as a
blind sheep in a thicket of thorns: there is no hope of his fleece, it is
well if he carry away his flesh whole on his back. A motion this term, an
order next; instantly al crossed: scarce the twentieth order sometimes stands:
execution is suspended, a writ of error puts all out of course. Oh the
uncertain events of suits! I hope, says the poor bloud-drawne wretch, I
shall have an end of my suite next term; nay, nor the next term, nor the next
year. Fool! thou art gotten into a suite of durance; almost an immortal
suit. And when the vpshot comes, perhaps the mispleading of a word shall forfet
all. It is a lamentable uncertainty, and one politic addition of fickleness
to the goods of this world, that no man might set his heart upon them: that an
estate bought, truly paid for, and inherited, shall be gone upon a word;
sometimes upon a syllable; upon a very bare letter, omitted or mis-written by
the Scriuener. These are scratching briars. If what is wanting in the goodness
of the cause, be supplied by the greatness of the fees, their tongs shall excuse
their tongs for their contra-conscient pleadings. The Italians have a shrewd
proverb against them. The Devil makes his Christmassepyes of Lawyers tongs
and Clerks fingers. This proverb I leave with them; and come to their kinsmen.

4 Corrupted Officers, who are also sharp and sharking brambles. Their office
is a bush of thorns at their backs, and they all to rent the country, with
briberie and extortion. These men seek after authority, and commanding-places,
not with any intent of good to the commonwealth, but to fill their own
purses, to satisfy their own lusts. As some love to be poring in the fire,
not that they care to mend it, but only to warm their own fingers.

5 We have Papists amongst us; look to them, they are rankling thorns, and
renting briars. False Gibeonites they are; and howsoever they pretend their old
shoes, the antiquity of their Church, we have ever found them thorns; ready
to put out our eyes, and (if they could) the eye of the Gospel. They exclaim
against us for persecution; and cry themselves (louder then oyster-women in the
streets) for patient Catholics, Saints, Martyrs. But match the peace they
enjoy under us, with the tyranny they exercised over us; the burning our
Fathers at stakes, the butchering our Princes, their conspiracy against our
whole Realm, their continual bending their weapons against Sovereigns and
subjects throtes; and you will say, they are thorns. I have read of a bird,
that when men are devout at their sacrifice, takes fire from the Altar, and
burns their houses. All their black treasons, and bloody intendments, they
derive from the Altar; and plead the warrant of Religion, to set our whole
Land in combustion. O that these brambles were stocked up: that Ishmael were
cast out of doors, that Sara and her son Isaac might live in quiet.

6 There are furious male contents among us: a contemptible generation of
thorns; that (because their hands are pinioned) prick only with their tongs.
They are ever whining, and upon the least cause filling the world with
importunate complaints. These are savage and popular humors, that cannot suffer
eminency to pass vnreproched. But they must vellicate goodness, and gird
greatness; that neither the living can walk, nor the dead sleep, in quiet.
Affecters of innovation, that are ever finding fault with the present times:
any thing pleases them but what is. Even the best blessings of God escape not
their ce^sures: neither do they esteem by judgment, or pronounce by reason:
they find fault with things, they know not wherefore, but because they do not
like them. Beware these thorns: they are like the wheels of some cunningly
wrought fire-workes; that fly out on all sides; and offering to singe others,
burn themselves. Laudant veteres, etc. as if no times were so miserable as
ours. As if the civil wars of France, or the bloody Inquisitio^ of Spain, or
the Turkish cruelty in Natolia, where he breeds his soldiers; or at home,
the time of the Barons war; or yet later, the persecution of a Boner; were none
of them so cruel, as these days, when every man sits and sings under his own
fig tree. Sure if they had once tasted the bitterness of war, they would
better esteem of their peace. These are pestilent thorns: nothing but fear
keeps them from conspiracy. Nay, so they might set the whole land on fire,
they would not grudge their own ashes.

7. There are briars too growing near the Church; too near it. They have
raised Church-liuings to four and five years purchase: and it is to be
feared, they will shortly rack up presentatiue livings, to as high a rate, as
they did their impropriations, when they would sell them. For they say, few
will give above sixteen years purchase for an impropriate Parsonage; and I
have heard some rate the donation of a benefice they must give, at ten years:
what with the present money they must have, and with referuation of tithes, and
such unconscionable tricks; as if there was no God in heaven, to see or punish
it. Perhaps, some will not take so much: but most will take some; enough to
impouerish the Church, to enrich their own purses, to damn their souls.

One would think, it was sacrilege enough to rob God of his maine tithes:
must they also nimme away the shreddes? must they needs shrink the whole
cloth, (enough to apparel the Church) as the cheating Tailor did, to a dozen
of buttons? Having full gorged themselves with the parsonages, must they pick
the bones of the Vicaredges too? Well says S. August. Multi in hac vita
manducant, quod postea apud inferos digerunt. Many devour that in this life,
which they shall digest in hell.

These are the Church-briers; which (let alone) will at last bring as famous a
Church, as any Christendom has, to beggerie. Politic men, begin a pace
already to withold their children from Schools and Universities. Any
profession else better likes them; as knowing, they may live well in whatsoever
calling, save in the ministry. The time was, that Christ threw the buyers and
sellers out of the Temple; but now the buyers and sellers have thrown him out
of the Temple. Yea, they will throw the church out of the church if they be not
stayed. But some may say to me, as one advised Luther, when he began to preach
against the Popes usurpation and tyranny, You had as good hold your peace.
This wickedness is so powerful, that you will never prevail against it. Get
you to your study, and say, Lord have mercy on us, and procure your self no
ill will. But be it good will, or be it ill will, we come hither to speak the
truth in our consciences. And if these Church-thornes will continue their
wickedness, be it unto them as they have deserved. If they will needs go to
hell, let them go: we cannot help it, let them perish. I had purposed the
discovery of more Brambles, but the time forbids it. I would to God, we were
well freed from those I have taxed.

THE END Of Thorns. THE FIFTH SERMON.

ESA. 9. 18. Wickedness burns as the fire: it shall devour the Briars and
Thorns, and shall kindle in the thickets of the Forest, and they shall mount
up like the lifting up of smoke.

GREG. lib. 4. Dialog. Ad magnam iudicantis iustitiam pertinet, vt nunquam
mortui careant supplicio, qui nunquam viui voluerunt carere peccato.

LONDON, Printed by George Purslowe, for John Budge, and are to be sold at his
shop, at the great South-dore of Paul's, and at Britains Burse. 1616.

THE END Of THORNS.
THE FIFTH SERMON.
HEB. Chap. 6. Verse. 8. But that which bears thorns and briars, is rejected,
and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned.
Our sins are thorns to others; some wounding with their direct blows,
others with their wipes, all with their examples. Man only has not felt their
blows; our Savior also so found them: when he was feign for our sakes to set
his naked breast, his naked heart, his naked soul against them. They say, the
Nightingale sleeps with her breast against a thorn, to avoid the Serpent.
Christ was content to be wounded, even to sleep to death with thorns, that
he might deliver us from that devouring serpent, the great infernal Dragon.
His head was not only raked and harrowed with material thorns: Bern.
Caput Angelicis spiritibus tremebundum coronatur spinis That head which the
Angelical spirits adore and tremble at, was crowned with thorns. But these
mys^call thorns, our iniquities, with fiercer blows drew blood of his soul.
They do in a sort still. Heb. 6. 6. Heb. 6. 6.
They crucify to themselves the Son of God a fresh, and put him to an open
shame. Not in himself, for they cannot: but can them no thanks; they would,
if they could: and to themselves they do it. Wretched men, will you not yet
let Jesus Christ alone, and be at rest? will you still offer violence to your
blessed Savior; and labor to pull him down from his throne to his Cross;
from his peaceful glory at the right hand of his Father, to more sufferings?
You condemn the merciless Soldiers, that platted a crown of thorns, Mat.
27. 29.
and put it on his innocent head. Sinful wretch, condemn thy self. Thy
sins were those thorns, and far sharper. Thy oppressions, wrongings, and
wringings, of his poor brethren, offer him the violence of new wounds: thy
oaths, thy frauds, thy pride scratch him like briars. Hear him complaining
from heaven, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? These Thorns grow on earth,
yet they prick Jesus Christ in heaven. Oh we little know the price of a sin,
that thus play the executioners with the Lord of life. Think, think; Christ
felt your sins as sharp thorns.

Lastly, you find them thorns your selves, if Christ did not for you. When
God shall enliuen and make quick the sense of your nummed consciences, you
shall confess your own sins ^ruell thorns to your souls, 2. Cor. 12. 2.
Cor. 12. 7.
A thorn in your flesh, that shall buffet you with terror. For a while men are
insensible of their iniquities. Christ, Math. 13. 22. Mat. 13. 22.
calls the riches of this world thorns, which choke the good seed of the
Gospel.

The common opinion of the world is, that they are goodly, fine and smooth
things; furs to keep them warm, oil to cheer their faces, and wine to
their hearts; of a silken softness to their affections. But Christ says, they
are thorns; stinging and choking thorns. And the covetous conscience shall one
day perceive in them, Triplicem puncturam, Ludolph.
a threefold pricking. Laboris in acquisitione; they are gotten with trouble.
Timoris in possessione; they are kept with fear. Doloris in amissione; they
are lost with grief.

Men commonly deal with their sins, as hedgers do, when they go to plash
thorny bushes: they put on tyning gloves, that the Thorns may not prick them.
So these harden their hearts, that their own thorns may give them no
compunction. But all vanities are but like the fools laughter, Eccl. 7. 6.
which Solomon compares to the crackling of thorns under a p^t: they make a
noise, and suddenly go out. But sin never parts with the wicked, without
leaving a sting behind it. In. Galat. cap. 1. ver. 3.
Luther says, there are two fiends, that torment men in this world: and they
are sin, and a bad conscience. The latter follows the former: or if you
will, the former wounds the latter: for sin is the thorn, and the conscience
the subject it strikes. This thorn often pricks deep; to the very heart. Acts
2. to the very bones, Psalm. 38. Psalm. 38. 3.
There is no rest in my bones because of my sin. I sid. lib. 2.
Soliloquiorum. men's enim malae conscientiae proprijs agitatur stimulis.
Vis nunquam esse tristis? been viue. Nunquam securus est reus animus. Would
thou never be sorrowful? live well. A guilty mind cannot be securely quiet. An
evil mind is haunted and vexed with the thorns of his own conscience. Sin
to the affections, whiles it is doing, is oleum vngens, supple oil. Sin to
the conscience when it is done, is tribulus pungens, a pricking thorn. What
extreme contraries do often wicked conceits run into? In their time of
security they cannot be brought, to think sin to be sin. At last
desperately, they think it such a sin, that it cannot be forgiven. At first
they are delighted with the sense and smell of their iniquity, as of a sweet
rose: but the rose of their delight withers, and there is a thorn under it,
that pricks the heart. Hereupon Solomon couples pleasant vanity, and
troublesome vexation together. If that tickles the flesh, this shall wound the
spirit. You shall hear an Usurer in the madness of presumption expostulating,
what? may I not make benefit of my money? Observe him, and in the end you shall
hear him in the madness of despair, cry out of his own damnation for it. At
first they make question whether it be a sin: at last they know it such a
sin, that they make question whether God will forgive it. So men will look
to sin either too superficially, or too superstitiously. There was no danger
says the Drunkard, when he is asked how he seap'd such a passage: bring him
back in the sober moming to see, and he falls down dead in astonishment.

I need not further amplify this point. Christ gives a vae ridentibus; Woe to
them that laugh, for they shall weep: and every smile of sin shall be turned
to a groan of sorrow. They that exhibit their lives as sacrifices risuiet
lubentiae; shall one day feel pricks, and goads, and thorns; scratching and
peircing their hearts: when (like the stricken dear, with the arrowhead
rankling in his side) they shall not be able to shift or change pains with
places. Let this reach to our souls two instructions.

1 That we labor our hearts betimes to a sensiblenesse of these thorns. A
Thorn swallowed into the flesh, if it be not looked to, rankles. Sin without
repentance, will fester in the soul; and is so much more perilous, as it is
less felt. Oh the number of thorns that lie in many conscience, who complain
no more, then if they ayld nothing. The prick of a thorn is not so painful
at first, while the blood is hot, as after a cold pause. Every man has his
complaints; and who lives out of the reach of discontent? You shall hear
tradesmen complaining of few or false customers. Laborers, of little work,
and less wages. Beggars complain the want of Charity: and rich men the want
of money. Merchants of rocks and Pirates: Lawyers of short fees; and Clyents of
long suits. But no man complains of the thorns in his own bosom. He
nourishes briars there that wound him: and the heart is as dedolent, Ephe. 4.
19.
as if it were past feeling. But where there is no discovery of the disease,
the recovery of the health is in vain hoped for.

2 After sense of the smart will follow a desire of remedy. The throbbing
conscience would be at ease, and freed from the Thorn that vexes it. David
rores out for the very disquietnesse of his heart. The aching heart will make a
crying tongue, and wet eyes. Lo the mercy of GOD! A remedy is not sooner
desired, then offered. The sacred Gospel directs us to a medicine, that shall
supple the heart, and draw out these thorns; though they stuck as thick in
it, as ever the arrows did in Sebastian. They speak of the herb Dictamnum,
called of some Ditanie, that it has a secret virtue to draw out any thing
fastened in the body. Lib. 26. cap. 14.
Pliny says, that this herb drunk, Sagittas pellit. Experience tells,
that it is sovereign to exhale a thorn out of the flesh. Our only Dictamnum
is the precious blood of our merciful Savior JESUS CHRIST. A plaster of that
is truly vertuall, to draw out all thorns from our consciences, Saucia
^nimis, which is nulla medicabilis herbis, is thus cured. Our sins drew blood
of him; that his blood might save us. He was crowned with Thorns, that we
might not be killed with thorns. He was wounded for us, that we might not
perish for our selves.

Take we heed, that we despise not this medicine. The law was so far from
drawing out these thorns, that it would drive them in further, and cause them
to rankle in the heart, without any hope of ease. It did but exasperate their
stings, and give them a deeper continuance of pricking. The mollifying and
healing Gospel extracts their venom, and sucks out their poison. Let us not
dare then to vilipend this cordial and sovereign medicine.

You perceive that our sins are Thorns; and what is their only remedy. Know
now, that if they be not drawn out in this world, they shall be found thorns
hereafter; when the owners shall hear Christ's sentence, Go ye cursed, etc.
for the end of them is to be burned. So I come to the punishment: but I will
soon have done with that, which shall never have done with those that must
undergo it.

There is a threefold gradation in the Penalty, Reiection, malediction,
combustion. Is rejected, is nigh unto cursing, and the end thereof is to be
burned. And it seems to have relation to a threefold distinction of time. 1.
For the present, it is rejected. 2. For instance or appropinquation, it is nigh
unto cursing. 3. For future certainty, the end of it is to be burned. As men
commonly deal with thorns: first they cut them up with bills and mattocks:
then they lay them by to wither: and lastly burn them in the furnace.

1 Reiection. This which we here translate (is rejected) is in the original
((...)) which may signify Reprobios, or reprobatus: so Beza has it; is
reproved, or disallowed of God. This ground shall have no ground in heaven, no
part in God inheritance. It is reprobate silver, not current with the Lord. No
man desires to purchase Land, that will bring forth nothing but weeds: he will
not cast away his silver upon it. And shall GOD buy so base ground, that will
be no better, at so inestimable a price, as the incorruptible blood of his own
Son? It despises the Lords goodness, and the LORDS goodness shall despise
it. It is rejected. If any man says, this is Durus Sermo, let him consider of
whom the Apostle speaks, verse. 4. against whom he concludes ab impossibili.
It is impossible, etc. A hard saying to understand, but more, most heard to
undergo. If God be driven to loose all his pains and cost upon an ungrateful
heart, he will at last renounce it, and give it over a desperate nature. As he
in the Comedy, Abeat, pereat, profundat, perdat. If it will be filthy, let it
be filthy still. If nothing will bring it to goodness, it shall be rejected.

2. The second degree of the Punishment is cursing: and this may seem to
exceed the former. Gods curse is a fearful thing. If you would view (though
but in part) the latitude and extension of it, I refer you to the 28. of
Deuteronomy. But I purpose not to be curiously punctual, in the demonstration
of these particular degrees of the Punishment. That which I will observe, is
this.

That God is more propense and inclined to blessing, then to cursing: more
prone to show mercy, then to inflict judgment. It is said in the former
Verse, the good ground receives blessing of God: receives it presently,
receives it at once. But here of the evil ground; it is nigh unto cursing: it
is not presently cursed, but nigh unto it. There is some pawse and delay: some
lucida interualla misericordiae. The whole vial of wrath is not poured on at
once. But first there is a despising or reiection; to let the wicked see, how
hateful their vices are in Gods sight. If this serve not, they are not
suddenly cursed; but there is a breathing time, and a merciful space between
that and cursing; and between cursing and burning. So slowly does GOD proceed
to judgment, so little haste he makes to the execution of his vengeance. He
is speedy to deliver, to save, to give his blessing; but he has leaden feet
when he comes to strike.

The use of this to our selves is, that the patient forbearance of God may
lead us to repentance, Romans the second and the fourth. Romans 2. 4.
The Prophet Joel bids us Rent our hearts, Joel. 2. 13.
and fall to weeping and mourning; Because the Lord is merciful and slow to
anger. Gods long-suffering is as a hand reached out, that points us to
repentance. Such is his goodness, that when all his terrors and menace; are
set in their places, yet he makes room for Repentance, whenever it comes.
And though they be as ready to strike, as Abraham's hand was to Isaacs
sacrifice; yet Repentance, tanquam vox Angeli, shall stay them. O blessed
Repentance, how sweet and amiable art thou! yet how few love thee!

The great man, that thinks he may securely be wicked, because he is
honorably great; and dares affront the Pulpit, though the greatest Bishop in
the land were preaching in it; cares not for repentance. The wealthy Gentleman,
that can bung up Hospitality into a Diogenes tubbe; nestle himself warm in a
City-chamber, whiles Owls and Dawes parlour themselves in his countrey-manors:
that (as it is storied of that Jew for the use of his money) takes his rent in
blood; the heart-bloud of his racked Tenants; cares not for Repentance.

The country Nabal, that hoords his grain, and with it locks up his soul in
a Garner, that the Sun of Gods blessing may not come at it: that starues the
poor, his family, himself; cares not for Repentance. The auarous Citizens,
whom the glad Devil can never find without a false measure in one hand, and a
cozening weight in the other; that have tricks in their sconces to ouer-reach
the devil himself; but that (like a cunning Fenser) he that taught them all
their tricks, kept one to himself, to cheat them of their souls; care not
for repentance. The muffled Lawyer, that has no sense left alive but his
feeling, and waighs all causes by the poyse of gold; that talks against others
right and his own conscience; that leads Jury into pe^iury, with his
fraudulent circumuentions; cares not for repentance.

The sharking Officer, Zosun. lib. 2.
(that like Menelaus, an Armenian Archer in the wars betwixt Constantius and
Magnentius) can shoot three arrows at once, at one loose; wherewith he wounds
not one, but three at the least: the Prince whom he serves, the person whom
he draws blood of, and the body of the Commonwealth; cares not for
repentance. I need not speak of the Church-robber, the Usurer, the Drunkard,
the Proud, the unclean adulterer: no man can think, that they care for
repentance. O but they all purpose to repent. Spare them a while; they are but
new set into the Oven; not yet fully baked in their hot vanities: let them foke
a little in their pleasures, and at last they will return. Hos. 7. 4.
They are as an Oven heated by the Baker. Repentance is an ascent of four
steps: many get up three of them, but climb not to the fourth and best.

1. Some there are that purpose to amend their lives. But purpose without
performance is like a Cloud without rain; not unlike Hercules Clubbe in the
Tragedy, of a great bulk, but the stuffing is moss and rubbish. If the tree
be fairly blossomed, and naked of fruit, it may speed as the Fig Tree in
the Gospel. be curseo: or at least (it is as the evil ground here) nigh unto
cursing. Many that purposed to repent, are now in hell, as the five foolish
Virgins, that intended to go in with the Bridegroom; but before the time
their lights dropped out.

One said, that hell is like to be full of good purposes, but heaven of good
works. If a bare Intention would serve, Gods Church on earth would be fuller
of Saints, and his Court in heaven fuller of souls. Ignorance and Sloth
adulterating, bring forth this lanke brood, this abortiue embrion, Purpose.
Such a man is like an ill debtor, who will not pay God his due of devotion till
he is old: and then he cannot pay for want of (time and money) space and grace
to repent. We make (in these days) our purposes like our Eeues, and our
performances like the holy days: servants work hard upon the Eeues, that they
may have the more liberty to play upon the Holidays: so we are earnest, and
labor hard on our purposes; but are idle and play upon our performances. But
Resolution without action, is a golden couch to a leaden Jewel.

2. The second round of this Ladder is Preparation. Some there are that will
prepare, and almost set themselves in a readiness for their journey to heaven;
yet never set one step forward. Preparation is indeed as necessary, as the
door is to the house: but as idle, if there be no house to the door. It may (as
John the Baptist did for Christ) prepare the way of the Lord into our hearts:
and it may be as vaite, as the Apothecaries Beast, Testia Pharmacopolae.
which he promised his Patient would help him of all diseases; but before
morning it had eaten up it self. Preparation is a necessary antecedent to all
great works, Amos 4. Am. 4. 12.
Prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. But a man may prepare meat, and not feed:
prepare meat, and not eat. Prepaeration does well, if reparation follows. A
man may climb both these rounds, and yet fall short of the true height of
Repentance.

3. The third stairre is a Beginning to abstain from some horrid iniquities;
and as it were, an entering into a new path; but not going one step in it,
without a voluntary reuolting. But Beginning is nothing to perfection. Some
begin in the spirit, and end in the flesh: that s^lute Christ in the market
place; take acquaintance of him in the street, but never bid him home to their
houses. It is ( vox praetereuntium derisoria) the speech of them that pass by.
This man began to build. A house but begun is not fit to dwell in: and shall
we think that Gods Spirit will dwell in an inchoate habitacle, and not likely
to be finished? The Apostle says, 2. Pet. 2. 21.
It had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, then
after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto
them.

4 The fourth Round only pleases God, and is good for our Souls, Repentance;
without which the evil ground is near to cursing; as it were at next door by;
and it shall come on him with a speedy visitation nisi interueniente
poenitentia. This is the Bulwark to defend us from the shot of Gods thunder
from heaven: this hedgeth us in from his judgments on earth. Woe to sinful
man without this: for he is near to cursing; and his end is to be burned.
Blessed Soul that has it. Wheresoever it dwells, mercy dwells by it. If
England has it, it shall ease her of her thorns, Ezekiel. 28. Ezekiel. 20. 14.
There shall be no more a pricking bryar unto the house of Israel, nor any
grieuing Thorn of all that are round about them.

3 The last and forest degree of the Punishment, is Burning. I will not
discourse, whether the fire of that euerlastingly-hote furnace be material or
spiritual. Surely, it is strangely terrible; and we are blessed, if we
neither understand it nor undergo it. The misery of the damned is usually
distinguished into the Pain of loss, and the pain of sense. Both implied in
this verse, and expressed, Thessalonians the second, Chap. 1. Verse 8, 9. 2.
The. 1. 8. 9.
Christ shall take vengeance on such as know not God, and obey not the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, there is pain of Sense. They shall be punished with
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of
his power, there is pain of loss.

1. This Poena damni, or privation of blessedness, may seem to be employed in
the first degree here mentioned, Reiection. The reprobate are cast away of God.
Much like that form of the last sentence, Math. 25. 41. Mat. 25. 41.
Depart from me, ye cursed: a fearful sentence, a terrible separation. From
Me, says Christ; that made my self man for your sakes, that offered my blood
for your redemption, and received these and these wounds for your remedy. From
Me, that would have healed, would have helped, would have saved you. From Me,
that invited you to mercy, and you would not accept it. From Me, that purchased
a kindgome of glory, for such as believed on me; and will wrappe their heads
with crowns of eternal joy: Depart from Me. This is a fearful Reiection, My
friendship, my fellowship, my Paradise, my presence, my heaven, where is
fullness of joy, and pleasure for evermore, Psalm. 16. vlt.
are none of yours. They might have been; they are lost. Neither shall they
only loose Christ, but all the company with Christ: the Quire of glorious
Angels, the society of his blessed Mother, the Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, all
the happy and holy Saints, with the whole host of heaven. They shall fret, and
vex, and be ready to eat their own galls, to see those triumphing in glory,
whom they on earth persecuted, martyred, tortured. They could here exercise
their savage tyranny over them; not only denying their own bread, but taking
away theirs: they could despise, beat, malign, undo, burn them at stakes:
now the estate of both is changed: as Abraham told Dives. They are comforted,
Luke 16. 25.
and thou art tormented.

2. This is not all. The privation of blessed joys is not enough: there must
follow the position of cursed torments. For their Punishment is proportioned to
their sin, Ier. 2. Ier. 2. 13.
They have committed two evils. They have forsaken the Lord, the fountain of
living waters, and hewed them out cisternes, broken cisternes that can hold no
water. As they turned from their Maker, so their Maker turns from them: there
is Poenadamni. As they fastened their delights on the creatures, so the
creatures shall be their tortures: there is Poena sensus. They rejected God,
and he reiects them; they adhered to wickedness, and it shall adhere to their
bones for ever, and bring them to burning.

Their torments which are here expressed by Fire, have two fearful
conditions, universality, and eternity.

1. They are universal, vexing every part of the body, and power of the soul.
It is terrible in this life, to be pained in every part of the body at one
time. To have ache in the teeth, gowt in the feet, colic in the reins, etc.
and to lie (as it were) upon a rack, for innumerable diseases, like so many
executioners, to torture him, is intolerable. But the largest shadow of these
torments to their substance, is not so much as a little bone-fire to the
combustion of the whole world.

2. They are eternal. If it had but as many ages to burn, as there be trees
standing on the earth, there would be some, though a tedious hope of their
end. But it is such a Fire, as shall never be quenched. This word Never is
fearful. Though they rain floudes of tears upon it, they shall be but like
oil to increase the flame: for the worm never dies, the fire never goes out.
You see the end of Thorns. Wickedness burns as the fire: Esa. 9. 18.
it shall devour the briars and thorns, and shall kindle in the thickest of
the Forest, and they shall mount up like the lifting up of sm^k^.

I resolved against prolixity. The general and summary doctrine is this. That
since the wicked ground, which bears thorns and briars, is near unto
cursing, and the end thereof is eternal fire: it follows necessarily, that
all they which lay the foundation of ungodliness, must needs build upon
condemnation. Let no man deceive you: I. Ioh. 3. 8.
He that commits sin is of the Devil. If the course of a man's life be
wicked, covetous, unclean, malicious, idolatrous, adulterous, drunken; he
lays the groundwork of his own destruction; and precipitates himself to
the malediction of God. He that lays the foundation in fire-work, must look
to be blown up. Perhaps this meditation, though it be of unquenchable Fire,
may yet work coldly in our hearts; and leave no impression behind it; yet you
cannot deny this to be true. He that would deny it must deny my Text, must
turn Atheist, and reject the holy word of God. Nay, he must think there is no
God, no revenge of wickedness, no devil, no hell. And he undertakes a very
hard task, that goes about to settle this persuasion in his mind. No, no. Let
no man deceive you with vain words: Ephesians. 5. 6.
for because of these things comes the wrath of God upon the children of
disobedience. And in this passage I must value all men alike: of what stuff,
or of what fashion soever his coat be: if his life be full of briars and
thorns, his end is to be burned. What shall we then do unto thee, O thou
preserver of men, that we may escape it? what, Mark. 1. 15.
but Repent, and believe the Gospel!

Let the commination of hell instruct us to prevent it: as the message of
Niniuehs overthrow effected their safety. 1. Let us fly by a true faith into
the arms of our Redeemer, that God reject us not. 2. Let us pour forth floods
of repentant tears, that we be not nigh unto cursing. 3. And let us bring
forth no more briars and thorns, that our end may not be, to be burned.
Faith, Repentance, Obedience; this same golden rule of three, will teach us to
work up our own salvation. This done, we shall not be rejected, but known
to be elected: we shall be so far from cursing. that we shall presently
receive the blessing. And our End shall be, not fire, but glory and peace.
Psalm. 37. 37.
Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of that man is
PEACE.

FINIS.

